THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9, 503-548
Printed in the United States of America
Verbal hallucinations and language
production processes in
schizophrenia
Ralph E. Hoffman
Department of Psychiatry and Yale Psychiatric Institute, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Conn. 06520
Abstract: How is it that many schizophrenics identify certain instances of verbal imagery as hallucinatory? Most investigators have
assumed that alterations in sensory features of imagery explain this. This approach, however, has not yielded a definitive picture of
the nature of verbal hallucinations. An alternative perspective suggests itself if one allows the possibility that the nonself quality of
hallucinations is inferred on the basis of the experience of unintendedness that accompanies imagery production. Information-
processing models of "intentional" cognitive processes call for abstract planning representations that are linked to goals and beliefs.
Unintended actions - and imagery - can reflect planning disruptions whereby cognitive products do not cohere with concurrent
goals. A model of schizophrenic speech disorganization is presented that postulates a disturbance of discourse planning. Insofar as
verbal imagery can be viewed as inwardly directed speech, a consequence of such planning disturbances could be the production of
unintended imagery. This link between the outward disorganization of schizophrenic speech and unintended verbal imagery is
statistically supported by comparing the speech behavior of hallucinating and nonhallucinating schizophrenics. Studies of "bor-
derline" hallucinations during normal, "goal-less" relaxation and drowsiness suggest that experiential unintendedness leads to a
nonpathological variant of hallucinatory otherness that is correctable upon emerging from such passive cognitive states. This contrasts
with the schizophrenic case, where nonconcordance with cognitive goals reinforces the unintendedness of verbal images and sustains
the conviction of an external source. This model compares favorably with earlier models of verbal hallucinations and provides further
evidence for a language production disorder in many schizophrenics. Short Abstract: How is it that many schizophrenics identify
certain instances of verbal imagery as hallucinatory? This paper proposes that the critical feature identifying hallucinations is the
experience of unintendedness. This experience is nonpathological during passive conscious states but pathological if occurring during
goal-directed cognitive processing. A model of schizophrenic speech disorganization is presented that postulates a disturbance of
discourse planning that specifies communicative intentions. These alterations could generate unintended verbal imagery as well.
Statistical data are offered to support the model, and relevant empirical studies are reviewed.
Keywords: cognition; hallucinations; imagery; language; memory; planning; schizophrenia; thought-disorder; volition
Verbal hallucinations (hereafter referred to as VHs) or
"voices" (the term most frequently used to refer to such
phenomena by patients themselves) are a frequent,
though not invariant, component of schizophrenic symp-
tomotology (Bleuler 1950; Seitz & Molholm 1947; see also
current DSM-III diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia,
American Psychiatric Association 1980). Simply stated,
the susceptible patient claims to "hear" the speech of
another in the absence of an actual speaker. These experi-
ences are vexing and mysterious for both the schizo-
phrenic and the investigators who wish to decipher their
meaning as expressions of pathological cognitive proces-
ses.
Psychiatrists generally explain VHs in terms of a "loss
of ego boundaries" or "inner/outer confusion." These
terms, at best, describe aspects of the schizophrenic's
irrationality while offering no new understanding of the
cause(s) of such phenomena. This paper will instead
attempt to develop a cognitive-processing model by con-
ceptually linking VHs and speech disorganization. The
latter, often referred to as "loose associations," is also a
frequent clinical manifestation of schizophrenia and has
undergone extensive scrutiny over the last 10 years,
including a recent BBS target article (Schwartz 1982; also
see reviews by Maher 1972; Rochester and Martin 1979;
Wykes 1980). The present author, in collaboration with
colleagues, has investigated schizophrenic speech disor-
ganization as a disturbance in generating multiproposi-
tional discourse plans that specify communicative inten-
tions. This paper will argue that such language-planning
disruptions also induce VHs.
The major components of this argument - which com-
pose the first four sections of the paper - are as follows: (1)
Sensory properties of VHs are not distinct from ordinary
verbal imagery; (2) VHs are verbal images that are accom-
panied by a feeling of unintendedness; (3) disruptions in
language-planning processes associated with schizo-
phrenia can cause verbal images to be experienced as
unintended; this claim is supported by a recently com-
pleted study that correlates the severity of speech disor-
ganization in schizophrenia and the presence of VHs; (4) if
such images are nonconcordant with concurrent cog-
nitive goals then the experience of unintendedness pro-
vides the basis for the sustained conviction of a nonself
origin.
The fifth section of the paper reviews the merits and
limitations of other theories of schizophrenic hallucina-
tions in comparison with the model presented here. The
©1986 Cambridge University Press
OUO-525X/86/030503-46/S06.00
503

Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
final section further details the model in relation to other
clinical observations and experimental studies of schizo-
phrenic neurocognitive disturbances.
1. Sensory properties of VHs
VHs are instances of auditory imagery that are phonet-
ically organized as words. Verbal images are a normal
component of human consciousness whose frequent oc-
currence during cognition has been extensively investi-
gated (Luria 1961; Sokolov 1972; Vygotsky 1962; 1978;
Zivin 1979). Regardless of how one understands the
function of these imagery processes, that we can "hear"
voiced images cannot be denied.
This immediately raises the central issue of the paper.
What specific factors lead schizophrenic persons to expe-
rience certain instances of verbal imagery as if they were
actually coming from another person?
Many investigators of the VH problem have assumed
that sensory attributes such as exceptional loudness,
vividness, or clarity cause certain verbal images to be
labeled as deviant. Another approach would be to pro-
pose that schizophrenia causes some major diminution in
the capacity to produce auditory imagery in general.
Then if any auditory imagery occurred, it would be noted
as exceptional and labeled as deviant. Solid empirical
evidence supporting either point of view is lacking, how-
ever. Seitz and Molholm (1947) reported that schizo-
phrenics with auditory hallucinations demonstrated
weaker auditory imagery on subjective rating scales com-
pared to control patients, a finding that was supported by
a later study by Starker and John (1982). On the other
hand, Mintz and Alpert (1972) reported a general tenden-
cy toward stronger auditory imagery among hallucinating
schizophrenics compared to controls. Brett and Starker
(1977) indicated that there were no differences at all
between hallucinating and nonhallucinating patients with
respect to the vividness or accessibility of voluntarily
induced imagery. Slade (1976a) reported enhanced imag-
ery vividness for both hallucinating and nonhallucinating
psychotics compared to normals, but no differences be-
tween the first two groups. Heilbrun, Blum, and Haas
(1983) compared vividness of imagery in the auditory and
visual modes for schizophrenics with VHs, but they found
no differences.
Approaches that consider other sensory attributes of
hallucinatory experience are of doubtful significance. For
instance, one might propose that the subjective "ampli-
tude" of auditory imagery has significant pathological
effects. However, both Bleuler (1950) and Sedman
(1966a) reported that schizophrenic VHs were at times so
faint that the words were experienced as a whisper or
were not discernible at all. Also, as part of an unreported
study, the present author asked a small series of halluci-
nating schizophrenics to gauge their VHs against an
externally generated sound input. Subjects were re-
quested to indicate whether their "voices" were louder
than, as loud as, or softer than the external sound.
Subjects indicated a full range of subjective amplitudes
that included both soft and loud levels. Linn (1978) and
Frank, Rendon, and Siomopoulous (1980) indicated that
VHs are most often heard in the second-person voice,
perhaps a distinguishing feature of VHs. However, this
also seems unlikely for two reasons. First, one does not
normally label auditory images of another's voice com-
pared to one's own as hallucinatory or otherwise patho-
logical. Second, Schneider (1957) and Sedman (1966b)
have emphasized that schizophrenics at times experience
their own voiced image as alien and pathological; thus a
non-first-person voice seems not to be a necessary feature
of schizophrenic hallucinatory imagery.
2. Imaging and Intending
How is it, then, that a VH can seem deviant or alien to the
schizophrenic when no specific sensory features can be
identified that contribute to this experience? Individuals
have extremely limited awareness of the complexity of
actual cognitive processes (Bern 1967; Dennett 1978;
Nisbett & Wilson 1977; Pylyshyn 1973; 1981). This sug-
gests that there are many information-processing steps
besides the actual conscious "display" of sensory informa-
tion during mental imagery production that may be
subject to pathological alterations leading to hallucinatory
attributes. In particular, Dennett (1978) differentiates
the occurrence of an imagery event, which he calls a, and
the immediate cognitive consequences of a, which is the
P-manifold of a. The P-manifold of the imagery event
includes a set of inferences about the nature of a. People
are notoriously poor at assessing their own guiding pre-
suppositions and predispositions, and certain apparently
perceptual attributes of an imagery event may actually
result from more or less automatic inferential processes
that alter how the image is experienced. This distinction
of a and (3 components of imagery experience highlights
subtle though critical issues involved in understanding
the etiology of VHs. If a verbal image is also a VH, then its
P-manifold would include some representation of what
the image "said," as well as the "sensation" that the image
somehow derived from the "outside." But there is no a
priori way of knowing whether the "alien/nonself sensa-
tion" of the image derives from the a- or the p-processing
levels.1
A parallel problem presents itself within the realm of
normal experience.2 When one is listening to a tape
recording of one's own voice a common reaction is that
the voice sounds alien - as if the speaker is not really
oneself. A possible cause of this experience could be the
sensory qualities of the recording itself. We might be
sensitive to subtle distortions of the sound of our own
voice due to the recording process; these distortions
could be experienced as alien. On the other hand, the
alien/otherness sensation might derive from a more or
less automatic inference: If I need to decode a series of
speech sounds in order to derive the propositional mes-
sage of the speech sounds, and in doing so I rely on
external speech perceptual-processing capabilities, then
it is fair to expect that someone else is doing the speaking.
Conversely, one ordinarily does not need to decode one's
own speech while one is speaking in order to know what
one is saying; we already have a message more or less in
mind while we speak. But if the propositional message of
one's own taped speech is recreated upon relistening,
then the predisposition regarding undecoded external
speech might cause one to experience tape-recorded
speech - including one's own - as if it were generated by
504
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
another speaker. The plausibility of the second explana-
tion is supported by the observation that in general only
one's own voice sounds alien; the taped voices of others
(unless fidelity is very bad) are quite recognizable and
acceptable; they are consonant with a nonself inference.
On the other hand, we may be uniquely sensitive to
sound-reproduction distortions of our own voice. No
solution for the tape-recording problem has been ex-
plored, though I think it raises significant issues. The
problem is nonetheless useful insofar as two distinct
hypotheses - one referrable to primary sensory informa-
tion and the second referrable to automatic or pre-
conscious inferential processes - are suggested that can
account for the alien sense of a certain class of self-
generated verbal images.
The position of this paper is that the alien/otherness
attribute of VHs derives from a P-level inference that is
generated on the basis of action-like attributes of image
production rather than primary sensory attributes. Witt-
genstein has written: "The concept of imaging is rather
like one of doing rather than receiving" (Wittgenstein
1980, section 111). He substantiates this statement by
noting that images can be willfully induced. I can decide
to walk or talk and simply do so. Similarly, I can decide to
picture a tree or hear a friend's voice, and consequently
"produce" the corresponding image.
Empirical data substantiate the image/action/output
relationship. Finke (1979) demonstrated that visual imag-
ery interacts with both central and peripheral cognitive
processes that subserve motor events, suggesting a com-
mon pathway for imagery and action sequences. Motor
events can also modify imagery. This is illustrated by the
phenomenon of efferent copy, whereby, for example,
moving one's eyeball with one's fingers rather than one's
ocular muscles displaces the image; this "passive" move-
ment of the eyeball lacks the proprioceptive feedback
from ocular muscle efferents that normally corrects for
changes in the image secondary to ocular displacement.
Also, covert speech muscle activity has been shown to
occur concurrently with normal verbal imagery (Sokolov
1972) as well as VHs (Cerny 1965; Gould 1948; Inouye &
Shimizu 1970). These findings again suggest the con-
vergence of imagery processes and manifest action se-
quences. Finally, the outer/inner speech linkage is sug-
gested by the study of language behavior in children.
Shortly after the acquisition of social, adult-directed
speech, the child begins to demonstrate egocentric
speech (talking out loud to himself) during creative play
and goal-directed activity (Luria 1961; Vygotsky 1962;
1978; Zivin 1979); egocentric speech then evolves into
unspoken verbal imagery that continues throughout the
remainder of childhood and adulthood (Sokolov 1972).
Just as action, speech, and imaging can be intended or
willed, so can certain actions (such as nervous tics) and
speech (such as slips of the tongue) be experienced as
unintended. Certain images can also be experienced as
unintended; an obvious example is ordinary dreaming.
The dream, expecially during rapid-eye-movement
(REM) sleep, is generally experienced as completely out
of control of the dreamer, with the source of the dream
presumed, to be some nonsubjective outside world.
Along these lines, this paper proposes that VHs are
verbal images that are experienced as unintended. In
support of this hypothesis, Horowitz claims that halluci-
nations are never accompanied by conscious intent
(Horowitz 1975). Kass (1968) also notes that the voluntary
production of images by schizophrenics is never experi-
enced as hallucinatory. This has been confirmed by the
present author, who asked the series of schizophrenics
mentioned earlier to reimagine a previous VH in the
present. They were then asked to contrast the two experi-
ences in terms of loudness, vividness, and so forth.
Invariably the subjects reported that the reimaginings
were different from true "voices," but were not generally
able to identify any particular sensory qualities that dis-
tinguished the two. It might be argued that the subjects
simply were not attentive to the task or adept at self-
reports of subjective experience. On the other hand,
their responses are consistent with the hypothesis that
intended images are not, in general, experienced as
hallucinations even if sensory qualities are kept constant.
Other clinical evidence supporting an "unintentional"
model of VHs is offered by hallucinating patients who also
demonstrate involuntary overt speech.3 Assuming that
the generation of verbal imagery and overt speech reflect
similar cognitive processes, the occurrence of involuntary
external speech among these patients suggests that their
VHs are composed of parallel, involuntary language
events.
In the following section, a model of language-produc-
tion disturbances in schizophrenia is described that could
also cause unintended verbal imagery. Unintendedness
is taken to be a necessary precursor that can lead to the
induction of hallucinatory attributes; an empirical test of
this hypothesis is described. In the subsequent section
conditions are proposed and discussed that are sufficient
to cause the schizophrenic to acquire a sustained convic-
tion that the unintended image is of nonself origin.
3. Language planning processes in
schizophrenia
Workers in cognitive science and artificial intelligence
have convincingly argued that even modest attempts to
model intelligent sequential behavior require the repre-
sentation of plans that are precursors to the action itself
(cf. Allen & Perrault 1980; Hayes-Roth & Hayes-Roth
1979; Sacerdoti 1977; Schank & Abelson 1977; Wilensky
1983). Cognitive plans provide coherence to action se-
quences and insure that behavior is consonant with asso-
ciated goals and beliefs. These planning processes fre-
quently occur outside of conscious awareness. For
example, consider walking to my car. It so happens that I
can, if I wish, consciously access a set of goals and
subgoals (wish to drive car, wish to be transported to
work, wish to be on time for work, etc.), certain beliefs
(my car will start, my work place is accessible by certain
roads, etc.), and the rudiments of a behavioral plan (walk
to car, open door, turn ignition key, etc.). Though I
generally get myself to work without being explicitly
conscious of any such plan and its relationship to goals and
beliefs, it is almost impossible to imagine how such goal-
directed behavior could occur without representations
such as these in a psychologically real sense (Pylyshyn
1980).
This perspective suggests an account of the experience
of unintendedness that accompanies certain of our ac-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
505

(II) If s, presupposes s0, and s2 presupposes s3, then s, presup-
poses s3, i.e., transitivity holds.
A well-formed discourse-planning structure can be
illustrated on the basis of a speech segment produced by a
47-year-old woman who was hospitalized for depression
(also discussed in Hoffman, Stopek & Andreasen, in
press):
(A) Interviewer: Can you describe where you live?
Patient: Yes, I live in Connecticut. We live in a 50-year-old
Tudor house. It's a house that's very much a home . . . ah . . . I
live there with my husband and son. It's a home where people
are drawn to feel comfortable, walk in, let's see . . . a home that
is furnished comfortably - not expensive - a home that shows
very much my personality.
The overall message of the above segment is fairly
obvious - the woman is extolling the virtues of her house
in terms of how it reflects on herself as a person. This
message is represented by the hierarchical discourse plan
People like
my personality
People are drawn
to this house
Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
tions. A nervous tic feels involuntary because it does not
reflect 
a motor plan consonant with accessible
goals/beliefs. Similarly, a slip of the tongue feels invol-
untary because it is not consonant with the current
speech goal, that is, to articulate a particular "message."
Research in psycholinguistics and computational lin-
guistics has suggested that normally a speaker generates
an abstract cognitive plan that reflects the gist or intention
of what he will say and is sensitive to the goals and beliefs
of the speaker (Allen & Perrault 1980; Cohen & Perrault
1979; Deese 1978; Hobbes 1979; Kintsch 1974; Kintsch &
Van Dijk 1978; Van Dijk 1980). This plan is then trans-
formed into lower level representations such as syntactic
units and phonetic strings (Arbib 1982; Garrett 1975;
Hoffman & Sledge 1984). Without this initial stage of
language processing, the speaker could not utilize multi-
ple sentences or clauses in a coordinated fashion to
express a single, coherent "message" and thereby attain
communicative goals. The consequence of such planning
difficulties would be "loose associations" and related
forms of speech disorder typically linked to schizo-
phrenia.4 As is the case for behavioral plans, discourse
planning generally occurs outside the conscious aware-
ness of the individual.
Deese (1978) has discussed a particular model of dis-
course planning whereby abstractly represented proposi-
tions that compose a communicative intention are ar-
ranged into a hierarchically organized data set.5 Topical
propositions occupy high nodal positions in the tree.
Structural subordination within the tree occurs if the
truth of one proposition is presupposed in order to dis-
cern the pragmatic sense of a second (dependent) propo-
sition. This model of discourse planning was used by
Hoffman, Kirstein, Stopek, and Cicchetti (1982) to for-
malize a model of textual coherence. The rudiments of
the model can be summarized as follows: A text (either
written or spoken) is experienced as coherent if the
presupposition relationship imposes a complete "partial
ordering" of the constituent statements of the text. "Par-
tial ordering" breaks down into two axioms:
(I) For all statement pairs, Sj and so, belonging to some text T,
either st presupposes s2, or s2 presupposes sv or there exists a
third statement, s3 in T such that s3 is presupposed by both S!
and s0.
I live in a house
House is
in Connecticut
House is
a home
House shows
my personality
House is very
comfortable
House is
comfortably
furnished
I live in a house
with husband
and son
House is 50 year
old tudor house
Furniture is
not expensive
Figure 1. A hierarchical analysis of the "house is like my
personality" segment. Certain statements can be located at
different sites in the tree depending on how one interprets the
communicative intention of the speaker. If "50-year-old Tudor"
is metaphorically interpreted as referring to certain human
qualities, then this statement is subordinated to the "house
shows my personality" statement; otherwise the statement
would be subordinated to the superordinate "house" statement
(Hoffman, Stopek & Andreasen 1986). Archives of General
Psychiatry. © 1986 American Medical Association. Reprinted
with permission of the publisher.
proposed in Figure 1. Note that this figure corresponds to
one particular interpretation of the communicative inten-
tion of the speaker. Alternatively, one might not take the
"house is a 50-year-old Tudor house" statement as reflect-
ing qualities of the personality of the speaker. This more
straightforward interpretation is supported by the fact
that speakers frequently supply orienting information
such as age and style when reporting on personal posses-
sions such as house or car. In this case the statement in
question would be positioned in the nodal position di-
rectly subordinate to the "I live in a house" statement. In
each reading of the passage, coherence is attained and is
reflected by different hierarchical orderings of the state-
ments in the text.
The above formulation is not intended to indicate that
such discourse-planning structures represent all mean-
ingful propositional relationships embedded within such
speech behavior; computationally motivated text analy-
ses discussed, for example, by Schank and Abelson (1977)
indicate that an exhaustive deconstruction of such rela-
tionships generates a much more densely connected
network of abstractly represented atomic propositions.
Rather, what is proposed is that discourse-planning struc-
tures are located in a short-term, small-capacity working
memory (cf. Anderson 1983), and that a tree geometry is
relied upon because it minimizes processing require-
ments for storage and recall.6 These efficient data struc-
tures can then serve as inputs to a large content-address-
able or associative memory (cf. Anderson 1983), which
accesses a comprehensive "gestalt" for particular texts.
Deese (1978) first proposed that the disorganization of
schizophrenic speech can be traced to a deviation of
propositional structures from a strict tree form (see also
506
THE BEHAViORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
discussions by Chaika, 1981, 1982, of the schizophrenic's
failure to subordinate propositions to topic, or to adhere
to a discourse macrostructure, a term from Van Dijk,
1980). As a result, the processing requirements of these
texts would be markedly increased for speakers, and the
experience of "looseness" or incoherence would accom-
pany encoding efforts on the part of listeners. Using the
formalization outlined above for partial orderings,
Hoffman et al. (1982) were able to devise a measure of
textual deviance that reflects the degree to which the
propositional structure of discourse departs from a strict
tree form. This metric can be reliably determined and did
very well in predicting clinician ratings of "thought disor-
der" in response to a set of speech segments produced by
a mixed population of psychiatric patients. Moreover, the
simple presence/absence of nonhierarchical discourse
structure, blindly determined, differentiated between
schizophrenic and nonschizophrenic speakers with 80%
accuracy. Though a full description of the analysis is
beyond the scope of this paper, it can be illustrated with
the following three schizophrenic speech segments:
(B) Interviewer: Have you ever been out of New York?
Patient: No, I've never been no where-no where . . .If I could
go I would go . . . I feel like cashing in my welfare check now
and just leaving . . . and I was gonna keep my-my two checks
and save them and get an apartment. I wanna save them and just
leave.
(C) Interviewer: Did you ever try to hurt yourself? (patient
being asked about her feelings about suicide after being admit-
ted to a psychiatric hospital)
Patient: I cut myself once when I was in the kitchen trying to
please David. I was scared for [sic] life because David didn't
want me and if David didn't want me then no man would.
(D) Interviewer: Tell me about school.
Patient: School? Well there are schools of play and schools of
fish, mostly you see fish school, people edumacating [sic] them-
selves, you see, sea is one thing and education is another. Fish is
school in their community, that's why the community of man
stands in the way of the community of the sea, and once they see
the light of sunny sunshine then they well let it be . . .
The relatively mild incoherence of (B) is due to the fact
that "saving/keeping checks" has two different senses
imposed by a shifting context - in the first case to provide
money to leave New York and in the second case to
provide money to stay. This corresponds to the deviant
tree structure represented in Figure 2. Here the two
separate chains of dependencies converge on the single
saving/keeping money statement. As can be seen, pre-
I CUT MYSELF
IN THE KITCHEN "
(IMP' I CUT
MYSELF ACCIDENTALLY)
I WAS SCARED
(FOR MY?)
LIFE
1 never left
/
I've never
been anywhere
NY
\ \
1
to
/
One needs $
to leave NY
/ 
^
1 feel like cashing
my welfare checks
\
would like
leove NY
/
1 wanted to stay in NY
/
1 wanted an
apartment in NY
One needs $
for apartment
/
\ 
/
1 want to save
my two checks
(CUT MYSELF)
WHILE TRYING -
TO PLEASE DAVID
I WAS SCARED
(FOR MY?)
LIFE
I
NO MAN
WANTS ME
I
(AS EXEMPLIFIED
BY FACT THAT)
I
DAVID DOESN'T
WANT ME
Figure 2. A hierarchical analysis of segment (B). Here there is
an instance of upward'branching that lends two different senses
to the "I want to keep/save checks" statements.
Figure 3. A hierarchical analysis of segment (C). The jagged
line denotes a break in presuppositional transitivity. Extraordi-
nary interpretations of the text could potentially restore a strict
hierarchical structure (see note 8), but this requires assuming
that the speaker disregarded the suicide theme without ac-
knowledging that she changed topic.
supposed statements corresponding to staying and leav-
ing New York do not, in themselves, presuppose any
third statement; hence this "upward branching" of pre-
suppositional chains violates axiom (I) defining partial
ordering.7
Segment (C) also suggests a condensation of two dis-
joint messages. This is illustrated in Figure 3. The right-
hand chain of statements describes a state of high stress of
the type that might lead to suicidal behavior. This de-
scription substantiates theparagrammatical statement, "I
was scared for life," which could be interpreted as "I was
scared o/life," or "I feared that my life was over," or "I
was scared forever." The left-hand hierarchy seemingly
refers to an incident where the speaker accidently cuts
herself. In this context, "I was scared for life" seems to
refer to her reaction to seeing that she had accidentally
cut herself. The result is a departure from a strict hier-
archical ordering of statements becuase statements such
as "no man wants me" and "David doesn't want me"
presuppose the "I was scared for life" statement and are
referrable to the suicide theme, but not the "I (acciden-
tally) cut myself statement. Thus a break in transitivity of
the presupposition relation (i.e., a violation of axiom II)
occurs that is represented by a jagged line.8
Segments (B) and (C), as mild discourse deviations,
yield planning structures that condense disjoint, albeit
related, messages resulting in overall incoherence and
deviance from a tree form. On the other hand, segment
(D) represents a practically total loss of hierarchical struc-
ture such that statements are juxtaposed primarily on the
basis of word play and phonetic similarity. Hence our
metric of discourse deviation would score (B) and (C) as
less severe than (D).
Chapman (1966) reported that schizophrenics fre-
quently experience their manifest speech as being poorly
matched to what they had in mind to say. An experimen-
tal study by Hoffman, Hogben, Smith, and Calhoun
(1985) parallels this observation. Schizophrenics and non-
schizophrenic psychiatric patients were given a list of
input propositions and requested to combine them into
ordinary conversational English. This translation task
induced many more disruptions in the meaning of input
propositions in the former than in the latter group.
A similar mismatching of cognitive intentions and lan-
guage output is postulated for verbal imagery production
in schizophrenia. This would predict that the more prone
a schizophrenic is to discourse-planning breakdowns, the
more likely he is to experience VHs. The relationship
between breakdowns in discourse planning and VHs was
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
507

Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
statistically supported by a recently completed study
whose design has been described in more detail else-
where (Andreasen, Hoffman & Grove 1984; Hoffman,
Stopek & Andreasen 1986). The spontaneous conversa-
tional speech of 39 schizophrenics, 24 manics, and 40
normals was studied and compared using a hierarchical
discourse analysis that was blindly and reliably con-
ducted. Over | of the discourse segments produced by
normal subjects demonstrated strict hierarchical struc-
ture, while over § of the schizophrenics and f of the manic
subjects demonstrated deviant discourse. Only 3 of the 24
manic subjects demonstrated VHs, so they were not
studied in terms of the relationship between language
disorganization and VHs. On the other hand, 26 schizo-
phrenics reported VHs, 9 schizophrenics did not, and
with 4 schizophrenics an adequate assessment of VHs was
not possible. The schizophrenics with and without VHs
were compared in terms of the severity of their discourse-
planning disturbance; this was estimated by calculating
the overall deviance score for each subject and correcting
this figure for utterance length. Mean scores of severity of
planning disturbance were approximately three times as
great in the former group as in the latter (although there
was some overlap of groups due to the large standard
deviation of the former group), a result that was statis-
tically significant (t=2.94, df =33, p<.005). Thus the
severity of discourse disorganization correlates, at least in
part, with the occurrence of VHs. This correlation is
consistent with the hypothesis that disruptions in dis-
course planning cause disorganized speech as well as
experientially unintended verbal imagery. These imag-
ery qualities, which I postulate as a necessary precursor
to the generation of hallucinations, can lead to external
misattribution under particular circumstances that will
be described in Section 4.
Because only portions of schizophrenic utterances de-
part from communication goals (see segments B and C for
examples of partial adherence to the goal of answering the
question with other portions of the text departing from
that goal), it is anticipated that only fragments of inner
speech issuing from a disturbed language plan would be
experienced as unintended. This would account for the
observation of Frank et al. (1980) that the mean number of
words of VHs was considerably fewer than that of man-
ifest utterances for their schizophrenic subjects.
These findings are also consistent with a study reported
by Heilbrun (1980), who found that hallucinating schizo-
phrenics were less able to recognize lexical, semantic,
and syntactic features of their own speech compared to
nonhallucinators. These recognition failures, could be
understood as a consequence of poorly determined
speech that was the product of disrupted planning
processes.
4. Goals, plans, and the nonself inference
This section will describe how the schizophrenic may, at
times, automatically or preconsciously infer that certain
unintended images are of nonself origin. The importance
of this question is highlighted by the fact that many of the
memories and images we normally experience during
wakefulness are not "willed" or consciously called forth,
but occur spontaneously during mentation. Yet these
images are not automatically experienced as hallucina-
tory.
If VHs are inferences induced by unintended verbal
images, then they are close cousins to delusional beliefs.
A recent review paper by Winters and Neale (1983)
breaks down the etiologies of pathological or delusional
beliefs into three major categories. First, delusions may
derive from more or less justified inferences based on
pathologically altered perceptions. Second, delusions
may be motivated by a need to reduce an uncomfortable
psychic state; a typical example would be the grandiose
delusion of being the president of the United States as a
response to a loss of self-esteem. Third, delusions may
result in a primary disturbance in the logic of inferential
processes. The second explanation has doubtful rele-
vance to schizophrenia - these individuals frequently
report that their "voices" are extremely frightening and
anxiety-provoking (Hollender & Boszorme'nyi-Nagi
1958).9 The third explanation has some surface plau-
sibility. Anecdotal reports have periodically suggested
that some schizophrenics demonstrate "paralogical" or
"predicate" reasoning. A classic example (cf. Oppen-
heimer 1971) is: "I am a virgin; the Virgin Mary was a
virgin; therefore I am the Virgin Mary." However, it is
hard to invoke such breakdowns in logic to account for
VHs, for systematic study has demonstrated that schizo-
phrenic subjects are no more prone to such inferential
pathology than control groups (Maher 1974). Thus the
most plausible explanation is that the external misattribu-
tion of a schizophrenic VH is a more or less justified
inference derived from altered perceptual data.
That these alterations in perceptual data derive from
the experienced unintendedness of images is suggested
by studies of hallucinatory phenomena during normal
mentation (Foulkes & Fleisher 1975; Foulkes & Scott
1973; Foulkes & Vogel 1965). These studies were moti-
vated by earlier sleep studies indicating that clearcut
dream/hallucinatory states are not limited to the REM
stage, but occur in varying degrees during all other sleep
stages as well (Foulkes 1962). Consequently, Foulkes and
Vogel (1965) mapped out a four-stage progression from
alert, relaxed consciousness to physiological sleep deter-
mined on the basis of electroencephalogram (EEG) and
electro-oculogram monitoring. The four stages were
identified as follows: alpha EEG plus rapid eye move-
ments (relaxed, nondrowsy consciousness); alpha EEG
plus no eye movements or slow ocular drift (drowsy
consciousness); desynchronized low-voltage EEG (stage I
sleep), desynchronized EEG with sleep spindles/K-com-
plexes (stage II sleep). It was found that clearcut halluci-
natory experience, that is, imagery that is momentarily
felt to originate from the "outside" as opposed to being
self-generated, was frequently reported for all four
stages: 31% of mentation reports during the alpha/REM
stage contained hallucinations with progressive increases
to 71% during stage II sleep. Because the hallucinatory
character of these experiences during wakefulness was
only fleeting, Foulkes and Vogel termed these experi-
ences "borderline" hallucinations. Nonetheless, this
finding clearly indicates that the nonself attribute can be
assigned to images during normal waking states of con-
sciousness. Later studies by Foulkes and Scott (1973) and
Foulkes and Fleisher (1975) indicated a similar high
508
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
frequency of hallucinatory mental contents during relax-
ed, nonpresleep mentation.
A careful examination of the data reported by Foulkes
and Vogel (1965) indicates increases in the frequency of
mentation that the subjects experienced as involuntary in
passing from relaxed wakefulness to stage II sleep. These
increases from stage to stage closely paralleled - and were
somewhat greater than - the observed increase in the
frequency of frank hallucinosis (i.e., momentarily believ-
ing that the image was from the "outside"). The stage-to-
stage statistical dominance of involuntary images com-
pared to frankly nonself experienced images suggests that
the former is a preliminary condition for the induction of
the latter during normal cognitive states.
How do these "borderline" hallucinations in normals
compare to the hallucinations of schizophrenia? An
important clue is offered by a study by Sedman (1966a).
He defined "pseudohallucinations" as images that were
experienced as if they were perceptions from the outside
but where the impression is recognized as being untrue;
"true" hallucinations had exactly the same perceptual
attributes as "pseudohallucinations" except that the pa-
tient had a sustained conviction that the perception had a
nonself origin. These two imagery types were studied in a
mixed population of psychiatric patients. About 50% of
nonpsychotic and affective psychotic patients reported
pseudohallucinations, but true hallucinations were re-
ported by only A of affective psychotics and by no
nonpsychotic patients. On the other hand, j§ of schizo-
phrenics reported true hallucinations, with very few
schizophrenics (fk) reporting pseudohallucinations. The
sensory modality of pseudohallucinations was an equal
mixture of auditory and visual types (with a small number
of tactile and olfactory experiences), whereas the pre-
dominant sensory modality of true hallucinations was
clearly auditory. Sedman's study suggests that pseudo-
hallucinations and true hallucinations are at least partially
distinguishable, and that the latter alone are fairly
(though not totally) specific to schizophrenic states.
Pseudohallucinations - similar to the borderline halluci-
nations of Foulkes - were predictably nonspecific with
respect to diagnosis.
The difference between "true" hallucinations and bor-
derline and pseudohallucinations is suggested by an ap-
parent paradox. The Sedman (1966a) study indicated that
schizophrenics demonstrated a drop-off in the frequency
of hallucinations as they passed from "clear" to "drowsy"
consciousness. This is exactly opposite to the trend re-
ported by Foulkes and colleagues for "borderline halluci-
nations" of normals. How can this be?
Reviewing the findings of Foulkes and colleagues sug-
gests three facts. First, the absence of cognitive goals can
produce unintended images. This is reasonable given that
the absence of concordance between cognitive goals and
cognitive outputs such as action and speech predicts the
experience of unintendedess (see above discussion for
nervous tics and slips of the tongue). In the absence of any
cognitive goals during passive cognitive states (day-
dreaming, drowsiness, etc.), no goal-concordance is pos-
sible and imagery production will be experienced as
unintended. Second, a more or less automatic expecta-
tion or inference in normals is that unintended images are
nonself derived. This is plausible because the great abun-
dance of unintended images experienced during the day
are sensory impressions that actually derive from the
outside world. Third, this nonself inference, if occurring
during passive cognitive states, must somehow be "un-
done." Otherwise psychosis would quickly ensue. This
self-corrective process reflects the normal emergence
from a passive to an active (i.e., goal-directed) cognitive
state; one can presumably learn that unintended or alien
representations occur during prior passive states and
thereby dismiss their veracity. In short, Foulkes's find-
ings impose the conclusion that we frequently do not
simply discount our daydreams as unreal, but rather
momentarily enter into them as if they were objectively
real only to disclaim them later when the salience of the
outer world is increased. Though this three-step model of
borderline hallucinations (imagery unintendedness, ex-
ternal misattribution, correction of external misattribu-
tion) is admittedly complex, something at least as compli-
cated must be postulated in order to account for the
momentary hallucinations of normal passive cognition
and subsequent accurate "reality-testing," that is, correc-
tion of the external misattribution.
If this model of borderline hallucinations is correct
then one would predict that subjects could suffer from
"irreversibly" hallucinated images if they occur in the
absence of passive conscious states. This prediction
would be supported if it turned out that schizophrenics
experience involuntary images concurrent with cognitive
processes that derive from specific goals and tasks. Then
an awareness of prior passive consciousness would not be
present as a clue leading to the reversal of the otherness
inference associated with unintended images; instead,
the felt nonconcordance between verbal imagery and
cognitive goals would reinforce the alien sense of the
image and sustain the external misattribution. This would
predict that reduced goal-directed cognition would actu-
ally protect the schizophrenic from hallucinations; under
these conditions unintended imagery would not occur
with cognitive goals that would make the otherness at-
tribute "toxic" or "convincing." This would account for
Sedman's (1966a) paradoxical observation that drowsy
conscious states practically eliminated true hallucinations
among schizophrenic subjects. This model also suggests,
along lines that are consistent with the discussion of
schizophrenic delusional inferences by Maher (1974),
that the nonself inferences that underlie VHs are in
themselves nonpathological. Why invent a pathological
form of external misattribution when a normal variant of
this inference seems so readily available given the obser-
vations of Foulkes and his colleagues?
A problem with this model of VHs is that the terms
"unintended" and "involuntary" can have different
meanings. To clarify the model, postulated relationships
between different levels of "unintendedness," goal-di-
rectedness, and hallucinatory attributes are outlined in
Table 1.
Strongly intended cognitive activities are those that are
preceded by conscious decisions. Weakly intended cog-
nitive productions are actions, speech, memories, or
images that spontaneously occur during normal waking
states but are still goal-directed. By definition, no con-
scious decisions are made to initiate events of this class. A
simple example is walking to my car to drive to work. I do
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
509

Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
Table 1. Levels of intending and the otherness inference
Type of
cognitive production
Description
Otherness inference
Correction of
otherness inference
Strongly intended
Weakly intended
Weakly unintended
Strongly unintended
Consciously decided upon ac-
tions, speech, memory
representations, etc.
Spontaneous actions, speech,
memories, imagery consonant
with consciously accessible
goal or set of goals
Passive, non-goal-directed
cognitive states, e.g.,
daydreaming, free association,
borderline hallucinations
(Foulkes), pseudohallucina-
tions (Stedman)
Nonconcordant with concur-
rent cognitive goals, e.g.,
"true" hallucinations, "thought
control," "speech automa-
tisms," "loose associations,"
"delusions of passivity"
absent
absent
possible
yes for internal representations;
can be blocked by kinesthetic
awareness of manifest motoric
and speech activity
yes, when subject emerges
from passive cognitive state
otherness attribute sustained
by goal-nonconcordance
so without being conscious of deciding to drive to work,
although such a goal is consciously accessible. The goal-
directed nature of spontaneous internal images is high-
lighted by Schank's (1983) investigations of dynamic
memory. He demonstrates that apparently spontaneous
memory retrieval can be triggered by different stages of
goal-driven problem-solving, pattern recognition, and
categorization tasks; what one is aware of during this
recall process is not "trying to recall memory X" but the
relevance of X to current problems and tasks. Further-
more, Vygotsky (1962; 1978), Luria (1961), and Zivin
(1979) have emphasized the importance of task perfor-
mance and problem solving, that is, goal-directed cog-
nitive processes, in triggering egocentric speech and
verbal imagery.
Weakly intended cognitive outputs are distinct from
mental representations that occur during passive, cog-
nitive states - labeled here as weakly unintended. Here
no cognitive goals - at either a conscious or a pre-
consc:""c level - are accessible to lend to the representa-
tion a contextual meaning. The resulting unintended
feeling is liable to be experienced as nonself derived.
However, this feeling, under normal circumstances, can
be accounted for and therefore accommodated upon
emerging from a passive to an active cognitive state.
In contrast, strongly unintended cognitive productions
co-occur with accessible cognitive goals but are noncon-
cordant with them. As just mentioned, verbal imagery
can accompany goal-directed cognitive processes. If ver-
bal imagery, as proposed, issues from a chain of ordinary
language processes, and schizophrenics suffer from dis-
ruptions in the planning of messages that derive from
cognitive goals, then their verbal imagery could poten-
tially clash with these goals. The resulting experience of
unintendedness could induce an external misattribution
on the basis of inferential processes that parallel the
induction of "borderline" hallucinations during normal
passive cognitive states, with goal nonconcordance sus-
taining these inferences. Thus, unintended cognitive
activity is nonpathological in the absence of goals but
potentially pathological if nonconcordant with cognitive
goals.
Further support for this model of schizophrenic VHs is
provided by the fact that schizophrenic language produc-
tions are generally initiated in a goal-directed fashion that
can then deviate - by virtue of planning disturbances -
from the motivating goal. For instance, segments (B) and
(C) indicate a willingness to answer particular questions
and provide certain kinds of information, although such
goals were not sustained. The goal-directedness of schizo-
phrenic communication has also been affirmed by other
workers (Chaika 1982; Harrow, Lanin-Kettering, Prosen
& Miller 1983; Zarlock 1966). Goals concurrent with
verbal imagery do not seem to be communication goals
(unless we must for some reason communicate with
ourselves); instead they are, as discussed above, fre-
quently referrable to manifest tasks and problem solving.
Thus language planning disruptions - when goal-noncon-
cordant - could potentially yield strongly unintended
speech and verbal imagery. This, of course, raises the
question of why overt speech is not more frequently
experienced as nonself generated in schizophrenia. The
answer seems quite simple: Kinesthetic sensations that
derive from motor aspects of speech production are
strong immediate evidence that the speech event is self-
generated; thus the otherness attribute is blocked. It also
seems that at times the otherness inference can leak
through during overt speech (see again note 3 describing
involuntary overt speech in schizophrenia), perhaps
when goal deviation in speech is especially radical. On
the other hand, sensory images - including verbal images
- are much more vulnerable to ambiguities with regard to
egocentric versus allocentric origin because both types of
imagery commonly occur during everyday experience
510
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
and there are no kinesthetic clues as to origin. Kinesthetic
cues also account for why nervous tics and slips of the
tongue, though experienced as unintended, are not sub-
ject to external misattribution.
Further support for the above model of VHs derives
from a study by Andreasen and Olsen (1982). They looked
at correlations between "negative" symptoms of schizo-
phrenia (affective flattening, anhedonia, avolition, etc.)
and "positive" symptoms (hallucinations, delusions,
"thought disorder," etc.) and found a robust negative
correlation between hallucinations and avolition. This is
precisely the relation predicted by our model: The less
goal-directed schizophrenic patients are, the less vul-
nerable they are to experiencing strongly unintended
(i.e., goal-nonconcordant) verbal imagery, hence the less
likely they are to experience VHs.
5. Alternative theories of verbal hallucinations
There have been few attempts to link clearly specific
types of cognitive pathology to hallucinatory phenomena
in schizophrenia. The following is a summary of alter-
native explanatory models that might be proposed or
have already been considered by other investigators.
5.1. Poor auditory attention. Studies based on subjective
reports have indicated that schizophrenics are frequently
unable to integrate visual stimuli into a meaningful whole
and tend to get distracted by irrelevant stimuli (Chapman
1966; Freedman & Chapman 1973). Difficulties in selec-
tive attention have also been demonstrated during vari-
ous experimental tasks (see reviews by Neale &
Oltmanns 1980, and Schwartz 1982). Finally, at a psycho-
physiological level, it is now well established that schizo-
phrenics demonstrate fairly consistent difficulties in
producing pursuit eye movements that track moving
stimuli (for review of this research see Holzman & Levy
1977). Though these findings may be of significance in
understanding certain aspects of schizophrenic cognitive
pathology, their relevance to the VHs problem is ques-
tionable. The predictable result of such input-processing
pathology on self-generated imagery (assuming that sen-
sory input and internal imagery processes are convergent
- which is quite a large assumption - see Dennett 1978,
and Pylyshyn 1973; 1981) is that the latter would be
poorly perceived, fragmented, and difficult to "center"
within the field of attention. However, these terms, at
times, can be applied to normal imagery. For instance,
attempting to recall a very distant memory may yield
fleeting, poorly formed images, yet ordinarily one does
not mistake such images to be of nonself origin. Thus it is
difficult to invoke such sensory qualities for assigning the
otherness attribute in the case of schizophrenic hallucina-
tions. Also, a recent study by Schnieder and Wilson
(1983) indicated that reaction times to auditory stimuli are
significantly faster among hallucinating schizophrenics
compared to nonhallucinating schizophrenics. This is the
opposite of what would be predicted by a poor-auditory-
attention explanation for auditory hallucinations.
5.2. Response set difficulties. Some workers have indi-
cated that the attentional difficulties of schizohprenics
include a pigeonholing defect whereby the response set
for stimuli is pathologically altered (cf. Hemsley & Rich-
ardson 1980; Schwartz 1982). In his commentary on
Schwartz's BBS target article, Hemsley (1982) proposes
that such perceptual difficulties could account for schizo-
phrenic hallucinations. Experimentally, pigeonholing ex-
presses itself as a dedifferentiation of target and distractor
stimuli; if a similar breakdown in the identification of
inner- and outer-derived auditory imagery occurs in
schizophrenia, a pathological mislabeling of these stimuli
could result in the identification of auditory hallucina-
tions. This explanation is not supported by other experi-
mental data, however. An important study by Margo,
Hemsley, and Slade (1981) considered the frequency of
schizophrenic VHs under various conditions. They deter-
mined that listening to externally generated speech re-
duced hallucinatory experiences, whereas other condi-
tions (listening to speech in a foreign language, electric
blips, or white noise) either had no effect or enhanced
VHs. The pigeonholing hypothesis predicts that external
distractor stimuli that are closest in nature to internally
generated verbal imagery result in the greatest tendency
for false categorization. The observed result is opposite to
that predicted by the hypothesis.
Hemsley (1982) discusses the results of the Margo et al.
study in a different light: He suggests that the schizo-
phrenic's inability to discern meaning from external sen-
sory stimuli - secondary to a pigeonholing defect - would
bring about a general preoccupation with internal stim-
uli. This model can be linked to an experimental study by
Kay and Singh (1975) indicating a general increase in
egocentricity in schizophrenics. Similarly, Slade (1976b)
proposes that hallucinating schizophrenics withdraw
from external stimuli with a secondary disinhibition of
internal stimuli. This in turn could cause a misidentifica-
tion of the source of internal imagery.
There are manifold difficulties with this model. First, it
is not clear why a preoccupation with internal stimuli per
se would cause them to be mislabeled as nonself derived;
if one is working very hard on some mental problem such
as complex arithmetic one does not generally hallucinate
the answer. Second, this model generates predictions
that are discontinued by experimental data. Like the
poor-auditory-attention mode for VHs, the internal pre-
occupation model predicts that reaction time to auditory
stimuli would be greater in hallucinating than non-
hallucinating schizophrenics, that is, a result in the direc-
tion opposite to that determined by Schnieder and
Wilson (1983). Also unaccounted for would be the obser-
vation by Sedman (1966a) that drowsy states of con-
sciousness actually decreased the frequency of hallucina-
tions in schizophrenics, and Andreasen and Olsen's
(1982) report of a negative correlation between avolition
and schizophrenic hallucinations. Once again the internal
preoccupation model would predict the opposite effect,
namely, increased hallucinatory experience with drow-
siness and avolition. This model would also be unable to
explain why volunatrily induced imagery is never experi-
enced as hallucinatory by schizophrenics, or to differenti-
ate borderline hallucinations in normals and "true" hallu-
cinations in schizophrenics; nor can it account for why the
predominant mode of schizophrenic hallucinations is ver-
bal. Finally, the model is not easily reconciled with
studies by Cegalis, Leen, and Solomon (1977), who found
that acute schizophrenics - who frequently suffer from
hallucinations - have a broader functional visual field
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
511

Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
than normals, and by Collicut and Hemsley (1981), who
found that there were no differences between auditory
thresholds for hallucinating schizophrenics compared to
controls. In short, many schizophrenics seem quite aware
of their outside environment.
5.3. An information overload model. The above discussion
suggests an alternative perceptual flooding model (Horo-
witz 1975). If one assumes that schizophrenics suffer from
sensory overload due to difficulties in, for example, infor-
mation filtering (see Venables 1964; Hemsley 1977), then
the classification procedures for processing perceptual
information could potentially be overburdened and dis-
rupted. Disrupted classification procedures could cause
misidentification of the origin of internal imagery. This
model would be able to account for the fact that increased
volitional behavior tends to increase VHs (Andreasen &
Olsen 1982; Sedman 1966a): Increased goal-directedness
presumably increases information input processing re-
quirements. The reported observation of correlations
between speech disorganization and VHs could be ac-
counted for if information overload can be invoked to
account for the former.
A drawback of this model is that the differential effects
of auditory distractors cannot be accounted for (Margo et
al. 1981): Presumably speech inputs require more infor-
mation processing than meaningless stimuli and should
therefore cause an increase in VHs rather than the re-
ported decrease. Also, no one has yet demonstrated that
there is a direct relationship between information over-
load or any other perceptual/input processing difficulty
and speech disorganization in schizophrenia (Oltmanns
1982). Third, the relationship between borderline hallu-
cinations in normals and true hallucinations in schizo-
phrenics cannot be accounted for, nor can the relative
predominance of verbal hallucinations (as opposed to
nonverbal auditory hallucinations or hallucinations in
other modalities) for these patients. Fourth, if informa-
tion overload and misclassification of experience are so
gross as to create a general confusion and loss of differ-
entiation of internal imagery versus objectively derived
imagery, then it is not clear how it is that schizophrenics
are able readily to accomplish as much as they do,
perceptually speaking. It is rare that schizophrenics are
not able accurately to identify the objects in their en-
vironment even when they are actively hallucinating, and
they can carry out tasks requiring precise visual coordina-
tion such as lighting cigarettes and feeding themselves.
Finally, it is not at all clear why schizophrenics would not
mislabel many objectively derived sensations as self-
derived internal images as frequently as they experience
hallucinations.
5.4. Schizophrenic hallucinations are psychophysiologi-
cally related to dreaming during sleep. This hypothesis
was most clearly articulated by Hartmann (1975). How-
ever, given the similarities between day dreaming and
night dreaming (Foulkes & Fleisher 1975; Foulkes &
Scott 1973; Foulkes & Vogel 1965), it is difficult to
translate this model into a well-delineated set of psycho-
physiological predictions. The simplest hypothesis
would be that schizophrenics are overly prone to being
in drowsy or presleep physiological states, even when
they seem alert. This, however, seems unlikely. First, it
is not uncommon to see schizophrenics hallucinating
while in an agitated state (Hollender & Boszorme'nyi-
Nagi 1958). Second, studies of arousal level in schizo-
phrenia on the basis of skin conductance have indicated a
wide variability with underaroused and overaroused
subgroups (Gruzelier & Venables 1972; Rubens &
Lapidus 1978), and there are no reports of correlations
with respect to the presence or intensity of hallucina-
tions. Third, Shimazono, Katsumi, Sakamoto, Tanaka,
Eguchi, and Nakamura (1965) reported that schizo-
phrenics have a far lower incidence of slow eye move-
ments during closed-eye wakefulness than normals. This
slow ocular drift is a hallmark of drowsy conscious states,
and its relative absence in schizophrenia suggests, if
anything, a relatively overaroused state. Fourth, EEG
study comparing schizophrenics and control groups indi-
cates very little in the way of differences in the predomi-
nance of alpha frequency range electrical activity,
though some trends toward decreased alpha have been
reported; also alpha blockage with eye opening occurs
with the usual robustness among schizophrenics
(Shagass 1976; Spohn & Patterson 1979).
Hartmann (1975) proposed that hallucinations in gen-
eral are caused by a combination of increased excitatory
factors in combination with diminished inhibitory factors
that correlate with changes in cortical norepinephrine
systems noted during REM sleep. This proposal, howev-
er, rested solely on the phenomenological similarity of
dreaming and hallucinations (loss of reality testing and
feedback correction) rather than on empirical data.
5.5. VHs are perceptions of ordinarily subliminal cog-
nitive processes. The subliminal hypothesis, proposed
by Frith (1979), is based on the notion that our speech-
processing capability automatially interprets all external
sounds as hypothetical speech, which are then rejected
for nonspeech inputs. Frith argues that an inappropriate
awareness of these incorrect early interpretations is the
basis for VHs in schizophrenia. This model can account
for (1) so-called functional hallucinations (Fish 1962), that
is, hallucinations that are triggered by actual sounds such
as running water; (2) the blocking effect of external speech
on VHs (Margo et al. 1981) - external speech cannot be
misinterpreted as actual speech because it is such; (3) the
fact that voluntarily induced imagery is never halluci-
nated - such imagery is always internally generated and
therefore distinct from any misinterpretation of external
sound. However, a major limitation of the model is that it
forces the conclusion that all hallucinatory experiences
derive from external sound; this seems untenable, for
schizophrenics are frequently able to hallucinate quite
actively in total silence. Frith attempts, somewhat spec-
ulatively, to explain this fact by proposing that the actual
sound of breathing or heartbeat is transformed into VHs.
Even if this explanation were accepted, the model, like
others described above, is not able to differentiate bor-
derline hallucinations in normals and true hallucinations
in schizophrenics, nor can it easily account for the protec-
tive effects of drowsiness and avolitional states (An-
dreasen & Olsen 1982; Sedman 1966a).
5.6. Other models of VHs based on language output
processes. The planning disruption model of schizo-
phrenic speech disorganization predicts the occurrence
512
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
of unintended verbal images, which in turn provides the
basis for developing an alternative understanding of VHs.
The speech disorganization of schizophrenics has also
been accounted for, in part, by other language-processing
models. If these alternative models of speech disorganiza-
tion can also account for unintended verbal imagery, then
the correlational data linking language disorganization
and VHs could be explained without needing to invoke
pathology at an abstract language-planning level.
First, Rutter (1979) offered empirical evidence on the
basis of the reconstructabilty of sentence order that se-
quential relationships between sentences were specifical-
ly disturbed in schizophrenia. However, disturbed sen-
tence sequences would also be predicted if schizophre-
nics tended to generate poorly organized discourse plans
with incomplete determination of topical dependencies;
hierarchical structure determines, in part, the sequential
ordering of sentences. Second, other workers have ar-
gued that schizophrenic difficulties arise from a failure in
maintaining a generalized set (Cohen, Nachmani & Rose-
nberg 1974; Harrow et al. 1983; Shakow 1962; 1977).
Along these lines, Vygotsky (1932) described associative
chaining of schizophrenic discourse, and Kay (1982) dis-
cussed the overreliance on affective or phonological cues
by schizophrenics (see, for instance, segment D) in organ-
izing their discourse. However, these language features
would be also predicted to occur in the absence of a well-
formed, stable, goal-driven discourse plan that is orga-
nized according to transitive presuppositional dependen-
cies; in the absence of a stable discourse plan the speaker
may fall back on "lower order" organizational principles
such as rhyming or alliteration in the determination of the
text. Third, the loss of cohesion in terms of nominal
references for schizophrenic speech has been described
by Rochester, Martin, and Thurston (1977). Again, this
finding can be understood as reflecting a more fundamen-
tal disturbance in multipropositional planning; Chaika
(1982) has similarly noted the dependence of cohesive ties
on discourse macrostructure in her discussion of the
Rochester et al. study. Fourth, Chaika (1982) has de-
scribed randomized sequencing of statements that devi-
ate from initial communicative goals. This associative
veering off target would also be predicted if schizo-
phrenics did not have access to a stable discourse plan.
Finally, the loss of a well-formed discourse plan would
result in speech that is easily distracted or reflects poor
attention; these two informational deficits have both been
proposed as causes of schizophrenic language disor-
ganization (Schwartz 1982).
In summary, the major distinguishing feature of the
discourse-planning model compared to the large collec-
tion of language-processing deficit models just mentioned
is that the former postulates a particular top-to-bottom
disturbance at an abstract representational level that is a
precursor to speech behavior, while the latter set of
studies views schizophrenic language as a failure of the
left-to-right sequencing of statements in the flow of
speech itself. Thus the planning perspective predicts
many of the encoding disturbances previously investigat-
ed for schizophrenia; however, these performance defi-
cits would be hypothetically linked to higher level "inten^
tional" cognitive structures (Hoffman et al. 1982).
This paper has argued that disturbances of higher level
language-planning structures need to be invoked in order
to account for the disturbed intentionality and the nonself
inference of VHs. But models that predict speech disor-
ganization per se are not able to make this link to VHs
because the anticipated effect of the former on verbal
imagery would simply be propositionally disorganized
verbal imagery. This in no way explains how it is that
instances of verbal imagery acquire the "otherness" at-
tribute. Thus, for instance, a segmental set (Harrow et al.
1983; Shakow 1962; 1977), distractibility and defects in
attention and information filtering (Neale & Oltmanns
1980; Schwartz 1982), sequencing defects (Rutter 1979),
and associative veering off target (Chaika 1982) could each
be invoked to account for certain subtypes of speech
disorganization of schizophrenics. Yet these forms of
cognitive pathology do not suggest how or why internal
verbal imagery would be experienced as alien or of
nonself origin unless one hypothesizes that the speaker's
expectations with regard to his own language productions
were violated. But as soon as one begins to consider the
speaker's expectations with respect to his own behavior,
then one is once again invoking cognitive plans that
organize past, present, and future behavior. Thus the
language-planning model of VHs seems to be required to
relate conceptually schizophrenic language disorganiza-
tion, disturbed intentionality, cognitive pathology, and
hallucinatory phenomena.
5.7. Disturbances of associative memory. One interest-
ing variant of the language-planning model of VHs can be
proposed by positing a particular disturbance in long-
term memory. Hopfield, Feinstein, and Palmer (1983),
Crick and Mitchison (1983), and Hoffman (in press) have
shown, using computer simulations of neuronal systems,
that associative memory can demonstrate specific types of
functional breakdown when storage capacities are over-
loaded. This can result in the creation of one or more
"parasitic" memories. A parasitic memory trace trans-
forms many distant or unrelated inputs into itself and
thereby disrupts the flow of expectable associations. Re-
call that it is proposed that planning structures for lan-
guage production are located in a working memory that
interacts with a long-term associative memory. A simple
model of tree construction would consist of the following:
(1) a nodal propositional element belonging to working
memory is loaded into associative memory; (2) associative
memory generates one or more propositional outputs, (3)
a subset of those outputs that presuppose the nodal
element is loaded into working memory as dependent
propositions, (4) this process is reiterated for the depen-
dent propositions. The result would be the production of
a propositional tree structure.10
If the long-term memory includes certain parasitic
states, then, at times, inputs to long-term memory deriv-
ing from working memory could be transformed into a
parasitic output that is then reentered in working memo-
ry as a component of the language plan. The result would
be a disruption of working memory contents, a loss of
congruence with current cognitive goals, and a strongly
unintended language representation. No direct tests for
parasitic memory states in schizophrenia have yet been
undertaken. However, an early study by Miller, Johnson,
and Richmond (1965) compared performance on a contin-
uous word association test and a verbal fluency test with
hallucinating and nonhallucinating schizophrenics. They
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
513

Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
found that responses of the former were much more
repetitive and stereotyped than those of the latter. This is
precisely the response pattern that would be predicted if
the associations of the hallucinators flowed into a parasitic
memory pattern. Also, there is abundant evidence indi-
cating disordered associations (Kelter, Cohen, Engel,
List & Strohner 1977; Silverstein & Harrow 1982), asso-
ciative interference (Hirsch & DeWolfe 1977), and dis-
turbed mnemonic organization (Koh, Kayton & Berry
1973; Maher, Manschreck & Rucklos 1980) in schizo-
phrenics, although the memory systems studied here
were short-term. An appeal of the parasitic memory
model is that if a VH or voice corresponds to a single
parasitic memory representation that is triggered by
widely dissimilar and distant associations, then the result
would be expected to be highly repetitive in content.
Though the variability of VHs has not yet been systemat-
ically studied, the impression of this author is that schizo-
phrenic voices are not very creative or expressive and
frequently consist of a small number of rigidly repeated
expressions. This is precisely the pattern predicted if
language-planning structures are systematically dis-
rupted by parasitically generated associative memory
outputs. Once again it needs to be emphasized that VHs
cannot be accounted for solely on the basis of a parasit-
ically organized associative memory. The predicted re-
sult in that case would simply be rigidly constrained
speech and verbal images. The postulation of planning
structures that are disrupted by memory dysfunction is
required in order to account for the altered sense of
intentionality that accompanies VHs.
6. Closing remarks
These final remarks flesh out the postulated relationship
among verbal hallucinations, other symptoms, and neu-
rocognitive disturbances in schizophrenia. Though some
of what will be said is speculative, these remarks are
included because of the potentially important and
provocative issues they raise.
6.1. The specificity of language disorganization and VHs.
How precise are we normally in generating hierarchically
organized speech? It is clear that we frequently digress
and move on to new topics during conversation. Our own
studies of normal speech suggest that certain kinds of
locutions are used to bridge such loci of incoherence; for
instance, the speaker may say "Well, to get back to what I
was saying before . . . " or "But anyhow guess what..."
The shared feature of these frame-shifters is that they are
not part of the flow of the narrative or discussion, but, in
various ways, refer to the discourse itself, by talking about
either the text or the speaker/listener interaction. These
metadiscursive statements function something like para-
graph indentations in written texts (Hoffman et al. 1982;
see also discussion of preterminators by Davidson 1975).
Another way to shift topics or to digress is simply through
conversational turn-taking. Each new turn permits the
assertion of a new topical statement.
Issues regarding the relative prevalence of language
pathology and VHs among nonschizophrenic patient
groups have not been addressed. For example, manics
may report VHs, though this finding is rather uncommon.
This is a potentially important observation insofar as
manic patients frequently demonstrate language disor-
ganization at least as profound as that of schizophrenics
(Andreasen 1979b; Harrow et al. 1983; Harvey 1983). For the
study described above (Andreasen, Hoffman & Grove 1984;
Hoffman et al. 1986), 3 out of 24 manics reported VHs.
If VHs are secondary to breakdowns in discourse plan-
ning, why is it that manics are, at least partially, protected
from VHs? A possible answer is provided on the basis of a
discourse analysis of speech segments randomly sampled
from this patient group. It was found that manics as a
group had well-formed subtrees embedded within over-
all deviant structures whereas schizophrenics, in general,
demonstrated subtrees that were subnormal in size. This
suggests that manics are quite competent in generating
discourse plans; their problem is that they rapidly switch
from one well-planned discourse structure to another
while producing speech. If this is the case, then the manic
will generally have in mind a well-formed goal-concor-
dant language plan simultaneously with the occurrence of
verbal images so that the latter generally are not experi-
enced as unintended. Thus, in spite of the speech disor-
ganization of manics, their vulnerability to VHs is much
lower.
It should also be noted that VHs and receptive aphasia
have been reported to co-occur in patients with demon-
strable brain pathology involving the left temporal lobe
(Bazhin, Wasserman & Tonkonogii 1975; Brown 1981).
This obviously represents another link between VHs and
language pathology, though in this case the mechanism of
VHs cannot easily be linked to language-planning difficul-
ties per se. A more likely explanation is the relative
absence of any verbal imagery (see earlier discussion of
sensory models of VHs). This type of hallucination may
thus be related to so-called phantom-limb hallucinations,
that is, proprioceptive sensations that persist following
loss of a limb due to surgery, accident, and so forth.
6.2. Distractor effects on VHs. The language-planning
model of VHs offers a good explanation for the various
effects of auditory distractors on the frequency of VHs in
schizophrenia (Margo et al. 1981). A recent report by
Andreasen, Hoffman, and Grove (1984) presents experi-
mental evidence on the basis of the "gist" test that
schizophrenics do quite well in encoding multiproposi-
tional speech inputs. This presumably requires the gen-
eration of some sort of propositional structure in working
memory that is not unlike the planning structures dis-
cussed above for language production. If these externally
driven propositional structures are generated, then de-
viant language-planning structures may be eclipsed, with
subsequent reduction of VHs. Also, it is plausible that
nonspecific noise could disrupt language-planning pro-
cesses (see the interference hypothesis proposed by Call-
away 1970) with subsequent increased vulnerability to
unintended imagery and hallucinatory experiences.
6.3. Other characteristics of VHs. How is it that schizo-
phrenic VHs are often experienced in the voice of another
person whose source is spatially located outside the
patient's head? An answer to this question is suggested by
a simple mental exercise: Imagine a striped animal.
Ordinarily, you would not simply imagine any old animal
(e.g., a cow) with stripes imposed on the image. You
would imagine, say, a tiger or a zebra. Our imagery
514
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
processes are economical. We imagine to whatever de-
gree possible what we already know and what ordinarily
makes sense with respect to the requirements of the
image. Our language-planning model postulates that an
imagistic feature of the schizophrenic's VH is that it is
experienced as unintended and nonconcordant with cur-
rent cognitive goals. His experience, like ours, is that
verbal images of this sort generally derive from speech
produced by other agents; such images are thus more or
less automatically inferred to be of nonself origin. And
Dennett's (1978) formulation allows the possibility that
inferences derived from imagery processes alter not only
what the subject believes about the image but how the
image feels and seems. Thus the nonself (^-inference
could, in principle, experientially cause the schizo-
phrenic's unintended verbal image to "sound like" some-
one else's voice originating from outside of the head.
Another factor yet to be considered in the induction of
VHs is the content of verbal imagery. Often schizo-
phrenic VHs express ideas that are unacceptable or dis-
tasteful to the subject. This has led to a traditional
psychoanalytical explanation of VHs as expressions of
wishes and motivations that need to be disavowed or
disowned by the subject. (See the multiple book review of
Griinbaum's Foundations of Psychoanalysis, BBS 9: 2,
1986). It seems unlikely, however, that judgments of
unacceptability of verbal imagery content could be the
sole determinant of VHs. First, one can deliberately
produce mental speech that is totally uncharacteristic of
one's values, beliefs, and wishes, yet such verbal images
are normally not experienced as VHs. Second, VHs
reported by schizophrenics are at times concordant with
their current values, wishes, and beliefs. On the other
hand, it is plausible that verbal contents that clash with
the subject's values, beliefs, and wishes would enhance
the likelihood that a nonself inference would be gener-
ated on the basis of verbal imagery; for the reasons just
stated, however, it still seems that unintended, goal-
nonconcordant experience is necessary for this inference
to be made. And if the expression of self-dissonant ideas,
wishes, and so forth repetitively occurs as VHs, this
suggests parasitic memory traces that secondarily disrupt
language planning and cause unintended verbal imagery.
These stereotyped VHs could then cause the not surpris-
ing inference that such experiences derive from a particu-
lar person or persons. This would in turn provide the
foundation for further inferences about the intentions of
these other agents and the development of a full-blown
paranoid clinical picture.
6.4. Why are schizophrenic hallucinations predominantly
verbal rather than, say, visual? The obvious reason VHs
predominate would be that schizophrenics suffer from
specific alterations in language processing. This perspec-
tive is supported by a number of clinical reports and
experimental data (Brown 1977; Chaika 1974; 1977; 1982;
Faber, Abrams, Taylor, Kasprison, Morris & Weisz 1983;
Faber & Reichstein 1981; Herbert & Waltensperger
1980; Hoffman et al. 1982; Hoffman et al. 1985; Hoffman
& Sledge 1984; Silverberg-Shalev, Gordon, Bentin &
Aranson 1981). Complementing this perspective are a
number of neurobiological studies indicating dominant-
hemisphere dysfunction among many schizophrenics.
This conclusion has been drawn on the basis of EEG
spectral analysis (Flor-Henry 1976; Morihisa, Duffy &
Wyatt 1983; Morstyn, Duffy & McCarley 1983b), later-
alizing EEG abnormalities (Abrams & Taylor 1980), skin
conductance studies (Gruzelier & Venables 1972),
positron emission tomography (Buchsbaum et al. 1982),
and P300-evoked potential mapping (Morstyn, Duffy &
McCarley 1983a).
Although the precise anatomical locus for message
planning has not been determined, a reasonable candi-
date is the dominant-hemisphere limbic system. Presum-
ably the locus of verbal imagery representations is the
dominant posterior temporal lobe (Lezak 1983). Limbic
dysfunction might then uncouple imagery processes from
readouts deriving from frontal and association cortex that
are referrable to goal, belief, and associative memory
representations. This is consistent with the idea that the
dominant-hemisphere limbic system is a mediator linking
generalized cortex with focal language-specific process-
ing areas (Brown 1979; Flor-Henry 1976; Lezak 1983).
This neurocognitive model is consistent with other
reports suggesting limbic system dysfunction in schizo-
phrenia (Flor-Henry 1976; Torrey & Peterson 1974). It
can also account for an interesting report by Alpert,
Rubenstein, and Kesselman (1976) indicating that cross-
dominance of language processes actually seems to pro-
tect schizophrenics from VHs. This finding would be
expected if crossed hemispheric sharing of language func-
tions protected schizophrenics from lateralized hemi-
spheric disturbances; language pathology would be di-
minished and VHs would not occur.
6.5. Other clinical manifestations of schizophrenia. The
relationship between a language-planning model of VHs
and other clinical manifestations of schizophrenia needs
to be considered. First, disrupted intendedness of other
forms of action and thought is reflected in various Schnei-
derian symptoms often seen in schizophrenia (Schneider
1957). "Thought control" and "thought insertion" consist
of the subject's believing that someone else is manipulat-
ing his thoughts or is interspersing the other's thoughts
with his own; in both cases the experiential intendedness
of mental representations is presumably disrupted for
their selfhood to be thrown into question. "Thought
withdrawal" refers to the experience of involuntarily
losing all mental contents and momentarily being unable
to produce another mental representation. All three
symptoms would be predicted on the basis of disruptions
in cognitive planning processes - with the secondary
shifts, breakdown, or loss of cognitive plans - that
organize strongly or weakly intended mental representa-
tions. "Delusions of passivity" refer to certain of the
subject's actions that are experienced as being willed by
another person. Once again, disruptions in planning -
this time at a motor level, with an associated affect of
unintendedness inducing an external misattribution -
could account for this symptom; it seems that at times the
kinesthetic sensation of motor activity is insufficient to
block the inference of nonself origin (see note 3 for a
description of automatic speech in schizophrenia).
Visual hallucinations are at times reported by schizo-
phrenics, though not as frequently as VHs. Investigators
of visual perception have posited higher order represen-
tations that synthesize different hypotheses about the
form and nature of objects and operate in parallel with
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
515

Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
lower order visual-input processing (Marr 1982). Disrup-
tions in these higher order synthetic structures during
visual imaging — similar to planning disruptions in speech
generation - could potentially induce visual hallucina-
tions.
Other perceptual abnormalities can be similarly ac-
counted for. Schizophrenics frequently report an abnor-
mal sensitivity to sound stimuli as well as factitious
auditory perceptions (e.g., ringing or rushing sounds).
Their frequency and relationship to frank VHs have not
been studied. One possible explanation is that higher
order, expectation-sensitive synthetic representations
that categorize and organize external stimuli are dis-
rupted (as in the pigeonholing deficit of Hemsley and
Richardson 1980, and Schwartz 1982). This would in-
duce excessive "opportunisticplanning, "thatis, unstable
shifting of higher level organizational schemata triggered
by novel stimulus inputs (Hayes-Roth & Hayes-Roth
1979), which is analogous to the disrupted and unstable
planning of language outputs.11 The predictable result
would be greater salience attached to irrelevant stimuli
even though, for example, thresholds for stimulus detec-
tion seem to be relatively normal in schizophrenia (Col-
licut & Hemsley 1981).
Thus, the language-planning model of VHs, when
considered in conjunction with Schneiderian symptoms
and perceptual phenomena (Schneider 1957), suggest
multiple vulnerabilities of higher level synthetic repre-
sentations to pathological disruption. However, linking
attentional difficulties in schizophrenia with higher level
synthetic representations is quite speculative. It should
be noted that the goal of this paper is to describe a locus of
cognitive pathology that underlies speech disturbances
and VHs and not to provide a general theory of schizo-
phrenia. Thus there may also be other types of informa-
tion-processing disturbances in schizophrenia responsi-
ble for the various perceptual abnormalities just mention-
ed.
Another set of clinical manifestations of schizophrenia
that can be linked to the planning model of VHs consists
of the negative symptoms of schizophrenia. These symp-
toms - anhedonia, social withdrawal, avolition, and so
forth - have recently received increased attention (An-
dreasen & Olsen 1982; Angrist, Rotrosen & Gershon
1980; Crow 1980; Wise 1982). There has been an assump-
tion that these symptoms are due to core defects in brain
processes (Angrist, Rotrosen & Gershon 1980; Crow
1980); our "intentional" model of schizophrenic symp-
toms suggests another perspective, however. Most or all
of these symptoms can be explained simply on the basis of
diminished goal-directedness of cognitive processes. As
just discussed, many positive schizophrenic symptoms
are predicted to derive from the strong unintendedness of
certain cognitive processes. If the resultant experience
(generally dysphoric) can function as negative feedback,
then the predicted result would be a diminution of goal-
directedness during the more chronic stages of the ill-
ness. Subsequently, cognitive processes would tend to be
experienced as weakly unintended (mental processes
occurring in the absence of goal) as opposed to strongly
unintended. This would in turn cause an overall reduc-
tion in many positive schizophrenic symptoms. This cor-
rection process would account for the negative correla-
tions between positive and negative symptoms in schizo-
phrenia when they are analyzed by principal components
analysis (Andreasen & Olsen 1982).
At present we have a limited understanding of schizo-
phrenic VHs. However, the model proposed here best
accounts for the wide range of empirical findings about
schizophrenic and normal hallucinations described in this
paper. It also suggests conceptual links with dominant-
hemisphere dysfunction and other clinical effects that
have been associated with schizophrenia. Further valida-
tion of the model, or some future variant of it, of course
awaits future experimental investigation.
NOTES
1. Although I rely on the conceptual apparatus of Dennett
(1978) for distinguishing primary representational charac-
teristics of images from inferentially generated attributes, the
arguments that follow do not depend upon deciding the issue
motivating Dennett's formulation. The debate concerns
whether the analogue or pictorial nature of imagery reflects
mental structures that are truly analogue or spatial in nature (cf.
Kosslyn 1981; Kosslyn & Pomerantz 1977) or whether these
properties derive from automatic inferential beliefs derived
from propositional data structures (cf. Pylyshyn 1973; 1981).
The first explanation, in Dennett's scheme, hypothesizes that
the pictorial nature of visual imagery and the acoustic/aural
nature of auditory imagery derive from an a representation,
while the second explanation assumes that such properties are
B-derivatives. Either explanation will do quite nicely for any-
thing this paper has to say about verbal imagery or verbal
hallucinations.
2. Thanks are due to Daniel Dennett for pointing out to me
this very informative problem in his review of an earlier version
of this paper.
3. Two schizophrenic patients who suffer from frequent VHs
are known by the author to manifest this phenomenon. Both
demonstrated instances of apparently involuntary or automatic
utterances that intruded into their normal flow of speech. The
first patient would completely disown such utterances. For
example, he was once talking about his past school experiences
and then abruptly said in a monotone voice, "My mother is
gone." When I asked what brought this last utterance to mind,
he denied ever saying it, thinking it, or hearing himself say it.
The second patient also demonstrated apparently involuntary
speech intrusions but would claim that they derived from one of
his voices. For example, he was once discussing, in reasonably
clear terms, a political topic when his speech was suddenly
interrupted with, "Let go of me. ' When asked what this was
referring to, he replied that it was not he who was speaking, but
a voice (which he had heard in the past) talking to another voice.
4. A representative research definition of "loose associa-
tions" from Reilly, Harrow, Tucker, Quinlan & Seigel (1975) is
"a lack of connection between ideas so that the reason for a shift
in thought is questionable or incomprehensible to the listener."
Besides Reilly et al. (1975), see Andreasen (1979a; 1979b) and
Andreasen, Hofiman & Grove (1984) for studies of the preva-
lence and specificity of "loose associations" and other related
forms of speech disorder with respect to schizophrenia.
5. A similar partial ordering of elements composing planning
representations for nonverbal goal-directed actions has been
presented in the artificial intelligence literature by Sacerdoti
(1977).
6. See Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman (1974) for a discussion of
the efficiency of tree representations during serial computa-
tional processing, and Fahlman, Hinton, and Sejnowski (1983)
for a discussion of how such data structures might be instanti-
ated by massively parallel machine architectures with biological
features.
7. One might propose to correct this deviance by turning the
structure on its head and identifying saving/keeping money as
516
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Commentary/Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
the topical statement. This, however, is not in keeping with the
original question of the interviewer and would result in further
problems: The statement, "I feeling like cashing my welfare
check now," would need to assume a subordinate placement
with respect to the saving/keeping money statement. This
placement is blocked (i.e., the presupposition relationship is not
fulfilled); this is because the two statements express contrary
intentions. Therefore this reinterpretation of the commu-
nicative intention of the speaker still does not permit a complete
partial ordering of the statements of this text.
8. A reinterpretation can be suggested that reorganizes the
text into a single hierarchy. This can be accomplished by
assuming that the accidental cutting occurred because the
speaker was so nervous and upset by David's rejection. Howev-
er, this violates the context of the entire statement, where the
speaker is responding to questions about prior suicidal behav-
ior. This compels the listener to look for suicidal references or an
explicit remark that changes the topic, such as, "No I never tried
to hurt myself but I once accidentally . . . "
9. This is obviously not always the case. Some schizo-
phrenics, particularly those who are chronically isolated from
others, will report that they "enjoy" their hallucinatory
experiences.
10. This mapping of densely linked data sets in association
memory into hierarchically organized data sets in working
memory was suggested to me by Daniela loan.
11. The possible relationship between excessively oppor-
tunistic planning and attentional defects in schizophrenia was
first suggested to me by Larry Birnbaum.
Open Peer Commentary
Commentaries submitted by the qualified professional readership of
this journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as
Continuing Commentary on this article, lntegrative overviews and
syntheses are especially encouraged.
Who may I say is calling?
Kathleen A. Akins and Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, Mass. 02155
The other day I was reading a rough draft of a paper
when I came to an underlined section of the text. Now (in
my mind's ear) the author's familiar voice changed, giving
careful emphasis to this passage. Strangely, the point was
not particularly illuminating but the underlining con-
tinued on and on, and I soon realized that this was surely
the result of a print command error. Only the first
sentence should have been italicized. But even seeing
this (and much against my will), his voice continued -
'emphasis added' and in a rising, near-manic pitch - on to
the end of the page. Here was the voice of the ignored
academic shouting into the intellectual void.
A. Tenlake, personal correspondence
For the normal subject, the phenomena of "talking to oneself"
are indeed a wide variety of complex events. Above, the audito-
ry image "heard" by the subject occurs in the course of a difficult
cognitive task, matches the perceptions of another speaker's
voice, and (irritatingly) does not seem subject to voluntary
extinction. But it is no hallucination. The elegance of Hoffman's
suggestion is that, amidst the jumble of strange but non-
pathological phenomena, he offers a unitary explanation of
several sorts of schizophrenic hallucinations and behavior.
These pathologies can be blamed on a single sort of malfunction
relatively deep within the organization of the cognitive system -
an action - production disorder that is magnified into a cognitive
illusion by the default assumptions of normal perception. Alas,
such unity also proves the theory's undoing, for in order to say
exactly where and how this disorder occurs, Hoffman must
locate it within an elaborate and detailed story about all the
normal phenomena, too tall an order at this time. Hoffman's
sketchy story leaves enticing loose ends to lure our attention.
What is Hoffman's understanding of "presupposition," "ab-
stract representation," the difference between involuntary and
unintended acts, accessible versus inaccessible goals? Instead of
yielding to temptation, however, we choose to concentrate on
what we take to be the central (good) idea of the paper and a
relatively minor, simplifying variation on it that might save
Hoffman from many of these perplexities, at least for the time
being.
Hoffman's account is threatened by (inter alia) an infinite
regress: If we identify "slips of the tongue" as misexecutions of
communicative intentions, relative to what could there be "slips
of thought"? Wittgenstein (1982) thought that "slips of thought"
were impossible because a mistake presupposes an intention.
Although we can intend to reach a particular (cognitive) conclu-
sion - say, discovering a new way to drive from home to office -
we cannot intend each of the individual thoughts that constitute
our attempted derivation or discovery, on pain of generating a
never-beginning regress of ulterior intentions to form thoughts.
Some thoughts must just "come to mind," however apt, well-
ordered, and useful they prove to be in the larger project.
If what Hoffman offers us is in effect the sketch of a theory of
slips of thought, he takes on the burden of straightening out all
these problems about goals and their relations to intentions, and
the question of when, if ever, our thoughts are intended. All this
is worth doing, but an easier path is missed when he dismisses
the suggestion that verbal imagery (as distinct from "thoughts")
is always the execution or misexecution of communicative inten-
tions: intentions to communicate with oneself. "Goals concur-
rent with verbal imagery do not seem to be communication goals
(unless we must for some reason communicate with ourselves);
instead they are . . . frequently referrable to manifest tasks and
problem solving" (sect. 4, para. 13).
There is in fact a lot to be said for the hypothesis that much of
what is called thinking is a sort of verbal communicating to
oneself, or, more provocatively, a form of communicating within
oneself. Rather than argue for this view here, we will just point
out that the assumption that all "verbal thought" has an internal
communicative function allows a simplification of Hoffman's
view, to wit:
When normal people have verbal imagery, they form
(self-)communicative goals, which yield speech-act planning,
which yields inwardly directed speech, and this speech is
thereupon recognized as intended or at least not unintended in
virtue of its lack of dissonance with those very communicative
goals. The result: the familiar phenomenology of "talking to
oneself." In particular, it is quite possible to make middle-level
production errors - of word choice, for instance — and recognize
and correct them. (Can one "mispronounce" a word in verbal
thought? Yes - think of reading the surnames in Russian novels.)
When schizophrenics attempt to engage in this familiar prac-
tice, they form (self-)communicative goals, which yield dis-
rupted speech-act planning (or perhaps performance), which
yields inwardly directed speech that is dissonant or discordant;
it fails to execute well the communicative goals just set. And if
the discrepancy involves a high-level communicative goal, the
verbal imagery is perceived as unintended-by-me, and subse-
quently as "other-produced." Although Hoffman does not say
this, one way to think of this "inference to otherness" is as
follows. Because the discordance is so gross, it cannot be
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
517

Commentary /Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
interpreted away as an accident or a slip, a low-level malfunction
such as a mispronunciation or a spoonerism. Indeed, because
the images are voices, they are interpreted as speech acts; they
are irresistably interpreted as intended. And if I don't intend to
say these things, then someone else must. The result: one
"hears voices." (Compare: If I discover my hand drumming on
the table, it is easy enough to interpret as mere fiddling - a
nervous habit: if I discover my hand signing a contract or writing
a death threat, I cannot interpret that as a mere verbal slip, but
as some speech act or other gone awry.)
Postulating (only) self-communicative goals enables one to
circumvent an infinite regress while eliminating some puzzling
aspects of the original theory (Do dreams really occur in goalless
states? Is the general nature of thought goal-directed?). Still, the
above suggestions are made with trepidation; they can be
regarded as just one more speculative gesture toward a complex
story that Hoffman has begun trying to tell.
the experiential aspect of the occurrence of unintended images
which are nonconcordant with currently operative cognitive
goals. In contrast, auditory images are not disowned (except
fleetingly, perhaps) when they occur in passive, goalless states
of consciousness. In support of this hypothesis Hoffman argues
that increases in goalless states would decrease the frequency of
disowned auditory images (i.e., VH). This, however, is contrary
to findings that goal-oriented task engagement reduces the
frequency of VH (Kazdin 1977; Allen, Halperin & Friend 1985).
The hypothesis is also inconsistent with the finding that VH can
be deliberately produced and removed (Allen, Halperin &
Friend 1985), thus violating Hoffman's necessary nonconcor-
dance postulate, because there is in this case no nonconcor-
dance between the current operative cognitive goal and the
presence of VH.
To conclude, although the model does not adequately explain
VH in schizophrenia, it does provide food for thought and
should stimulate new approaches in this area.
A three-component analysis of Hoffman's
model of verbal hallucinations
Heidelinde Allen
Psychology Department, Royal Free Hospital, London NW3 2QG, England
Hoffman's target article is interesting and welcome because it
attempts to provide a detailed analysis of verbal hallucinations
(VH) within a recently developed framework of language pro-
cessing. However, the explanations offered by the model are
problematic, as can be demonstrated by examining each of the
three main components of VH:
(1) They are cognitions, presented as images by virtue of
having acoustic properties for the subject.
(2) They are unintended cognitions in that they are not under
the subject's conscious voluntary control at either the produc-
tion or the removal level.
(3) They differ from other types of unintended cognitions in
that they are disowned.
Hoffman's model addresses these components, but, taking
each in turn, consider:
(1) The model takes it for granted that certain unintended
cognitions should be presented as auditory images. They are, he
asserts, a common occurrence. Yet auditory images are not
presented as a common experience in the research concerning
(a) the occurrence of unintended cognitions in normals (Neisser
1967; Underwood 1979), in obsessions (Rachman 1981), and in
depression and anxiety states (Beck 1976), and (b) subvocal
"self-talk" (which Hoffman equates with auditory images) in
children and adults (Meichenbaum 1974). It seems, therefore,
that the frequent occurrence of auditory imagery is rather
specific to schizophrenia. This cannot be taken for granted but
needs to be addressed.
(2) The unintended aspect of VH is seen as an epiphenomenon
of a defect in discourse planning. The defect is inferred from
discourse that consists of thematically unrelated ideas. Thus the
validity of this hypothesis rests on the co-occurrence of speech
marked by thematically unrelated ideas and VH. This, however,
is contradicted by findings that (a) speech-disordered schizo-
phrenics are able to produce thematically coherent discourse
(Allen 1984) and (b) there is no necessary relationship between
speech disorder and VH (for example only 4 out of 10 schizo-
phrenics were found to have both; Allen & Allen 1985). Also,
since it is presumed that VHs are the unintended byproduct of a
discourse planning defect, it seems likely that they would vary
randomly. This is not the case, however, for they tend to remain
constant over time and across different situations, and to be
restricted to a limited number of topics, usually of a punitive
nature.
(3) The disowning feature of VH is presumed to derive from
Language process and hallucination
phenomenology
Murray Alpert
Department of Psychiatry, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, N.Y. 10016
Hoffman shifts the locus of the VH from the stimulus error
originally proposed by Esquirol (Kolb 1973) to a response error.
However, except for the study with Andreasen and Grove
(1984), Hoffman provides little empirical data for these sug-
gestions. His discussion is based, largely, on reasoning and
analogy. In the study with Andreasen and Grove a correlation
between the tendency to hallucinate and the severity of distur-
bance in discourse planning was found in a group of 35 schizo-
phrenics. Depending on sample characteristics, productive
symptoms may intercorrelate, and it seems premature to devel-
op a theory of hallucinogenesis based on such a scant data base.
The suggested site for hallucinogenesis, in a discourse planning
stage, seems unfortunate and likely to misdirect empirical work.
These stages are best thought of as intervening variables, con-
ceptual aides to help consider the flow of a cognitive process.
This theory reifies them as hypothetical constructs and even
locates the function in specific brain nuclei.
An argument is made based on the observation that normals
feel that recordings of their own voice sound alien; and Hoffman
seems to be suggesting that schizophrenics may fail to recognize
their self-generated verbal imagery in a manner similar to the
way that normals fail to recognize their own voice. Normals may
fail to recognize their own voice for a number of reasons. What
they hear of their voice while speaking has a large bone conduc-
tion component which has a low frequency bias. The recording
is, in fact, very different spectrally from what they might hear
while speaking. In addition, as Hoffman remarks regarding
efferent copy, alluding to the large differences between exaf-
ferent and reafferent stimulation, the task for the nervous
system while speaking is to not hear oneself (Alpert 1965). If we
did hear, we would be shouting into our own ear as we talked to
someone some distance away. The argument need not be
labored except to point out the danger of reasoning from an
analogy between nonself recognition of voice and nonself recog-
nition of imagery. [Ed. note: This point was made by several
other commentators but removed elsewhere in the interest of
space.]
The failure of hallucinators to recognize the source of their
VHs in their own imagery is crucial to the theory and, as we have
indicated, the arguments offered to explain this failure are not
compelling. Hoffman posits a disturbance in a discourse-plan-
ning stage but retains an important role for verbal imagery. He
518
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Commentary /Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
does not indicate the role of imagery in discourse planning, and
in fact the VH appears to be simply the product of the generation
of and failure to recognize imagery. Hallucinators hear the
voices of others; the imagery error seems more related to
dialogue than- to discourse planning.
Consistent with Hoffman's model, I found that suggestion
could cause nonhallucinator schizophrenics to report hearing
things, although what they reported were not VHs but rather
things like footsteps. Suggestion led the hallucinating schizo-
phrenics to report more frequent VHs but no nonverbal sounds
(Alpert 1985). Two studies, however, found hallucinators to use
syntactic organization more efficiently than nonhallucinating
schizophrenics when performing a task using poorly intelligible
verbal stimuli. This finding does not appear congruent with
Hoffman's requirement of a defect in discourse planning among
hallucinators. Rather, compared to nonhallucinators, they ap-
pear more likely to perceive auditory experiences verbally
(Alpert, Rubinstein & Kesselman 1976; Mintz & Alpert 1972).
A survey of hallucinations in a series of sequentially admitted
patients to Bellevue Hospital's acute services found that about
half of the sample of schizophrenics reported VHs whereas 20%
reported visual hallucinations. The visual hallucinations were
not verbal. However, those reporting visual hallucinations
were, without exception, among those with VHs. These data
would suggest that something in addition to, and perhaps other
than a defect in discourse planning is implicated in the genesis of
VHs. It is interesting to note that a similar gradient of severity of
hallucinated status exists for the alochol withdrawal psychoses
where first auditory (largely verbal) and then combined auditory
and visual hallucinations are seen as the addiction progresses
(Alpert, Angrist, Diamond & Gershon 1970). In line with this,
we found that the phenomenal characteristics of alcoholic VHs
are different from those in schizophrenia (Alpert & Silvers
1970). Such differences might present an opportunity for study
of the discourse planning hypothesis.
Hoffman cites the study of Miller, Johnson, and Richmond
(1965) indicating that schizophrenics with VHs are less compe-
tent in language usage, but not the Johnson and Miller (1965)
paper which suggests that this deficiency predated the onset of
schizophrenia. There seems to be something about the schizo-
phrenic condition that elicits VHs in vulnerable individuals and
visual hallucinations in a subset of these. A defect in discourse
planning does not seem central because the defect can be
detected prior to the onset of the VHs and is also associated with
nonlexical hallucinations. However, the lexical issue seems
important. In a discussion of the commonalities in the cardinal
signs of schizophrenia (Alpert 1985), I noted that all, including
flat affect, involved some disturbance in language processing. In
emphasizing their verbal content Hoffman has focused on an
important aspect of schizophrenic hallucinations. Locating the
lesion in left-hemisphere language areas is not consistent with
my reading of the evidence (Alpert & Martz 1977; Mayer,
Alpert, Stastney, Perlick & Empfield 1985).
Verbal hallucinations, unintendedness, and
the validity of the schizophrenia diagnosis
R. P. Bentall and P. D. Slade
Sub-Department of Clinical Psychology, Department of Psychiatry, New
Medical School, Liverpool L69 3SX, England
Despite the wealth of evidence collected by psychologists on
normal human perception and cognition, the hallucinations of
psychotic individuals have been a relatively neglected topic of
empirical research. For example, with the exception of three
volumes of collected papers (Keup 1970; Siegal & West 1975;
West 1962) and a book by Johnson (1978) proposing a particular
theory, a book shortly to be published by the present commen-
tators (Slade & Bentall 1986) will be one of the first attempts to
review systematically the research in this area. Because of this
relative lack of research and theorising, Hoffman's bold attempt
to draw together the literature on the verbal hallucinations of
patients diagnosed as "schizophrenic" is to be particularly wel-
comed. However, a number of problems are apparent in
Hoffman's account which, we believe, merit serious attention.
1. The association between verbal hallucinations and "schizo-
phrenia." Central to Hoffman's theory would appear to be the
assumption that there is a valid scientific entity called "schizo-
phrenia, " distinct in some way from other forms of mental
disorder. The cognitive deficits presumed to underlie this disor-
der are hypothesised as causal in the determination of a range of
schizophrenic symptoms. Thus, in Hoffman's account, speech
disturbance and verbal hallucinations are assumed to be the
result of the same deficit - a disorder of discourse planning. This
is the kind of approach taken by traditional psychiatry and is
sometimes called the "categorical model" (Blashfield 1983).
We know of no convincing evidence to support this model.
Although the operational diagnostic criteria (e.g., DSM-III)
developed by psychiatrists in recent years have led to improved
levels of interrater reliability using particular criteria, different
criteria tend to classify different patients as schizophrenic
(Brockington, Kendell & Leff 1978). Studies using factor analy-
sis or cluster analysis have so far failed to yield sufficient
evidence of factors of schizophrenic traits or clusters of schizo-
phrenic individuals (Bentall 1986; Blashfield 1983; Slade &
Cooper 1979). The relationship between schizophrenia and the
affective psychoses has proved particularly problematic, and
research using discriminant function analysis has failed to iden-
tify clear borderlines between these conditions on the basis of
symptoms (Brockington, Kendell, Wainwright, Hillier & Walk-
er 1979; Kendell & Gourlay 1973) or outcome (Kendell &
Brockington 1980).
Not surprisingly, given these problems, although verbal hal-
lucinations would seem to be very common among patients
diagnosed as schizophrenic (W.H.O. 1975), they are also often
present in patients with other diagnoses, such as psychotic
depression. It should also be noted that, in some cultures,
hallucinatory experiences are fairly common among people not
regarded as mentally ill (Bourguignon 1970) and that, even in
our own society, they may be more prevalent among non-
psychotic individuals than is often realised (Bentall & Slade
1985b; McKellar 1968; Sidgewick 1894; West 1948). Given the
absence of evidence for the categorical model, it seems likely
that the cognitive mechanisms underlying verbal hallucinations
are similar, whatever the diagnoses of the patients experiencing
them.
2. The association between verbal hallucinations and disor-
dered speech. Hoffman claims an association between verbal
hallucinations and disordered speech. However, factor analytic
studies of psychotic symptom data provide only marginal sup-
port for this association (Slade & Cooper 1979). Certainly
clinical experience and quantatitive data both indicate that
individuals with hallucinations but no recognisable speech dis-
order are relatively common among psychiatric populations. In
Hoffman's own research, as he readily admits, his exclusion of
manic hallucinators from his analysis is problematic. Among his
manic subjects, speech disorder was relatively common but
hallucinations rare. It is possible that, had he assessed psychot-
ically depressed patients, he would have found the reverse to be
the case.
3. The Identification of the experience of unintendedness as the
main cause of the halluclnator's Inference that his Inner speech
originates from a source external to himself. Central to the later
philosophy of Wittgenstein (1953) was the observation that
humans can only describe their own mental states inferentially.
Consistent with the later Wittgenstein and with Hoffman's own
hypothesis, there is evidence from research on memory
monitoring that indicates that internal or mental events are
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
519

Commentary/Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
more likely to be mistaken for experiences originating from an
external source when they are unintended and under the con-
trol of external stimuli (Johnson, Raye, Foley & Foley 1981). It
seems unlikely, however, that the experience of unintended-
ness is the only variable that influences a hallucinator's decision
that an experienced event originates from an external source.
For example, it is clear that a person's judgment about
whether an experienced event is "real" or "imaginary" is influ-
enced by contextual information. As Perky (1910) and Segal
(1970) have been able to demonstrate, given appropriate infor-
mation, individuals may misclassify "real" events as products of
their imagination (the reverse of the inferential error implicated
in hallucinations). A number of studies have shown that halluci-
nators are more likely to report hallucinations when given
appropriate suggestions or expectations that a stimulus is about
to be presented (Alpert 1985; Mintz & Alpert 1972; Young,
Bentall, Slade & Dewey, in press).
Other variables that are likely to be important in determining
the onset of hallucinations are internal arousal, external stimula-
tion, and the reinforcing consequences of hallucination (Slade
1976).
4. The failure to account fornonverbalhallucinations.lt may be
unfair to criticise Hoffman for failing to account for nonverbal
hallucinations. However, it should be noted that although
patients diagnosed as schizophrenic usually experience halluci-
nations in the auditory modality in the West, visual or tactile
hallucinations are not unknown, and there is evidence to sug-
gest that these kinds of hallucinations are much more prevalent
among patients in Africa and the Middle East (Al-Issa 1978).
Although such symptoms may perhaps result from false infer-
rences made about visual or tactile imagery, it is difficult to see
how these symptoms can be related to a disorder of discourse
planning.
5. The lack of Implications for therapy. Finally, Hoffman's
theory has few implications for therapy, as an effective psycho-
logical treatment for discourse planning does not exist. Yet,
despite the relative lack of interest shown in hallucinations by
clinical psychologists, there is evidence that they respond to a
variety of psychological treatments including operant pro-
cedures, systematic desensitisation, thought stopping and re-
sponse competition, and satiation (Slade & Bentall 1986).
Despite these criticisms, it is important to emphasise that
there are many aspects of Hoffman's approach with which we are
in agreement. We particularly welcome his identification of
hallucinations with inferential processes; we have recently pub-
lished a study of our own, using signal detection theory, which
provides evidence supporting this hypothesis (Bentall & Slade
1985a). We also feel that it is likely that the experience of
unintendedness is one of the properties of inner speech that can
lead predisposed individuals to attribute such speech to an
external source. We feel that it is unlikely, however, that this is
the only factor involved.
Intended versus intentional action
Myles Brand
Philosophy and Cognitive Science, University of Arizona, Tucson, Ariz.
85721
Schizophrenics typically experience auditory images, or verbal
hallucinations (VHs), that have the appearance of being gener-
ated by another person. Ralph Hoffman poses the problem:
Civen that there are no sensory features that differentiate VHs
from normal covert speech, why do VHs appear alien? And in
essence his answer is this. Imaging is actional. Thus, VHs are
actions. Actions are generated by cognitive processes that in-
volve representational schemata of a pattern of goal-directed
activity. For speech, these schemata are discourse plans. VHs
are bits of covert speech that are nonconcordant with concurrent
discourse plans. A feeling of being acted upon, of being a passive
recipient, accompanies actions, including VHs, that are noncon-
cordant with an activated representational schema of goal-
directed activity. This answer is highly plausible, more plausi-
ble than the alternatives Hoffman considers. At least I do not
want to debate it. Rather, I want to complement this answer by
clarifying the action theoretic base on which it is built.
Some time ago Wittgenstein (1953, para. 621) raised the
conceptual issue about the difference between mere reflex
behavior and action by asking, "What is left over if I subtract the
fact that my arm goes up from the fact that I raise my arm?" The
best answer to Wittgenstein's question is "nothing." The bodily
activities of raising one's arm and one's arm rising are identical;
photographically, there is no difference. Rather, they differ with
respect to their causal antecedents. The processes generating
actions are distinct from those generating mere reflex move-
ments. The same point can be made about nonbodily, or mental,
actions such as problem solving, covert speech, and imaging.
This is a functional view of action: Actions are those events that
have a characteristic etiology.
The classical defense of this theory of action was provided by
Davidson (1963). He identified the causal antecedent with a
complex of beliefs and desires. This theory of action is correct,
but Davidson's defense of it was wrong, and that for two related
reasons. First, it misidentified the causal antecedents. The
representational content of belief is too coarse-grained to reflect
the cognitive state preceding action. Some of these processes,
for instance, are rapid and not accessible to the subject. They are
informationally encapsulated. And desires, understood in terms
of preferences, are sometimes absent prior to action. Persons
sometimes act without regard to, or even in spite of, their
preferences. Second, this defense was couched in common-
sense or folk psychological terms. A description of the causal
antecedents to action must rather be stated in the proprietary
vocabulary of the sciences of the mental.
The causal antecedent to action must have both cognitive and
motivational components (Brand 1984). In the simplest cases,
the cognitive component includes the monitoring and guidance
mechanisms for on-going activity. In more complicated cases, it
also includes a representation of the goal-directed pattern of
activity into which the action fits. A motivational factor is
required to explain why the action was initiated. Simply having
a representation of a pattern of activity and well-working motor
control mechanisms is not sufficient for action. If it were, there
would be no difference between idle planning and acting on
one's plan. This motivational factor has dropped out of recent
discussions of action generation, and Hoffman is no exception to
this trend. An adequate account of the etiology of action must
make reference to noncognitive factors. But this is a story to be
told at another time. For now, let us borrow the term "intend-
ing" from common-sense psychology to name the causal ante-
cedent to action, but only so long as we understand it as
shorthand for the characteristic processes described in the
proprietary vocabulary. Hoffman too seems to have adopted this
usage. On this basis, the functional theory says that something is
an action only if it is directly caused by an intending.
Most actions are performed within the context of an overall
pattern of activity. Changing a flat tire is such a pattern, and
cranking the jack is an action falling within this pattern. The
cognitive antecedent of such an action includes a representation
that locates this action within the entire pattern of activity.
Schank's script theory is one way to articulate these actional
representations (Schank & Abelson 1977; Schank 1980). Thus,
for example, cranking the jack is partially generated by a schema,
for changing a flat tire. An action whose cognitive antecedents
include a representation of the pattern of activity into which it
fits is intentional. Put another way, intentional action is planned
action (Brand, in press). In summary, then, all actions are
caused by intendings. All planned actions are intentional. There
520
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Commentary)'Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
are unintentional actions (i.e., unplanned actions); but there are
no unintended actions.
Slips present an interesting case. It would appear that they
cannot be uniformly treated. Some slips are intentional actions,
such as an embarrassing faux pas. In these cases there is a
schema into which the action fits, though for various reasons the
subject is not attending to that schema at the time. Other slips
are unintentional actions. For instance, there are certain charac-
teristic errors made by expert typists, such as letter reversal and
letter doubling, which result from the structure of the monitor-
ing and guidance mechanisms (Rumelhart & Norman 1982). In
these cases, the motor control mechanisms cause the action, but
it does not fit into the representational schema.
Armed with this sketch of an action theory, let us turn back to
Hoffman's explanation of VHs in schizophrenics. Hoffman dis-
tinguishes between strongly intended and weakly intended
actions, where the former are "consciously decided upon ac-
tions" and the latter "spontaneous actions." This is really a
distinction between those actions whose cognitive antecedents
include representations of the pattern of activity into which the
action fits and those that do not. That is, it is a distinction
between intentional and unintentional actions. Hoffman also
distinguishes between weakly unintended and strongly unin-
tended actions. Taking "intending" as shorthand for the cog-
nitive and motivational antecedent causal processes, no actions
are unintended. Daydreams and free associations, Hoffman's
so-called weakly unintended occurrences, are not actions at all.
A strongly unintended action, moreover, is better described as
an unintentional action performed in the context of a pattern of
activity whose contained goals are nonconcordant with the
action. An action that would fall within this category is my
suddenly thrusting my arms upward for no apparent reason
while in the midst of changing a flat tire. Note that something in
this category can mock an intentional action. Suppose that in
addition to thrusting my arms suddenly upward I started to clap,
all with no apparent reason, and that afterward I returned to
changing the tire. There is mock intentionality here because
putting my arms upward and clapping are a sequence of actions
requiring some representational schema; but this sequence is
nonconcordant with the goals embedded in the controlling
representational schema of changing the tire.
Overt speech is intentional; it requires cognitive schemata -
discourse plans - that are part of the causal antecedents for each
segment of the speech. If we assume with Hoffman that covert
speech is relevantly similar to overt speech (an assumption
about which I am somewhat uneasy), covert speech is also
intentional. VHs are then unintentional actions that are noncon-
cordant with the goals embedded in the cognitive schema for the
concurrent covert speech. Better, VHs are sequences of actions
that exhibit mock intentionality similar to thrusting one's arms
upward and clapping in the midst of changing a tire. VHs can be
well-formed, internally consistent sentences; but they are not
intentional, because they do not fall within the overriding
activated schema for the concurrent activity.
Suppose again my arms suddenly moved upward when I was
changing the tire. That experience, I imagine, would feel alien;
it would be as if something had happened to me. That action
would have interjected itself into an ongoing pattern of goal-
directed activity. Similarly, when a VH interjects itself in an on-
going pattern of covert speech, or indeed into a pattern of any
covert activity, a feeling of alienation from the VH might be
expected. The predicted activity pattern is broken for no appar-
ent reason, and the subject feels victimized, as if something
happened to him.
Cases in which one's arms suddenly thrust upward or cases of
VHs are different from slips. They are different from accidental
slips in which there is no motor control breakdown, because
VHs are genuine actions. They are also apparently different
from certain types of verbal slips. In those cases there is an
activated representational schema to which one can attend,
though sometimes only with difficulty. In the case of VHs, I
would hypothesize, the schizophrenic is not able to attend to the
schema controlling the VH, but only to the overriding one. It
would be interesting to test this hypothesis.
Reality and control
James Deese
Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Va. 22901
It is one of those ironic twists in the history of ideas that Sigmund
Freud invented (and that is the correct word - as opposed to
discovered) the modern notion of the unconscious. The twist is
ironic because the identification of Freud's ideas with dynamic
processes and the origins of neuroses rendered the intellectual
world blind to the ubiquity of unconscious processes. Freud's
contemporaries, the psychologists at the University of Wiirz-
burg, discovered the pervasiveness of unconscious or pre-
conscious processes in a series of "experiments' (misguided
term). They found in the most mundane and trivial situations
that introspection was not a reliable guide to our mental pro-
cesses. They discovered in the most elementary problem (What
is the sum of two and two?) that the answer comes with no
conscious awareness of the method of solution. In short,
intended (to use Hoffman's term) mental activities are prepared
for us in a way that is not available to our conscious experience.
Hoffman, in his seminal paper, puts this fact together with a
method for discovering the structure of discourse (Deese 1984)
to tell us that the hearing of voices in schizophrenic patients is a
result of the failure of the unconscious planning mechanism for
the production of discourse. From an earlier paper (Hoffman,
Kirstein, Stopek & Cicchetti 1982) we learned that schizo-
phrenic patients do not form the strong hierarchies in discourse
that are the natural lot of most of us when we talk, write, or even
just muse. Psychotic persons do not order discourse the way
most of us tend to do (even the best of us slips from time to time),
by making a hierarchy of important and subsidiary ideas. The
failure of schizophrenics in this respect makes it difficult to know
what schizophrenics are talking about.
Hoffman is right in telling us (1) that schizophrenics do not
organize hierarchically and (2) that such organization is uncon-
scious for all of us. His conclusion is that the verbal hallucina-
tions of schizophrenics are the result of the failure of the
unconscious planning machinery. The hapless schizophrenic
has not directed what he hears, and so he hears the hallucina-
tions as external voices. Verbal imagery, for most of us, is
planned and thus not perceived as hallucinations. I merely
mention the remarkable similarity between this conclusion and
the counterintuitive conclusion reached by Julian Jaynes (1977)
about the origin of consciousness. Jayne's conclusion was pure
conjecture; Hoffman, however, provides us with an original and
testable notion about the nature of schizophrenic thought.
Problems and questions nevertheless remain. The biggest
problem is that of accounting for nonverbal hallucinations (hav-
ing visions as opposed to hearing voices or having visions and
hearing voices). Hoffman deals with this problem, but he is not
altogether convincing. Then there are questions. Hoffman does
not deal with the problem of dreams. Are dreams intended or
unintended? If they are not, then the similarity between dreams
and the mental processes of schizophrenia squarely lands us on
Hoffman's side. If they are intended, then there is a problem,
for dreams do have strange and irrational structures.
Another question untouched by Hoffman is that of the biology
of schizophrenia. Most of us who have an interest in the biology
of schizophrenia (or a more general interest in the relation
between mentality and the brain) suppose that so bizarre a set of
symptoms as those identified with schizophrenia have some
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
521

Commentary /Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
basis in biochemical disturbances in the brain. Furthermore,
most of us suppose that such disturbances are diffuse (though
there may be an affinity of certain substances for particular
sites).
What Hoffman's thesis does is to cause us to wonder whether
or not there is some specific, more localized failure in the central
nervous system. We need to ask ourselves what is the neural
substrate of the unconscious planning process that lets us and
not the schizophrenic know that something has been organized
for us. If Hoffman is right that intendedness is essential for not
hearing verbal imagery as an external voice, then a search for the
neural origin of intendedness becomes of central importance.
[See also Libet: "Unconscious Cerebral Initiative and the Role
of Conscious Will in Voluntary Action," BBS 8(4) 1985; and
Goldberg: "Supplementary Motor Area Structure and Func-
tion," BBS 8(4) 1985.]
The diversity of the schizophrenias
Raymond Faber
Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Health Science Center at
San Antonio; Psychiatry Service, Audie L Murphy Memorial Veterans
Hospital, San Antonio, Tex. 78284
Hoffman presents an interesting thesis linking schizophrenic
language disorders and auditory (verbal) hallucinations to an
underlying planning disturbance. He considers auditory hallu-
cinations to be unintended verbal images, or "nonself'-experi-
enced inner speech. These are the converse of outwardly di-
rected speech. Thus, Hoffman suggests that a formal symmetry
between inner and outer speech is reflected by the association of
formal thought disorder and verbal hallucinations (VHs) in
schizophrenics.
The target article is valuable in several respects, including
stimulating discussion of the phenomenology of psychotic symp-
toms, offering a testable hypothesis to understand better psy-
chotic symptoms, and considering other theories of schizo-
phrenic VHs.
Any other discussion of phenomenology must acknowledge
the seminal contributions of Karl Jaspers (1963) in his General
Psychopathology. It is remarkable how little the field has pro-
gressed since the first edition was published in 1913. Hamilton
(1985) has provided the most accessible current distillation of
psychopathology. VHs are but one category of auditory halluci-
nations. Other categories include elementary, functional, in-
complete, and complete auditory hallucinations and thought
echo. Many otherwise astute clinicians are unfamiliar with these
distinctions, and systematic studies examining auditory halluci-
nation subtype prevalence and associations are lacking. It would
be highly desirable for future studies to subdivide and quantify
the phenomena of auditory hallucinations. Unfortunately, I am
finding in an on-going study that some patients are surprisingly
unable to elaborate on the phenomenology of their "voices."
The situation is much more settled regarding descriptions of
formal thought disorders, especially with the definitions pro-
vided by Andreasen (1979a). Satisfactory descriptions of affect
are also available (Abrams & Taylor 1978; Andreasen & Olsen
1982). The form and development of delusions (apophanous
phenomena) is another topic needing refinement. I would be
interested in knowing whether Hoffman has considered narrow-
ing his theory by specifying the types of VHs and formal thought
disorders linked by a planning disturbance. Perhaps his data can
be accordingly reviewed and more robust associations might be
revealed.
This leads to my second general point regarding the testa-
bility of Hoffman's hypothesis. The decline of dogmatism in
psychiatry is most welcome albeit overdue. Hoffman's model
can be tested directly by studying the association of VHs and
formal thought disorder in schizophrenic populations. Hoffman
provides empirical support by summarizing a study he con-
ducted that found a highly significant positive association be-
tween severity of discourse disorganization and VHs. This
summary in the target article raises some questions, however.
How were these symptoms rated? One of Hoffman's coauthor's
rating forms for positive and negative schizophrenic symptoms
(Andreasen & Olsen 1982) rates hallucinations over a period of
time and not only in acute cross-section, but language distur-
bance ratings are based on current objective observations.
Thus, on that instrument, present and past symptoms can be
intermixed. Also, in the target article summary VHs are noted
but not their nature, frequency, and intensity. Similarly, the
quantification of discourse disorganization is not described. A
more significant question is whether any of the subjects were
free of significant discourse disorganization, yet displayed VHs.
Such subjects would tend to refute Hoffman's hypothesis that
discourse disorganization in schizophrenics is a prerequisite for
VHs. Finally, the association might simply reflect more severely
ill patients having more symptoms.
Data from recent work (Eubanks, Faber, Spangher & Mum-
ford, unpublished manuscript) do not support Hoffman's hy-
pothesis. We examined 59 schizophrenics for the presence of
neuropsychological dysfunction and head CT (computerized
tomographic scan) abnormalities. Patients were assessed
clinically by Andreasen's positive and negative symptom scale.
We categorized 25 patients as positive (equivalent to Type I), 14
as negative (Type II), and 20 patients as mixed, with marked
positive and negative symptoms. In the positive and mixed
groups there was a negative association between VHs and
positive formal thought disorder. This is in direct contrast with
Hoffman's findings. Many patients had VHs and were coherent,
logical, and relevant in their speech. In my clinical experience I
have been more impressed by the diversity of psychotic symp-
tom clusters than by any regular association of symptoms. Thus
my impression has been that hallucinations, delusions, formal
thought disorder, and blunted affect tend to be independent of
each other, and patients may have one or more of these symp-
toms in any combination. This line of thinking runs contrary to
the currently popular Type I and II classification.
In my opinion, the term schizophrenia now obfuscates more
than it clarifies. In essence it is shorthand for any nonorganic,
nonaffective, enduring psychotic process. Have we come very
far since Kraepelin? How strong is the evidence that patients
with a formal thought disorder and blunted affect have the same
disorder as patients without those symptoms but having halluci-
nations or delusions? What is the likelihood of a schizophrenic
patient with a given symptom having any other symptom?
My final comments concern an alternative theory and an
extension of Hoffman's hypothesis. My own work exploring
similarities between schizophrenic language and aphasia (Faber
& Reichstein 1981; Faber, Abrams, Taylor, Kasprison, Morris &
Weisz 1983) suggest a comprehension disturbance might be
involved in both disordered discourse and VIIs. Patients with
disordered discourse are unaware of their language being aber-
rant and may speak at great length, oblivious to their listeners'
difficulties. Likewise, the nonself, unintended nature of verbal
images deemed VHs are not understood by patients so afflicted
as being originating in themselves. A dominant posterior tem-
poral lobe dysfunction might underlie both phenomena.
Finally, mention should be made of the association between
obsessions - involuntary, recurrent ego-dystonic thoughts, im-
ages, or impulses - and extrapyramidal movement disorders
(Cummings 1985). Obsessions and VHs share unintendedness
as a property and thus might have similar pathophysiological
mechanisms.
522
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Commentary/Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
Auditory hallucinations, inner speech, and
the dominant hemisphere
Pierre Flor-Henry
Alberta Hospital Edmonton; Department of Psychiatry, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, T5J 2J7 Canada
Baillarger (1846) distinguished between psychosensory and psy-
chic hallucinations, the former perceived through the ears as
coming from outside, the latter "produced in the interior of the
soul"; he concluded that such patients "hear not voices but
thoughts." Maudsley (1886) pointed out that the insane "do not
always hear the voices as distinct, articulated utterances . . .
they are in his head and are interior voices, thoughts which he
hears rather than words actually heard with his ears. They are
distinctly apprehended and clearly understood even when they
come . . . mysteriously from great distances." Parish (1897)
concluded that "auditory hallucinations consist merely in the
unnoticed articulation of one's thoughts, which become audible
and take the form of an auditory hallucination . . . it would
appear that the greater number of the 'voices' if not all, are
caused by automatic speech on the part of the participant."
Modell (1958; 1960; 1962) emphasised that the most essential
feature of hallucinatory experiences is the process by which
one's own thoughts are attributed to voices; he considered
verbal hallucinations to be in fact hallucinations of inner speech.
Drawing from his profound knowledge of the phenomenology of
schizophrenic mentation, Bleuler (1911; 1934) viewed their
acoustic hallucinations in the following way: "The voices are
unlike spoken voices but are as if thoughts." Similar were the
opinions of Ey (1934), who considered verbal hallucinations a
disturbance of internal speech; of Janet (1906; 1936), who
discussed "hallucinations psychomotrices verbales"; and of
Lhermitte (1949; 1951) who stated that hallucinations were
disorders of thought and of inner language. Thus, as Johnson
(1978) concludes, "the clinical evidence [is] that hallucinations
of inner speech are the most important feature of auditory
hallucinations. "
Confirming these detailed and perceptive clinical and phe-
nomenological observations of the last 100 years are the numer-
ous empirical investigations, initiated by Gould (1948; 1949;
1950), that demonstrate by amplifying the laryngeal mus-
culature that during hallucinations there is activation of the
vocal apparatus: in essence, subliminal vocalization which is
perceived by the subject as externally projected and nonself-
derived. The pioneering studies of Gould have been confirmed
by Cerny (1964; 1965), McGuigan (1966), Inouye and Shimizu
(1970), Lindsley (1956; 1960; 1961; 1962; 1963a; 1963b), and
Johnson (1958; 1967). It is therefore well established that during
verbal hallucinosis there is myogenic activation of the vocal
system triggered by disorganized inner speech. Conversely, it
has been shown that silent thinking and silent reading in normal
subjects are associated with subvocalizations and laryngeal elec-
tromyographic activation (Faaborg-Anderson 1957; Faaborg-
Anderson & Edfeldt 1958; Jacobson 1932; Luria 1960; Max
1937). At the neurophysiological level pathological dysregula-
tion of inner speech with consequent subliminal activation of the
laryngeal musculature implies a disorganization in the neural
networks mediating language, that is, of the dominant fronto-
temporal network.
I have reviewed elsewhere (Flor-Henry 1969; 1983a; 1983b)
the evidence derived from extremely varied experimental ap-
proaches, which shows that the fundamental defect in schizo-
phrenia relates to impaired dominant-hemispheric functions. If
this is true, schizophrenia should be associated with formal
abnormalities in the phonological or linguistic system because
these functions are dependent on the integrity of neural systems
in the dominant hemisphere. This too has been confirmed. The
study of language abnormality in schizophrenia in the last 20
years has shown that there is, in this syndrome, a defect in
formal linguistic organization at the semantic and lexical level of
discourse, a defect in speech comprehension, and a correspon-
dence between thought disorder, statistical abnormalities in the
relative frequency of certain linguistic elements, and movement
abnormalities. In view of the fundamental importance of motor
system abnormality in psychopathology, the demonstration by
Manschreck, Maher, and Ader (1981) that language deviance
and abnormal motor behavior in thought-disordered schizo-
phrenia are significantly correlated is theoretically important.
In addition, the so-called nonaphasic disturbances of language,
neologisms, echolalia, and paucity of speech are identical in
chronic schizophrenia, in certain stages of dementia, and in
neurological syndromes where the language regions of the
dominant hemisphere are partially disconnected from the rest of
the left hemisphere: It seems improbable that these rela-
tionships are chance events (see Flor-Henry 1983a, pp. 85-89
for review).
There is also direct neuroanatomical and neurophysiological
evidence of disturbed dominant temporal functions directly
correlated with the presence of auditory hallucinations in
schizophrenia. Southard (1914), who was director of the psycho-
pathic department of Boston State Hospital and professor of
neuropathology at Harvard University, studied the topography
of cortical lesions in 25 cases of dementia praecox and found that
the lesions were unilateral on the left side in 25% of cases and
diffuse in all the others, except for a single one which was
unilateral, right sided. Further, in 12 cases with hallucinations,
6 had temporal lesions whereas in the 13 cases without halluci-
nations the lesions were diffuse or the temporal lobes were
intact. Takahashi et al. (1981), in the CT scan investigation of 257
DSM-III-diagnosed schizophrenics, found that left temporal
cortical atrophy alone was associated with hallucinations.
Uchino et al. (1984), examining 40 schizophrenics with CT scan
and correlating neuroradiological features with mental state as
determined by the Present State Examination (Wing, Cooper &
Sartorius 1974), observed that auditory hallucinations were
related to enlargement of the left Sylvian fissure and enlarge-
ment of the left anterior horn of the lateral ventricle. Studies of
regional cerebral blood flow in schizophrenia reveal increased
circulation in the left hemisphere in the resting state. Whereas
in normals during a verbal task the left hemisphere flow is
increased above base line, this is exaggerated in schizophrenia
(Gur et al. 1985). Kubachi et al. (1985) compared 16 schizo-
phrenics without and 8 with auditory hallucinations and found
that auditory hallucinations were associated with increased left
temporal flow but reduced frontal flow bilaterally (disturbance
of inner speech perceived as nonself?). Bazhin, Wasserman, and
Tonkonogii (1975) reported in the analysis of 30 dextral paranoid
schizophrenics that during verbal hallucinosis there was an
increase in the acoustic threshold of the right ear (i.e., a
contralateral left temporal deficit). Stevens, Bigelow, and Den-
ney (1979) and Stevens and Livermore (1982) in a telemetric-
EEG study of schizophrenic patients note a significant correla-
tion between hallucinations and suppression of left temporal
alpha power (i.e., regional left temporal activation). In the
general context of hallucinations in schizophrenia it is notewor-
thy that Braccha, Bigelow, Cabrera, and Wyatt (1984) showed
that a left-hemisphere lateralization was also present for visual
hallucinations, significantly more often perceived in the right
visual field (i.e., a left posterior temporo-parietal locus).
In summary, clinical and phenomelological, neuroanatomical
and neurophysiological evidence indicates that auditory halluci-
nations in schizophrenia are reflections of altered neural struc-
tures responsible for verbal—linguistic expression. Abnormal
activation of these neural sets produces subliminal subvocaliza-
tion, "hallucinations of inner speech," which because unin-
tended are perceived subjectively as foreign to the self. The
intensity of thought-disorder, the frequency of paraphasic, dys-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
523

Commentary/Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
phasic, formal linguistic anomalies and motor control pathology
are all interrelated and increase the probability of verbal
hallucinosis - this is empirically verified. Hoffman's elegant
essay, attributing the experience of verbal auditory hallucina-
tions to disruptions in language-planning processes evoking
unintended verbal intrusions whose sensory characteristics are
similar to those of ordinary mental imagery - but which are
perceived as hallucinatory because of the unintendedness - is a
perfectly adequate model at the level of cognitive pathology
description and is in keeping with the now massive documenta-
tion that relates the schizophrenic syndrome to disturbance of
dominant hemispheric functions.
Arousal and the disruption of language
production processes in schizophrenia
Per F. Gjerde
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Calif. 94720
Hoffman's target article represents an interesting attempt to
explain verbal hallucinations within an information processing
framework. Although my reaction is primarily positive, I would
like to make a few points, focusing in particular on Hoffman's
failure to consider the possible role of physiological arousal in
defining the characteristics of schizophrenic cognition. I will
then comment briefly on his conjecture that the experience of
unintendedness provides the basis for verbal images (when
nonconcordant with concurrent cognitive goals) to be experi-
enced as hallucinatory, that is, as having a "nonself" origin.
As I have noted elsewhere (Gjerde 1983), recent attempts to
use information-processing models to account for cognitive
deficits in schizophrenia have typically proceeded with a frame-
work of "cold cognition" - a theoretical emphasis which paral-
lels the pervasive tendency of contemporary cognitive psychol-
ogy to ignore affect-related phenomena (cf. Zajonc 1980). This
approach may be useful in delineating regularities among essen-
tially normal subjects. Nonetheless, problems arise when it is
applied to populations that are known to deviate in their affec-
tive and arousal-related characteristics, such as schizophrenics.
In particular, we do not know the extent to which observed
differences between schizophrenics and normal controls on
information-processing tasks derive from differences in arousal
levels or from differences in cognitive characteristics per se.
Until this issue has been settled, we cannot say whether schizo-
phrenia is an arousal-related or an information-processing-
related disorder (e.g., see Cromwell 1978).
A closer consideration of the relationships between arousal
and cognition in schizophrenia would, in my view, strengthen
Hoffman's argument considerably. In particular, it may help us
understand further why language-planning processes appear so
disorganized in schizophrenia. Empirical evidence in the area of
arousal and cognition suggests that the effects of arousal on
information processing in schizophrenia are particularly salient
when effortful, short-term memory processes are involved (cf.
Gjerde 1983). As Hoffman notes, it is likely that the discourse-
planning structures are located in short-term, small capacity
memory - the location at which the disruptive effects of arousal
are most likely to be felt. (Note that the controversy over
whether schizophrenics are habitually over- or underaroused
[or both] may be relatively unimportant for some cognitive
processes because deviation from optimal arousal in either
direction may disrupt performance. This position is implied by
the Yerkes-Dodson inverted U relationship between arousal
and performance.)
Space limitations prevent me from reviewing in detail the
effects of arousal on the processing of information. Briefly
stated, deviant arousal levels appear to bias the subject's search
toward readily available information: reduce the speed of re-
trieval, especially from semantic memory [see also multiple
book review of Tulving, Elements of episodic memory, BBS 7(2)
1984]; reduce the depth of processing; limit the range of cue
utilization; and, perhaps most important in this context, de-
crease the processing of the semantic properties of stimuli (cf.
Easterbrook 1959; Eysenck 1977; Gjerde 1983; Korchin 1964;
Schwartz 1974; 1975). Given this set of findings, it follows that
arousal is likely to increase the observed incoherence of thought
and speech processes, including language-production processes
- the condition, according to Hoffman, that leads verbal images
to be experienced as nonintended and, therefore, as halluci-
natory. In addition, arousal may also increase the probability of
creating "parasitic" memories - a functional breakdown in
associative memory occurring when storage capacities are over-
loaded. It is likely that arousal affects a person's available storage
capacity. Hyperarousal, for example, may directly reduce task-
available capacity, but it may also reduce capacity more indi-
rectly, by, for example, increasing the attention given to task-
irrelevant activities. Whichever of these possibilities is correct,
arousal increases the probability of capacity overload - the
situation that occurs when task requirements exceed available
information-processing capacity. Capacity overload, if I under-
stand Hoffman correctly, is an important precondition for the
generation of parasitic memories. Arousal may therefore en-
hance the probability of parasitic memories. In conclusion,
Hoffman's model may well benefit from a closer consideration of
the various ways in which arousal affects information processing
in schizophrenia.
Although Hoffman gives a cogent analysis of how it is that
disruptions in language processes associated with schizophrenia
cause verbal images to be experienced as unintended, I am less
convinced by his argument that the experience of unintended-
ness itself provides a sufficient basis for attributing a nonself
origin to these phenomena, even when they are nonconcordant
with self-defined cognitive goals. On a more fundamental level,
one may also question whether verbal hallucinations, by defini-
tion, need to be experienced as having a "nonself origin. Under
certain circumstances, verbal hallucinations may be experi-
enced as ego alien - as a perversion or an extension of oneself-
but not necessarily as external. Perhaps a continuum of clinical
disturbance is involved here. On one extreme of this continuum
one would have those who experience verbal hallucinations as
ego alien but also as being part of oneself- as "inner voices,"
perhaps not too unlike the normal experience sometimes re-
ferred to as "the voice of consciousness." In the middle range,
one would have those who experience their verbal hallucina-
tions as external but controllable. Finally, on the other extreme
of this continuum, we would have those who experience halluci-
nations as both external and uncontrollable. However, even
when verbal images are experienced as external, nonconcor-
dance with cognitive goals and the experience of unintended-
ness do not seem to constitute a sufficient basis for attributing
them to nonself sources. In my view, this is the least convincing
part of Hoffman's argument. Perhaps a more careful empirical
analysis of the sensory properties of verbal hallucinations could
provide additional clues. Previous studies on this topic have not,
I think, provided conclusive evidence that properties of verbal
hallucinations are not distinct from ordinary verbal imagery.
These critical comments aside, Hoffman is to complimented
for having made a useful contribution to our understanding of
verbal hallucinations in schizophrenia. The theory set forth in
his target article should provide a framework likely to generate
further empirical progress on this elusive topic.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I am indebted to Sheldon Korchin for valuable discussions on the topic
of hallucinations in schizophrenia.
524
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Commentary /Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
Teleology and agency in speech production
Robert M. Gordon
Department of Philosophy. University of Missouri-St. Louis, St. Louis, Mo.
63121
Hoffman invokes a cognitive theory to explain why schizo-
phrenics hallucinate verbal utterances, and particularly why
they hallucinate them as utterances of another person. I under-
stand him to be arguing, first, that the verbal imagery seems
unintended because it is not the product of a high-level "cog-
nitive goal" of the sort that is posited as underlying the organiza-
tion of normal speech production; and second, that it seems to
be from another person because in addition there are concur-
rent cognitive goals with which the seemingly unintended
imagery is inconsistent.
One problem with this account is that it appears to assume
that teleology coincides with (seeming) agency. This is a false
assumption: Goal-directed systems that perform the home-
ostatic functions of the brain do not as a rule have an output that
seems to be of our own intending. And our intentional actions
seem no less our own, however inconsistent they may be with
the goals of such regulatory systems. More to the point, the
"planning" of speech behavior, in a "subpersonal" sense now
common in cognitive psychology and artificial intelligence, does
not of itself explain why the subject would attribute the behavior
to himself (as an intended utterance) rather than to some distinct
planning system - a system as "alien" as the one that regulates
body temperature.
Hoffman occasionally speaks of "conscious accessibility" and
perhaps means to suggest that where a high-level cognitive goal
is (in the relevant sense) consciously accessible, the "product" is
perceived as being of one's own intending. This may or may not
be a necessary condition of agency; it is certainly not sufficient.
For one may be conscious of the goals of a teleological system
without being conscious of them as one's own goals.
Thus Hoffman's teleological theory as it stands fails to account
for the difference between (inner or outer) speech that seems to
be the expression of one's own thoughts and speech that seems
to be the expression of another's thoughts. This is certainly not
to suggest that we must supplement the teleology by positing a
self that does the planning. The attribution to self belongs to the
explatwndum, not the explanans. One possibility - which might
require only a "friendly amendment" to Hoffman's theory - is
that one attributes inner or outer speech to oneself only if the
planning process guiding the speech production is in certain
respects responsive to reason. For example, a crude counterfac-
tual indicator of agency might be as follows: Would the speech
production cease if one were certain of being amply rewarded
for its cessation (or punished for its failure to cease)? More subtle
tests would concern the way the content of the speech produc-
tion responded to argumentation. Again, I present this only as
one possibility among others.*
The general point, I suppose, is that talk of "goals" and
"plans" in cognitive psychology is dangerous: One is too readily
tempted to explain folk-psychological discriminations, for exam-
ple, of intention and agency, in terms of a theory that has quite a
different aim - to explain some capacity or function of the brain
such as speech production.
NOTE
1. See Gordon (1986) for relevant remarks on the seemingly passive
character of emotions.
Speech errors and hallucinations in
schizophrenia - no difference?
Trevor A. Harley
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, West
Midlands, England
Freud once said something to the effect that pathological be-
haviour isn't really very different in quality from normal be-
haviour, there's just more of it - especially the mistakes. (See,
e.g., Freud 1891.) Certainly, if one compares the speech errors
made by normal speakers with the speech output of aphasics,
this conjecture receives some support. Now the same seems to
be true of schziophrenics.
In particular, I have shown (Harley 1984) that in normal
speakers fragments of conversational plans can intrude into the
intended output speech with the result being a speech error.
There are a number of ways in which conversational plans can
interfere. Hence, errors can arise from competition between
alternative ways of saying the same thing, from what has been
said in the past, or from plans for something else the speaker
might have been planning to say. Errors can even arise from
other thoughts that intrude, and these thoughts can be both
relevant and irrelevant. As an example, consider the following
schizophrenic-sounding statement uttered by a normal speaker:
Target: 
I want to cut out the elephant on the back of
that.
Utterance: I want to cook the elephant on the back of
that.
Context: 
The speaker was in a kitchen with a number of
other people and wanted to make general
conversation with those other people. How-
ever, he was not sure what to say. He thought
about making a general remark about cook-
ing, but instead intended to talk about cutting
out a picture on the back of a cereal packet
that was in view.
In this speech error a fragment of a conversational plan intrudes
into another utterance. The verbal hallucinations of schizo-
phrenics seem to be remarkably similar to these fragments, as
Hoffman makes clear. But whereas normal speakers often con-
fuse these planning fragments with what they intend to say,
schizophrenics do not appear to have this difficulty. Indeed,
they attribute a "feeling of otherness" to them. It would be
interesting to know the extent to which schizophrenics make
these non-plan-internal errors, as I have described them.
A major difficulty with using speakers' reports as data when
interpreting speech errors is their highly phenomenological
nature. A similar problem applies when analyzing the imagery
of schizophrenics and its attribution. We must rely upon what
speakers say they "intend." As with all research on speech
production, defining "planned" and "intended" is a difficult
problem. Hoffman has provided some clarification, but some
problems still remain. There are two major difficulties. The first
is that there appear to be no formal criteria for assigning any
behaviour to the four categories, only intuitive appeal. To rely
upon a definition of "consciously intended" rather begs the
question, as (naive) speakers often equate a conscious decision
to carry out an action with an intention to do that action. In
addition, unless there is a methodology for describing the
speaker's conscious or preconscious goals, assigning an item to a
particular category on the basis of these phenomena can be
semantically empty. More serious is the observation that
Hoffman appears to predicate a great deal on the assumption
that conversations, planning, and indeed even thoughts are
hierarchically organized. This need not be the case. Internal
representations cannot be segmented in this orderly fashion. At
the highest level at least plans must be heterarchical, if only to
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
525

Commentary /Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
account for contingencies. People have alternative higher level
plans in the event of a subgoal failure. Furthermore, as Hoffman
notes, discourse situations are dynamic, in that topics are
frequently changing (see, e.g., Schank 1977). Even for a normal
speaker, conversational management is quite a complex task.
In conclusion, Hoffman provides an attractive hypothesis
which finds corroboration in other data. In an ideal world we
would want to know why some people assign an "otherness
attribute" in situations when they should not. Perhaps there is
still life in some attentional theory, in a variant where the locus
of deficit is at a much higher level.
Verbal hallucinations and speech
disorganization in schizophrenia: A further
look at the evidence
Martin Harrow,ab Joanne T. Marengo,ab and Ann Raginac
"Michael Reese Medical Center, Chicago, III. 60616; "Department of
Psychiatry and Department of Behavioral Sciences, University of Chicago;
"Northwestern University
Hoffman has contributed valuable ideas in his hypothesis that
unintended verbal imagery is responsible for the "nonself"
experience of verbal hallucinations (VHs). In addition, he has
presented a broad cognitive-processing model that relates
speech disorganization to VHs. His overall model may help to
explain key aspects of VHs. However, it provides only a partial
explanation for VHs and falls short in several specific areas
discussed below.
Because of these limitations a multifactor model is needed,
with several different factors accounting for VHs and other
cognitive aberrations in schizophrenia. The hypothesized
mechanism of unintended imagery is at best only a part of a
larger picture and does not fully explain a number of major
phenomena associated with VHs. One of these is the systematic
and persistent quality of certain messages experienced over
time in VHs.
Nonconcordance between VHs and concurrent cognitive
goals is also proposed as involved in patients' convictions as to
the nonself origin of VHs. However, the nonself experience of
"voices" is more complex. Thus, VHs describe the phe-
nomenology of events that schizophrenics (sometimes) can con-
trol (Breier & Strauss 1983), events they seem to "hear" through
their ears (implying an auditory component).
Furthermore, schizophrenics often believe in the reality of
their VHs and delusions, and their behavior is influenced by
them, despite the obvious unreality to nonpsychotic people.
Hoffman's model does not explain why schizophrenics do not
recognize that their VHs, their disorganized speech, and their
delusions are grossly deviant in terms of consensual norms. This
lack of recognition of prominent social norms has been labeled
"impaired perspective" (Harrow & Quinlan 1985).
Hoffman proposes that disordered cognitive phenomena are
involuntary. He suggests that there is a mismatching of cog-
nitive intentions and verbal output in schizophrenics. However,
in recent studies in which patients judged their disorganized
speech, schizophrenics showed impaired perspective, rating
their disorganized speech as adequate (Harrow & Miller 1980).
These disorganized verbalizations were what the schizophrenics
intended, and they were satisfied with them. This research
suggests that discourse planning is disordered, but that schizo-
phrenics say what they "intend" to say according to their
original plan (Harrow, Lanin-Kettering, Prosen & Miller 1983;
Harrow & Miller 1980; Harrow & Quinlan 1985).
In addition, data from current research support continuum
models of cognitive aberrations, rather than all-or-none models
(Chapman & Chapman 1980; Harrow & Silverstein 1977;
Strauss 1969). Hoffman discusses VHs in a present-absent
fashion, although he notes literature on "borderline" hallucina-
tions. His model does view speech disorganization as lying on a
continuum of "severity."
Caution is also mandated by several recent empirical find-
ings. First, much of Hoffman's thesis is based on research
supporting his claim of a close link between VHs and the
severity of speech disorganization. Yet, recent research indi-
cates that speech disorganization is more closely related to
delusions and only shows modest correlation with hallucinations
(e.g., Andreasen & Olsen 1982; Marengo & Harrow 1985).
A second problem concerns manic patients, who show speech
disorganization but infrequent VHs. Hoffman proposes that
manics generate competent discourse plans but switch rapidly
from "one well-planned discourse structure to another while
producing speech." However, a series of studies have failed to
find differences between schizophrenic and manic speech disor-
ganization (Andreasen 1979b; Harrow et al. 1983; Harvey 1983;
Marengo & Harrow 1985). Other research suggests that there
may be differences between speech disorganization in schizo-
phrenics and manics (Ragin & Oltmanns, in press), but the
evidence in this area is mixed.
Finally, Hoffman's model leans for support on Andreasen and
Olsen's (1982) finding that in schizophrenia "the correlations
between positive and negative symptoms were negative," and
"positive and negative syndromes are at opposite ends of a
continuum" (p. 793). Recent research by a number of investiga-
tors has not supported the existence of this negative relationship
(e.g., Lewine, Fogg & Meltzer 1983; Pogue-Geile & Harrow
1985).
Overall, Hoffman's hypothesis may help advance knowledge
about VHs. However, a multifactor model is needed for a
complete understanding of the varied aspects of disordered
schizophrenic cognition.
Hearing voices and the bicameral mind
Julian Jaynes
Psychology Department, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J. 08544
Auditory verbal hallucinations exist in varying percentages in
every population in the world where they have been studied.
They are of course most notable nowadays in severely stressed
individuals that we label schizophrenic. But, contrary to what
many an ardent biological psychiatrist wishes to think, they
occur in normal individuals also, and they are not always indica-
tive of pathology. This has been known for over a century (see
Johnson 1978). The most recent study shows that 71% of college
students have had at least brief verbal hallucinations at some
time (Posey & Losch 1983).
Present cases. I have in my files letters from about a hundred
correspondents who have had hallucinations, all the way from a
transsexual who as a boy suffered considerable sexual molesta-
tion and then as an adult after a spell of Scientology became
"overwhelmed" with voices until his sex change operation when
they "abated" (her word), to milder cases, such as torpedoed
sailors during the war who conversed with an audible God for
hours in the water.
Most of my correspondents are men, but some are women,
one of whom had a single experience:
I remember looking to the left car window to see if someone was
speaking to me from there. The voice told me to write my funeral (of
all things!) and when I got out a piece of paper and pen, the words
poured visually into my head and I was hardpressed to keep up. I lost
parts. It was an intense experience after which I ended up weeping.
This mixture of auditory and Belshazzar-like visual verbal hallu-
cination is unique in my data.
The variety of auditory hallucinations is remarkable. Another
case with whom I have had much correspondence and many
telephone conversations is a professor in a technical school on
the West Coast. A deeply religious man, he gradually began to
526
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Commentary/Hoffman: 
A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
hallucinate divine voices a few summers ago after becoming
interested in spiritualism. The voices included a god of another
universe, Yahweh as a false god, Lucifer, and a variety of lesser
divinities and saints, "at least 20 in all . . . each with a particular
mood, character, history and personality." It is the most similar
case to the famous case of Schreber (1955) I have ever heard of.
On the other hand, some who have had continuing long-term
hallucinated voices hear only one. An example I have come to
know personally is an extremely successful and happy business
man who is sometimes teased by his wife and children for
spending so much time in the evening with "Richard," a superi-
or being who "dictates" to him reams of what I consider to be
boring pseudoprofundities.
Some of these cases were at sometime diagnosed as schizo-
phrenic, but others never. These letters, unsolicited, are ex-
tremely articulate, even those from individuals who are continu-
ing to hear their voices. This is not what would be expected on
the basis of Hoffman's theory.
The evidence In history. Other important evidence to be taken
into account by any theory of hallucinations comes from various
historical personages: William Blake who insisted he could
teach anyone to listen to and see angels as he did, angels from
whom he heard his poetry (see Jaynes 1981); or his teacher, the
astonishing polymath Emanuel Swedenborg, whose multiple
hallucinations were written down into whole shelves of books
that founded a new religion; or Joseph Smith and the Book of
Mormon; or Muhammad hearing the Koran; or many other
examples dating back to all the prophets and oracles and aoidoi
of history. Or in our own era, Colonel Qaddafi of Libya, born a
Beduin, who according to numerous reports hears voices from
time to time and periodically goes into the desert to communi-
cate with them.
The evidence In children. The spectrum of incidence of audito-
ry hallucinations has to include not only normal nonschizophre-
nic adults but also children. Those who have studied the phe-
nomena of "imaginary playmates" (which should read
hallucinated playmates) are convinced that such children hear
the "voices" of their (by us unseen) friends in their conversations
with them (Harvey 1918; Pines 1978; Singer & Singer 1984). In
my own studies, I have found that about half of the women
students at a religious college had had hallucinated playmates,
half of these clearly remembering the pitch and quality of the
voices. One of these women still has her hallucinated playmates,
now grown up like her, who appear in times of stress, their
voices clearly "heard" and not imagined. She is not psychotic.
Verbal hallucinations In a nonverbal population. A further
group that must be considered in any theory of verbal hallucina-
tions has been discovered only recently (Hamilton 1985). These
are cerebral palsied spastic-athetoid nonverbal congenital quad-
riplegics who have never spoken in their lives. They must be
fed, bathed, toileted, and moved by others, and they are often
regarded - tragically - as "vegetables." Surprisingly, some of
them are fully capable of understanding speech at a normal
level. Using finger, lip, or eye movements, communication can
be established with a known technique, something like the
game of "twenty questions," in which the patient can indicate
yes or no (see Moore 1972).
When asked privately through this technique about the pos-
sibility of hearing voices, most of these patients "gave startled
expressions followed by excited 'yes' signals." The voices were
usually the same sex as the patient, sounding like a relative but
identified as God. They spoke as from outside the patient,
usually from the upper left (when hearing the voice the patient's
eyes shifted to the left as if involuntarily), told the patient what
to do and what was right, and made the patient miserable when
disobeyed. Usually the voices were helpful, supporting any
training program that was initiated. But in some patients the
voice was unwanted, saying things opposite to their thoughts.
The patients felt they could not communicate with the voices.
The data were checked for possible Clever Hans effects by
having a second questioner who did not know the earlier results.
Hamilton's pioneering and emotionally moving data are ex-
tremely rich, and I hope the research can be extended. I regard
these findings as support for the hypothesis of the bicameral
mind.
The bicameral mind. It is to be noted that throughout Hoff-
man's substantial, thickly referenced paper on auditory halluci-
nations, there is not a single description of an example, except
for mention of speech-intrusions in a note. Had the author been
more interested in what the hallucinations said, he might have
noticed the larger questions. Why are hallucinations so often
admonitory, 73% commands in men and more often criticisms in
women? Why are they often religious in nature? Why do
criminal psychotics feel they must obey their voices - much the
way Abraham did in taking his son up the mountain?
In the theory of the bicameral mind I attempt to give a much
fuller explanation of these phenomena (Jaynes 1977). Verbal
hallucinations are so prevalent in various cultures today because
they were once the basis of a mentality different from the one we
have now. There is evidence suggesting that this ability to
hallucinate evolved along with the evolution of language during
the late Pleistocene (Jaynes 1976) as the response part of a brain
register of all admonitory information. Its survival value was in
directing individuals in various long-term tasks that cued their
occurrence. By 9000 BC, such voices were called what we call
gods, and they produced a new kind of social control that
allowed agricultural civilizations to begin. These suggestions are
speculative, but they make contact with and sense of data points
in archeological evidence all along the way. All early civiliza-
tions we know of seem to have been ruled by such hallucinations
or gods. Space does not permit me to go into all the reasons why
this would have worked then and would not work now in the
conscious era. Skeptics need go no further than the Bible. It is
very hard to imagine what was going on in the early books if not
auditory hallucinations.
Hoffman has selected one small corner of a profound and
profoundly important phenomenon, neglecting all of its history,
content, variety, and ubiquity. His theory is apparently based
on a correlation among distressed and certainly medicated
patients between hallucinations and language disorganization (I
had thought that paranoid schizophrenics were the most likely
to have auditory hallucinations and the least likely to have
speech distortions). These patients, however, were admitted to
the hospital on the basis of a set of symptoms, the two most
prominent being just these. Of course they will correlate in such
a selected sample. The point of my commentary is that if the true
range of auditory verbal hallucinations had been considered,
that correlation would have gone to zero. And that would
dissolve Hoffman's hypothesis or any similar one.
Distinctiveness, unintendedness, location,
and nonself attribution of verbal
hallucinations
John Junginger
Wishard Memorial HospitallMidtown, Indiana University Medical Center,
Indianapolis, Ind. 46202
How is it that many schizophrenics identify certain instances of
verbal imagery as hallucinatory? The intuitive answer is that
the sensory properties of hallucinations are more distinct,
more "true-to-life" than normal cognitive events. Unfortunate-
ly, and as noted by Hoffman, this intuitive notion generally has
not been supported by research. In one study (Junginger &
Frame- 1985), for example, we found that although patients
reliably report that they perceived their verbal hallucinations
(VHs) very clearly, the "voices" were not very loud and the
reality of the experience was difficult to judge. We recently
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
527

Commentary /Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
have also found that patients reliably report that a headphone
"voice" presented at a level approximating normal speech is
louder, clearer, and more outside the head than their most
recent VHs. Thus, it appears that hearing a hallucinated voice
is not that different a sensory experience from normal verbal
imagery, but it does differ from normal auditory perception.
Hoffman's emphasis on the unintendedness of VHs in the
patient's attribution of "nonself' is intriguing. Unintendedness
may help explain the seemingly puzzling report by a small
number of subjects in our research who recognize a halluci-
nated voice as their own but still make attributions of nonself.
I'm a bit puzzled, however, by Hoffman's speculation that kin-
esthetic cues prevent schizophrenics from making nonself at-
tributions of unintended overt speech. Several researchers
(e.g., Gould 1948; Inouye & Shimizu 1970; McGuigan 1966)
have found covert speech muscle activity coincident with re-
ports of VHs. How is it that this covert speech does not prevent
misattribution? Is it that the kinesthetic cues provided by so-
called subvocal speech are of insufficient intensity to prevent
misattribution? Or, more likely, are other unknown factors
influencing the patient's attributions?
Hoffman seems to recognize that his emphasis on uninten-
dedness invites comparisons with other psychiatric symp-
tomatology. Obsessional patients, for example, report a variety
of thoughts, images, and impulses that are clearly perceived as
unintended but not as nonself. Assuming that these patients
experience these intrusive cognitive events during active con-
sciousness, how is it that psychosis does not "quickly ensue"?
Obsessions are not typically perceived as voices of course,
which raises a question not addressed by the proposed model.
That is, without reference to the frequency of verbal imagery
during normal cognition, the frequency with which some
schizophrenics hallucinate seems to suggest that verbal imag-
ery is a more prominent part.of their thinking. The alternative
is that VHs are unrelated, or only partly related to the occur-
rence of verbal imagery. The question of whether it is the
patient's verbal imagery or his thoughts (a distinction clearly
made by Hoffman) that become "audible" is important. If ver-
bal imagery is not integral to the perception of VHs, then
phenomena such as obsessions and thought insertion are not
distinguishable from VHs in the proposed model.
A final comment is directed at Hoffman's statements about
the presumed relationship between the perception of external
VHs and the attribution of nonself. Research has shown that
schizophrenics perceive VHs coming from both outside and
inside their bodies 0udkins & Slade 1981; Junginger & Frame
1985; Mott, Small & Anderson 1965). Although still given some
importance in clinical diagnosis (see, e.g., DSM-III's (APA
1980) description of perceptual disturbance in schizophrenia,
p. 182), the perceived location of VHs is apparently unrelated
to attributions that they are alien. It is interesting to speculate,
and it is not necessarily damaging to the proposed model of
VHs, what role parameters such as clarity (Junginger & Frame
1985), direction of hostility (Judkins & Slade 1981), and attribu-
tions of nonself play in the patient's perception of location.
Currently, however, location appears to have no clinical sig-
nificance, at least within the psychoses. Why schizophrenics
locate their VHs where they do is still unresolved.
Lexical access and discourse planning:
Bottom-up interference or top-down control
troubles?
Wendy G. Lehnert
Department of Computer and Information Science, Graduate Research
Center, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass. 01003
Hoffman's interest in verbal hallucination and language produc-
tion is undeniably ambitious but nevertheless grounded on a
reasonable base of scientific inquiry. Hoffman has made an effort
to incorporate results from diverse areas of research, including
cognitive psychology, neurology, artificial intelligence, psychia-
try, and psycholinguistics. He posits a model for language
generation based on discourse-planning mechanisms. He ar-
gues that schizophrenics are prone to discourse planning distur-
bances, and that severe discourse planning disturbances corre-
late with verbal hallucinations (VHs). Although it is difficult to
verify any clearcut cause and effect here, Hoffman introduces
the notion of borderline hallucinations in order to argue that
"the absence of cognitive goals can produce unintended im-
ages," and from this he concludes that disturbances of higher
level language-planning structures predict VHs with the sense
of otherness experienced by schizophrenics. Moreover, this
model of high-level language disturbance accounts for low-level
encoding disturbances typically associated with language-pro-
cessing deficit models that operate in a more bottom-up fashion.
I do not profess to be an expert on linguistic disorders in
schizophrenia, but I do have some familiarity with experiments
on lexical access and word-sense ambiguities which makes me
wonder whether Hoffman's preference for top-down processing
disturbances tells the whole story. In one set of experiments,
David Swinney devised an innovative experimental design that
allowed him to study lexical access during sentence comprehen-
sion in a manner that minimized interference effects from the
experimental probes (Swinney, Onifer, Prather & Hirschkowitz
1979). The point of the experiments was to tease apart two
competing hypotheses about lexical access, the Prior Decision
Hypothesis and the Post Decision Hypothesis. Both hypotheses
address the problem of how one handles words that carry
multiple word senses during sentence comprehension. Prior
Decision states that an understander will retrieve from memory
only those word senses that are syntactically and semantically
"favored" by previous context. Post Decision states that all
possible word senses are retrieved at the time an ambiguous
word is encountered, and then the "favored" word sense is
retained and all other competing word senses are discarded.
The results of Swinney's experiment support the Post Deci-
sion Hypothesis. It appears that in normal language processing,
people activate all possible word senses associated with an
ambiguous word, regardless of the contraints present in the
previous context. However, these multiple word senses do not
remain active for very long. Within a few hundred milliseconds
of their activation only one word sense (the contextually appro-
priate one) will continue to remain active.
When the same experiments were run with schizophrenic
subjects a very different picture emerged (Swinney 1984). All
possible word senses were activated in response to ambiguous
target items, but the schizophrenic subjects were distinguished
by their apparent inability to sift through the multiple word
senses in order to discard inappropriate senses. After 200
milliseconds the schizophrenic subjects retained only the most
frequent interpretation for the ambiguous target item. This
selection would be made even when contextual information in
the sentence dictated that a less frequent interpretation was
correct.
At this point it is necessary to point out that these lexical-
access experiments are aimed at language-processing ca-
pabilities during comprehension. There is no guarantee that the
same mechanisms that work during comprehension are neces-
sarily operating during generation, although it seems likely that
underlying memory mechanisms are shared to some extent.
Schizophrenics appear to have a normal facility for word-
sense retrieval insofar as they manage to activate all possible
word senses just as normal subjects do. But the schizophrenic's
ability to sort through the competing word senses seems to be
impaired. They do not seem to be able to choose which word
sense is intended.
Is it possible to connect this result with Hoffman's discourse-
planning model for generation? If Hoffman is right about gener-
528
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Commentary /Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
ation, then we should expect to find an analogous model to
account for the lexical access experiments. Perhaps the schizo-
phrenic subjects are missing a high-level goal normally associ-
ated with comprehension which allows them to manufacture
VHs during comprehension as well as generation. In that case,
we must still explain the lexical access data. Are VHs somehow
connected to a memory overload of too many word senses? Can
the notion of "parasitic" memories be drawn into the picture to
make this connection?
I suspect that it is possible to pull these fragments together
into a coherent picture, but I am not convinced that the source
of the difficulties is fundamentally top-down. It seems quite
plausible that the lexical access disturbance found during com-
prehension could also be coming into play during generation. If
multiple word-sense selection can interfere with high-level
comprehension goals, why not high-level generation goals as
well?
Suppose we have a well-structured discourse plan at hand,
and we begin by generating an initial sentence. If the processes
that access lexical items during sentence generation share any of
the lexical-retrieval mechanisms used for comprehension, then
our schizophrenic speaker may inadvertently trigger a plethora
of unnecessary word senses whenever a potentially ambiguous
word is generated. If it is then impossible to discard these
useless associations from active memory, there may very well be
a low-level disturbance responsible for interference with high-
level discourse goals.
Although we cannot be sure that a defective word-sense
controller is operating during sentence generation, it is striking
to see how often schizophrenic speech patterns involve topic
shifts based on word ambiguities (see, e.g., segment D from
Hoffman's article). Such topic shifts could very well be the result
of low-level interference from a lexical-retrieval mechanism.
Because I do not see how Hoffman's model can explain such
topic shifts, I would be inclined to support a model of low-level
interference originating with mechanisms for lexical retrieval.
Intentionality and autonomy of verbal
imagery in altered states of consciousness
David F. Marks
Department of Psychology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
When stated in its most general form, Hoffman's thesis that
unintendedness provides the basis for external misattributions
in schizophrenic verbal hallucinations can be supported on
several grounds. One line of support is drawn from studies of the
normal transitions in lucidity accompanying changes in con-
sciousness between alert wakefulness and sleep (Foulkes &
Vogel 1965). In a recent article, signal detection theory was
applied to the problem of imagery and states of consciousness
(Marks 1983). Two distributions of neural activation correspond-
ing to imagery (or "noise") and sensory input (or "signal plus
noise") were assumed along with two criteria. The first criterion
(C) corresponds to a mobile threshold or limen and determines
which experiences reach consciousness and which remain pre-
conscious or subliminal. In the waking state most of the signal
distribution and some imagery is potentially conscious. The
second criterion (labelled R for 'Reality-testing') is to the right of
C, and this is the demarcation between that which is assessed
"real" and that which is assessed "unreal." In the state of alert
wakefulness, all of the sensory signal distribution is judged real,
and none of the imagery world is judged real.
States of consciousness are represented by altering the posi-
tions of the two distributions along the horizontal axis, and also
by shifting the C and R criteria. As alertness changes into
drowsiness the theory assumes that the two distributions of
imagery and sensory activity move closer together and so more
NEURAL ACTIVITY
Figure 1 (Marks). Hypnagogic images and verbal hallucina-
tions as represented in the signal detection model of con-
sciousness (Marks 1983).
of the sensory world becomes unreal and more of the imagery
world becomes conscious. In the hypnagogic state, between
waking and sleep, the sensory and imagery worlds become
mixed up, with approximately half of both being conscious and
seemingly real and half being unconscious and seemingly unreal
(Figure 1).
Auditory confusions may occur; for example, if the telephone
rings, one may hear it as music, or if music sounds, one may
imagine people talking, walking, or even dancing, or we may
awaken to the sound of an imagined but seemingly real tele-
phone (McKellar & Simpson 1954). Freud (1955) referred to
dreams as "something alien, arising from another world." Hyp-
nagogic imagery is also autonomous rather than deliberately
controlled or intended. To use Prince's (1909) analogy, "It is like
putting your hand into someone else's pocket, and taking out
something not your own." The imagery seems to erupt into
consciousness from a dissociated subsystem of cognitive control
(McKellar 1979).
The ability to judge correctly experiences as perceptual or
imaginal is represented conceptually in the signal detection
model as a receiver operating characteristic (ROC). The Hit
Rate is the proportion of sensory events judged as "real" and the
False Alarm Rate is the proportion of imagery events judged as
"real" (Figure 2).
For both the schizophrenic's "voices" and hypnagogic im-
ages, there is a high false-alarm rate relative to the hit rate, and
the ROC approaches the diagonal shown in Figure 2. So there is
at least a family resemblance between the two phenomena. But
alert 
i
wakefulness
^ B
FALSE ALARM RATE 
sleep
Figure 2 (Marks). Receiver operating characteristics for vari-
ous states of consciousness (Marks 1983).
THE BEHAVIORAL AND B3AIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
529

Commentary /Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
it is also necessary to differentiate between the normal, and
probably universal, hypnagogic phenomenon and the abnor-
mal, and rather rare, VH observed in some schizophrenics.
Hoffman attempts to solve this problem by differentiating
between strongly and weakly unintended cognitive produc-
tions, and so the passive, weakly unintended images of the
hypnagogic state would create a reversible misattribution while
the active, strongly unintended images of the schizophrenic
would create an irreversible misattribution. A less arbitrary and
simpler explanation would be that our usual experience of sleep-
related imagery in the form of dreams allows the invalidity of
"nonself' inferences about images to be learned. Dreams pre-
pare us for the subjectivity of images in the waking state.
Horowitz (1983) describes three ways in which reality testing
can occur in the waking state: (1) automatically, (2) through a
process of checking, and (3) through logical appraisal and
learned counterweights. The progressive loss of reality testing
seems to result either from an intensification of images or from
perceptual aberrations (Horowitz 1983, 124-26).
Hoffman relates the unintendedness of verbal images in
schizophrenics to the unintendedness and disorganization of
schizophrenic discourse. Here lies the rub. Hoffman argues (if I
understand him correctly) that the latter causes the former.
Nobody would wish to deny that these two phenomena fre-
quently co-occur, but is there any convincing evidence that
unintendedness of imagery is caused by disordered discourse
planning? This seems unlikely for two important reasons. First,
imagery is developmentally prior to lexical processes (Bruner
1964; Horowitz 1983; Marks 1986; Piaget 1930), and so inten-
tionality (and unintentionally) develops in the context of actions
and images and only later takes control of verbal discourse. This
fact is reinforced by the not uncommon occurrence of visual, and
not verbal, hallucinations in schizophrenics, especially in the
more disoriented and confused patients (Horowitz 1983, p. 39).
Second, hallucinations are decoupled from discourse distur-
bances in a number of nonschizophrenic states of mind such as
sensory deprivation, hypnosis, hypnagogic reverie, and drug
intoxication, during all of which many subjects continue to talk
sensibly and fluently.
It appears that a breakdown of some kind in intentionality is a
cornerstone of schizophrenic disorders, including intentionality
in action, imagery, discourse, and thinking. Intentionality and
its development (and possible disturbance) have been sorely
neglected in the behavioral and brain sciences. Although
Hoffman's theory seems wrong, at least in its present formula-
tion, it is certainly a step in the right direction and warrants
further exploration.
nations of voices during wakeful situations. That study sug-
gested the existence of five types of auditory hallucinations in
normals, at least three of which are of th6 sort referred to by
Hoffman as VHs in schizophrenics. In the Posey & Losch study,
subjects were directed to describe events of "hearing voices"
fully aloud "as if someone had spoken." Thirty-nine percent of
the sample reported hearing their own thoughts aloud either as
if in their own voice or in an alien voice. For example, one
subject described hearing "That one is wrong" as he took a math
exam. (Cf. remark in Hoffman, sec. 5.2, para. 1.) Approximately
10% reported having heard a comforting or advising voice
perceived as alien. An example was a subject who showed no
evidence of pathology on the MM PI but often heard voices,
including her dead grandfather advising her on the selection of
the dress to wear to his funeral. Five percent reported holding
conversations with alien vocal hallucinations.
Hoffman may or may not be right that the alien/otherness
attribute arises because of some "unintendedness" inference,
but it may be incorrect that a language-production disorder
characteristic of some schizophrenics is a necessary condition for
the inferential mechanism. It may be more parsimonious to
hypothesize that VHs are a normal cognitive process in at least
some individuals. Jaynes (1977) has suggested that VHs may
once have been essentially universal. In fact, much of the
neurological discussion in Hoffman's paper can be interpreted
as supportive of Jaynes's view that VHs could arise from non-
dominant (right)-hemisphere-mediated language processes
being perceived as external (alien) voices by the conscious,
dominant (left) hemisphere. Likewise, one would presume that
Hoffman's "intendedness/unintendedness" mechanism would
be left-hemisphere mediated and that the probability of occur-
rence of "unintendedness" could be related to the degree of
language function laterality.
To some extent, both theories conjecture that VHs are possi-
ble because of the Iateralization of language processes. This
could be investigated by further research on relationships be-
tween hallucination rates (in both normals and schizophrenics)
and measures of laterality. The present commentator would
agree with Hoffman that the report by Alpert, Rubenstein, and
Kesselman (1976) is interesting in this regard.
In summary, however, Hoffman's point that "disturbances of
higher level language-planning structures" are required to ac-
count for the "nonself inference of VHs" should be evaluated in
light of the findings of VHs in normals by Posey and Losch
(1983).
Verbal hallucinations also occur in normals
Thomas B. Posey
Department of Psychology, Murray State University, Murray, Ky. 42071
Hoffman offers a cognitive processing model in which an aspect
of pathologically disordered speech planning by schizophrenics
leads to experiencing verbal imagery as verbal hallucinations
(VHs). He emphasizes a mechanism of "unintendedness" of
imagery that may, in schizophrenics, produce the experience of
hearing VHs as vocal and alien, that is, as if someone else was
speaking. Hoffman has apparently assumed that VHs are due to
some aspect of schizophrenia. This may not be the case.
While it is certainly well established that for some (although
not all) schizophrenics auditory hallucinations are a major fea-
ture of their symptomatology, a recent study has suggested that
auditory hallucinations of hearing voices are relatively common
in the normal population. Posey & Losch (1983), in a study of
375 college students, found that 71% of their subjects reported
some experience with at least brief, occasional auditory halluci-
When is an image hallucinatory?
Graham F. Reed
Department of Psychology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, M4N 3M6
Canada
Hoffman's argument is thought-provoking but, ironically, much
of its intellectual appeal is probably due to its counterintuitive
nature. At first sight, the assertion that the form of a subject's
verbal expression should be capable of persuading him that the
utterance is not his own comes as a surprise. It would seem more
plausible to argue the exact opposite - that the phenomenologi-
cal flavour associated with an utterance determines its form. But
Hoffman presents us with an elegant and well-documented
account, suggesting that in schizophrenia disturbed discourse
planning is manifested in speech disorganization which can
cause verbal imagery to be experienced as unintended. In turn,
this unintendedness is responsible for the "nonself quality
that, we are told, is characteristic of schizophrenic verbal
hallucinations.
This last point immediately raises an objection that may be
crucial to the focus of Hoffman's argument, for the nonself
530
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Commentary/'Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
quality - the attribution of images to sources outside the imager
- is not a characteristic that defines or is specific to hallucina-
tions. It is common to several relatively common and benign
experiences, such as afterimages, eidetic imagery, and hypno-
pompic and hypnagogic experiences. In all of these, the indi-
vidual ascribes his imagery to some external source or locus (for
an interesting account of "impersonal imagery" see McKellar
1972). But in these cases, the subject is readily persuaded that
his initial impression of the objective reality of his images was
incorrect. This is not so with hallucinators, who are notoriously
resistant to any modification of belief in this regard. Indeed, the
present commentator has long maintained that the only crucial
criterial attribute of hallucinations is conviction, not simply in
regard to the nonself quality of the hallucination, but to the
objective validity of the whole experience (Reed 1972).
Further reservations about the value of Hoffman's theory as
an explanation of hallucination must be expressed in view of its
severely restricted applicability. Probably the majority of
schizophrenic auditory hallucinatory experiences are not in fact
verbal. First, there are acoasmas - primitive sounds such as
whistles, bangs, and rustles which are meaningless in them-
selves. Second, many schizophrenic voices cannot be classed as
linguistic utterances. They consist of single words that are often
inaudible (being mumbled, whispered, or distant) or in-
comprehensible (being neologisms or distortions). It is difficult
to see how such experiences could be amenable to analysis in
terms of faulty discourse planning.
On the other hand, Hoffman's approach would seem very
apposite for the study of such classical schizophrenic "thought
disorders" as "thought penetration" and "thought broadcasting"
or Cedankenlautwerden, where the patient hears his own
thoughts spoken aloud as he thinks them. Indeed, it is in the
study of schizophrenic cognition rather than in that of VHs.
specifically that this approach may prove to be most valuable. As
Hoffman points out, his approach can account for attenuated
intentionality and nonself inferences, which other models of
schizophrenic speech disturbance are less able to do.
In short, Hoffman has made a substantial and elegant contri-
bution to the study of language and thought in schizophrenia.
His thesis - that the experience of unintendedness can reflect
planning disruptions - may provide illumination for the study of
formal schizophrenic "thought disorders." But its relevance to
hallucinations is at best tenuous.
Verbal hallucinations and information
processing
Bjorn Rishovd Rund
Institute of Psychology, University of Oslo, 0317 Oslo 3, Norway
When viewed in relation to existing theoretical approaches to
hallucinations expressed in terms of "loss of ego boundaries,"
"active concretization," and so forth, Hoffman's position clearly
represents a step in the right direction. Dealing with the
phenomenon from a cognitive frame of reference enables us to
relate verbal hallucinations to other cognitive disturbances
displayed by schizophrenics.
Hoffman fails, however, to address several important issues
concerning the nature of verbal hallucinations. Furthermore,
the central hypothesis regarding the causal connection between
verbal hallucinations and language-production processes lacks
convincing empirical support in his presentation. In my opin-
ion, however, the weakest link in Hoffman's approach is his
attempt to explain how it is possible to perceive nonexistent
outside stimuli (another person's voice). In the following I will
develop these ideas further and will suggest the outline of an
alternative approach to the understanding of the perception of
nonexistent stimuli.
Hoffman devotes little attention to the nature of verbal
hallucinations, thereby weakening the foundation for his spec-
ulations concerning the causes of the phenomenon. A central
issue in connection with the proposed causal link between
language-planning processes and verbal hallucinations is
whether the voices heard by the hallucinating individual are
speaking in a coherent or incoherent manner. I assume a
consequence of Hoffman's position is that such voices would be
speaking in an incoherent manner. There is no evidence of this,
however. Moreover, any attempt to uncover the "true nature "
of such hallucinated voices is made even more difficult by the
fact that the schizophrenic is the only source of information; it is
entirely possible that the voices are speaking coherently, but
that the schizophrenic is reporting incoherently. Conversely, it
is also possible that the voices are incoherent but are re-
produced in a coherent manner by the individual doing the
reporting.
Hoffman seems to assume that there is no sharp distinction
between self-generated voices inside one's head and "true"
hallucinations (voices originating from the outside). I am of the
opinion that the latter phenomenon includes cognitive compo-
nents that make it qualitatively different from the former,
namely, the perception of nonexistent external stimuli, a point I
shall return to. Voices inside the head ("borderline" hallucina-
tions), on the other hand, are a phenomenon that is closely
related phenomenologically and cognitively to delusions and
compulsive thoughts in the sense that all three usually imply
that unintended, ego-alien "elements" intrude into one's mind.
The empirical evidence referred to by Hoffman to support the
claim that disruptions in discourse planning cause disorganized
speech as well as experientially unintended verbal imagery
(which he postulates as a necessary precursor to generation of
hallucinations) is meager. The finding that severity of discourse
disorganization to some degree correlates with the occurrence
of verbal hallucinations in schizophrenics reveals nothing con-
cerning causal direction. Furthermore, in the same study re-
ferred to by Hoffman (Andreasen, Hoffman & Grove 1984;
Hoffman, Stopek & Andreasen, 1986) it was found that 3 of the
manic subjects demonstrated deviant discourse and only § of
them demonstrated verbal hallucinations. (Hoffman's attempt
to explain this finding by claiming that manic patients are
competent in generating discourse plans, but rapidly switch
from one well-planned discourse structure to another while
producing speech, is also poorly documented.) The claim that
there is a connection between speech disorganization and verbal
hallucinations is further weakened by findings that certain
nonschizophrenic psychiatric conditions such as alcoholic hallu-
cinosis and several organic disorders are characterized by the
presence of verbal hallucinations without accompanying speech
disturbances.
The central question in Hoffman's target article - how is it
possible to experience certain instances of verbal imagery as if
they were actually coming from another person? - remains
unanswered. Hoffman refers to Dennett's (1978) theory pos-
tulating the existence of a set of inferences about the nature of
unintended verbal imagery events made by the individual,
some of these being perceptual attributes. As I understand it,
Hoffman believes that these perceptual attributes cause the
verbal image to "sound like" someone else's voice originating
outside the head.
I think Hoffman/Dennett's proposed explanation can account
for how certain psychological qualities, including the imagery of
how a voice sounds, can be attributed to an external source
(another subject). Thus, Hoffman's theory can offer a plausible
explanation of how obsessional thoughts and delusions origi-
nate; for example, a schizophrenic attributes to another person
the belief that he (the schizophrenic) is a homosexual and that he
can also imagine the sound of the other person's voice. The
theory cannot, however, explain the fact that the person actually
does hear someone speaking who is not present and not speak-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
531

Commentary/Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
ing. Such "true" hallucinations imply that nonexistent stimuli
must somehow be constructed by the schizophrenic. The model
that may best account for this process is derived from informa-
tion-processing theory.
Current models of information processing assume that such
processes are multileveled, the first level being sensory storage
and the final "box" in the sequence (flow-chart) long-term
storage. Conscious experience, that is, focal attention (also
referred to as controlled processing) is located at some stage
between these points in the information-processing sequence.
Phenomena such as subliminal perception illustrate that infor-
mation can somehow proceed directly from sensory storage to
long-term storage, bypassing conscious processing (focal atten-
tion). Such phenomena suggest the possibility that the process
may also work in reverse, that is, information may pass directly
from long-term memory to sensory storage. This notion has
certain similarities to ideas proposed by Tanzi as early as 1909
(see Arieti 1974) to explain hallucinations from a neurophysio-
logical perspective.
Various researchers have expressed the belief that schizo-
phrenics to a greater extent than others disregard or exclude
stimuli originating outside themselves and are therefore more
immersed in internally generated events; namely, thoughts and
fantasies (cf. sections 5.1 & 5.2 in Hoffman's article). In accor-
dance with this view, Magaro (1980) has proposed that certain
schizophrenics (notably, paranoid schizophrenics) utilize an
information-processing strategy characterized by consistently
working backward from the schemata (long-term memory) to
the icon (sensory storage). It may therefore be the case that
schizophrenics, possibly because of a sensory overload (cf.
Hoffman, section 5.3) or an extremely slow processing (Yates
1966) are more susceptible than nonschizophrenics to such a
direct flow between long-term storage and the sensory storage
level. Because further processing of information that has flowed
back from long-term storage will proceed from the sensory
level, misidentification of its source may occur (see Hoffman,
section 5.2). In this manner stimuli originating within the
schizophrenic (stored information) may be experienced as origi-
nating outside the individual (for example, outside voices).
Various other central characteristics of schizophrenia, such as
language disturbances and difficulties associated with the selec-
tion of relevant stimuli and focal attention, may also be viewed
from the perspective of information processing (Rund 1983;
1985).
Hallucination, rationalization, and response
set
Steven Schwartz
Department of Psychology, University of Queensland, St. Lucia,
Queensland 4067, Australia
Hoffman's theory of auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia
ties together several formerly separate strands of clinical and
experimental data. As I find the theory plausible, at least in its
general thrust, my comments are not critical of Hoffman's basic
premises. Instead, I will attempt to place his hypothesis in a
wider context while expanding on one or two secondary issues.
Rationalization and personality-preservation. A 30-year-old
housewife described by Gazzaniga (1970) had her corpus cal-
losum surgically sectioned in an attempt to treat her severe
seizures. Following the operation, she was tested in a variety of
situations, including one that required her to report the content
qf pictures flashed to either the right or left visual field. As might
be expected, she could only report pictures in the right visual
field because these were projected to the left ("speaking")
cerebral hemisphere; she denied seeing anything in the left
visual field. Nevertheless, when a picture of a nude pin-up was
presented on the left, she produced a "hearty grin and chuckle."
When asked why she was amused, the patient first said she
didn't know, and then explained that "the machine was funny,
or something" (Gazzaniga 1970, 106).
The patient became aware that she was behaving as if some-
thing was funny, but she did not know why; eventually, she
came up with a rationalization (albeit a weak one) for her
behavior. As Freud and his disciples have said (Freud 1901),
such rationalizations serve an important psychological function:
They maintain the integrity of the personality by giving meaning
to what would otherwise appear to be inexplicable behavior.
Rationalization need not be conscious, nor need it always be
successful. There are times, in fact, when it can actually contrib-
ute to pathology. For example, some anorexic patients, suffer-
ing from an appetite disturbance secondary to a hypothalamic
lesion (see Wakeling 1985) may rationalize their weight and
appetite loss as an intense desire to lose weight. Dieting and
disturbances in body image soon follow.
Hoffman's theory of verbal hallucinations may also be viewed
as a type of rationalization. Some, but not all, schizophrenic
patients have language-planning disturbances that produce un-
intended verbal images. These unintended images are per-
ceived as coming from external sources because "the great
abundance of unintended images experienced during the day
are sensory impressions that actually derive from the outside
world." Put simply, they rationalize their unintended verbal
images as "voices" derived from sources outside themselves.
Such rationalizations may serve to "explain" the unintended
images, but at the cost of displaying a schizophrenic symptom.
Although Hoffman's theory can be viewed this way, he sees
things slightly differently. To him, the "nonself' attribute of
schizophrenic verbal images is the result of altered perceptual
data. Because they are unintended, verbal images are altered so
that they appear to be coming from external sources. However,
Hoffman himself suggests that such perceptual alterations occur
after the initial perception. (He says that among drowsy non-
schizophrenics, images that initially appear hallucinatory may
later be corrected.) For this reason, I prefer to look upon
Hoffman's theory as another instance of rationalization in, as the
Freudians say, "the service of the ego."
The Importance of context. Hallucinatory experiences are not
exclusive to schizophrenics; other patients have them (Zigler &
Phillips 1961), and even "normal" people sometimes report
hearing voices when no one is around (see Bentall & Slade
1985a). As Hoffman points out, however, nonschizophrenics
appear to confine their hallucinatory experiences to special
contexts (when drowsy, and so on). Hallucinations are not
reported by nonpatients when some other, plausible rationale
for their experience is available. Thus, the split-brain patient
did not attribute her feeling of amusement to thought insertion,
hallucinations, or anything similar. Instead, she reasoned that
her laughter must have been due to something presented in the
experiment. Contextual constraints are also likely to be the
reason that aphasic patients whose language may be even more
disturbed than schizophrenics' typically do not hallucinate.
The importance of the social context is underlined by an-
thropological and clinical studies (Al-Issa 1977) indicating that
the frequency and type of hallucinations schizophrenics pro-
duce vary across cultures. In different cultures, different at-
titudes toward hearing voices and seeing visions encourage
some types of hallucinations rather than others. There has even
been variation among Western patients' hallucinations over
time. Visual hallucinations have been decreasing over the past
century while auditory hallucinations have been increasing (see
Al-Issa 1977, for a review). One explanation for cultural and
temporal differences is that the social context at least in part
determines how unusual sensory experiences are interpreted.
Schizophrenic patients are not insensitive to context, but they
are less able to use it than nonschizophrenics. Schizophrenics'
relative disregard for context, for conversational pragmatics,
532
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Commentary/Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
and for testing their rationalizations against reality may, in fact,
be a basic schizophrenic deficit.
What constitutes evidence? Hoffman states that the correla-
tion between discourse-planning errors and verbal hallucina-
tions (see Andreasen, Hoffman & Grove 1984, for example) is
"consistent with the hypothesis that disruptions in discourse
planning cause disorganized speech as well as experientially
unintended verbal imagery" (emphasis added). Unfortunately,
it is not sufficient to find that patients whose discourse is
confusing also hallucinate more because this correlation may
simply mean that "sicker" patients have more symptoms of
every kind. Hoffman's theory is also not likely to find much of a
foundation in the shifting sands of laterally research. Studies of
group differences in lateral asymmetry are subject to so many
qualifications that they are unlikely to answer any questions at
all (Schwartz & Kirsner 1984). Although some of the evidence
reviewed by Hoffman is not subject to these criticisms (An-
dreasen & Olsen 1982, for example), it is nevertheless true that
the theory is more speculative than substantive.
One way to add some substance to the theory is to tie it to
other work on cognitive deficits in schizophrenia. Hoffman
seems to reject the notion that a pigeonholing deficit as de-
scribed in Schwartz (1982) has much to do with hallucinations,
but it may yet have a role to play. A recent study by Bentall and
Slade (1985a) compared hallucinating and nonhallucinating
schizophrenic patients in their ability to detect an auditory
signal (the word "who") in a background of noise. The two
groups were found not to differ in their "sensitivity" (defined as
area under the receiver operating characteristic curve) but they
did differ in a measure of "bias." The hallucinating patients were
more likely than the nonhallucinating patients to classify any
stimulus as a signal. The finding that hallucinating patients are
no worse (or better) than the nonhallucinating patients in dis-
tinguishing a true signal from simple noise is in agreement with
the position taken earlier in regard to sensory images. That is,
schizophrenics do not appear to have altered perceptions. The
difference in response bias, on the other hand, suggests that the
hallucinating patients are prone to classify any event they are
not sure of as a signal. Such a bias could easily lead them to
mistake verbal images (or inner speech) for external voices.
Hallucinations and contextually generated
interpretations
Nicholas P. Spanos
Department of Psychology, Carlelon University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
K1S 586
Individuals are labeled as hallucinating when their verbaliza-
tions or other behaviors lead observers to infer that they are
experiencing sense perceptions in the absence of the stimulus
conditions usually associated with such perceptions. Perhaps
the criteria most commonly used by observers to make such
inferences are counterfactual statements by persons indicating
that they "see" or "hear" events that are not, in fact, present.
The judgment that another is hallucinating involves a stock of
implicit assumptions and expectations concerning both the
hallucinator and the social context in which the labeling occurs.
For example, a seemingly simple statement such as "I can see
him [a deceased person] standing in front of me as clearly as I see
you" is likely to be interpreted by observers in very different
lights depending upon the background of the speaker, the social
context in which the statement was embedded, and the assump-
tions of the observer. Thus, if the speaker is a hospitalized
schizophrenic, or a hypnotic subject who has been given a
hallucination suggestion, observers are likely to assume that the
counterfactual statement reflects a "false perception." If the
counterfactual statement is instead made by an otherwise "nor-
mal" adult in the context of reminiscing about a deceased mutual
friend, it is likely to be interpreted as a metaphorical expression
of the vivid, emotionally toned memories called up by thoughts
of the deceased.
The term "hallucination" is frequently applied to a range of
quite different phenomena. Hoffman limits its application to
internally generated experiences that possess sensory qualities
("hearing voices"), have an unintended quality, and are inferred
to have a "nonself' (usually an external) origin. Hoffman hypoth-
esizes that these characteristics occur (i.e., the person halluci-
nates) when auditory images are discordant with ongoing goal-
directed cognitive activity. The nonconcordance produces the
feeling of unintendedness that, in turn, forms the basis for an
inference of nonself origin. Hoffman's hypothesis is, I believe,
an important contribution to our understanding of how some
people sometimes come to define their imaginings as having an
external, nonself origin. It is worth noting, however, that a great
many experiences that meet Hoffman's criteria for hallucination
cannot be accounted for in terms of this hypothesis.
Hoffman cites Foulkes and Fleisher's (1975) findings that
many normal subjects attribute a nonself quality to their
daydreams at the time they are daydreaming. However, when
the daydream ends and subjects again become cognizant of their
surroundings, they retrospectively interpret their daydreams as
having been imaginings. This retrospective reinterpretation as
"only imagined" differentiates daydreams from hallucinations.
According to Hoffman, normal daydreams may be temporarily
experienced as real (i.e., external) because they occur during
passive (i.e., nongoal-directed) states. When the person
emerges from a passive to a goal-directed state the veridicality of
the earlier imaginings is "undone." If such undoing did not
occur and the person continued to treat imaginings as unin-
tended, external occurrences, "psychosis would quickly
ensue."
I suggest that the above sequence of events is highly context-
bound. Concordant goal-directed events can be experienced
either as purposeful or as unintended and of nonself origin
depending upon the context in which they are embedded.
Similarly, contextual factors can greatly influence whether the
imaginings that occur in so-called passive states are defined
retrospectively as daydreams or as external happenings.
Subjects given direct instructions to make a limb movement
(e.g., raise an arm) typically describe their movement as an
intended, goal-directed action. When direct instructions are
replaced by suggestions that are worded to imply nonvolition
(e.g., your arm is rising), the same subjects tend to describe
their ensuing movements as unintended events (Spanos &
Gorassini 1984). Lifting one's arm is a goal-directed activity
whether it is done in response to an instruction or a suggestion.
In either case the response requires the appropriate processing
of the verbal communication, the development of an intention,
and the carrying out of an action that is concordant with the
requirements of the intention. Nevertheless, subjects' in-
terpretation of this action as either intended or unintended can
be substantially influenced by the expectations implicit in the
wording of simple verbal requests (Spanos, in press).
When given the suggestion to see a nonexistent object, a few
normal subjects generate the appropriate images and report
believing that the suggested object is really present. As with the
arm movements described above, these suggested images are
obviously goal-directed. Nevertheless, these goal-concurrent
images are sometimes temporarily experienced as having a
nonself (i.e., external) origin. In experimental settings subjects
who report that they saw a suggested object usually mean that
they then believed that the suggested object was real at the time
but now realize that they had only imagined the object (Spanos
& Radtke 1981). In other words, these subjects behave like
Foulkes and Fleisher's (1975) daydreamers and retrospectively
reinterpret their experiences as "only imagined." However,
such retrospective undoing probably has less to do with an
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
533

CommentaryI'Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
alteration from a passive to an active state than with the implicit
social norms that govern what constitutes appropriate in-
terpretations of experience during different stages of an experi-
mental sequence. While responding to a hallucination sug-
gestion, subjects are operating on the basis of normative
expectations that encourage the interpretation of imaginings as
"real events." However, when the suggestion is terminated a
new set of expectations comes into play. Both the experimenter
and the subject know that it is appropriate for the subject now to
acknowlege that the suggested object was never really there. On
the other hand, when implicit norms encourage (rather than
discourage) continued belief in the nonself, unintended origin of
imaginings then retrospective undoing need not occur.
A relatively common example of believed-in-imaginings that
are not retrospectively undone following termination of the
suggestion occurs in the phenomenon of past-life age-regression
(Kampman 1976). Subjects given past-life suggestions, like
those given hallucination suggestions, are tacitly encouraged to
treat their imaginings as nonself-generated events. However,
for subjects in the past-life situation a belief in reincarnation
legitimates the continuance of a nonself-origins interpretation
following termination of the suggestion period. In a related way,
Western European history is replete with examples of non-
psychotic visionaries who continued to ascribe a nonself origin
to their imaginings long after termination of the visionary
episode (Cohn 1970; Spanos 1983); the anthropological liter-
ature on shamanism provides numerous cross-cultural examples
of the same phenomenon (Al-Issa 1977).
Interpretations of imaginings as having a nonself origin are
influenced by a host of factors. Hoffman's hypothesis of distur-
bance of discourse planning provides an ingenious account of
how nonself interpretations sometimes arise in some people.
[See also Spanos: "Hypnotic Behavior," BBS 9(3) 1986.]
Image or neural coding of inner speech and
agency?
Gail Zivin
Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Jefferson Medical Collegt
Philadelphia, Pa. 19107
Hoffman has suggested an extremely interesting and plausible
hypothesis. However, he has misread his cited account of inner
speech data by Luria (1961) and Sokolov (1972), data on which a
key feature of the other inner speech work he cites also rests
(Vygotsky 1962; 1978; Zivin 1979).
Hoffman finds it useful to characterize the internal stimulus
that the schizophrenic misinterprets as a "verbal image." (He
sometimes implies that the misreading is of the speech plan and
sometimes that it is of the verbal image.) However, no investiga-
tor of the classic inner speech phenomenon has produced
evidence that verbal imagery is involved. The concept behind
this work is the materialist neuromotor theory of mind: that
inner speech, the vehicle of problem-solving thought, is a motor
phenomenon, whose content is read out through "analyzing"
(decoding) the speech motor impulses that underlie nonvoiced
inner speech. There are neither data nor claims for "verbal
images" of inner speech, and all of the Sokolov book as well as
particular Luria experiments reflect only this orientation by
presenting motor impulse data as the controlling impulses of
(the thought that comes from) inner speech. Hoffman has two
options: (1) to drop the reference to this inner speech or (2) to
retain the reference while recognizing that there is no evidence
that it is neurally processed or experienced as imagery.
If Hoffman chose the second option, he could, on the one
hand, simply hope that the classic inner speech phenomenon
will ultimately be shown to be accompanied by images. On the
other hand, he could examine whether his argument loses
anything by replacing the concept of image with that of read-out
of neural coding of inner speech plans or productions.
The concept of image is invoked in connection with four
points, but it makes a substantive difference only with one. The
first three points reduce to a preference for the casual face
validity that arises from verbal images seeming to be similar to
ordinary external perceptions. Nevertheless, the logic of each of
these four points of argument can be retained without the
concept of imagery. The concept need only be replaced with a
concept of neural coding of the plan or the inner speech that is
decoded to yield the speech content and intent. This could be
experienced as equivalent to verbal imagery. If this replace-
ment is accepted as plausible for experience and as equally
reflecting our scant knowledge of the neurology of inner speech,
then the logical force of the first three points can be retained
without invoking "imagery."
The three points for which Hoffman indirectly appeals to face
validity through the concept of imagery are the following. (1) He
invokes attribution theory, which is usually applied to externally
originating perceptions. Images seem more immediately analo-
gous to such perceptions than does the readout of neural cod-
ings. (2) " 'Parasitic' memories" are hypothesized as the mecha-
nism that disorders the readout of the speech plan. It is con-
genial to an image concept because in lay thought, memory is
filled with images. (3) Imagery facilitates the argument's con-
trast between hallucinations and borderline and pseudohalluci-
nations, all of which are easily conceived in terms of images.
[These contrasts, in turn, help define the pivotal dimension of
weak-strong intentions. The issue of neural coding for inten-
tions is addressed at the end of this commentary.]
Point (4) defends against the following objection: If the speech
plan or image is misread, why do schizophrenics not experience
their own overt speech as hallucinations? Hoffman counters that
sensory (image) readings characterize inner speech and motor
impulses characterize overt speech: "kinethestic sensa-
tions . . . from motor aspects of speech production are strong
immediate evidence that the [overt] speech is self-generated;
thus the otherness attribute is blocked." There seem to be
problems with this argument. It is one thing to assume inadver-
tently, because one is part of a culture that usually casts internal
representations in terms of images, that verbal images must
accompany the cited behavioral and motor data for inner
speech. It is quite different to deny motor impulses to inner
speech. The latter denial suggests that Hoffman either does not
know or does not take seriously the Sokolov and Luria data he
cites.
Setting aside the issue of scholarship, however, it is clear that
the fourth point can have the same impact, with greater ac-
curacy, if one proposes instead that, for example, it is the
multiplied sensory and motor output of overt speech, in contrast
to the fewer inputs and outputs of inner speech, that insure
•• against interpreting overt speech as hallucination. Thus, while
continuing to cite the classical inner speech references,
Hoffman could change his characterization of the readout from
image to nonvoiced speech impulses (afferent, efferent, and
reafferent) without disturbing his underlying concept of the
disordered reading of the speech plan, and without compromis-
ing these four points of his argument.
Can Hoffman's key idea, the misreading of intention, fit with
this more neuromotor description of inner speech? Without this
description, what might Hoffman mean by an error in interpret-
ing that one is the agent of one's inner speech or its plan?
Hoffman cites computer simulations showing that storage over-
load can result in a "parasitic memory trace that transforms
many associations." This is plausible as a general processing
disruption, but I do not see that it sheds light on Hoffman's key
idea. By contrast, there are several neuromotor concepts that
might. (1) Particular motor impulses have been shown to inter-
fere with the readout of inner speech motor impulses (Sokolov
1972). This could also affect the readout of the inner speech
534
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Response/Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
plan. There are three other concepts that more directly concern
the control of voluntary motor action (Kelso 1983), each of which
might be read not only as a control check on the quality of motor
action but also as an internal signal that the action is one's own.
(2) "Corollary discharge" is a feedforward signal from motor to
sensory systems that supposedly prepares the sensory system
for the proprioceptive "reaiferent" consequences of the move-
ment. [See also Berkenblit et al.: "Adaptability of Innate Motor
Patterns and Motor Control Mechanisms," BBS C;o) 1986.] (3)
"Efference copy" is a neurological copy of a motor command
that is sent to a hypothetical central control center to check
whether the intended movement matches the executed move-
ment's "reafferent" feedback. (4) "Central efferent monitoring"
resembles the efference copy idea but uses sets of previously
stored efference copies so that a movement can be monitored
while it is being executed, that is, before it can provide re-
afferent feedback. Hoffman's interesting hypothesis deserves to
stimulate the search for such specific agency-conveying neural
mechanisms of inner (and overt) sneech and their underlying
plans.
Author's Response
What can schizophrenic "voices" tell us?
Ralph E. Hoffman
Department of Psychiatry and Yale Psychiatric Institute, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Conn. 06520
The diverse disciplines and orientations of the commen-
tators have predictably led to a wide range of reactions to
practically all aspects of my model of schizophrenic verbal
hallucinations (VHs). I will respond according to five
general themes that appear to have emerged.
1. Specificity of psychopathology
1.1. Hallucinations In normals. Many commentators (Al-
len, Alpert, Bentall & Slade, Jaynes, Marks, Posey,
Reed, Schwartz, Spanos) note that normal individuals
sometimes report hallucinatory experiences. This is con-
sistent with the model, which predicts that hallucinations
can occur under both normal and pathological conditions.
The former is linked to "passive," goalless cognition (e. g.,
daydreaming or hypnagogic states), whereas the latter is
predicted to occur when images clash with goals. In both
casej, hallucinatory "nonself sensory modifications of
images are inferred from nonconcordance with con-
sciously accessible goals.
Bentall & Slade and Spanos remark that hallucinatory
experiences in normals depend on context (e.g., positive
reinforcement, social and cultural norms, etc.). This
makes sense if these qualities are based on inferences that
can be influenced by supporting or contradictory infor-
mation. Along these lines, Spanos notes that activities
such as arm-raising and imaging can be experienced as
unintended - and in the latter case, as hallucinations -
when they occur as a result of hypnotic suggestion. An
effect of hypnotic suggestion is to block the conscious
accessibility of goals ("I did not decide to raise my arm, he
did . . . "). Because the model predicts that actions will
be experienced as unintended in the absence of con-
sciously accessible goals, hypnotically suggested actions
should be experienced as unintended, and hypnotic
imaging should be hallucinatory.
Reed discusses the hallucinatory quality of certain
eidetic imagery. This phenomenon is experimentally
studied with afterimages (Haber 1979). Morris and
Hampson (1983) argued that such effects are induced by a
form of hypnotic suggestic ; if so, their hallucinatory
qualities could be accounted for along the lines just
discussed. However, this does not account for the halluci-
natory attributes of spontaneous eidetic imagery. The
best known study of this phenomenon is by Luria (1968),
who reported the case of a man with remarkable mne-
monic abilities arising from his excessive capacity to store
and access complex visual imagery. It is relevant to this
discussion that this man was so preoccupied with his own
eidetic-like imagery that his goal-directed behavior and
speech were markedly impaired. This suggests that spon-
taneous eidetic imagery may distract subjects from con-
current goals. Our model predicts that the resulting goal-
inaccessibility would impart hallucinatory features to the
image. [See also Haber: "Twenty years of haunting
eidetic imagery," BBS 2(4) 1979; and Libet: "Uncon-
scious cerebral initiative and the role of conscious will in
voluntary action," BBS 8(4) 1985.]
More puzzling are instances of VHs in normal indi-
viduals described by both Posey and Jaynes that seem to
occur during ordinary goal-directed activity such as talk-
ing or writing. Perhaps these VHs occur during mo-
mentary goalless or autosuggestive states. On the other
hand, there is good evidence that many individuals have a
biological predisposition toward schizophrenia but may
never actually enter a sustained psychotic state (cf.
Nuechterlein & Dawson 1984). Perhaps those "normal"
individuals who hallucinate during ordinary goal-di-
rected activity have this vulnerability. Along these lines,
Chapman, Edell, and Chapman (1980) studied college
students and identified individuals who were psychosis-
prone on the basis of self-report ratings. These indi-
viduals often reported verbal hallucinatory experience -
though not of the intensity reported by schizophrenics -
as well as making deviant verbalizations that were odd,
poorly organized, and at times incoherent. This is con-
sistent with a VH model based on language planning
deviance. A third possibility is that extremes in arousal
may alter normal discourse-planning abilities (see
Gjerde's commentary) to the degree that VHs are
produced.
Jaynes notes that VHs are reported by children. This
is consistent with the VH model when considered in the
light of work in developmental linguistics. Language
research reported by Bates (1976) suggest that coherent
multipropositional discourse planning is not fully
achieved until ages 7-8. My model predicts that non-
pathological VHs could occur prior to this linguistic
achievement, providing that the verbal imagery of inner
speech had been "internalized."
1.2. Visual hallucinations. It has been noted by Alpert,
Bentall & Slade, and Schwartz that some schizophrenics
report visual hallucinations as well as VHs and that
nonverbal hallucinations are especially prominent among
schizophrenics in non-Western cultures (Al-Issa 1978).
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
535

Response/Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
The implications of such phenomena for my model are not
clear. Alpert notes that all schizophrenic patients in a
New York City study who experienced visual hallucina-
tions also experienced VHs. Murphy, Whitkover, Fried,
and Ellenberger (1963) note that auditory hallucinations
are still frequent among non-Western schizophrenics.
Thus it may be that discourse planning disruptions do
cause VHs in schizophrenics, but that there may still be
other causes of nonverbal hallucinations. For example,
certain cultures and ethnic groups may positively rein-
force "passive" hallucinatory experience (such as day-
dreams, hypnosis, and hypnagogic states) that seem to
have religious or inspirational content (see commentaries
by Jaynes, Spanos, and Schwartz regarding culture-
specific contextual effects on the occurrence of hallucina-
tions). These hallucinatory experiences need not be ver-
bal but could co-occur with VHs. This explanation could
be tested by determining whether the prevalence of
nonverbal hallucinations correlates positively with the
degree that such experiences were viewed as positive
(i.e., as divine or inspirational) in different schizophrenic
groups across cultures.
1.3. VHs versus other auditory phenomena. It is noted by
Faber, Gjerde, Junginger, and Reed that there is a wide
range of abnormal verbal imagery apart from the VHs
reported by schizophrenics, including functional and
incomplete auditory hallucinations, and thought echo.
The target article describes a model of functional halluci-
nations (i.e., the transformation of external sounds such
as running water into a heard voice) that is based on
opportunistic planning. Thought echo is equivalent to
audible thoughts or Gedankenlautwerden (Hamilton
1979). Incomplete auditory hallucinations, alien imagery,
and audible thoughts refer to specific sensory attributes
that may be present to varying degrees: (i) the "voice"
may be heard rather than felt, (ii) the origin of a "voice"
may be experienced as located in an external, "nonself'
space, (iii) the verbal image may have accoustic features
distinct from those of the subject's own voice. I propose
that these changes are caused by the auditory image
processor in order to "make sense" of the unintendedness
and goal-discordance of verbal representations. The
usefulness of Dennett's (1978) discussion is that these
changes can be thought of as secondary, optional modifi-
cations of the imagery experience that are based on
inference but still experienced as sensory. Thus, VHs, as
noted by Harrow, Marengo & Ragin and by Rund, can
be "heard" through the ears even though nothing is
happening in the ears and can seem, as noted by Junging-
er, to be sometimes outside the body and at other times
not. Because I am proposing that these sensory qualities
result from inferences rather than from "hard-wired"
processes, they can vary in degree (see Harrow et al.).
1.4. The specificity of schizophrenic symptoms and unin-
tended cognitive processes. The serious difficulties in-
volved in assuming that schizophrenia represents a well-
defined category of signs and symptoms reflecting a single
etiology are emphasized by Bentall & Slade and by
Faber. Perhaps workers should be less inclined to study
schizophrenic VHs per se and more inclined to study VHs
in subjects with well-delineated speech disturbances of
various sorts. I believe that the latter approach will be
more useful and will provide further evidence that our
current diagnostic procedures are, at best, only partially
sensitive to specific neurocognitive pathologies.
Junginger and Rund indicate that obsessions are an-
other example of unintended thought. Junginger asks
why such ideation is not generally psychotogenic. Al-
though it is true that obsessions cannot be controlled,
obsessive thoughts and compulsive actions are not unin-
tended in the sense in which I have defined the term.
Obsessives generally have ready conscious access to the
goal of their obsessive-compulsiveness. Someone who
ritualistically washes his hands 50 times per day generally
knows the goal - however irrational — namely, to cleanse
his hands. Though the obsessive is dominated by one or
more maladaptive goals, his actions and thoughts are
quite concordant with them. The prediction is that those
obsessives who become psychotic are the ones who can-
not access the goals that organize their behavior and
therefore fear being controlled by outside forces. Thus I
would disagree with Rund, who believes that obsessions
and pseudohallucinations are closely related; the former
are goal-driven, whereas the latter are goalless, though
both are experienced as "ego-alien."
2. "Intending" and cognitive planning
2.1. Subpersonal goals and planning. According to the
VH model, nonconcordance with consciously accessible
goals causes actions and images to be experienced as
unintended. Gordon questions this because there are a
myriad of homeostatic functions of the brain (for example,
body temperature regulation) with biologically pro-
grammed, "subpersonal" goals that we can somehow
think about and that are nonconcordant with overt ac-
tions. He suggests that the VH model would predict that
well-planned actions would be experienced as unin-
tended with respect to these subpersonal goals.
Perhaps the best way to improve the model is to say that
unintended actions are those that are nonconcordant with
relevant, consciously accessible goals. For example, if I
mused about the fact that my hypothalamus is concerned
with temperature regulation while I was changing the flat
tire of my car, I would not suddenly experience this motor
activity as unintended; temperature regulation, a goal of
my hypothalamus, though nonconcordant with tire-
changing activities, is also not relevant to this activity.
Indeed, if our activities were relevant and accountable to
the myriad of autonomic and automatic goals of our
brains, then we would be permanently catatonic. Howev-
er, as discussed by Brand, if I noticed that my hands were
clapping while I was attempting to change the tire of my
car, I would ordinarily experience this behavior as invol-
untary, because such hand clapping is discordant with the
goal of tire changing; hand clapping is relevant to the tire-
changing goal because it interferes with the pursuit of that
goal. On the other hand, suppose I could consciously
access the goal of trying to keep warm because I was cold
while changing the tire. The hand clapping may then not
be experienced as unintended because a current, rele-
vant, concordant goal (namely, keeping warm) is con-
sciously accessible.
536
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Response/Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
2.2. Self-reference and intending. The limitations of con-
sciously accessible beliefs and desires in models of the
intention are also discussed by Brand. He suggests invok-
ing cognitive processes to model causes of action. This
however, raises the dilemma outlined by Gordon, name-
ly, if intentions are simply composed of the causal ante-
cedents of actions, how do I experience my actions as
deriving from a self, in particular myself, rather than from
some autonomous subpersonal cognitive "planner?" I do
not have a solution to the dilemma posed by Brand and by
Cordon, but it is important to note that the VH model
does not require a solution. It does not need a theory of
intention, or even a theory of the experience of "intend-
ing" since it is only predicting when this experience is
absent or altered. I actually believe that we never really
have the experience of intending; we only experience
failures of intention, that is, slip-ups of actions or images
that cause goal-mismatches. In other words, it is the alien
sensation of unintendedness that defines the borders of
self-derived intendedness rather than intendedness
being, somehow, a primary sensation in itself.
This is consistent with Brand's reference to Wittgen-
stein (1953), who noted that there is not much difference
between my arm being raised and my raising my arm. I
believe that if we were absolutely perfect in our execution
of plans in pursuing particular goals, and if no goal
conflicted with any other, then we would never be aware
that we intended to do anything. Thus Gordon's attempt
to determine the "intendedness" of an action on the basis
of penetrability by reason goes beyond the objectives of
the model (and is not, in my opinion, a good problem to
attempt to solve). The reason we do not assign our actions
to some autonomous cognitive planner rather than to
ourselves is that we do not routinely experience our
actions as deriving from either ourselves or from subper-
sonal planners. In general, all we experience is the action
itself. Paraphrasing Wittgenstein (1953, p. 219): To know
one's intention is to be able to predict what one does. But
such predicting is not directly experienced unless it is
directly represented, for example, as inner speech
[saying to myself that I will do X], which is another form of
action.
2.3. On nomenclature. The suggestion is made by Brand
that all actions are intended insofar as they derive from
cognitive antecedents. In contrast, the VH model identi-
fies certain actions as unintended. However, as described
above, I do not use the term "intended" the same way
Brand does. Instead of referring to causal antecedents,
my usage is experiential. An action (or image) is intended
if it is not experienced as unintended (the latter experi-
ence accompanying nonconcordance with consciously ac-
cessible goals). As Brand states, his distinction between
intentional and unintentional actions corresponds to my
distinction between strongly and weakly intended ac-
tions. Daydreams and other weakly unintended (to use
my terminology) actions are intended in Brand's termi-
nology because they must have causal antecedents even
when they have no consciously accessible goals.
Brand's discussion of "mock intentionality" captures
elegantly what I was clumsily trying to describe as exter-
nal misattributions because of reprocessing of unin-
tended images. Brand argues that if my hands start to clap
when I am changing the tire, I will be more likely to
attribute alien intentionality to them than if they flail
randomly (assuming that I am not cold!), since only the
former seems goal-directed. Similarly, schizophrenic
VHs caused by discourse-planning disruptions are not
random phonetic strings; they express intelligible propo-
sitions to which mock intentionality can be credited.
Harrow et al. and Reed point out the importance of the
sustained conviction of nonself origin in differentiating
between schizophrenic VHs and normal pseudohallucin-
ations. This "impaired perspective" (Harrow & Quinlan
1985) may be forced by the unique goal-discordance and
mock intentionality of schizophrenic VHs.
Harley asks for more reliable criteria for determining
the kinds of intending outlined in Table 1 of the target
article. He stresses the highly phenomenological nature
of such determinations. Subjective accounts of goals and
intentions are highly unreliable; thus one can sympathize
with the difficulties Harley must encounter in assessing
the intentions that underlie the speech errors he studies.
Schwartz illustrates this point by reminding us of Gazza-
niga's (1970; 1985) split-brain patients who routinely
confabulate explanations that make sense of odd, irra-
tional behavior deriving from the nondominant hemi-
sphere. It is not surprising that (as noted by Harrow et al.)
schizophrenics will claim that their disorganized speech
is what they intended to say, particularly because the
discourse disturbance model predicts that they were
never sure of their speech intentions to begin with.
The purpose of distinguishing between strongly and
weakly intended actions in Table 1 of the target article
was to highlight the fact that we do not consciously decide
to do most of what we do. The reason for distinguishing
between weakly and strongly unintended imagery was to
provide a framework for understanding differences be-
tween normal and pathological hallucinosis. The useful-
ness of the scheme in Table 1 is not in predicting subjec-
tive reports of goal concordance on the basis of
experiential (un)intendedness; these reports are just too
vulnerable to post hoc modifications. Rather, the scheme
is invoked to map out theoretical relationships between
different kinds of unintended action, imagery produc-
tion, and the planning of communicative intentions in
schizophrenia. Further verification of the scheme awaits
other methods for objectively identifying goal-directed
cognitive processes. One approach may be to use pupil-
lary dilation to measure cognitive effort and goal-direc-
tedness. Schizophrenic VHs are predicted to occur with
effortful, goal-directed cognition and should therefore be
accompanied by pupillary dilation. On the other hand,
visual hallucinosis, deriving from drug ingestion for ex-
ample, may derive from passive goalless states and hence
not be accompanied by pupillary changes.
2.4. Nonself features of exafferent versus reafferent
voices. It is noted by Alpert [and several other commen-
tators, although the repetition was removed by the edi-
tor] that bone conduction induces a low frequency bias in
listening to one's own voice, thus offering a ready expla-
nation for why one's own tape-recorded voice (which is
not modified by this low frequency bias) frequently
sounds alien and not like one's own. This explanation
sounds very plausible. However, it needs to be restated
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
537

Response/Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
that, in discussing the tape-recorder problem, I was not
committed to the inferential model of nonself attributes of
the auditory image. This problem was presented simply
to illustrate how hypotheses that parallel those being
discussed in connection with the VH problem can be
proposed for a relatively commonplace experience.
3. Goals, volition, and hallucinosis
3.1. Unintended thought. Although they generally en-
dorse the VHs model, Alans & Dennett are concerned
about the implications of positing "unintended thought"
as the central feature of hallucinations, because the con-
verse, "intended thought," risks recursive cycles of in-
tentions of intentions. The model is not really vulnerable
to this criticism, however, for it does not posit unin-
tended thoughts but rather unintended images, where
imaging is considered to be a special kind of cognitive
output, like an action. Moreover, the model is not a
cognitive theory of intentions per se, but an attempt to
delineate a class of cognitive processes whose outputs are
experienced as unintended, the latter being a more
limited problem.
3.2. Controlling hallucinations. In light of two studies
indicating that schizophrenics can at times control their
hallucinations, Alpert, Allen, and Harrow et al. ques-
tioned the degree to which hallucinations are involun-
tary.
For some patients, Breier, and Strauss (1983) found
that a decrease in activity diminished the frequency of
hallucinations and other psychotic symptoms, whereas
for other patients an increase in activity helped. Allen,
Halperin, and Friend (1985) report that participation in
certain activities such as typing caused their patient to
experience fewer hallucinations. My own clinical impres-
sion is that schizophrenics benefit from repetitive, struc-
tured activity (like typing) but experience more symp-
toms when tasks require rapid planning shifts or frequent
novel planning strategies. The VH model predicts these
different effects because repetitive activity may help to
stabilize cognitive planning and therefore reduce goal-
discordant actions and images whereas novel or high
contingency planning may increase the vulnerability to
planning breakdowns, thus inducing more psychotic
symptoms.
The Allen et al. (1985) case report also indicates that the
patient is able to induce hallucinations voluntarily. My
attempts to get patients to do the same have generally
been unsuccessful, which is consistent with Kass (1968)
and Horowitz (1975). Perhaps the voluntary production of
VHs in the Allen et al. case was actually a simple re-
production of the image of a VH, which patients can do
quite readily.
The Allen et al. (1985) case report indicated that the
frequency of later hallucinations decreased when behav-
iorally associated with the voiced image, "stop." Perhaps
the evocative connotations of "stop" as a verbal image
could actually act as an end-of-plan punctuation mark akin
to a sentence period or a "clear" statement. Then if "stop"
is behaviorally associated with VHs, disruptive, goal-
nonconcordant planning fragments could be interrupted
by this representation.
It should.be noted that shifting activity levels or verbal
self-instruction do not indicate voluntary control of VHs
but are maneuvers that diminish the frequency of future
VHs. These techniques, in volitional terms, are equiv-
alent to controlling involuntary jerks of the hand by
sitting on it, rather than willing the hand to stop.
Bentall & Slade criticize the VH model because it has
no implications for therapy. Although the above remarks
are speculative, they do illustrate that the model may'
have therapeutic implications.
3.3. The goal of dreams. Quoting Freud (1955), Marks
agrees that dreams are experienced as "alien, from an-
other world." Akins & Dennett and Deese question
whether this quality of dreams can be attributed to the
model, insofar as it predicts that the nonself, hallucinato-
ry attributes of the dream derive from its "goallessness."
Are there goals of dreaming? At times psychoanalysis can
help a person to access wish expressions hidden in the
dream that may qualify as goals. But the reconstruction of
wish expressions are best thought of as mock intendings
(see Brand), because they are retrospective and do not
alter the external misattribution of the dream as dreamt.
Crick and Mitchison (1983), Jouvet (1978), and others
have postulated neurocognitive goals for dreams related
to learning and the upkeep of memories. But an aware-
ness of these goals does nothing to make sense of the
dream, hence the goals are subpersonal (see Gordon).
Thus dreams indeed seem to lack relevant, consciously
accessible goals that enhance our ability to make sense of
them at the time of dreaming.
4. The relationship between verbal hallucinations
and language difficulties
4.1. VHs can occur in the absence of language difficulties.
It is noted by Marks that hallucinations secondary to
sensory deprivation, hypnosis, hypnagogic states, and
drug intoxication occur in the absence of discourse distur-
bances; this is consistent with the model because all of
these states may induce goallessness and unintended
cognitive outputs. Alpert, Bentall & Slade, and Schwartz
state that VHs can occur among psychiatric patients who
are not schizophrenic and have no recognizable speech
difficulties. But Alpert and Silvers (1970) indicated that
the VHs of schizophrenia, compared to the VHs of, for
example, alcoholic hallucinosis, more frequently express
intelligible propositions. This is predictable from the
hypothesis that discourse-planning disturbances under-
lying schizophrenic VHs affect the relationship between
multiple propositions while leaving the expression of
individual propositions intact. Alcoholic VHs may derive
from a mechanism other than discourse-planning disrup-
tions and could be secondary to drug-induced cognitive
goallessness. Similarly, the VHs of psychotically de-
pressed persons (see Bentall & Slade) are qualitatively
different from schizophrenic VHs: The former more fre-
quently consist in a single word or name being called and
they generally do not express a whole proposition (Hamil-
ton 1979); moreover, depressive VHs are frequently
hypnogogic (Slater & Roth 1969). Thus the VHs of de-
pressives may derive from normal speech errors (cf.
Harley 1985) or the goallessness of hypnagogic states.
538
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Response/Hoifman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
4.2. Coherence of schizophrenic speech. Speech-disor-
dered schizophrenics can at times produce thematically
coherent discourse, Faber and Allen note. This certainly
reflects the findings of our own recent study (Hoffman,
Stopek & Andreasen, in press), in which multiple speech
segments produced by a particular schizophrenic vary in
their degree of coherence. However, as discussed in that
report, the overall coherence of a schizophrenic speaker's
utterance is expected to reflect a complex combination of
factors that include the ability of the speaker to construct
discourse-planning hierarchies, the complexity of the
subject matter that the schizophrenic wishes to talk
about, and the degree that the schizophrenic minds or is
bothered by his own incoherent speech. Frequently,
shorter utterances, utterances with many repeated ele-
ments, utterances with simpler expressive goals, and
utterances that have been rehearsed (such as delusional
ones) can be coherently produced by schizophrenics.
Also, the incidence of VHs for schizophrenics during the
day can be very sporadic, suggesting that their discourse-
planning difficulties can be sporadic.
Finally, the commentary by Gjerde regarding the
potentially disruptive effects of very high or very low
arousal levels on working memory predicts that fluctuat-
ing arousal levels will induce variability of discourse-
planning abilities. Thus it is not surprising that some
schizophrenics with VHs were able to produce coherent
discourse in our cross-sectional study, and that the dis-
course-planning deviance of speech samples correlated
only partially with VHs.
4.3. Different types of disordered speech. It is also not
surprising that studies referred to by Allen (Allen 1984;
Allen & Allen 1985), Bentall & Slade (Slade & Cooper
1979), Faber (Eubanks, Faber, Spangher & Munford,
unpublished manuscript) and Harrow et al. (Marengo &
Harrow 1985) showed only a weakly positive or negative
association between VHs and disordered speech. Disor-
dered speech, although potentially a result of discourse-
planning disturbances, can also be the result of ideational
deviance, lexical access and semantic problems, dys-
grammatisms, phonological disorganization, and loss of
referential cohesion. The latter problems have all been
observed among schizophrenics (Allen 1984; Allen &
Allen 1985; Chaika 1974; 1977; Faber, Abrams, Taylor,
Kasprison, Morris & Weisz 1983; Herbert & Wal-
tensperger 1980; Hoffman & Sledge 1984; Morice &
Ingram 1982; Rochester, Martin & Thurston 1977), but
they are not linked, according to my model, to VHs.
Manics, who shift from one coherent discourse struc-
ture to another during a single utterance, are also not
predicted to have VHs even though their speech is
disordered. Rund states that the target article did not
document this finding in sufficient detail. The "shift"
hypothesis was supported by the fact that manics had
coherent hierarchical subtrees equivalent in size to dis-
course structures generated by normals, though these
were embedded in discourse structures that were non-
hierarchical overall (Hoffman, Stopek & Andreasen, in
press). Shift-induced incoherence is distinct from the
schizophrenic case where the ability to generate any
discourse hierarchy is deficient. Harrow et al. question
whether there are actual differences between schizo-
phrenic and manic speech disorganization because earlier
workers failed to find such differences (Andreasen 1979b;
Harrow, Grossman, Silverstein & Meltzer 1982; Harvey
1983; Marengo & Harrow 1985). The reason they did not
find these diagnostic differences is that they were not
using measures that were sensitive to such discourse
disturbances.
The suggestion by Faber that an optimal association
between VHs and formal thought disorder may be arrived
at by restricting the range of these two phenomena is
therefore a very good one. As just discussed, the model
would predict that VHs expressing whole propositions (as
opposed to names or single words) would most frequently
co-occur with thought disorder involving a deficient hier-
archical organization of multiple propositions (as opposed
to speech problems involving syntactic difficulties, se-
mantic disorganization, ideational deviance, planning
shifts, dysfluency, or cohesion problems).
Alpert questioned the relationship between language-
processing defects and VHs. He referred to earlier stud-
ies (Alpert, Rubenstein & Kesselman 1976; Mintz &
Alpert 1972) indicating that hallucinators use syntactic
organization more efficiently than nonhallucinating
schizophrenics - with both groups being subnormal -
when processing poorly intelligible verbal stimuli. Once
again, these findings are not inconsistent with the lan-
guage-planning model of VHs. During syntactic process-
ing, the formative elements are words or their semantic
precursors, which are hierarchicallly organized into a
syntactic "frame" (Garrett 1975; Hoffman & Sledge
1984). The cognitive disturbance postulated to underlie
the discourse disturbance and VHs of schizophrenics can
be attributed to a processing level where whole proposi-
tions or statements are hierarchically organized into a
coherent message. Thus the cognitive pathology of VHs is
hypothesized to occur at a level distinct from syntactic
processing.
Recent indications that task performance can induce a
flexible allocation of cognitive resources (cf. Kahneman
1973) suggest that the enhanced syntactic processing
capabilities of hallucinating schizophrenics noted by Al-
pert and colleagues could be a compensatory reaction to
higher-order failures in message construction. This ap-
proach could also account for the very interesting findings
of Swinney (1984) discussed by Lehnert. Swinney found
that compared to normals schizophrenics remember the
multiple meanings of ambiguous words longer during
sentence comprehension. Excessive dwelling on seman-
tic correlates of single words could again be a compen-
satory response to disruptions of higher-level message
representations involving multiple propositions. Similar-
ly, compensatory increases in the "gain" of accoustic
sensitivity could be a response to higher-level speech-
processing disturbances. This may account for the subjec-
tive hyperacusis of many schizophrenics, and for the
acoasmas (hallucinated meaningless sounds) mentioned
by Reed.
4.4. Bottom-up models of discourse planning difficulties.
On the other hand, Lehnert proposes that this change in
lower-level lexical access generates outflow interference
that could reflexively disrupt discourse planning; Alpert
also proposes that some lexical difficulty underlies the
production of VHs. This bottom-up model is appealing
because it incorporates the Swinney (1984) findings and is
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
539

Response/Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
supported by another study (Hoffman, Hogben, Smith &
Calhoun 1985) where complex, lower-level syntactic pro-
cessing was shown to predispose schizophrenics to high-
er-level message disruptions. Whether a top-down or a
bottom-up model of discourse-planning disturbances
holds for schizophrenia remains an extremely important
issue to explore. Whatever the "direction" of pathology,
it needs to be stressed that a discourse planning distur-
bance is necessary in order to link VHs with langauge
processing difficulties in schizophrenia. For example,
schizophrenic lexical access problems hypothesized by
Swinney (1984), if they occur in the absence of discourse-
planning disturbances, would cause a general diminution
in verbal imagery, or poorly organized verbal imagery,
but not hallucinated verbal imagery.
4.5. 
Language-planning 
disturbances 
in 
normals.
Discussing his own work (Harley 1984), Harley indicates
that fragments of conversational plans can intrude into an
intended speech output in normals and cause speech
errors. How do these normal speech planning errors
relate to those of schizophrenics? Harley's speech errors
involved single word substitutions while schizophrenic
planning disturbances implicate whole propositions that
are discordant with the discourse plan. The latter is
predicted to induce VHs involving whole propositions;
this is consistent with Alpert and Silvers (1970), who note
that schizophrenic VHs generally express intelligible
propositions. If a VH occurred on the basis of a Harley's
variety of speech error, it would involve one or two
words. This suggests an alternative mechanism for VHs in
normals (see section 1.1) and depressives (cf. Hamilton
1979) that express one or two words.
4.6. Are VHs linguistically incoherent themselves? The
VH model, according to Rund, predicts that VHs should
be incoherent; incoherence is actually infrequent for
schizophrenic VHs. However, as discussed above, the
model in fact predicts that schizophrenic VHs are com-
posed of coherent propositions (which are discordant with
the overriding multipropositional discourse plan). If, as
noted by Reed, schizophrenic VHs are dyssyntactic,
incoherent, or neologistic, these phenomena could be
due to lower-order language-processing difficulties that
involve lexical access, syntax, and semantics.
4.7. Longitudinal considerations. On the basis of Johnson
and Miller (1965) Alpert also questions the association of
language disorganization and VHs; he summarizes this
paper by saying that the authors demonstrated that lan-
guage deficiencies predated the onset of hallucinations.
Actually, the antecedent test used by Johnson and Miller
that statistically distinguished inductees who later devel-
oped schizophrenia with hallucinations from those who
contracted schizophrenia without hallucinations was
overall performance on the "Army Classification Bat-
tery," with verbal subscores yielding no statistical dif-
ferences. This study, therefore, does not demonstrate
evidence that conflicts with my model.
4.8. Hemispheric laterality. It is reported by Alpert that
there is little evidence indicating an association between
VHs and dominant hemisphere disturbances; he refers to
an early study (Alpert & Martz 1977) that examined alpha
suppression in response to verbal and nonverbal tasks.
However, FIor-Henry outlines many other reports de-
scribing neuropathological findings (Southard 1914), CT
data (Takahashi et al. 1981; Uchino et al. 1984), studies of
cerebral blood flow (Gur et al. 1985; Kurachi et al. 1985),
acoustic threshold studies (Bazhin, Wasserman &
Tonkonogii 1975), and telemetric EEG data (Stevens et
al. 1979; Stevens & Livermore 1982) that indicate an
association between dominant hemisphere disturbances
and VHs. Thus, contrary to the assumption of Deese,
there are many workers who believe that schizophrenics'
cognitive deficit(s) are focally located rather than diffusely
distributed.
Deese also asks about the neural origin of intended-
ness. I wonder whether there is only one location. For
example, the planning locus for organizing speech inten-
tions may be distinct from the planning locus that orga-
nizes motoric sequences. [See Ojemann: "Brain Organi-
zation for Language," BBS 6(2) 1983; Libet: "Uncon-
scious Cerebral Initiative," BBS 8(4) 1985; and Goldberg:
"Supplementary Motor Area Structure and Function,"
BBS 8(4) 1985.]
4.9. Discourse planning disruptions and the constancy of
VHs. Schizophrenic VHs, write Allen and Harrow et al.,
are often redundant over time and restricted to a few,
mostly punitive topics. Although this clinical impression
may have validity, it has not been systematically assessed.
In the target article, however, a mechanism is proposed
that could account for such invariance of schizophrenic
VHs, namely, that planning disruptions are secondary to
parasitic representations in associative memory (see also
Crick & Mitchison 1983; Hoffman, in press.
4.10. Methodological issues. The rating of VHs in the
language study described in the target article is called
into question by Faber. VHs were rated as simply pre-
sent or absent as part of an admissions diagnostic evalua-
tion using a standardized Schedule for Affective Disor-
ders and Schizophrenia (SADS) format. Speech samples
were generated a few days later. Without a doubt, this
was not an optimal design. Ensuring that speech samples
and assessment of VHs occurred on the same day, as well
as undertaking a more careful determination of the
nature, frequency, and intensity of VHs, may enhance
the results of such a correlational study.
Faber notes that quantification of discourse disor-
ganization is not described. This is detailed in the Hoff-
man et al. (in press) report. An overall deviance score was
determined by assigning a numerical weight to each of
the ways a hierarchical structure can deviate from a strict
partial ordering. For example, a loss of presuppositional
transitivity over chains of propositions (see Segment C
and Figure 3 in target article) was scored as 2 and a
statement that had no discernible relation to the other
statements of the text was scored as 4. In this way all
instances of structural deviance were noted, weighted
and summed for two speech samples that were analyzed
for each patient. The total number of statements (corre-
sponding to the total number of tensed verbs) was also
determined, and this score was divided into the total
deviance score to generate an incoherence rating that was
used to test the statistical hypothesis described in the
study. The incoherence rating thus corresponds to the
average severity of discourse-planning disturbance cor-
rected for utterance length.
540
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

Response /Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
Faber and Schwartz suggest that the association be-
tween VHs and discourse disturbance described in the
target article may simply reflect the fact that more se-
verely ill patients have more symptoms. I accordingly
examined the relationship between severity of discourse-
planning disturbances and the severity of delusions. Be-
sides hallucinations, delusions are the other class of
positive symptoms that are prominently featured in
schizophrenia. If the counterhypothesis of Faber and
Schwartz is correct, there should be a positive correlation
between these two measures for the patients described in
the target article. These measures turned out to be
completely independent of each other (r = .02), thus
suggesting that overall severity of illness was not the key
factor linking discourse-planning disturbances and VHs.
4.11. Heterarchical versus hierarchical planning.On the
basis of his speech error research Harley notes that at
some level conversational planning must be heterarchical
in order to be sensitive to various contingencies. It is
fundamental to the VH model that discourse planning is
disrupted when it becomes nonhierarchical. We may
both be right - that conversational planning starts out
heterarchically in order to sort out various contingencies,
but that for a coherent message to be attained, a hier-
archical plan must finally "precipitate out." The term
"precipitate" is used specifically to reflect the fact that
tree structures are most efficient for storing and accessing
information and therefore, from a representational point
of view, are optimally stable structures for lending co-
herence to speech activity (Deese 1978). The non-
hierarchical or heterarchical structure of schizophrenic
speech may therefore correspond to a microgenetic re-
gression to a "nonpathological" antecedent representa-
tional level that is ordinarily unexpressed; this perspec-
tive has been developed in detail in a recent paper
(Hoffman & Sledge 1984; see also Brown 1977).
4.12. Goals and positive symptoms. There is an objection
by Harrow et al. to invoking the negative correlation
between negative and positive symptoms reported by
Andreasen & Olsen (1982) as support for the prediction
that symptoms generating by planning disturbances will
tend to reduce goal-directed activity. They refer to two
other studies that did not find this correlation. The first
study (Lewine, Fogg & Meltzer 1983) is difficult to
interpret because it includes speech disorganization as a
negative symptom. The second study (Pogue-Geile &
Harrow 1985) reported only an overall correlation of a
negative symptom index and a positive symptom index;
the most critical relationship, based on the VH model, is
that of amotivation and VHs, which was not specifically
assessed.
4.13. VHs in mute, cerebral palsy patients. An interesting
group of mute, spastic-athetoid cerebral palsy patients
who hallucinate godlike voices is discussed by Jaynes,
who suggests that this constitutes further evidence for his
bicameral model of VHs. The findings certainly support
the idea that VHs tend to be linked in people's minds with
godlike powers, but this association is not surprising,
since the "mock intentionality" of involuntary inner
speech is likely to be credited to a divine origin when
these voices are "heard" in the absence of an actual
speaker. It is not clear, however, how this supports the
bicameral localization hypothesis, namely, that VHs de-
rive from latent, right hemisphere cognitive processes.
An athetoid component to cerebral palsy is a strong
indication of pathology involving subcortical structures,
especially the corpus striatum (Kaplan 1983). Damage to
these structures produces disruptions of motor function-
ing that may include speech articulation. Extreme artic-
ulatory disturbances may result in functional muteness.
This suggests an alternative explanation for VHs in these
patients. Though speech articulation is totally blocked, a
capacity for inner speech could perhaps still be devel-
oped. Such patients would be unaccustomed to perceiv-
ing aurally perceived speech as self-originating, including
their own inner speech. Any instance of inner speech
would acquire nonself attributes by inference and would
be experienced as an external voice. That these voices
admonish and encourage accords with the fact that people
often do that to themselves. That these voices sometimes
also express thoughts that are opposite to the patient's
own is again found with ordinary inner speech, in which
forbidden, unacceptable ideas are represented and kept
hidden from others.
5. Other theories of hallucinations
5.1. Neural activation. An interesting model of transitional
states of consciousness that accommodates borderline
hallucinosis of hypnogogic states is presented by Marks.
The model considers the interactions between internal
and externally derived imagistic events and their at-
tributed reality. How these factors are regulated is ex-
plained in terms of "neural activation." However, it is not
at all clear how neural activation, as a concept, can
account for conscious awareness and attributed reality.
This term has many meanings, and it may refer to in-
creased neural firing frequency, turning on a neural
module, increasing the salience of a neural or mental
representation, and so forth; a much more detailed model
is required to differentiate the neural activation of a
regular image and the neural activation of a hallucination.
5.2. The bicameral model. As noted by Deese and by
Posey, the VH model is at least partially compatable with
the bicameral model of verbal hallucinations described by
Jaynes (1977). If the left hemisphere of the bicameral
mind is assumed to maintain overriding, consciousness-
determining cognitive schemata, and if right hemispheric
events intruded on left hemispheric processes, then my
model would predict that the resulting instances of inner
speech would be experienced as unintended and poten-
tially hallucinatory. Jaynes (1977) argues that schizo-
phrenic VHs are a reactivation of the bicameral mind.
However, an advantage of my model over the bicameral
model is that only the former relates hallucinatory phe-
nomena to normal cognitive processes; the bicameral
model, though it can account for hallucinatory phe-
nomena, offers no adequate description of the later
(postbicameral) integration of the two cerebral hemi-
spheres that produced normal (i.e., nonhallucinatory)
consciousness. Are we now less conscious of nondominant
hemispheric processes? If so, what neurocognitive ac-
count can be given for this shift? If not, are our nondomi-
nant hemispheric "voices" now ordinary images or feel-
ings? If this is the case, what has induced this experiential
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
541

Response/Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
shift? These questions require clear answers before the
bicameral model can be assessed as an account of schizo-
phrenic hallucinosis.
5.3. Poor inner speech comprehension. The language
difficulties of schizophrenia might be etiologically linked
to VHs, Faber agrees. However, instead of endorsing a
discourse-planning model, he proposes that a receptive
aphasia-like condition, perhaps referrable to dominant
posterior temporal lobe dysfunction, causes verbal im-
ages to be unrecognizable as self-derived. Although there
is some supporting evidence that dominant temporal
hemisphere lesions can induce VHs (Brown 1981), it was
argued in the target article that these hallucinations are
more akin to "phantom limb" phenomena. To take
Faber's hypothesis more seriously, one would like to see
some way of understanding how this aphasic condition,
which diminishes the person's ability to recognize the
meaning of words, would induce the alien, nonself misat-
tribution of VHs. There is no evidence that the schizo-
phrenic cannot readily understand the words composing
his VHs; the difficulty seems to be with some other
quality of the experience.
5.4. Arousal models. The possible relevance of arousal in
causing schizophrenic VHs is mentioned by Bentall &
Slade. Gjerde summarizes arousal studies of normals and
schizophrenics. He states that both under- and over-
arousal could have significant disruptive effects on lin-
guistic information in working memory due to alterations
in retrieval efficiency and sensitivity to semantic informa-
tion. He also notes that overarousal may overload memo-
ry capacity and induce parasitic states of the type dis-
cussed in the target article. Disruptions in language
planning could result. It should be noted that VHs were
hypothesized to be secondary to discourse-planning dis-
ruptions and could easily cause pathological increases in
arousal due to the subjective distress they generally
induce (cf. Hollender & B6sz6rm6nyi-Nagi 1958); these
increases in arousal could cause further disruptions in
discourse planning and VHs. Thus, causality may be
circular and difficult to tease apart.
5.5. Unbuffered long-term memory outputs. It is sug-
gested by Rund that schizophrenic VHs derive from long-
term memory outputs that are unbuffered by attentional
control and flow directly to sensory registers. This model
is actually not too different from the VH model, except
that in the latter attentional control is represented as
language-specific propositional hierarchies. Discourse-
planning breakdowns would also cause the contents of
long-term memory contents to be functionally "dumped"
into language output programs. The difficulty with
Rund's approach is that it does not account for a variety of
clinical observations and research findings: (i) the pre-
dominance of VHs and language disturbances in schizo-
phrenia, (ii) the relationship between normal and patho-
logical hallucinations, (iii) the fact that schizophrenic VHs
most often express whole propositions, (iv) the faster
reaction times of hallucinating schizophrenics reported
by Schneider and Wilson (1983) (a focal attentional deficit
would predict slower reaction times), (v) the fact that
drowsiness and avolition are negatively correlated with
VHs in schizophrenia (Andreasen & Olsen 1982; Sedman
1966a) (attention deficits would predict, if anything, a
positive correlation), (vi) the effects of external speech on
diminishing VHs (Margo, Hemsley & Slade 1981) (an
attentional deficit that is not specific to language process-
ing would not be expected to be preferentially improved
by external speech).
5.6. The pigeon-holing model. Attention is drawn by
Schwartz to a recent study by Bentall and Slade (1985a)
indicating that hallucinating schizophrenics are more
prone than nonhallucinating schizophrenics to classify
noise as a meaningful signal. Schwartz suggests that this
finding supports the hypothesis that a pigeon-holing
deficit may lead to VHs. This finding would easily account
for functional hallucinations in schizophrenia where
voices are "heard" on the basis of nonverbal stimuli.
However, the problem in VHs is not a proneness to make
sense out of nonsense, but misidentifying, as externally
derived, inner speech that is already meaningful insofar
as it is composed of syntactically organized lexical strings.
5.7. An alternative model of "normal" hallucinations. It is
suggested by Marks that we ordinarily adjust to "normal"
or "borderline" hallucinations (cf. Foulkes & Fleisher
1975) because nighttime dreaming conditions us to ac-
commodate to the invalidity of these nonself experiences
and therefore allows us to correct the hallucinosis of our
daydreams. This may be true, but this formulation does
not indicate why schizophrenics are unable to correct the
false external attribution of their hallucinations; schizo-
phrenics have been shown to do as much dreaming as the
rest of us (Benson, Zarcone & Mezzich 1979).
6. Inner speech and verbal imagery
6.2. The goals of inner speech. It is argued by Akins &
Dennett that positing communication goals for inner
speech circumvents some of the current difficulties of the
VH model. What are these (self) communication goals?
One possibility is that verbal imagery, if conscious, is a
stabilizing mental representation in working memory,
"fixing" response sets. Another is that conscious verbal
imagery is particularly evocative in terms of associative
memory and the elaboration of rich mental representa-
tions. Nonetheless, there is still the problem that the goal
of talking to myself is a subpersonal goal: I do not make
sense of talking to myself by realizing that I am attempt-
ing to talk to myself, or that I am stabilizing my working
memory, or that I am gaining privileged access to my
associative memory. All this relates to cognitive theory
that may or may not be correct. Rather, the goal-orienta-
tion whereby I make sense of talking to myself is in terms
of a particular problem I am trying to solve, a memory I
am reaching for, a set of actions I am trying to organize, or
a manifest utterance I am practicing. Thus, inner speech
communication goals remain on a subpersonal level and
thereby incur all the difficulties of subpersonal goals in
determining the intendedness of actions that were de-
scribed by Gordon.
6.2. Developmental considerations. In reference to the
writings of Piaget (1930) and Bruner (1964), Marks states
that imagery develops before spoken language. On this
542
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

References/Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
basis he questions how a language-planning disturbance
related to outward speech can cause pathology of internal
imagery. However, the image-to-language developmen-
tal progression discussed by these authors concerns ico-
nic images of externally derived visual/sensory informa-
tion rather than self-generated verbal imagery. Thus the
antecedent development of iconic imagery does not affect
the argument that inner speech derives from outer
speech, and that defects in the planning of the latter could
induce difficulties in the former.
6.3. Subvocal speech and verbal imagery. I hypothesize
that the nonself inference of unintended external speech
is blocked by the kinesthetic sensation of speech produc-
tion. Junginger and Zivin ask why the covert speech
muscle activity of VHs does not block the nonself in-
ference. The term "kinesthetic" refers quite literally to
perception of movement. Whereas many researchers
(Cerny 1965; Gould 1948; Inouye & Shimizu 1970) have
demonstrated that VHs are accompanied by EMG ac-
tivity of speech muscles, in general this muscle activity
does not result in actual tissue movement. We do not see
the schizophrenic, in general, mouthing his VHs as they
occur. It is this conscious perception of movement that
VHs lack, but which, I propose, serves as good prima
facia evidence for the schizophrenic that his overt speech
is his own.
This also raises the much broader issue raised by Zivin,
namely, the relationship between verbal imagery and the
motor processes of inner speech. She notes that the sole
focus of Sokolov (1972) and Luria (1961) is inner speech
viewed as a neural readout of a motor speech plan. Surely
motor activity is much more readily studied than images,
which cannot be directly measured. If such neural read-
outs can constitute a conscious nonimagistic experience,
then Junginger's question about whether the schizo-
phrenic's "audible thoughts" need to be verbal images
can be answered in the negative. Although I believe there
is indeed some face validity to the assumption that verbal
images accompany inner speech, I also agree with Zivin
that inner speech viewed as verbal translations of motor
readouts will do as well for my model. Certainly Sokolov
fully accepts that inner speech has a verbal form since he
discusses the syntactic changes and phonemic reductions
of inner speech (Sokolov 1972, p. 50). How we experience
these verbal representations - as "heard auditory im-
ages" or somehow just "felt" as implied by Allen - seems
less important than the fact that inner speech is an action
that can be intended. Even if inner speech is not always
composed of verbal images that are "heard," it can still be
the case that, in response to experiential unintendedness,
these verbal representations - and verbal representa-
tions they must be - can be transformed into "heard"
images that sound more or less as if they derive from the
outside.
I am intrigued by Zivin's review of neuromotor control
concepts and wonder to what extent they can be related to
discourse planning and control. The translation cannot be
direct insofar as speakers do not have a fully elaborated
motor plan that covers the entirety of extended multisen-
tence discourse. At best, our motor speech plans extend
across a phrase or sentence. Nonetheless, higher-level
analogues of "corollary discharge" and "efferent copy"
may be operative in checking discourse plans.
7. Summary
All commentators raised important clarifying issues. Par-
ticularly useful were the discussions by Brand and Gor-
don, whose concepts of subpersonal goals and mock
intentionality helped me to think through other issues
related to the model. The most substantive criticism, I
believe, pertained to hallucinatory phenomena in nor-
mals and cross-cultural variables in psychopathology,
which deserve much greater attention than they have
received to date. For example, although it is true that
many normals report VHs (Posey & Losch 1983), it is
completely unknown what percentage of these "normal"
VHs occur during goal-directed activity; my model pre-
dicts that this percentage is extremely low. Another
major research issue, emphasized by the commentators
and in my response, concerns whether disordered speech
in schizophrenia is a top-down or a bottom-up distur-
bance. The former is compatible with the hypothesis that
parasitic disruptions of associative memory are the cause
of the redundancy of VHs. A bottom-up model lacks any
plausible explanation to account for this feature. On the
other hand, the bottom-up model is appealing because it
is more readily explored experimentally. Regardless of
which strategy is correct, a distinct discourse-planning
level of langauge production needs to be postulated in
order to link VHs to unintended language representa-
tions. I still think that this postulated linkage provides the
best model of schizophrenic VHs to date, and I hope that
this presentation will spur future study and research on
psychopathology from a psycholinguistic and cognitive
science perspective.
References
Abrams, R. & Taylor, M. A. (1978) A rating scale for emotional blunting.
American Journal of Psychiatry 135:225-29. 
[RF]
(1980) Psychopathology and the electroencephalogram. Biological Psychiatry
15:817-78. 
[taREH]
Aho, A., Hopcroft, J. & Ullman, ]. (1974) The design and analysis of
computer algorithms. Addison-Wesley. 
[taREH]
Al-Issa, I. (1977) Social and cultural aspects of hallucinations. Psychological
Bulletin 84:570-87. 
[NPS, SS]
(1978) Socio-cultural factors in hallucinations. International Journal of Social
Psychiatry 24:167-76. 
[rREH, RPB]
Allen, H. A. (1984) Positive and negative symptoms and the thematic
organisation of schizophrenic speech. British Journal of Psychiatry
144:611-17. 
[rREH, HA]
Allen, H. A. & Allen, D. S. (1985) Positive symptoms and the organization
within and between ideas in schizophrenic speech. Psychological
Medicine 15:71-80. 
[rREH, HA]
Allen, H. A., Halperin, ]. & Friend, R. (1985) Removal and diversion tactics
and the control of auditory hallucinations. Behaviour Research and
Therapy 23:601-05. 
[rREH, HA]
Allen, ]. F. & Perrault, C. R. (1980) Analyzing intention in utterances.
Artificial Intelligence 15:143-78. 
[taREH]
Alpert, M. (1965) Feedback effects of audition and vocal effort on intensity of
voice. Ph.D. dissertation, New York University. [MA]
(1985) The signs and symptoms of schizophrenia. Comprehensive 
Psychiatry
26:103-12. 
[MA, RPB]
Alpert, M., Angrist, B., Diamond, F. & Gershon, S., 1970. Comparison of
ditran intoxication and acute alcohol psychoses. In: Origins and
mechanisms of hallucinations, ed. Wolfram Keup. Plenum Press. 
[MA]
Alpert, M. & Martz, M.J. (1977) Cognitive views of schizophrenia in light of
recent studies of brain asymmetry. In: Psychopathology and brain
dysfunction, ed. C. Shagass, S. Gershon & A. J. Friedhoff. Raven
Press. 
[rREH, MA]
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
543

References!Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
Alpert, M., Rubinstein, H. & Kesselman, M. (1976) Asymmetry of
information processing in hallucinators and nonhallucinators. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Diseases 162:258-65. 
[tarREH, MA, TPB]
Alpert, M. & Silvers, K. N. (1970) Perceptual characteristics distinguishing
hallucinations in schizophrenia and acute alcoholic psychoses. American
Journal of Psychiatry 127:298-302. 
[rREH, MA]
American Psychiatric Association (1980) Diagnostic and statistical manual, 3d.
ed. 
[taREH, JJ]
Anderson, J. R. (1983) The architecture of cognition. Harvard University
Press. 
[taREH]
Andreasen, N. C. (1979a) Thought, language and communication disorders: 1.
Clinical assessment, definition of terms, and evaluation of their reliability.
Archives of General Psychiatry 36:1315-21. 
[taREH, RF]
(1979b) Thought, language and communication disorders: 2. Diagnostic
significance. Archives of General Psychiatry 36:1325-30. 
[tarREH, MH]
Andreasen, N. C., Hoffman, R. & Crove, W. (1984) Language abnormalities
in schizophrenia. In: New perspectives in schizophrenia, ed. M. Seeman
& M. Menuck. Heath. 
[tarREH, MA, BRR, SS]
Andreasen, N. C. & Olsen, S. (1982) Negative versus positive schizophrenia.
Archives of General Psychiatry 39:789-94. 
[tarREH, RF, MH, SS]
Angrist, B., Rotrosen, J. & Gershon, S. (1980) Differential effects of
amphetamine and neuroleptics on negative vs. positive symptoms in
schizophrenia. Psychophartnacology 72:17—19. 
[taREH]
Arbib, M. A. (1982) From artificial intelligence to neurolinguistics. In: Neural
models of language, ed. M. A. Arbib, D. Caplan & J. C. Marshall.
Academic Press. 
[taREH]
Arieti, S. (1974) Interpretation of schizophrenia. Basic Books. 
[BRR]
Baillarger, J. (1846) Des Hallucinations. Bailliere. 
[PF]
Bates, E. (1976) Text and context: The acquisition of pragmatics. Academic
Press. 
[rREH]
Bazhin, E. F., Wasserman, L. 1. & Tonkonogii, I. M. (1975) Auditory
hallucinations and left temporal lobe pathology. Neuropsychologia.
13:481-87. 
[tarREH, PF]
Beatty, J. (1982) Task-evoked pupillary responses, processing load, and the
structure of processing resources. Psychological Bulletin 91:276-92.
[rREH]
Beck, A. T. (1976) Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders.
International Universities Press. 
[HA]
Bern, D. J. (1967) Self-perception: An alternative interpretation of cognitive
dissonance phenomena. Psychological Review 74:183-200. 
[taREH]
Benson, K., Zarcone, V. P. & Mezzich, J. (1979) A classification of
schizophrenic and its subtypes with measures of sleep staging and REM
sleep phasic events. Sleep Research 8:162. 
[rREH]
Bentall, R. P. (1986) The scientific status of schizophrenia: A critical
evaluation. In: Current issues in clinical psychology, ed. N. Eisenberg &
D. Glasgow. Gower Press. 
[rREH, RPB]
Bentall, R. P. & Slade, P. D. (1985a) Reality testing and auditory
hallucinations: A signal detection analysis. British Journal of Clinical
Psychology 24:159-69. 
[rREH, RPB, SS]
(1985b) Reliability of a scale measuring disposition towards hallucination: A
brief report. Personality and Individual Differences 6:527-29. 
[RPB]
Blashfield, R. K. (1983) The classification of psychopathology: Neo-
Kreapelinian and quantitative approaches. Plenum Press. 
[RPB]
Bleuler, E. (1911, 1950) Dementia praecox or the group of schizophrenias.
Aschaffenberg's Handbuch. International Universities Press. 
[taREH,
PF]
(1934) Textbook of Psychiatry, trans. A. A. Brill. Macmillan. 
[PF]
Bourguignon, E. (1970) Hallucinations and trance: An anthropologist's
perspective. In: Origins and mechanisms of hallucinations, ed. W. Keup.
Plenum Press. 
[rREH, RPB]
Bracha, H. S., Bigelow, L. B., Cabrera, F. & Wyatt, R. (1984) Spatial
location of visual hallucinations suggests dominant hemisphere temporal
lobe dysfunction in schizophrenia. Presented at annual meeting of Society
of Biological Psychiatry, Los Angeles. 
[PF]
Brand, M. (1984) Intending and acting: Toward a naturalized action theory.
Bradford Books, MIT Press. 
[MB]
(in press) Intentional actions and plans. Midwest Studies in Philosophy.
[MB]
Breier, A. & Strauss, J. (1983) Self-control in psychotic disorders. Archives of
General Psychiatry 40:1141-45. 
[rREH, MH]
Brett, E. A. or Starker, S. (1977) Auditory imagery and hallucinations. Journal
of Nervous and Mental Disease 164:394-400. 
[taREH]
Brockington, I. F., Kendell, R. E. & Leff, J. P. (1978) Definitions of
schizophrenia: Concordance and prediction of outcome. Psychological
Medicine 8:399-412. 
[RPB]
Brockington, I. F., Kendell, R. E., Wainwright, R. S., Hillier, V. F. &
Walker, J. (1979) The distinction between the affective psychoses and
schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry 135:243-48. 
[RPB]
Brown, J. (1977) Mind, brain, and consciousness: The neuropsychology of
cognition. Academic Press. 
[taREH]
(1979) Language representations in the brain. In: Neurobiology of social
communication in primates, ed. H. Steklis & M. Raleigh. Academic
Press. 
[taREH]
(1981) Image and object. Journal of Mental Imagery 5:26-28. 
[taREH]
Bruner, J. S. (1964) The course of cognitive growth. American Psychologist
19:1-15. 
[rREH, DFM]
Buchsbaum, M., Ingvar, D., Kessler, R., Waters, R., Cappelletti, J., Van
Kammen, D., King, C , Johnson, J., Manning, R., Flynn, R., Mann, L.,
Bunney, W. & Sokoloff, L. (1982) Cerebral glucography with positron
tomography. Archives of General Psychiatry 39:251-59. 
[taREH]
Callaway, E. (1970) Schizophrenia and interference: An analogy with a
malfunctioning computer. Archives of General Psychiatry 22:193-208.
[taREH]
Cegalis, J., Leen, D. & Solomon, E. (1977) Attention in schizophrenia: An
analysis of selectivity in the functional visual field. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology 86:470-82. 
[taREH]
Cerny, M. (1964) Electrophysiological study of verbal hallucinations. Activitas
Nervosa Superior (Praha) 6:94-95. 
[PF]
(1965) On neurophysiological mechanisms in verbal hallucinations: An
electrophysiological study. Activias Nervosa Superior (Prague) 7:197-98.
[tarREH, PF]
Chaika, E. (1974) A linguist looks at "schizophrenic" language. Brain and
Language 1:257-76. 
[tarREH]
(1977) Schizophrenic speech, slips of the tongue, and jargonaphasia: A reply
to Fromkin and to Lecours and Vanier-CIement. Brain and Language
4:464-75. 
[tarREH]
(1981) How shall a discourse be understood? Discourse Processes 4:71-88.
[taREH]
(1982) -A unified explanation for the diverse structural deviations reported
for adult schizophrenics with disrupted speech. Journal of
Communication Disorders 15:167-89. 
[taREH]
Chapman, J. (1966) The early symptoms of schizophrenia. British Journal of
Psychiatry 12:225-51. 
[taREH]
Chapman, L. & Chapman, ]• (1980) Scales for rating psychotic and psychotic
like experiences as continua. Schizophrenia Bulletin 6:476-80. 
[MH]
Chapman, L. J., Edell, W. S. & Chapman, J. P. (1980) Physical anhedonia,
perceptual aberration, and psychosis proneness. Schizophrenia Bulletin
6:639-53. 
[rREH]
Cohen, B., Nachmani, G. & Rosenberg, S. (1974) Referential communication
disturbances in acute schizophrenia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology
83:1-13. 
[taREH]
Cohen, P. R. & Perrault, C. R. (1979) Elements of a plan-based theory of
speech acts. Cognitive Science 3:177-212. 
[taREH]
Cohn, N. (1970) The pursuit of the millenium. Oxford University
Press. 
[NPS]
Collicut, J. R. & Hemsley, D. R. (1981) A psychophysiological investigations
of auditory functioning in schizophrenia. British Journal of Clinical
Psychology 20:199-204. 
[taREH]
Crick, F. & Mitchison, C. (1983) The function of dream sleep. Nature
304:111-14. 
[tarREH]
Cromwell, R. L. (1978) Attention and information processing: A formulation
for understanding schizophrenia. In: The nature of schizophrenia, ed.
L. C. Wynne, R. L. Cromwell & S. Matthysse. John Wiley. 
[PFC]
Crow, T. J. (1980) Molecular pathology of schizophrenia: More than one
disease process? British Medical Journal 280:66-68. 
[taREH]
Cummings, J. L. (1985) Clinical Neuropsychiatry. Grune & Stratton. [rREH,
RF]
Davidson, D. (1963) Actions, reasons, and causes. Journal of Philosophy
60:685-700. 
[MB]
Davidson, J. (1975) Ending structures in conversation. Ph.D. dissertation,
University of California, Irvine. 
[taREH)
Deese, J. (1978) Thought into speech. American Scientist 66:314-21.
[tarREH]
(1984) Thought into speech. Prentice-Hall. 
[JD]
Dennett, D. (1978) Two approaches to mental images. In: Brainstorms:
Philosophical essays on mind and psychology. Bradford Books. 
[tarREH,
BRR]
Easterbrook, J. A. (1959) The effect of emotion on cue utilization and the
organization of behavior. Psychological Review 66:183-201. 
[PFG]
Eubanks, D., Faber, R., Spangher, G. & Mumford, A. (unpublished
manuscript). Is there a dementiaform subtype of schizophrenia? 
[RF]
Ey, H. (1934) Hallucinations ct delire, Les formes hallucinatoires de
I'automatisme verbal. Alcan. 
[PF]
Eysench, M. W. (1977) Human memory: Theory, research, and individual
differences. Pergamon Press. 
[PFG]
Faaborg-Anderson, K. C. (1957) Electromyographic investigation of intrinsic
544
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

References/Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
laryngeal muscles in humans. Ada Physiologies Scandanavica
Supplement 140:41:1-148. 
[PF]
Faaborg-Anderson, K. C. & Edfeldt, A. Q. (1958) Electromyography of
intrinsic and extrinsic laryngeal muscles during silent speech correlated
with reading activity. Acta Otolaryngologia 49:478-82. 
[PF]
Faber, R., Abrams, R., Taylor, M., Kasprison, A., Morris, C. & Weisz, R.
(1983) Comparison of schizophrenic patients with forma] thought disorder
and neurologically impaired patients with aphasia. American Journal of
Psychiatry 140:1348-51. 
[tarREH, RF]
Faber, R. & Reichstein, M. B. (1981) Language dysfunction in schizophrenia.
British Journal of Psychiatry. 139:519-22. 
[taREH, RF]
Fahlman, S., Hinton, G. & Sejnowski, T. (1983) Massively parallel
architectures for AI: NETL, Thistle and Boltzmann machines. In:
Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Washington, D.C.. 
[taREH]
Finke, R. (1979) The functional equivalence of mental images and errors of
movement. Cognitive Psychology 11:235-64. 
[taREH]
Fish, F. J. (1962) Schizophrenia. John Wright. 
[taREH]
Flor-Henry, P. (1969) Psychosis and temporal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsia 10:363-
95. 
[PF]
(1976) Lateralized temporal-limbic dysfunction and psychopathology. Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences 280:777-97. 
[taREH)
(1983a) Cerebral basis of psychopathology. Wright, PSG. 
[PF]
(1983b) Commentary and synthesis. In: Laterality and psychopathology, ed
P. Flor-Henry & J. Gruzelier. Elsevier/North Holland Biomedical Press.
[PF]
Foulkes, D. (1962) Dream reports from different stages of sleep. Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology 65:14-25. 
[taREH]
Foulkes, D. & Fleisher, S. (1975) Mental activity in relaxed wakefulness.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology 84:66-75. 
[tarREH, NPS]
Foulkes, D. & Scott, E. (1973) An above-zero waking baseline for the
incidence of momentarily hallucinatory mentation. In: Sleep Research,
ed. M. H. Chase, W. C. Stern & P. L. Walter. Brain Information
Service/Brain Research Institute. 
[taREH]
Foulkes, D. & Vogel, G. (1965) Mental activity at sleep onset. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology 4:231-43. 
[taREH, DFM]
Frank, S. M., Rendon, M. I. & Sioinopoulous, G. (1980) Language in
hallucinations of adolescent schizophrenics. In: Applied 
Psycholinguistics
and Mental Health, ed. R. W. Rieber. Plenum Press. 
[taREH]
Freedman, B. & Chapman, L. J. (1973) Early subjective experience in
schizophrenic episodes. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 82:46-54.
[taREH]
Freud, S. (1891, 1953) On aphasia, Trans. E. Stengel. Imago Press. 
[TAH]
(1901) Psychopathology of everyday life, trans. A. Tyson. Norton. 
[SS]
(9155) The ego and the id. In; The standard edition of the complete works
ofSigmund 
Freud, vol. 19, ed. J. Strachey. Hogarth. 
[rREH, DFM]
Frith, C. D. (1979) Consciousness, information processing and schizophrenia.
British Journal of Psychiatry 134:225-35. 
[taREH]
Carrett, M. (1975) The analysis of sentence production. In: The psychology of
learning and motivation, vol. 9, ed. G. Bowers. Academic Press.
[tarREH]
(1976) Syntactic processes in sentence production. In: New approaches to
language mechanisms, ed. E. C. T. Walker & R. Wales. North Holland.
[taREH]
Cazzaniga, S. M. (1970) The bisected brain. Appleton-Century-Crofts. [rREH,
SS]
(1985) The social brain. Basic Books. 
[rREH]
Cerver, D. (1967) Linguistic rules and perception and recall of speech by
schizophrenic patients. British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology
6:204-11. 
[taREH]
Gjerde, P. F. (1983) Attentional capacity dysfunction and arousal in
schizophrenia. Psychological Bulletin 93:57-72. 
[PFG]
Cordon, R. M. (1986) The passivity of emotions. Philosophical Review 95:371-
92. 
[RGM]
Could, L. N. (1948) Verbal hallucinations and activity of vocal musculature:
An electromyographic study. American Journal of Psychiatry 105:367-73.
[tarREH, PF, JJ]
(1949) Auditory hallucinations and subvocal speech: Objective study in a
case of schizophrenia. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 109:418-
27. [PF]
(1950) Verbal hallucinations as automatic speech: The reactivation of
dormant speech habit. American Journal of Psychiatry 107:110. 
[PF]
Gruzelier, J. H. & Venables, P. H. (1972) Skin conductance orienting activity
in a heterogenous sample of schizophrenics. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease 155:277-87. 
[taREH]
Cur, R. E. (1978) Left hemisphere dysfunction and left hemisphere
overactivation in schizophrenia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 87:226-
38. 
[taREH]
Gur, R. E., Gur, R. C , Skolnick, B. E., Caroff, S., Obrist, W. D., Resnick,
S. & Reivich, M. (1985) Brain function in psychiatric disorders. 3:
Regional cerebral blood flow in unmedicated schizophrenics. Archives of
General Psychiatry 42:329-34. 
[rREH, PF]
Haber, R. N. (1979) Twenty years of haunting eidetic imagery: Where is the
ghost? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 2:583-629. 
[rREH]
Hamilton, J. (1985) Auditory hallucinations in nonverbal quadriplegics.
Psychiatry 48:382-92. 
[JJa]
Hamilton, M. (1979) Fish's clinical psychopathology. John Wright. 
[rREH]
(1985) Fish's clinical psychopathology, 2d ed. PSG. 
[RF]
Harley, T. A. (1984) A critique of top-down independent level models of
speech production: Evidence from non-plan-internal speech errors.
Cognitive Science 8:191-219. 
[rREH, TAH]
Harrow, M., Grossman, L., Silverstein, M. & Meltzer, H. (1982) Thought
pathology in manic and schizophrenic patients. Archives of General
Psychiatry 39:665-71. 
[rREH]
Harrow, M., Lanin-Kettering, 1., Prosen, M. & Miller, J. (1983) Disordered
thinking in schizophrenia: Intermingling and loss of set. Schizophrenia
Bulletin 9:354-67. 
[taREH, MH]
Harrow, M. & Miller, J. (1980) Schizophrenic thought disorders and impaired
perspective. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 89:717-27. 
[rREH, MH]
Harrow, M. & Quinlan, D. (1985) Disordered thinking and schizophrenic
psychopathology. Gardner Press. 
[rREH, MH]
Harrow, M. & Silverstein, M. (1977) Psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia
after the acute phase. Schizophrenia Bulletin 3:608-16. 
[MH]
Hartmann, E. (1975) Dreams and other hallucinations: An approach to the
underlying mechanism. In: Hallucinations: Behavior, experience and
theory, ed. R. K. Siegel & L. J. West. John Wiley. 
[taREH]
Harvey, N. A. (1918) Imaginary playmates. Ypsilanti: State Normal College.
[JJa]
Harvey, P. (1983) Speech competence in manic and schizophrenic psychoses:
The association between clinically rated thought disorder and cohesion
and reference performance. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 92:368-77.
[tarREH, MH]
Hayes-Roth, B. & Hayes-Roth, F. (1979) A cognitive model of planning.
Cognitive Science 3:275-310. 
[taREH]
Heilbrun, A. F. (1980) Impaired recognition of self-expressed thoughts in
patients with auditory hallucinations. Journal of Abnormal Psychology
89:728-36. 
[taREH]
Heilbrun, A., Blum, M. & Haas, M. (1983) Cognitive vulnerability to
auditory hallucination: Preferred imagery mode and spatial location of
sounds. British Journal of Psychiatry 143:294-99. 
[taREH]
Hemsley, D. R. (1977) What have cognitive deficits to do with schizophrenic
symptoms? British Journal of Psychiatry 130:167-73. 
[taREH]
(1982) Failure to establish appropriate response sets: An explanation for a
range of schizophrenic phenomena? Behavioral and Brain Sciences
5:599. 
[taREH]
Hemsley, D. R. & Richardson, P. H. (1980) Shadowing by context in
schizophrenia. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 168:141-
45. 
[taREH]
Herbert, R. & Waltensperger, K. (1980) Schizophrasia: Case study of paranoid
schizophrenic's language. Applied Psycholinguistics 1:81-93. [tarREH]
Hirsch, C. L. & DeWolfe, A. S. (1977) Associative interference and
premorbid adjustment in schizophrenia. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology
86:589-96. 
[taREH]
Hobbes, J. (1979) Conversation as planned behavior. In: Proceedings of the
6th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Tokyo.
[taREH]
Hoffman, R. (in press). Computer simulations of neural information processing
and the schizophrenia/mania dichotomy. Archives of General Psychiatry.
[tarREH]
Hoffman, R., Hogben, G., Smith, H. & Calhoun, W. F. (1985) Message
disruptions during syntactic processing in schizophrenia. Journal of
Communication Disorders 18:183-202. 
[tarREH]
Hoffman, R., Kirstein, U, Stopek, S. & Cicchetti, D. (1982) Apprehending
schizophrenic discourse: A structural analysis of the listener's task. Brain
and Language 15:207-33. 
[taREH, JD]
Hoffman, R. & Sledge, W. (1984) A microgenetic model of paragrammatisms
produced by a schizophrenic speaker. Brain and Language 21:147-73.
[tarREH]
Hoffman, R., Stopek, S. & Andreasen, N. (1986) A discourse analysis
comparing manic versus schizophrenic speech disorganization. Archives
of General Psychiatry 43:831-38. 
[tarREH, BRR]
Hollender, M. & B6sz6rmenyi-Nagi, I. (1958) Hallucinations as an ego
experience. Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry 80:93-97. 
[tarREH]
Holzman, P. S. & Levy, D. L. (1977) Smooth pursuit eye movements and
functional psychoses: A review. Schizophrenia Bulletin 3:15-
27. 
[taREH]
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
545

References!Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
Hopfield, J. J., Feinstein, D. I. & Palmer, R. G. (1983) "Unlearning" has a
stabilizing effect in collective memories. Nature 304:158-59. 
[taREH]
Horowitz, M. (1975) Hallucinations: An information-processing approach. In:
Hallucinations: Behavior, experience and theory, ed. R. K. Siege! &
L. J. West. John Wiley. 
[tarREH]
(1983) Image formation and psychotherapy. Aronson. 
[DFM]
Inouye, T. & Shimizu, A. (1970) The electromyographic study of verbal
hallucinations. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 151:415-22.
[taREH, PF, JJ]
Jacobson, E. (1932) Electrophysiology of mental activities. American Journal
of Psychology 44:677-94. 
[PF]
Janet, P. (1906) Major symptoms of hysteria. Macmillan. 
[PF]
(1936) Le language interieur dans I'hallucination psychique. Annales
Medicopsychologiques 2:377-86. 
[PF]
Jaspers, K. (1963) General psychopathology, 
trans. J. Hoenig & M. W.
Hamilton. University of Chicago Press. 
[RF]
Jaynes, J. (1976) The evolution of language in the late Pleistocene. Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences 280:312-25. 
[rREH, JD, JJa, TBP]
(1977) The origin of consciousness in the breakdown of the bicameral mind.
Houghton Mifflin. 
[JJa]
(1981) The visions of William Blake. Art World 6:1-6. 
[JJa]
Johnson, F. H. (1958) Auditory hallucinations as interpreted by means of
recorders. Anatomical Record 130:321. 
[PF]
(1967) Neurophysiological disuse of inner speech as used in thinking in
schizophrenia. Anatomical Record 157:366. 
[PF]
(1978) The anatomy of hallucinations. Nelson-Hall. 
[RPB, PF, JJa]
Johnson, M. K., Raye, C. L., Foley, H. J. & Foley, M. A. (1981) Cognitive
operations and decision bias in reality monitoring. American Journal of
Psychology 94:37-64. 
[rREH, RPB]
Johnson, R. L. & Miller, M. D. (1965) Auditory hallucinations and intellectual
deficits. Journal of Psychiatric Research 3:37-41. 
[rREH, MA]
Jouvet, M. (1978) Does a genetic programming of the brain occur during
paradoxical sleep? In: Cerebral correlates of conscious experience, ed.
P. A. Buser & A. Rougel-Buser. Elsevier/North Holland. 
[rREH]
Judkins, M. & Slade, P. (1981) A questionnaire study of hostility in persistent
auditory hallucinations. British Journal of Medical Psychology 54:243-50.
[JJu]
Junginger, J. & Frame, C. (1985) Self-report of the frequency and
phenomenology of verbal hallucinations. Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease 173:149-55. 
[JJu]
Kahneman, D. (1973) Attention and effort. Prentice-Hall. 
[rREH]
Kaplan, R. J. (1983). Movement disorders. In: The clinical neurosciences, ed.
R. N. Rosenberg, vol. 2, Churchill Livingston. 
[rREH]
Kass, W. (1968) The experience of spontaneous hallucination. Bulletin of the
Menninger Clinic 32:67-85. 
[tarREH]
Kay, S. R. (1982) Conceptual disorder in schizophrenia as a function of
encoding orientation. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 170:154-
63. 
[taREH]
Kay, S. R. & Singh, M. M. (1975) A developmental approach to delineate
components of cognitive dysfunction in schizophrenia. British Journal of
Social and Clinical Psychology 14: 387-99. 
[taREH]
Kazdin, A. E. (1977) The token economy: A review and evaluation. Plenum
Press. 
[HA]
Kelso, J. A. S. (1983) Concepts and issues in human motor behavior. In:
Human motor behavior, ed. J. A. S. Kelso. Erlbaum Associates 
[GZ]
Kelter, S., Cohen, R., Engel, D., List, G. & Strohner, H. (1977) The
conceptual structure of aphasic and schizophrenic patients in a nonverbal
sorting task. Journal of Psycholinguists Research 6:279-303. 
[taREH]
Kendell, R. E. & Brockington, I. F. (1980) The identification of disease
entities and the relationship between schizophrenic and affective
psychoses. British Journal of Psychiatry 137:321-24. 
[RPB]
Kendell, R. E. & Gourlay, J. A. (1973) The clinical distinction between the
affective psychoses and schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry
117:261-66. 
[RPB]
Keup, W,, ed. (1970) The origins and mechanisms of hallucinations. Plenum
Press. 
[RPB]
Kintsch, W. (1974) The representation of meaning in memory. Erlbaum
Associates. 
[taREH]
Kintsch, W. & Van Dijk, T. A. (1978) Toward a model of text comprehension
and production. Psychological Review 85:363-94. 
[taREH]
Klimes, K. (1941) "Audible thoughts" as a preliminary stage of acoustic
hallucination. Archiv Fur Psychiatrie 114:358-65. 
[rREH]
Knight, R. A. & Sims-Knight, J. E. (1979) Integration of linguistic ideas in
schizophrenics. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 88:191-202. 
[taREH]
Koh, S. D., Kayton, L. & Berry, R. (1973) Mnemonic organization in young
nonpsychotic schizophrenics. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 81:299-
310. 
[taREH]
Kolb, L. C. (1973) Modern clinical psychiatry, 8th ed. W. B. Saunders. [MA]
Korchin, S. (1964) Anxiety and cognition. In: Cognition: Theory, 
research,
promise, ed. E. Scheerer. Harper & Row. 
[PFG]
Kosslyn, S. (1981) The medium and the message in mental imagery: A theory.
Psychological Review 88:46-66. 
[taREH]
Kosslyn, S. & Pomerantz, J. (1977) Imagery, propositions and the form of
internal representations. Cognitive Psychology 9:52-76. 
[taREH]
Kubachi, M., Kobayashi, K., Suzuki, M., Hiramatsu, H., Yamaguchi, N.,
Matsuda, H., Hisada, K. & Momonoi, F. (1985) Front-temporal blood
flow in schizophrenic disorders. Folia Psychiatrica et Neurologica
Japonica 39:102. 
[rREH, PF]
Lewine, R., Fogg, L. & Meltzer, H. (1983) Assessment of negative and
positive symptoms in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin 9:368-76.
[rREH, MH)
Lezak, M. D. (1983) Neuropsychological assessment, 2d ed. Oxford University
Press. 
[taREH]
Lhermitte, J. (1949) Comment comprendre les hallucinations. Gazette
Mcdicale de France, Paris 56:345-51. 
[PF]
(1951) Les hallucinations, clinique et physiopathologie. G. Doin. 
[PF]
Lindsley, O. R. (1956) Operant conditioning methods applied to research in
chronic schizophrenia. Psychiatric Research Report 5:118-39. 
[PF]
(1960) Characteristics of the behavior of chronic psychotics as revealed by
free-operant conditioning methods. Diseases of the Nervous System
Monograph Supplement 21:66-78. 
[PF]
(1961) Direct measurement and functional definition of vocal hallucinatory
symptoms in chronic psychosis. Proceedings of the Third Congress of
Psychiatry. McCill University Press. 
[PF]
(1962) Operant conditioning methods in diagnosis. In: Psychosomatic
medicine: The first Hahnemann symposium, ed. J. H. Nodine & J. H.
Moyer. Lea and Febiger. 
[PF]
(1963a) Direct measurement and functional definition of vocal hallucinatory
symptoms. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 136:293-97. 
[PF]
(1963b) Free-operant conditioning and psychotherapy, vol. 3. In: Current
psychiatric therapies, ed. J. H. Masserman. Grune and Stratton. 
[PF]
Linn, E. (1978) Verbal auditory hallucinations: Mind, self, and society.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 164:8-17. 
[taREH]
Luria, A. R. (1960) Verbal regulation of behavior. In: The central nervous
system and behavior, ed. M. A. B. Brazierr. Madison Printing Co. 
[PF]
(1961) The role of speech in the regulation of normal and abnormal
behavior. Liveright. 
[tarREH, GZ]
(1968) The mind of a mnemonist. Basic Books. 
[rREH]
McGuigan, F. J. (1966) Covert oral behavior and auditory hallucinations.
Psychophysiology 3:73-80. 
[PF, JJ]
McKellar, P. (1968) Experience and behaviour. Penguin Press. 
[RPB]
(1972) Imagery from the standpoint of introspection. In: The function and
nature of imagery, ed. P. W. Sheehan. Academic Press. 
[GFR]
(1979) Between wakefulness and sleep: Hypnagogic fantasy. In: The
potential of fantasy and inwgination, ed. A. A. Sheikh & J. T. Shaffer.
Brandon House. 
[DFM]
McKellar, P. & Simpson, L. (1954) Between wakefulness and sleep:
Hypnagogic imaging. British Journal of Psychology 45:266-76. 
[DFM]
Magaro, P. A. (1980) Cognition in schizophrenia and paranoia: The
integration of cognitive processes. Erlbaum Associates. 
[BRR]
Maher, B. A. (1972) The language of schizophrenia: A review and
interpretation. British Journal of Psychiatry 120:3-17. 
[taREH]
(1974) Delusional thinking and perceptual disorder. Journal of Individual
Psychology 30:98-113. 
[taREH]
Maher, B., Manschreck, T. C. & Rueklos, M. (1980) Contextual constraint
and recall of verbal material in schizophrenia: The effect of thought
disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry 137:69-73. 
[taREH]
Manschreck, T. C , Maher, B. A. & Ader, D. N. (1981) Formal thought
disorder, the type-token ration, and disturbed voluntary motor movement
in schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry 139:7-15. 
[PF]
Marengo, J. & Harrow, M. (1985) Thought disorder: A function of
schizophrenia, mania or psychosis? Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease 173:35-41. 
[rREH, MH]
Margo, A., Hemsley, D. R. & Slade, P. D. (1981) The effects of varying
auditory input on schizophrenic hallucinations. British Journal of
Psychiatry 139:122-27. 
(tarREH]
Marks, D. F. (1983). Signal detection theory applied to imagery and states of
consciousness. International Imagery Bulletin 1:39-51. 
[DFM]
(1986) The neuropsychology of imagery. In: Theories of image formation,
ed. D. F. Marks. Brandon House. 
[DFM]
Marr, D. (1982) Vision: A computational investigation into the human
representation and processing of visual information. W. H. Freeman.
[taREH]
Maudsley, H. (1886) Natural causes and supernatural seemings. Kegan Paul,
Trench and Co. 
[PF]
Mayer, M., Alpert, M., Stastny, P., Perlick, D. & Empfield, M. (1985)
546
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

References!'Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
Multiple contributions to clinical presentations of flat affect in
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin 11:420-26. 
[MA]
Max, L. W. (1937) An experimental study of the motor theory of
consciousness. 4: Action of current responses in the deaf during
awakening, kinaesthetic imagery, and abstract thinking. Journal of
Comparative Psychology 24:301. 
|PF]
Meichenbaum, D. (1974) Cognitive behaviour modification. General Learning
Press. 
[rREH, HA]
(1977) Cognitive-behavior modification: An integrative approach. Plenum
Press. 
[rREH]
Miller, M. D., Johnson, R. L. & Richmond, L. H. (1965) Auditory
hallucinations and descriptive language skills. Journal of Psychiatric
Research 3:43-56. 
[taREH, MA]
Mintz, S. & Alpert, M. (1972) Imagery vividness, reality-testing and
schizophrenic hallucinations. Journal of Abnonnal Psychology 19:310-
16. 
[tarREH, MA, RPB]
Modell, A. H. (1958) The theoretical implications of hallucinatory experiences
in schizophrenia. Journal of American Psychoanalytical Association
6:442-80. 
[PF]
(1960) An approach to the nature of auditory hallucinations in
schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry 3:259-66. 
[PF]
(1962) Hallucination in schizophrenic patients and their relation to psychic
structure. In: Hallucinations, ed. L. West. Grune and Stratton. 
[PF]
Moore, M. V. (1972) Binary communication for the severely handicapped.
Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 53:532-33. 
[JJa]
Morice, R. D. & Ingram, J, C. L. (1982) Language analysis in schizophrenia:
Diagnostic implications. Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry 16:11-21. 
[rREH]
Morihisa, A., Duffy, F. H. & Wyatt, R. J. (1983) Brain electrical activity
mapping (BEAM) in schizophrenic patients. Archives of General
Psychiatry 40:719-28. 
[taREH]
Morris, P. E. & Hampson, P. J. (1983) Imagery and consciousness. Academic
Press. 
[rREH]
Morstyn, R., Duffy, F. H. & McCarley, R. (1983a) Altered P300 topography
in schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry 40:729-34. 
[taREH]
(1983b) Altered topography of EEC spectral content in schizophrenia.
Elcctroenccphalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 56:263-71.
[taREH]
Mott, R., Small, I. & Anderson, J. (1965) Comparative study of hallucinations.
Archives of General Psychiatry 12:595-601. 
[JJu]
Murphy, H. B. M., Whitkover, E. D., Fried, J. & Ellenberger, H. (1963)
Cross-cultural survey of schizophrenic symptomatology. International
Journal of Social Psychiatry 9:237-49. 
[rREH]
Neale, J. M. & Oltmanns, T. F. (1980) Schizophrenia. John Wiley. 
[taREH]
Neisser, U. (1967) Cognitive psychology. Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
[HA]
Nisbett, R. E. & Wilson, T. (1977) Telling more than we can know: Verbal
reports on mental processes. Psychological Review 84:231-59. 
[taREH)
Nuechterlein, H. K. & Dawson, E. M. (1984) Information processing and
nttention.il functioning in the developmental course of schizophrenic
disorders. Schizophrenia Bulletin 10:160-230. 
[rREH]
Oltinnnns, T. F. (1982) Criteria for evaluating hypotheses regarding
information processing and schizophrenia. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
5:610-11. 
[taREH]
Oppenheimer, H. (1971) Clinical psychiatry. Harper & Row. 
[taREH]
Parish, E. (1897) Hallucinations and illusions. Walter Scott. 
[PF]
Perky, C. W. (1910) An experimental study of imagination. American Journal of
Psychology 21:422-52. 
[RPB]
Piaget, J. (1930) The child's conception of physical causality. Harcourt.
[rREH, DFM]
Pines, M. (1978) Invisible playmates. Psychology Today 12:38-42. 
[JJa]
Pogue-Geile, M. & Harrow, M. (1985) Negative symptoms in schizophrenia:
Their longitudinal course and prognostic importance. Schizophrenia
Bulletin 11:427-39. 
[rREH, MH)
Posey, T. B. & Losch, M. E. (1983) Auditor)' hallucinations of hearing voices
in 375 normal subjects. Imagination, Cognition, and Personality 2:99-
113. [rREH, JJ, TBP]
Prince, M. (1909) The dissociation of a personality. Longmans. 
[DFM]
Pylyshyn, Z. (1973) What the mind's eye tells the mind's brain: A critique of
mental imagery. Psychological Bulletin 80:1-24. 
[taREH]
(1980) Computation and cognition: Issues in the foundation of cognitive
science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3:111-69. 
[taREH]
(1981) The imagery debate: Analogue media versus tacit knowledge.
Psychological Review 88:16-45. 
[taREH]
Rachman, S. (1981) Unwanted intrusive cognitions. Advances in Behavior
Research and Therapy 3:89-99. 
[HA]
Ragin, A. & Oltmanns, T. (in press) Communicability and thought disorder in
schizophrenics and other diagnostic groups: A followup study. British
Journal of Psychiatry. 
[MH]
Reed, F. G. (1972) The psychology of anomalous experience. Hutchinson.
[rREH, GFR]
Reilly, F., Harrow, M., Tucker, G., Quinlan, D. & Siegel, A. (1975)
Looseness of associations in acute schizophrenia. British Journal of
Psychiatry 127:24-46. 
[taREH]
Rochester, S. & Martin, J. (1979) Crazy talk: A study of the discourse of
schizophrenic speakers. Plenum Press. 
[taREH]
Rochester, S., Martin, J. & Thurston, S. (1977) Thought-process disorder in
schizophrenia: The listener's task. Brain and Language 4:95—114.
[taREH]
Rubens, R. L. & Lapidus, L. B. (1978) Schizophrenic patterns of arousal and
stimulus barrier functioning. Journal of Ahnomial Psychology 87:199-
211. [taREHj
Rumelhart, D. & Norman, D. A. (1982) Simulating a skilled typist: A study of
skilled cognitive-motor performance. Cognitive Science 6:1-32. 
[MB]
Rund, B. R. (1983) The effect of distraction on focal attention in paranoid and
non-paranoid schizophrenic patients compared to normals and non-
psychotic psychiatric patients. Journal of Psychiatric Research 17:241-50.
[BRR]
(1985) Attention, communication, and schizophrenia. Yale Journal of
Biology and Medicine 58:265-75. 
[BRR]
Rutter, D. (1979) The reconstruction of schizophrenic speech. British Journal
of Psychiatry 134:356-59. 
[taREH]
Sacerdoti, E. D. (1977) A structure for plans and behavior.
Elsevier. 
[taREH]
Schank, R. (1977) Rules and topics in conversation. Cognitive Science 1:421-
42. 
[TAH]
(1983) Dynamic memory. Cambridge University Press. 
[taREH, MB]
Schank, R. & Abelson, R. (1977) Scripts, plans, goals, and understanding.
Erlbaum Associates. [taREH, MB]
Schneider, K. (1957) Pramare und secundare symptome bei schizophrenic.
Fortschritte der Neurologie, Psychiatrie und Ihrer Grenzgebeite 25:487-
90. 
[taREH]
Schneider, S. J. & Wilson, C. R. (1983) Perceptual discrimination and
reaction time in hallucinatory schizophrenics. Psychiatry Research 9:243-
53. 
[tarREH]
Schreber, D. P. (1955) Memoirs of my nervous illness. Dawson. 
[JJa]
Schwartz, S. (1974) Arousal and recall: Effects of noise on two retrieval
strategies. Journal of Experimental Psychology 102:896-98. 
[PFG]
(1975) Individual differences in cognition: Some relationships between
personality and memory Journal of Research in Personality 9:217-25.
[PFG)
(1982) Is there a schizophrenic language? Behavioral and Brain Sciences
5:579-626. 
[taREH, SS]
Schwartz, S. & Kirsner, K. (1984) Can group differences in hemispheric
asymmetry be inferred from behavioral laterality indices? Brain and
Cognition 3:57-71. 
[SS]
Sedman, G. (1966a) A comparative study of pseudohallucinations, imagery and
true hallucinations. British Journal of Psychiatry 112:9-17. 
[tarREH]
(1966b) "Inner voices": Phenomenological and clinical aspects. British
Journal of Psychiatry 112:485-90. 
[taREH]
Segal, S. J. (1970) Imagery and reality: Can they be distinguished? In: Origins
and mechanisms of hallucinations, ed. W. Keup. Plenum Press. 
[RPB]
Seitz, P. & Molholm, H. B. (1947) Relation of mental imagery to
hallucinations. Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry 57:469-
80. 
[taREH]
Shagass, C. (1976) An electrophysiological view of schizophrenia. Biological
Psychiatry 11:3-30. 
[taREH]
Shakow, D. (1962) Segmental set. Archives of General Psychiatry 6:1-17.
[taREH]
(1977) Segmental set: The adaptive process in schizophrenia. American
Psychologist 32:129-39. 
[taREH]
Shimazono, Y., Katsumi, A., Sakamoto, S., Tanaka, T., Eguchi, T. &
Nakamura, H. (1965) Eye movements of waking subjects with closed
eyes. Archives of General Psychiatry 13:537-43. 
[taREH]
Sidgewick, H. A. (1894) Report of the census of hallucinations. Proceedings of
the Society for Psychical Research 26:25-394. 
[RPB]
Siegal, R. K. & West, L. V., eds. (1975) Hallucinations: 
Behaviour,
experience and theory. John Wiley. 
[RPB]
Silverberg-Shalev, R., Gordon, H., Bentin, S. & Aranson, A. (1981) Selective
language deterioration in chronic schizophrenia. Journal of Neurology,
Neurostirgery, and Psychiatry 33:547-51. 
[taREH]
Silverstein, M. I. & Harrow, M. (1982) Inter-relationships among three
measures of disordered thinking in continuous word association.
Psychological Reports 50:803-9. 
[taREH]
Singer, J. L. & Singer, D. C. (1984) Television, imagination and aggression.
Erlbaum Associates. 
[JJa]
Slade, P. D. (1976a) An investigation of psychological factors involved with
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3
547

Re/erences/Hoffman: A cognitive processing model of schizophrenic hallucinations
the predisposition to auditory hallucinations. Psychological Medicine
6:123-32. 
[taREH]
(1976b) Toward a theory of auditory hallucinations: An outline of an
hypothetical four-factor model. British Journal of Social and Clinical
Psychology 15:415-23. 
[taREH, RPB]
Slade, P. D. & Bentall, R. P. (1986) Sensory deceptions: Towards a scientific
theory of hallucinations. Croom-Helm. 
[RPB]
Slade, P. D. & Cooper, R. (1979) Some conceptual difficulties with the term
'schizophrenia': An alternative model. British Journal of Social and
Clinical Psychology 18:309-17. 
[RPB]
Slater, E. & Roth, M. (1969) Clinical psychiatry. Williams and Wilkins.
[rREH]
Sokolov, A. N. (1972) Inner speech and thought. Plenum Press. 
[taREH]
Southard, E. E. (1914) American journal of insanity 71:383-403. 
[rREH,
PF]
Spanos, N. P. (1983) Ergotism and the Salem witch panic: A critical analysis
and an alternative conceptualization. Journal of the History of the
Behavioral Sciences 19:358-69. 
[NPS]
(in press) Hypnosis, nonvolitional responding and multiple personality: A
social psychological perspective. In: Progress in experimental 
personality
research, ed. B. Maher, & W. Maher, Academic Press. 
[NPS]
Spanos, N. P. & Gorassini, D. R. (1984) The structure of hypnotic test
suggestions and attributions of responding involuntarily. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 46:1162-72. 
[NPS]
Spanos, N. P. & Radtke, H. L. (1981) Hypnotic visual hallucinations as
imaginings: A cognitive-social psychological perspective. Imagination,
Cognition and Personality 1:147-70. 
[NPS]
Spohn, H. & Patterson, J. (1979) Recent studies of psychophysiology in
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin 5:581jm[tarREH, CZ]
Starker, S. & Jolin, A. (1982) Imagery and hallucination in schizophrenic
patients. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 170:448-51. 
[taREH]
Stevens, J. R., Bigelow, L., Denney, D., et al. (1979) Telemetered EEG-
EOG during psychotic behaviors of schizophrenia. Archives of Ceneral
Psychiatry 36:251-62. 
[rREH, PF]
Stevens, J. R. & Livermore, A. (1982) Telemetered EEG in schizophrenia:
Spectral analysis during abnormal behaviour episodes. Journal of
Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry 45:385-95. 
[rREH, PF]
Strauss, J. (1969) Hallucinations and delusions as points on continua function.
Archives of Ceneral Psychiatry 21:581-86. 
[MH]
Swinney, D. A. (1984) Theoretical and methodological issues in cognitive
science: A psycholinguistic perspective. In: Method and tactics in
cognitive science, ed. W. Kintsch, J. R. Miller & P. G. Poison. Erlbaum
Associates. 
[rREH, WGL]
Swinney, D. A., Onifer, W., Prather, P. & Hirschkowitz, M. (1979) Semantic
facilitation across sensory modalities in the processing of individual words
and sentences. Memory and Cognition 7:159-65. 
[WGL]
Takahashi, R., Inaba, Y., Inanaga, K., et al. (1981) CT scanning and the
investigation of schizophrenia. Third World Congress of Biological
Psychiatry, Stockholm (S 371). 
[rREH, PF]
Tenlake, A. Personal correspondence. 
[KAA]
Torrey, E. F. & Peterson, M. R. (1974) Schizophrenia and the limbic system.
Lancet 2:942-46. 
[taREH]
Uchino, J., Araki, K., Tominaga, Y., Niwa, H., Nakama, I., Michitsuji, S.,
Ishizawa, M., Ohta, Y., Nakane, Y. & Takahashi, R. (1984) Correlation
between CT findings of schizophrenics and their clinical symptoms. .2:
Using discriminatory analysis and chi-square test. Folia Psychiatrica et
Neurologia Japonica 38:179. 
[rREH, PF]
Underwood, G. (1979) Memory systems and conscious processes. In: Aspects
of consciousness, ed. G. Underwood & R. G. Stevens. Academic Press.
[HA]
Van Dijk, T. (1980) Macrostructures: An interdisciplinary study of global
structures in discourse, interaction, and cognition. Erlbaum Associates.
[taREH]
Venables, P. (1964) Input disturbances in schizophrenia. In: Progress in
experimental personality research, ed. B. A. Maher. Academic Press.
[taREH]
Vygotsky, L. S. (1932) Thought in schizophrenia. Archives of Neurology and
Psychiatry 31:1063-77. 
[taREH]
(1962) Thought and language. Ed. & trans. E. Hanfmann & G. Vakar. MIT
Press. 
[taREH, GZ]
(1978) Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes.
Harvard University Press. 
[taREH, GZ]
Wakeling, A. (1985) Neurobiological aspects of feeding disorders. Journal of
Psychiatric Research 19:191-201. 
[SS]
West, D. J. (1948) A mass observation questionnaire on hallucinations.
Journal of the Society Psychical Research 34:187-96. 
[RPB]
West, L. J., ed. (1962) Hallucinations. Grune & Stratton. 
[RPB]
Wilenslcy, R. (1983) Planning and understanding. 
Addison-Wesley. 
[taREH]
Wing, J. K., Cooper, J. E. & Sartorius, N. (1974) The measurement and
classification of psychiatric symptoms. Cambridge University Press. [PF]
Winters, K. C. & Neale, J. M. (1983) Delusions and delusional thinking in
psychotics: A review of the literature. Clinical Psychology Review 3:227-
53. 
[taREH]
Wise, R. A. (1982) Neuroleptics and operant behavior: The anhedonia
hypothesis. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 5:39-87. 
[taREH]
Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical investigations, trans. G. E. M.
Anscombe. Macmillan. 
[rREH, MB, RPB]
(1980) Remarks on the philosophy of psychology, ed. G. H. von Wright &
H. Nyman. University of Chicago Press. 
[taREH]
(1982) Last writings on the philosophy of psychology, vol. 1. University of
Chicago Press. 
[KAA]
World Health Organisation (1975) Schizophrenia: A multinational study.
W.H.O. 
[RPB]
Wykes, T. (1980) Language and schizophrenia. Psychological Medicine
10:403-6. 
[taREH]
Yates, A. J. (1966) Data-processing levels and thought disorder in
schizophrenia. Australian Journal of Psychology 18:103-17. 
|BRR]
Young, H. F., Bentall, R. P., Slade, P. D. & Dewey, M. E. (in press) The
role of brief instructions and suggestibility in the elicitation of auditory
and visual hallucinations in normal and psychiatric subjects. The Journal
of Nervous and Mental Disease. 
[RPB]
Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feeling and thinking: Preferences need no inferences.
American Psychologist 35:151-75. 
[PFG]
Zarlock, S. P. (1966) Social expectations, language, and schizophrenia. Journal
of Humanistic Psychology 6:68-74. 
[taREH]
Zigler, E. & Phillips, L. (1961) Psychiatric diagnosis and symptomatology.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology 63:69-75. 
[SS]
Zivin, G., ed. (1979) The development of self-regulation through private
speech. John Wiley. 
[taREH, GZ]
548
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1986) 9:3

