The Zombie Hunch: Extinction of an
Intuition?
DANIEL DENNETT
Here is a good way of looking at the problem of consciousness:
Oct.18,1969 
THE 
Price so cents
NEWYOIIKEH
i2**fc#K,K**,

Daniel Dennett
If Saul Steinberg's 1967 New Yorker cover is the metaphorical truth
about consciousness, what is the literal truth? What is going on in
the world (largely in this chap's brain, presumably) that makes it the
case that this gorgeous metaphor is so apt?
1. The Naturalistic Turn
Our conception of this question at the end of the twentieth century
is strikingly different from the ways we might have thought about
the same issue at the beginning of the century, thanks very little to
progress in philosophy and very much to progress in science.
Steinberg's pointillist rendering of our conscious man gives us a fine
hint about the major advances in outlook that promise—to many of
us—to make all the difference. What we now know is that each of us
is an assemblage of trillions of cells, of thousands of different sorts.
Most of the cells that compose your body are descendants of the egg
and sperm cell whose union started you (there are also millions of
hitchhikers from thousands of different lineages stowed away in
your body), and, to put it vividly and bluntly, not a single one of the
cells that compose you knows who you are, or cares.
The individual cells that compose you are alive, but we now under-
stand life well enough to appreciate that each cell is a mindless mech-
anism, a largely autonomous micro-robot, no more conscious than a
yeast cell. The bread dough rising in a bowl in the kitchen is teeming
with life, but nothing in the bowl is sentient or aware—or if it is, then
this is a remarkable fact for which, at this time, we have not the slight-
est evidence. For we now know that the 'miracles' of life—metabo-
lism, growth, self-repair, self-defence, and, of course, reproduction—
are all accomplished by dazzlingly intricate, but non-miraculous,
means. No sentient supervisor is needed to keep metabolism going,
no elan vital is needed to trigger self-repair, and the incessant nano-
factories of replication churn out their duplicates without any help
from ghostly yearnings or special life forces. A hundred kilos of yeast
does not wonder about Braque, or about anything, but you do, and
you are made of parts1 that are fundamentally the same sort of thing
as those yeast cells, only with different tasks to perform. Your trillion-
robot team is gathered together in a breathtakingly efficient regime
that has no dictator but manages to keep itself organized to repel out-
siders, banish the weak, enforce iron rules of discipline—and serve as
the headquarters of one conscious self, one mind. These communi-
ties of cells are fascistic in the extreme, but your interests and values
1 Eukaryotic cells.
28

The Zombie Hunch: Extinction of an Intuition?
have almost nothing to do with the limited goals of the cells that com-
pose you—fortunately. Some people are gentle and generous, others
are ruthless; some are pornographers and others devote their lives to
the service of God, and it has been tempting over the ages to imagine
that these striking differences must be due to the special features of
some extra thing—a soul—installed somehow in the bodily head-
quarters. Until fairly recently, this idea of a rather magical extra
ingredient was the only candidate for an explanation of consciousness
that even seemed to make sense. For many people, this idea (dualism)
is still the only vision of consciousness that makes any sense to them,
but there is now widespread agreement among scientists and philoso-
phers that dualism is—must be—simply false: we are each made of
mindless robots and nothing else, no non-physical, non-robotic
ingredients at all.
But how could this possibly be? More than a quarter of a millen-
nium ago, Leibniz posed the challenge to our imaginations with a
vivid intuition pump, a monumentally misleading grandfather to all
the Chinese Rooms (Searle), Chinese Nations (Block) and latter-day
zombies.
Moreover, it must be confessed that perception and that which
depends upon it are inexplicable on mechanical grounds, that is to
say, by means of figures and motions. And supposing there were
a machine, so constructed as to think, feel, and have perception,
it might be conceived as increased in size, while keeping the same
proportions, so that one might go into it as into a mill. That being
so, we should, on examining its interior, find only parts which
work one upon another, and never anything by which to explain a
perception. Thus it is in a simple substance, and not in a com-
pound or in a machine, that perception must be sought for.
(Leibniz, Monadology, 1714:parag. 17 [Latta translation]).
There is a striking non sequitur in this famous passage, which finds
many echoes in today's controversies. Is Leibniz's claim epistemo-
logical—we'll never understand the machinery of consciousness—or
metaphysical—consciousness couldn't be a matter of 'machinery'?
His preamble and conclusion make it plain that he took himself to
be demonstrating a metaphysical truth, but the only grounds he
offers would—at best—support the more modest epistemological
reading.2 Somebody might have used Leibniz's wonderful
2 Leibniz makes this particularly clear in another passage quoted in
Latta's translation: 'If in that which is organic there is nothing but mecha-
nism, that is, bare matter, having differences of place, magnitude and fig-
ure; nothing can be deduced or explained from it, except mechanism, that
29

Daniel Dennett
Gulliverian image to illustrate and render plausible* the claim that
although consciousness is—must be, in the end—a product of some
gigantically complex mechanical system, it will surely be utterly
beyond anybody's intellectual powers to explain how this is so. But
Leibniz clearly intends us to treat his example as demonstrating the
absurdity of the very idea that consciousness could be such an
emergent effect of a hugely complex machine ('Thus it is in a
simple substance, and not in a compound or in a machine, that per-
ception must be sought for.') The same mismatch between means
and ends haunts us today: Noam Chomsky, Thomas Nagel and
Colin McGinn (among others) have all surmised, or speculated, or
claimed, that consciousness is beyond all human understanding, a
mystery not a puzzle, to use Chomsky's proposed distinction.4
According to this line of thought, we lack the wherewithal—the
brain power, the perspective, the intelligence—to grasp how the
'parts which work one upon another' could constitute conscious-
ness. Like Leibniz, however, these thinkers have also hinted that
they themselves understand the mystery of consciousness a little
bit—just well enough to able to conclude that it couldn't be solved
by any mechanistic account. And just like Leibniz, they have
offered nothing, really, in the way of arguments for their pessimistic
conclusions beyond a compelling image. When they contemplate
the prospect they simply draw a blank, and thereupon decide that
no further enlightenment lies down that path or could possibly lie
down that path.
3 It would not, of course, prove anything at all. It is just an intuition pump.
4 Most recently, in the following works: Noam Chomsky, 'Naturalism
and Dualism in the Study of Mind and Language', Int.jf. of Phil. Studies,
vol. 2, pp. 181-209 (his Agnes Cuming lecture of 1993), 1994. Thomas
Nagel, 'Conceiving the Impossible and the Mind-Body Problem',
Philosophy, 73, 1998, pp. 337-52. Colin McGinn, The Mysterious Flame:
Conscious Minds in a Material World (New York: Basic Books, 1999).
is, except such differences as I have mentioned. For from anything taken by
itself nothing can be deduced and explained, except differences of the
attributes which constitute it. Hence we may readily conclude that in no
mill or clock as such is there to be found any principle which perceives what
takes place in it; and it matters not whether the things contained in the
'machine' are solid or fluid or made up of both. Further we know that there
ence of magnitude. Whence it follows that, if it is inconceivable how per-
ception arises in any coarse 'machine', whether it be made up of fluids or
solids, it is equally inconceivable how perception can arise from a fine
'machine'; for it our senses were finer, it would be the same as if we were
perceiving a coarse 'machine', as we do at present.' [from Commentatio de
Anima Brutorum, 1710, quoted in footnote in Latta, p. 228.]
30

The Zombie Hunch: Extinction of an Intuition?
Might it be, however, that Leibniz, lost in his giant mill, just
couldn't see the woods for the trees? Might there not be a birds-eye
view—not the first-person perspective of the subject in question,
but a higher-level third-person perspective—from which, if one
squinted just right, one could bring into focus the recognizable pat-
terns of consciousness in action? Might it be that somehow the orga-
nization of all the parts which work one upon another yields con-
sciousness as an emergent product? And if so, why couldn't we hope
to understand it, once we had developed the right concepts? This is
the avenue that has been enthusiastically and fruitfully explored dur-
ing the last quarter century under the twin banners of cognitive sci-
ence and functionalism—the extrapolation of mechanistic naturalism
from the body to the mind. After all, we have now achieved excellent
mechanistic explanations of metabolism, growth, self-repair, and
reproduction, which not so long ago also looked too marvellous for
words. Consciousness, on this optimistic view, is indeed a wonderful
thing, but not that wonderful—not too wonderful to be explained
using the same concepts and perspectives that have worked elsewhere
in biology. Consciousness, from this perspective, is a relatively recent
fruit of the evolutionary algorithms that have given the planet such
phenomena as immune systems, flight, and sight. In the first half of
the century, many scientists and philosophers might have agreed with
Leibniz about the mind, simply because the mind seemed to consist
of phenomena utterly unlike the phenomena in the rest of biology.
The inner lives of mindless plants and simple organisms (and our
bodies below the neck) might yield without residue to normal biolog-
ical science, but nothing remotely mindlike could be accounted for in
such mechanical terms. Or so it must have seemed until something
came along in midcentury to break the spell of Leibniz's intuition
pump; computers. Computers are mindlike in ways that no earlier
artifacts were: they can control processes that perform tasks that call
for discrimination, inference, memory, judgment, anticipation; they
are generators of new knowledge, finders of patterns—in poetry,
astronomy, and mathematics, for instance—that heretofore only
human beings could even hope to find. We now have real world arti-
facts that dwarf Leibniz's giant mill both in speed and intricacy. And
we have come to appreciate that what is well nigh invisible at the level
of the meshing of billions of gears may nevertheless be readily com-
prehensible at higher levels of analysis—at any of many nested 'soft-
ware' levels, where the patterns of patterns of patterns of organization
(of organization of organization) can render salient and explain the
marvellous competences of the mill. The sheer existence of
computers has provided an existence proof of undeniable influence:
31

Daniel Dennett
there are mechanisms—brute unmysterious mechanisms operating
according to routinely well-understood physical principles—that have
many of the competences heretofore assigned only to minds.
One thing we know to a moral certainty about computers is that
there is nothing up their sleeves: no ESP or morphic resonance
between the disk drives, no action-at-a-distance accomplished via
strange new forces. The explanations of whatever talents computers
exhibit are models of transparency, which is one of the most attrac-
tive features of cognitive science: we can be quite sure that if a com-
putational model of any mental phenomena is achieved, it will
inherit this transparency of explanation from its simpler ancestors.
In addition to the computers themselves, wonderful exemplars
and research tools that they are, we have the wealth of new concepts
computer science has defined and made familiar. We have learned
how to think fluently and reliably about the cumulative effects of
intricate cascades of micro-mechanisms, trillions upon trillions of
events of billions of types, interacting on dozens of levels. Can we
harness these new powers of disciplined imagination to the task of
climbing out of Leibniz's mill? The hope that we can is, for many
of us, compelling—even inspiring. We are quite certain that a natu-
ralistic, mechanistic explanation of consciousness is not just possi-
ble; it is fast becoming actual. It will just take a lot of hard work of
the sort that has been going on in biology all century, and in cogni-
tive science for the last half century.
2. The Reactionaries
But in the last decade of the century a loose federation of reac-
tionaries has sprung up among philosophers in opposition to this
evolutionary, mechanistic naturalism. As already noted, there are
the mysterians, Owen Flanagan's useful term for those who not only
find this optimism ill-founded but also think that defeat is certain.
Then there are those who are not sure the problem is insoluble, but
do think they can titrate the subtasks into the 'easy problems' and
the 'Hard Problem' (David Chalmers) or who find what they
declare to be an Explanatory Gap (Joseph Levine) that has so far—
and perhaps always will—defy those who would engulf the mind in
one unifying explanation.5 A curious anachronism found in many
5 David Chalmers, 'Facing Up to the Problems of Consciousness', J.
Consc. Studies, 2, pp. 200—19, and The Conscious Mind: In Search of a
Fundamental Theory (Oxford University Press, 1996). Joseph Levine,
'Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap', Pacific Philosophical
Quarterly, 64, pp. 354-61, 1983.
32

The Zombie Hunch: Extinction of an Intuition?
but not all of these reactionaries is that to the extent that they hold
out any hope at all of solution to the problem (or problems) of con-
sciousness, they speculate that it will come not from biology or cog-
nitive science, but from—of all things—physics!
One of the first to take up this courtship with physics was David
Chalmers, who suggested that a theory of consciousness should
'take experience itself as a fundamental feature of the world, along-
side mass, charge, and space-time.' As he correctly noted, 'No
attempt is made [by physicists] to explain these features in terms of
anything simpler'6 a theme echoed by Thomas Nagel:
Consciousness should be recognized as a conceptually irreducible
aspect of reality that is necessarily connected with other equally
irreducible aspects—as electromagnetic fields are irreducible to but
necessarily connected with the behaviour of charged particles and
gravitational fields with the behaviour of masses, and vice versa.7
And Noam Chomsky:
The natural conclusion ... is that human thought and action are
properties of organized matter, like 'powers of attraction and
repulsion', electrical charge, and so on.8
And Galen Strawson, who says, in a review of Colin McGinn's
most recent book: 'we find consciousness mysterious only because
we have a bad picture of matter' and adds:
We have a lot of mathematical equations describing the behav-
iour of matter, but we don't really know anything more about its
intrinsic nature, The only other clue that we have about its intrin-
sic nature, in fact, is that when you arrange it in the way that it is
arranged in things like brains, you get consciousness.9
Not just philosophers and linguists have found this an attractive
idea. Many physicists have themselves jumped on the bandwagon,
following the lead of Roger Penrose, whose speculations about
quantum fluctuations in the microtubules of neurons have attracted
considerable attention and enthusiasm in spite of a host of
6 Chalmers, 'Facing Up to the Problems of Consciousness', J. Consc.
Studies, 2, pp. 200-19.
7 Nagel, op.cit., p. 338.
8 Chomsky, op. cit., 189. Chomsky is talking about the conclusion drawn
by La Mettrie and Priestley, but his subsequent discussion, footnoting Roger
Penrose and John Archibald Wheeler, makes it clear that he thinks this is a
natural conclusion today, not just in early post-Newtonian days.
9 Galen Strawson, 'Little Gray Cells,' New York Times Book Review,
7/11/99, p. 13.
33

Daniel Dennett
problems.10 What all these views have in common is the idea that
some revolutionary principle of physics could be a rival to the idea
that consciousness is going to be explained in terms of 'parts which
work one upon another,' as in Leibniz's mill.
Suppose they are right. Suppose the Hard Problem—whatever it
is—can only be solved by confirming some marvellous new and
irreducible property of the physics of the cells that make up a brain.
One problem with this is that the physics of your brain cells is, so
far as we know, the same as the physics of those yeast cells under-
going population explosion in the dish. The differences in func-
tionality between neurons and yeast cells are explained in terms of
differences of cell anatomy or cytoarchitecture, not physics. Could
it be, perhaps, that those differences in anatomy permit neurons to
respond to physical differences to which yeast cells are oblivious?
Here we must tread carefully, for if we don't watch out, we will sim-
ply reintroduce Leibniz's baffling mill at a more microscopic
level—watching the quantum fluctuations in the microtubules of a
single cell and not being able to see how any amount of those 'parts
which work one upon another' could explain consciousness. If you
want to avoid the bafflement of Leibniz's mill, the idea had better
be, instead, that consciousness is an irreducible property that
inheres, somehow, 'in a simple substance,' as Leibniz put it, 'and
not in a compound or in a machine.' So let us suppose that, thanks
to their physics, neurons enjoy a tiny smidgen (a quantum, per-
haps!) of consciousness. We will then have solved the problem of
how large ensembles of such cells—such as you and I—are con-
scious: we are conscious because our brains are made of the right
sort of stuff, stuff with the micro-je-ne-sais-quoi that is needed for
consciousness. But even if we had solved that problem, we would
still have the problem illustrated by my opening illustration: how
can cells, even conscious cells, that themselves know nothing about
10 Incurable optimist that I am, I find this recent invasion by physicists
into the domains of cognitive neuroscience to be a cloud with a silver
lining: for the first time in my professional life, an interloping discipline
beats out philosophy for the prize for combining arrogance with ignorance
about the field being invaded. Neuroscientists and psychologists who used
to stare glassy-eyed and uncomprehending at philosophers arguing about
the fine points of supervenience and intensionality-with-an-s now have to
contend in a similar spirit with the arcana of quantum entanglement and
Bose-Einstein condensates. It is tempting to suppose that as it has become
harder and harder to make progress in physics, some physicists have
sought greener pastures where they can speculate with even less fear of
experimental recalcitrance or clear contradiction.
34

The Zombie Hunch: Extinction of an Intuition?
art or dogs or mountains compose themselves into a thing that has
conscious thoughts about Braque or poodles or Kilimanjaro? How
can the whole ensemble be so knowledgeable of the passing show, so
in touch with distal art objects (to say nothing of absent artists and
mountains) when all of its parts, however conscious or sentient they
are, are myopic and solipsistic in the extreme? We might call this the
fo/>/c-of-consciousness question.
I suspect that this turn to physics looks attractive to some people
mainly because they have not yet confronted the need to answer this
question, for once they do attempt it, they find that a 'theory' that
postulates some fundamental and irreducible sentience-field or the
like has no resources at all to deal with it. Only a theory that proceeds
in terms of how the parts work together in larger ensembles has any
hope of shedding light on the topic question, and once theory has
ascended to such a high level, it is not at all clear what use the lower-
level physical sophistications would be. Moreover, there already are
many models of systems that uncontroversially answer versions of the
topic question, and they are all computational. How can the little box
on your desk, whose parts know nothing at all about chess, beat you
at chess with such stunning reliability? How can the little box driving
the pistons attached to the rudder do a better job of steering a straight
course than any old salt with decades at sea behind him? Leibniz
would have been ravished with admiration by these mechanisms,
which would have shaken his confidence—I daresay—in the claim
that no mechanistic explanation of 'perception' was possible.11
David Chalmers, identifier of the Hard Problem, would agree
with me, I think. He would classify the topic question as one of the
'easy problems'—one of the problems that does find its solution in
terms of computational models of control mechanisms. It follows
from what he calls the principle of organizational invariance.12
Consider once again our pointillist gentleman and ask if we can tell
from the picture whether he's a genuinely conscious being or a zom-
bie—a philosopher's zombie that is behaviourally indistinguishable
from a normal human being but is utterly lacking in consciousness.
Even the zombie version of this chap would have a head full of
II A classic example of the topic problem in nature, and its ultimately
computational solution, is Douglas Hofstadter's famous 'Prelude ... Ant
Fugue' in Godel Escher Bach (1979), the dialogue comparing an ant colony
('Aunt Hillary') to a brain, whose parts are equally clueless contributors to
systemic knowledge of the whole. In his reflections following the reprint-
ing of this essay in Hofstadter and Dennett, (eds), The Mind's I, (1981), he
asks 'Is the soul more than the hum of its parts?'
12 Chalmers, 1996, op. cit., esp. chapter 7.
35

Daniel Dennett
dynamically interacting data-structures, with links of association
bringing their sequels on-line, suggesting new calls to memory,
composing on the fly new structures with new meanings and pow-
ers. Why? Because only a being with such a system of internal oper-
ations and activities could non-miraculously maintain the complex
set of behaviours this man would no doubt exhibit, if we put him to
various tests. If you want a theory of all that information-process-
ing activity, it will have to be a computational theory, whether or not
the man is conscious. According to Chalmers, where normal people
have a stream of consciousness, zombies have a stream of uncon-
sciousness, and he has argued persuasively that whatever explained
the purely informational competence of one (which includes every
transition, every construction, every association depicted in this
thought balloon) would explain the same competence in the other.
Since the literal truth about the mechanisms responsible for all the
sworls and eddies in the stream, as well as the informational con-
tents of the items passing by, is—ex hypothesi—utterly unaffected
by whether or not the stream is conscious or unconscious,
Steinberg's cartoon, a brilliant metaphorical rendering of con-
sciousness, is exactly as good a metaphorical rendering of what is
going on inside a zombie. (See, e.g., the discussion of zombie beliefs
in Chalmers, 1996, pp. 203-5.)
3. An Embarrassment of Zombies
Must we talk about zombies? Apparently we must. There is a pow-
erful and ubiquitous intuition that computational, mechanistic
models of consciousness, of the sort we naturalists favour, must
leave something out—something important. Just what must they
leave out? The critics have found that it's hard to say, exactly:
qualia, feelings, emotions, the what-it's-likeness (Nagel)13 or the
ontological subjectivity (Searle)14 of consciousness. Each of these
attempts to characterize the phantom residue has met with serious
objections and been abandoned by many who nevertheless want to
cling to the intuition, so there has been a gradual process of distil-
lation, leaving just about all the reactionaries, for all their disagree-
ments among themselves, united in the conviction that there is a real
difference between a conscious person and a perfect zombie—let's call
that intuition the Zombie Hunch—leading them to the thesis of
13 Thomas Nagel, 1974, 'What is it Like to be a Bat?' Phil. Review, 83,
pp. 435-50.
14 John Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind, (MIT Press, 1992).
36

The Zombie Hunch: Extinction of an Intuition?
Zombism: that the fundamental flaw in any mechanistic theory of con-
sciousness is that it cannot account for this important difference.15 A
hundred years from now, I expect this claim will be scarcely
credible, but let the record show that in 1999. John Searle, David
Chalmers, Colin McGinn, Joseph Levine and many other philoso-
phers of mind don't just feel the tug of the Zombie Hunch (I can feel
the tug as well as anybody), they credit it. They are, however reluc-
tantly, Zombists, who maintain that the zombie challenge is a seri-
ous criticism. It is not that they don't recognize the awkwardness of
their position. The threadbare stereotype of philosophers passion-
ately arguing about how many angels can dance on the head of a pin
is not much improved when the topic is updated to whether zom-
bies—admitted by all to be imaginary beings—are (1) metaphysical-
ly impossible, (2) logically impossible, (3) physically impossible, or
just (4) extremely unlikely to exist. The reactionaries have acknowl-
edged that many who take zombies seriously have simply failed to
imagine the prospect correctly. For instance, if you were surprised
by my claim that the Steinberg cartoon would be an equally apt
metaphorical depiction of the goings on in a zombie's head, you had
not heretofore understood what a zombie is (and isn't). More point-
edly, if you still think that Chalmers and I are just wrong about this,
you are simply operating with a mistaken concept of zombies, one
that is irrelevant to the philosophical discussion. (I mention this
because I have found that many onlookers, scientists in particular,
have a hard time believing that philosophers can be taking such a
preposterous idea as zombies seriously, so they generously replace it
with some idea that one can take seriously—but one that does not do
the requisite philosophical work. Just remember, by definition, a
zombie behaves indistinguishably from a conscious being—in all
possible tests, including not only answers to questions [as in the
Turing test] but psychophysical tests, neurophysiological tests—all
tests that any 'third-person' science can devise.)
Thomas Nagel is one reactionary who has recoiled somewhat
from zombies. In his recent address to this body, Nagel is particu-
larly circumspect in his embrace. On the one hand, he declares that
naturalism has so far failed us:
We do not at present possess the conceptual equipment to under-
stand how subjective and physical features could both be essen-
tial aspects of a single entity or process.
15 In the words of one of their most vehement spokespersons, 'It all
comes down to zombies.' Selmer Bringsjord, 'Dennett versus Searle: It All
Comes Down to Zombies and Dennett is Wrong,' (APA December, 1994).
37

Daniel Dennett
Why not? Because 'we still have to deal with the apparent conceiv-
ability of ... a zombie.' Notice that Nagel speaks of the apparent con-
ceivability of a zombie. I have long claimed that this conceivability is
only apparent; some misguided philosophers think they can conceive
of a zombie, but they are badly mistaken.16 Nagel, for one, agrees:
the powerful intuition that it is conceivable that an intact and nor-
mally functioning physical human organism could be a
completely unconscious zombie is an illusion."
David Chalmers is another who is particularly acute in his criti-
cisms of the standard mis-imaginations that are often thought to
support the zombie challenge (his 1996 chapter 7, 'Absent Qualia,
Fading Qualia, Dancing Qualia,' bristles with arguments against
various forlorn attempts), but in the end, he declares that although
zombies are in every realistic sense impossible, we 'non-reductive
functionalists' still leave something out—or rather, we leave a job
undone. We cannot provide 'fundamental laws' from which one can
deduce that zombies are impossible (p. 276 and elsewhere).
Chalmers' demand for fundamental laws lacks the independence he
needs if he is to support his crediting of the Zombie Hunch, for it
arises from that very intuition: if you believe that consciousness
sunders the universe in twain, into those things that have it and
those that don't, and you believe this is a fundamental metaphysical
distinction, then the demand for fundamental laws that enforce and
explain the sundering makes some sense, but we naturalists think
that this elevation of consciousness is itself suspect; supported by
tradition and nothing else. Note that nobody these days would
clamour for fundamental laws of the theory of kangaroos, showing
why pseudo-kangaroos are physically, logically, metaphysically
impossible. Kangaroos are wonderful, but not that wonderful. We
naturalists think that consciousness, like locomotion or predation, is
something that comes in different varieties, with some shared func-
tional properties, but many differences, due to different evolution-
ary histories and circumstances. We have no use for fundamental
laws in making these distinctions.
We are all susceptible to the Zombie Hunch, but if we are to credit
16 Daniel Dennett, 1991, Consciousness Explained, New York and Boston:
Little Brown, esp chapters 10—12; 1994, 'Get Real,' reply to 14 essays, in
Philosophical Topics, 22, no. I & 2, 1994, pp. 505-68; 1995, 'The
Unimagined Preposterousness of Zombies,' J. Consc. Studies, 2, pp.
322-36.
17 Nagel, 1998, op. cit., p. 342.
38

The Zombie Hunch: Extinction of an Intuition?
it, we need a good argument, since the case has been made that it is a
persistent cognitive illusion and nothing more. I have found no good
arguments, and plenty of bad ones. So why, then, do so many
philosophers persist in their allegiance to an intuition that they
themselves have come to see is of suspect provenance? Partly, I think,
this is the effect of some serious misdirection that has bedevilled
communication in cognitive science in recent years.
4. Broad Functionalism and Minimalism
Functionalism is the idea that handsome is as handsome does, that
matter matters only because of what matter can do. Functionalism
in this broadest sense is so ubiquitous in science that it is tanta-
mount to a reigning presumption of all of science. And since
science is always looking for simplifications, looking for the greatest
generality it can muster, functionalism in practice has a bias in
favour of minimalism, of saying that less matters than one might
have thought. The law of gravity says that it doesn't matter what
stuff a thing is made of—only its mass matters (and its density,
except in a vacuum). The trajectory of cannonballs of equal mass
and density is not affected by whether they are made of iron, cop-
per or gold. It might have mattered, one imagines, but in fact it
doesn't. And wings don't have to have feathers on them in order to
power flight, and eyes don't have to be blue or brown in order to see.
Every eye has many more properties than are needed for sight, and
it is science's job to find the maximally general, maximally non-
committal—hence minimal—characterization of whatever power or
capacity is under consideration. Not surprisingly, then, many of the
disputes in normal science concern the issue of whether or not one
school of thought has reached too far in its quest for generality.
Since the earliest days of cognitive science, there has been a par-
ticularly bold brand of functionalistic minimalism in contention,
the idea that just as a heart is basically a pump, and could in princi-
ple be made of anything so long as it did the requisite pumping
without damaging the blood, so a mind is fundamentally a control
system, implemented in fact by the organic brain, but anything else
that could compute the same control functions would serve as well.
The actual matter of the brain—the chemistry of synapses, the role
of calcium in the depolarization of nerve fibres, and so forth—is
roughly as irrelevant as the chemical composition of those cannon-
balls. According to this tempting proposal, even the underlying
micro-architecture of the brain's connections can be ignored for
39

Daniel Dennett
many purposes, at least for the time being, since it has been proven
by computer scientists that any function that can be computed by
one specific computational architecture can also be computed (per-
haps much less efficiently) by another architecture. If all that mat-
ters is the computation, we can ignore the brain's wiring diagram,
and its chemistry, and just worry about the 'software' that runs on
it. In short—and now we arrive at the provocative version that has
caused so much misunderstanding—in principle you could replace
your wet, organic brain with a bunch of silicon chips and wires and
go right on thinking (and being conscious, and so forth).
This bold vision, computationalism or 'strong AI' [Searle], is
composed of two parts: the broad creed of functionalism—hand-
some is as handsome does—and a specific set of minimalist
empirical wagers: neuroanatomy doesn't matter; chemistry doesn't
matter. This second theme excused many would-be cognitive
scientists from educating themselves in these fields, for the same
reason that economists are excused from knowing anything about
the metallurgy of coinage, or the chemistry of the ink and paper
used in bills of sale. This has been a good idea in many ways, but
for fairly obvious reasons, it has not been a politically astute
ideology, since it has threatened to relegate those scientists who
devote their lives to functional neuroanatomy and neurochemistry,
for instance, to relatively minor roles as electricians and plumbers in
the grand project of explaining consciousness. Resenting this
proposed demotion, they have fought back vigorously. The recent
history of neuroscience can be seen as a series of triumphs for the
lovers of detail. Yes, the specific geometry of the connectivity
matters; yes, the location of specific neuromodulators and their
effects matter; yes, the architecture matters; yes, the fine temporal
rhythms of the spiking patterns matter, and so on. Many of the fond
hopes of opportunistic minimalists have been dashed—they had
hoped they could leave out various things, and they have learned
that no, if you leave out x, or y, or z, you can't explain how the mind
works.
This has left the mistaken impression in some quarters that the
underlying idea of functionalism has been taking its lumps. Far
from it. On the contrary, the reasons for accepting these new claims
are precisely the reasons of functionalism. Neurochemistry matters
because—and only because—we have discovered that the many dif-
ferent neuromodulators and other chemical messengers that diffuse
through the brain have functional roles that make important dif-
ferences. What those molecules do turns out to be important to
the computational roles played by the neurons, so we have to pay
40

The Zombie Hunch: Extinction of an Intuition?
attention to them after all. To see what is at stake here, compare the
neuromodulators to the food that is ingested by people.
Psychologists and neuroscientists do not, as a rule, carefully inven-
tory the food intake of their subjects, on the entirely plausible
grounds that a serving of vanilla ice cream makes roughly the same
contribution to how the brain goes about its tasks as a serving of
strawberry ice cream. So long as there isn't any marijuana in the
brownies, we can ignore the specifics of the food, and just treat it as
a reliable energy source, the brain's power supply. This could turn
out to be mistaken. It might turn out that psychologically impor-
tant, if subtle, differences, hinged on whether one's subjects had
recently had vanilla ice cream. Those who thought it did make a dif-
ference would have a significant empirical disagreement with those
who thought it didn't, but this would not be disagreement between
functionalists and anti-functionalists. It would be a disagreement
between those who thought that functionalism had to be expanded
downward to include the chemistry of food and those who thought
that functionalism could finesse that complication. Consider the
following:
there may be various general neurochemical dispositions [based
on the neuropeptide systems] that guide the patterning of
thoughts that no amount of computational work can clarify.
(Panskepp, 1998) Panskepp, J. 1998, Affective Neuroscience: The
Foundations of Human and Animal Emotions, Oxford and NY,
CUP.
This perfectly captures a widespread (and passionately endorsed)
attitude, but note that there is nothing oxymoronic about a compu-
tational theory of neuromodulator diffusion and its effects, for
instance, and pioneering work in 'virtual neuromodulators' and
'diffusion models of computational control' is well underway.
Minds will turn out not to be simple computers, and their compu-
tational resources will be seen to reach down into the sub-cellular
molecular resources available only to organic brains, but the
theories that emerge will still be functionalist in the broad sense.
So within functionalism broadly conceived a variety of important
controversies have been usefully playing themselves out, but an inter-
mittently amusing side effect has been that many neuroscientists and
psychologists who are rabidly anti-computer and anti-AI for various
ideological reasons have mistakenly thought that philosophers' qualia
and zombies and inverted spectra were useful weapons in their battles.
So unquestioning have they been in their allegiance to the broad,
bland functionalism of normal science, however, that they simply
41

Daniel Dennett
haven't imagined that philosophers were saying what those philoso-
phers were actually saying. Some neuroscientists have befriended
qualia, confident that this was a term for the sort of functionally char-
acterizable complication that confounds oversimplified versions of
computationalism. Others have thought that when philosophers were
comparing zombies with conscious people, they were noting the
importance of emotional state, or neuromodulator imbalance. I have
spent more time than I would like explaining to various scientists that
their controversies and the philosophers' controversies are not trans-
lations of each other as they had thought but false friends, mutually
irrelevant to each other. The principle of charity continues to bedevil
this issue, however, and many scientists generously persist in refusing
to believe that philosophers can be making a fuss about such a narrow
and fantastical division of opinion.
Meanwhile, some philosophers have misappropriated those same
controversies within cognitive science to support their claim that
the tide is turning against functionalism, in favour of qualia, in
favour of the irreducibility of the 'first-person point of view' and so
forth. This widespread conviction is an artifact of interdisciplinary
miscommunication and nothing else.
5. The future of an illusion
I do not know how long this ubiquitous misunderstanding will per-
sist, but I am still optimistic enough to suppose that some time in
the new century people will look back on this era and marvel at the
potency of the visceral resistance18 to the obvious verdict about the
Zombie Hunch: it is an illusion.
18 It is visceral in the sense of being almost entirely a-rational, insensi-
tive to argument or the lack thereof. Probably the first to comment explic-
itly on this strange lapse from reason among philosophers was Lycan, in a
footnote at the end of his 1987 book, Consciousness (MIT Press) that
deserves quoting in full:
On a number of occasions when I have delivered bits of this book as
talks or lectures, one or another member of the audience has kindly
praised my argumentative adroitness, dialectical skill, etc., but added
that cleverness—and my arguments themselves—are quite beside the
point, a mere exercise and/or display. Nagel (1979 [Preface to Mortal
Questions Cambridge University Press]) may perhaps be read more
charitably, but not much more charitably:
I believe one should trust problems over solutions, intuition over
arguments .... [Well, excuuuuuse me!—WGL] If arguments or
42

The Zombie Hunch: Extinction of an Intuition?
Will the Zombie Hunch itself go extinct? I expect not. It will not
survive in its current, toxic form but will persist as a less virulent
mutation, still psychologically powerful but stripped of authority.
We've seen this happen before. It still seems as if the earth stands
still and the sun and moon go around it, but we have learned that it
is wise to disregard this potent appearance as mere appearance. It
still seems as if there's a difference between a thing at absolute rest
and a thing that is merely not accelerating within an inertial frame,
but we have learned not to trust this feeling. I anticipate a day when
philosophers and scientists and laypeople will chuckle over the
fossil traces of our earlier bafflement about consciousness: 'It still
seems as if these mechanistic theories of consciousness leave some-
thing out, but of course that's an illusion. They do. in fact, explain
everything about consciousness that needs explanation.'
If you find my prediction incredible, you might reflect on
whether your incredulity is based on anything more than your cur-
rent susceptibility to the Zombie Hunch. If you are patient and
open-minded, it will pass.
systematic theoretical considerations lead to results that seem intu-
itively not to make sense ... then something is wrong with the argu-
ment and more work needs to be done. Often the problem has to be
reformulated, because an adequate answer to the original formulation
fails to make the sense of the problem disappear (pp. x-xi).
If by this Nagel means only that intuitions contrary to ostensibly sound
argument need at least to be explained away, no one would disagree (but
the clause 'something is wrong with the argument' discourages that
interpretation). The task of explaining away 'qualia'-based intuitive
objections to materialism is what in large part I have undertaken in this
book. If I have failed, I would like to be shown why (or, of course, pre-
sented with some new anti-materialist argument). To engage in further
muttering and posturing would be idle. (pp. 147—8)
43

Copyright of Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement is the property of Cambridge University Press and its
content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

