DANIEL C. DENNETT 
WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
It has seemed important to many people to claim that computers cannot in 
principle duplicate various human feats, activities, happenings. Such apri- 
oristic claims, we have learned, have an embarrassing history of subsequent 
falsification. Coa~Ltrary to recently held opinion, for instance, computers can 
play superb che~zkers and good chess, can produce novel and unexpected 
proofs of nontrivial theorems, can conduct sophisticated conversations in 
ordinary if tightly circumscribed English. The materialist or computerphile 
who grounds an uncomplicated optimisim in this ungraceful retreat of the 
skeptics, however, is in danger of installing conceptual confusion in the worst 
place, in the foundations of his own ascendant view of the mind. The triumphs 
of Artificial Intelligence have been balanced by failures and false starts. Some 
have asked if there is a pattern to be discerned here. Keith Gunderson has 
pointed out that the successes have been with task-oriented, sapient features 
of mentality, the failures and false starts with sentient features of mentality, 
and has developed a distinction between program-receptive and program- 
resistant feature~ of mentality. 1 Gunderson's point is not what some have 
hoped. Some have hoped he had found a fall-back position for them: viz., 
maybe machines can think but they can't feel. His point is rather that the 
task of getting a machine to feel is a very different task from getting it to 
think; in particular it is not a task that invites solution simply by 
sophisticated imlovations in programming, but rather, if at all, by devising 
new sorts of hardware. This goes some way to explaining the recalcitrance of 
mental features like pain to computer simulation, but not far enough. Since 
most of the discredited aprioristic thinking about the limitations of 
computers can be seen in retrospect to have stumbled over details, I propose 
to conduct a more detailed than usual philosophic thought experiment. Let 
us imagine setting out to prove the skeptic wrong about pain by actually 
writing a pain program, or designing a pain-feeling robot. I think the 
complications eEountered will prove instructive. 
The research strategy of computer simulation has often been misconstrued 
by philosophers. Contrary to the misapprehensions innocently engendered by 
Synthese 38 (1978) 415-456. All Rights Reserved. 
Copyright © 1978 by D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, Holland. 

416 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
Turing's classic paper, 'Computing Machinery and Intelligence, '2 it is never to 
the point in computer simulation that one's model be indistinguishable from 
the modelled. Consider, for instance, a good computer simulation of a 
hurricane, as might be devised by meteorologists. One would not expect to 
get wet or wind-blown in its presence. That ludicrous expectation would be 
akin to use-mention error, like cowering before the word 'lion.' A good 
computer simulation of a hurricane is a program which, when you feed in 
descriptions of new meteorological conditions, gives you back descriptions of 
subsequent hurricane behavior. The descriptions might be in roughly ordinary 
English, dealing with clouds, waves and tides, or in some arbitrary notation, 
dealing with barometric pressure, wind velocities, and yet more esoteric (but 
measurable) features of hurricanes. The goal is to devise a program that will 
give you good 'predictions' of what a hurricane will do under a great variety 
of highly complex conditions. Such a program is tantamount to an immense 
conjunction of complicated conditionals: 'if conditions A, B, C .... obtain, 
then R will result; and if conditions D, E, F .... obtain, S will result; 
and... ' Obviously the only way to populate that conjunction reliably is by 
deriving the particular conditionals from general covering laws, all properly 
meshed and coordinated. So in order to write a good simulation program one 
must have a theory of hurricane behavior, and it must be a good theory. But 
if one must have a theory in the first place, why bother incorporating it into a 
program? There are several good reasons. First, the demands of program 
writing force into the open any incoherencies, gaps, or unanswered questions 
in a theory; it keeps the theoretician honest. Second, once a theory is thus 
incorporated into a working, 'debugged' program, its implications can be 
quickly determined and assessed. A simulation can be an 'experience- 
generator'; hurricanes are not that numerous, but a simulation program could 
generate thousands of different storm histories to scrutinize for implausibility 
or worse. Also, of course, such a program could be used in high-speed real 
time prediction of current weather. The fact that such a simulation program 
is ultimately only a high speed generator of the consequences that some 
theory assigns to various antecedent conditions is often obscured by the 
mode of presentation of the input and output. It is often useful, convenient, 
or just plain exciting to use the output to drive a visual display, a raster or TV 
screen on which appears, say, a swirling vortex moving up a map of the East 
Coast, but that swirling vortex is a sort of epiphenomenon, the tail that 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
417 
doesn't wag the dog. The theory incorporated into the program directs the 
behavior of the presentation, and does not read off the behavior of the 
presentation, which itself plays no role" in the simulation beyond its role as a 
convenient display. 
Now let us consider a similarly inspired computer simulation of human 
pain. We write a program, based on our theory of pain, such that when we 
type in descriptions of conditions, e.g., 
'An anvil drops from a height of two feet onto S's unanesthetized 
left foot,' 
the computer types back descriptions of results, e.g., 
'S jumps about on right foot, a tear in his eye, screaming.' 
We test the program by varying how we fill in the blanks in our permissible 
input formulae (e.g., "A 
is dropped from a height of:__, on S's .____") 
and checking the resulting outputs for plausible variety and dependence on 
the input. What is unsatisfying about this computer simulation of pain? The 
skeptic might reply that it is a simulation at best only of pain behavior, but 
consider our hurricane simulation: what else is there to simulate but the 
hurricane's behavior? A better reply is that we have so far only attempted to 
simulate external pain behavior. This defect is easily remedied. Revised, our 
program will yield such outputs as 
'S's (?-fibres are stimulated .... a pain-memory is laid down, S's 
attention is distracted; S's heart-rate increases... S jumps about 
on right foot, a tear in the eye, screaming.' 
(We can be sketchy, for the moment, about the internal 'behavior' or effects 
alluded to in the program.) Suppose, then, that we pack our output 
descriptions with neurophysiological description or even mentalistic psycho- 
logical description about effects on memory, belief, desire, etc. Still, the 
skeptic may insist we have left something - indeed everything - of import- 
ance out. We have simulated, perhaps, the internal and external causes and 
effects of pain, but not the pain itself. 3 Some identity theorists may wish to 
retort to this that C-fibre stimulation just is the pain, 4 but we needn't take a 
stand on that point, since there are further ways of obliging the skeptic. We 

418 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
can rewrite our program so it yields such outputs as 
'There is a pain, P, of the in-the-left'foot variety, in S; S's C-fibres 
are stimulated...' 
Now we have explicitly included the pain. But, says the skeptic, the program 
still leaves out the quality of the pain. Very well. We expand our theory, and 
concomitantly our program,:'to yield detailed descriptions about even this. 
Again we feed in 
'An anvil is dropped from a height of two feet on S's left foot,' 
and this time we get back: 
There is a pain, P, of the in-the-left-foot variety in S; P begins as a 
dull, scarcely noticeable pressure, and then commences to throb; 
P increases in intensity until it explodes into shimmering hot 
flashes of stabbing stilettoes of excruciating anguish [or words to 
that effect] .... ; S's C-fibres are stimulated... 
I see no reason why our program could not be enlarged to incorporate all this; 
the biggest problem would seem to be discovering sufficient uniformity and 
lawfulness in such 'phenomenological' effects as reported by sufferers to 
permit much prediction. Of course if the data we collect suggest a random 
distribution of these effects within certain boundaries that is easy enough to 
incorporate into our program as well. s 
I do not expect this would satisfy the skeptic. He might try to express his 
doubts by pointing out that there is nothing pain-like going on in the 
computer when it churns out these reports. But of course not. Nor does the 
computer hurricane generate an internal low barometric pressure behind its 
steely facade. At this point is should dawn on the skeptic that he has been 
barking up the wrong tree. He has no pressing quarrel with this research 
strategy when it is directed to psychological phenomena, since its guiding 
presupposition is not that men are computers (any more than hurricanes are) 
but simply that one can have a rigorous theory of human psychology, 
materialist, dualist, epiphenomenalist, or whatever. Isn't there, however, 
another research strategy that differs significantly from the one we've been 
considering, where the aim of the computer is to do, not describe? For 
instance, 'Shakey' at Stanford Research Institute is a robot that can 
'recognize' simple objects with its television eyes; it pushes cubes and 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
419 
pyramids around in response to typed commands. Such 'performance 
models,' one might say, really do things; they do not so much incorporate 
theories (as do simulations) as instantiate theories. 6 The skeptic's challenge is 
now for us to make such a robot, a feeler of pain, not a mechanized theory 
about feelers of pain. So let us try to design such a robot. Of course our 
efforts in this task will be as much guided by our theory of pain as were our 
earlier simulation efforts, and we might ask the skeptic if he had any quarrels 
with our earlier, programmed theory as a theory of pain. If the skeptic makes 
no objections to it, or if we are able to revise our theory to satisfy his 
objections, we are home free, for it is a relatively straightforward task to 
build the robot with the help of our earlier 'describing' program. The 
describing program simply becomes the control system for our new robot. 
Here is how it is done. Suppose our original program yielded outputs like 
'S trembles, a tear in his eye, and says "Ouch! My thumb hurts." ' First, we 
rewrite all outputs in the first person: 'I tremble, a tear in my eye, and I say 
"Ouch! My thumb hurts."' Then we drop the redundant 'I say' wherever it 
occurs and move all direct quotation onto a separate 'protocol' terminal, 
which will then print only 'Ouch! My thumb hurts.' The rest of the output is 
reprogrammed to drive a display of flashing lights with labels. The 'tremble' 
light goes on, the 'tear in the eye' light, and so forth. Then we replace the 
input sentences in a similar manner. We make up magnetized plastic tokens 
representing different objects - anvils, knives, olives - falling from different 
heights, and we label an array of slots to accept these tokens: 'thumb,' 'big 
toe,' etc., so ~at dropping the anvil token into the thumb slot simulates 
dropping the anvil on the thumb. Of course that's not very realistic, but we 
can improve it easily. For instance, we can replace the 'tremble' light with an 
eccentric flywheel that makes the whole computer vibrate when it is turning; 
the tear in the eye problem has already been solved for us by the toy 
manufacturers, and the other details of verisimilitude are either obviously 
irrelevant or can be solved by the Disney studios given six months and enough 
Federal grant money. The result will be a robot that really does things; it 
trembles and reels and whimpers; Jt says just where the pain is; it attempts to 
duck falling objects - perhaps it even kicks back if we kick it. 7 
But what about the rest of our earlier simulation? What happens to the hot 
flashes and dull throbs mentioned in our descriptive progam? These parts of 
the output we transform into labeled flashing lights and leave them that way: 
sometimes the 'dull throb' light is on (blinking slowly if you like) and 

420 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
sometimes the 'hot flash' light is on. If the skeptic insists on more 
verisimilitude here, what can he be asking for? Remember that these lights are 
not blinking randomly. The 'dull throb' light goes on only at appropriate 
times, the robot can then say 'there is a dull, throbbing pain' and the other 
apposite side effects of dull, throbbing pains are presumed to be arranged to 
coincide as well. But, the skeptic persists, no amount of side.effect can turn 
what is not a dull, throbbing pain into a dull, throbbing pain, and, obviously, 
calling this event a dull, throbbing pain does not make it one either. This 
objection, for all its plausibility, is unfair as it stands. The skeptic, we must 
assume, had no objection to settling for an IBM typewriter as the 'speech' 
element in this robot, and surely typing is not talking - and calling typing 
talking would not make it talking. Since he has not challenged us to make a 
bona fide member of the species homo sapiens out of whatever bits and 
pieces are on the shelves at IBM, he must be permitting us to use some 
substitutes - the legs can be titianium, not flesh and bones - and since our 
flashing light (or whatever turns it on) has all the functional features he has 
demanded of pain, why is he now changing the game? Calling the robot a 
human being would not make the robot a human being either, but that was 
never set as a goal. It begins to appear that what the skeptic was after all 
along was not a simulation or an analogue of pain, but the synthesis of real 
pain, like the synthesis of urea by W6hler in 1828 that marked the unification 
of organic and inorganic chemistry. The synthesis of real pain in a machine 
would tend to confirm that we human beings are just fancy soft machines, as 
the materialist contends. 
That we might reconstrue our task in this way highlights a peculiarity in 
our ordinary concept of pain. The word 'pain' has both a sortal grammar ('I 
have a pain,' 'pains shooting up my arm') and a mass noun grammar ('there is 
more pain now,' 'it will cause you some pain'). The mass noun grammar often 
permits us - even invites us - to view pain as a sort of biological or psycholo- 
gical substance, rather than a process or event or activity or state. For instance, 
the amount of morphine that can be safely administered depends on the amount 
of pain it has to kill. For excruciating pain (e.g., that of coronary thrombosis) 
two to four times the usual therapeutic dose may be given without danger. 
But in cases of severe pains that can quickly and spontaneously disappear 
(e.g., those of coronary occlusion or biliary colic) such doses are dangerous, 
since if the pain disappears suddenly the patient may show signs of morphine 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
421 
poisoning. If such were to happen, one would do well to punch or slap the 
patient, since, as Stearns observed in 1883, "pain is the antidote for morphine 
poisoning." One creates more pain for the morphine to neutralize, and thus 
prevents the excess of morphine from poisoning. 8 This suggests that 
specificity to morphine as an antagonist would be a legitimate test for any 
robot pain to pass. 
This reconstrual of the task might seem, however, to harbor a conceptual 
confusion. Does one not contradict oneself in speaking of the synthesis of 
real pain? Synthetic urea is urea, as genuine as any to be found, 
but synthetic :rubber is not rubber. 9 Is artificial intelligence genuine 
intelligence? Artificial coloring is perfectly genuine coloring, but artificial 
flowers are not flowers. The field of artificial intelligence trades on this 
ambiguity. Successes are often heralded as examples of genuine intelligence 
created by artifice, but in the face of objections this claim can be adjusted; 
artificial intelligence works just as well as, or is a useful and even theoretically 
interesting subsl~tute for, genuine intelligence. I do not believe the term 
'artificial intelligence' is objectionable on these grounds, for I do not believe 
in the distinction we are invited to make in this instance. Suppose the 
intelligence of some artifacts does function just as well as human intelligence 
(an immense supposition, of course); then, since intelligence, like respiration, 
is a purely functional notion, artificial intelligence, like artificial respiration, 
is no less genuine for being obtained by artifice. It may not be just like 
natural, human intelligence, but is genuine intelligence, as genuine as (we can 
imagine) the alien intelligence of extra-galactic creatures might be. 1 o But 
what of artificial or synthetic pain? Is pain like rubber and flowers, or like 
coloring, respiration and intelligence? Whatever answer we might agree on 
(and agreement is both unlikely and ultimately unimportant), one lesson is 
clear: if pain is deemed to be essentially a biological phenomenon, essentially 
bound up with birth, death, the reproduction of species, and even (in the case 
of human pain) social interactions and interrelations, then the computer 
scientist attemp~Ling to synthesize real pain in a robot is on a fool's errand. He 
can no more succeed than a master cabinetmaker, with the finest tools and 
materials, can succeed in making, today, a genuine Hepplewhite chair. 
Reservations about whether synthetic pain would be real pain may seem 
overly precious, but it is important to bring them into the open, for several 
reasons. First, a great deal of the counterintuitiveness of the notion of robo~ 

422 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
pain no doubt derives from a dim appreciation of this side of our notion of 
pain. Real pain is bound up with the struggle to survive, with the real 
prospect of death, with the afflictions of our soft and fragile and warm 
flesh. 1 ! With our concept of pain, as with many others, there is a tug toward 
parochiality: real Chateau Latour has to have been made in a particular place, 
in a particular way, by particular people: an artificially concocted fluid 
indistinguishable to both chemists and connoisseurs from Chateau Latour 
would still not be real Chateau Latour. (Real vodka, on the other hand, can 
be made from just about anything, anywhere, by anybody.) The parochiality 
of the concept of pain, is, moreover, not an irrational feature, or at least not 
obviously so, for it has a role to play in defining our moral community. There 
can be no denying (though many have ignored it) that our concept of pain is 
inextricably bound up with (which may mean something less strong than 
essentially connected with) our ethical intuitions, our senses of suffering, 
obligation, and evil. 12 It will not do to suppose that an assessment of any 
attempt at robot synthesis of pain can be conducted independently of 
questions about what our moral obligations to this robot might be. One 
reason, then, why you can't make a computer that feels pain is that our 
concept of pain is not a pure psychological concept but also ethical, social, 
and parochial, so that whatever we put inside Our computer or robot will not 
avail unless it brings in its train these other considerations, a matter over which 
our control, as computer designers, is worse than limited. IThis~ reason is 
important, and worth developing with more care, but not here, for it is also a 
bit of a red herring. Even if contextual matters, such as questions of origin 
and 'form of life', make a difference, they do not make enough of a 
difference. I do not think the skeptic wishes to rest his case at a point where 
the programmer's synthetic product might fall short only by these yardsticks 
(like the clever chemist's imitation Chateau Latour which only seems to have 
'good breeding'). Moreover, were the synthetic product that good, the 
contextual matters might either fall into line (we would start treating the 
computer very much as one of us, and commiserate with it, comfort it, etc.) 
or be dislodged in our minds from their position of importance. In any event 
what the skeptic finds impossible to imagine is that this thing that happens in 
and to him (and it happens in and to him quite independently- or so it 
seems - of his biological origin, destiny, social milieu or ethical status) can be 
made to happen in and to a robot. 
At this point it is easy for the skeptic to fall into extravagant and 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
423 
irrelevant claims to support or flesh out his skepticism. When he says no 
robot could feel pain as he does, is it the artificiality, the chemistry, or what 
that makes the difference? A cloned duplicate of himself would presumably 
be capable of feeling pain, but if we could construct a biochemical duplicate 
of him, would this artifact be a painless robot? On what grounds, other than 
the grounds of origin we have just now set aside? Supposing, then, that a 
manufactured biochemical duplicate would feel pain, on his view, what 
difference could it make if we use other materials? Only two replies, both 
insupportable, occur to me: (1) organic compounds are capable of realizing 
functional structures with capacities of a sophistication or power in principle 
unrealizable in non-organic materials, or (2) though an inorganic replica might 
succeed in duplicating a human being's functional structure, the states in it 
functionally isomorphic to human pain states would fail to be genuine pain 
states because the biochemistry of pain state realizations is essential. 13 These 
are both highly implausible vitalistic claims, and any skeptic led to defend his 
view in this territory has simply been led astray. That is not to say that 
murmurs of vkalism do not make a large contribution to the skeptics' 
attitudes, but just that the contribution should be first isolated and then 
ignored. To find something better for the skeptic to say we must give him 
more details to work with. We have been assuming, up to now, that the 
programmer could have at his disposal a fairly satisfactory theory of pain to 
exploit in designing his robots. We have been assuming, that is, that the 
mysteriousness of pain might thwart our efforts at synthesizing pain without 
thwarting our efforts at theorizing about it. But how realistic is that 
assumption? The best way to examine it is to set down the bare bones of 
current physiological theory relating to pain, and list some of the attested 
pain phenomena, the data any acceptable theory of pain must account for, 
and see if there are any insuperable difficulties presented by them. We can 
record the known dependencies and interrelations among these phenomena 
by plotting a 'flow-chart' of sorts for a pain program. 
The flow-chart presented here is merely a sketch, lacking rigor and detail, but 
its point is to facilitate philosophical scrutiny of pain, not to launch any 
serious project of programming or theoretical psychology or neuro- 
physiology. I hope it will be clear that the difficulties we encounter would 
only be exacerbated in a more systematic model. 
We can begin with what is known about the functional anatomy of 

424 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
transmission from pain sites into the brain. As is generally the case, the 
further in from the periphery we move, the murkier the details. The journey 
begins at the site of injury, with receptors sometimes called nociceptors that 
respond with some degree of specificity to a variety of noxious events: 
mechanical distortion, intensities of heat and cold and chemical changes, for 
instance. The outputs of these receptors travel brain-ward through at least two 
very different types of fibres: swiftly through the large myelinated A-fibres, 
and slowly through the narrow, unmyelinated C-fibres. 14 Both signals arrive 
at the substantia gelatinosa, the midbrain gateway, where a complicated 
interaction takes place. A-fibres also send effects inwards via other channels. 
The A- and C-fibres seem to make two different functional contributions. On 
the one hand, it seems that the C-fibres are the preponderant transmitters of 
'slow,' 'deep,' 'aching,' or 'visceral' pains, while A-fibres are implicated in 
'sharp,' 'bright,' 'stabbing' pains. Recently Melzack and Wall have suggested a 
more interesting function for the A-fibres. They act at the substantia 
gelatinosa to inhibit the effect of the C-fibres, thus closing the gate to 
pain-impulse transmission, or at least damping the output of that gate. 
Moreover, the A-fibre channels that bypass the Melzack-Wall gate in the 
substantia gelatinosa seem to initiate more central activity that sends 
inhibitory signals back down to the gate, further blocking the transmission of 
impulses from the C-fibres. The capacity of the hypothesized Melzack-Wall 
MELZACK- 
WALL GATE 
f 
"~'x 
,- 
\ 
/ 
! 
) 
NOCICEPTORS I 
TTT 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
425 
gate system to explain a variety of pain phenomena is immense, as we will 
soon see. 1 s What, then, happens to the output of the gate, the so-called T-cell 
transmissions? In broadest outline we can say that once again there is a split 
into two channels. One channel carries through the lower, phylogenetically 
older portion of the brain, the limbic system (hypothalamus, reticular 
formation, paleocortex, hippocampus), and the other passes through the 
thalamus and is projected onto the higher, phylogenetically newer, character- 
istically human part of the brain, the neocortex. Let us simplify by calling 
these the old low path and the new high path. The new high path is subject to 
yet another bifurcation: there is both a specific and a non-specific projection 
of fibres from the thalamus onto the cortex. 
The new high path, which is relatively undeveloped or non-existent in lower 
animals, subserves fine-grained perception: location and characterization of 
pain and other stimuli. It is here that pattern recognition, depth perception, 
and most of the other sophisticated operations of perceptual analysis are 
completed. The old low path is characterized by orthodoxy as the aversive 
. 
I 
I 
NEW HIGH PATH 
" 
! 
(NEOCORTEX) 
I 
SPEC. NON-SPEC. 
\ 
i 
l 
\ 
I THALAMUS I 
OLD LOW PATH 
~---- 
( 
(LIMBIC SYSTEf~ 
7T 

426 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
system, the 'motivational-affective processing' system. Orthodoxy is well 
buttressed by evidence in this instance, 16 and this suggested separation of the 
hurtfulness or awfulness of pain from its other characteristics- to speak 
loosely - will loom large in our further discussion. 
Having charted this far with the aid of anatomical roadmaps, we have 
reached terra incognita and if we are to proceed with our flow chart we must 
abandon the pretence that our boxes represent anatomically salient struc- 
tures, and proceed with a purely functional, abstract breakdown of the 
system. We can make use of the freedom thus provided to be more boldly 
speculative, and also, inevitably, vaguer about the nature of functions and 
relations we are charting. The only constraint on our design will be that it 
accommodate the known and presumed phenomena. 
Everyone knows, for instance, that distracting one's attention (e.g., by 
going to a movie) diminishes or banishes pain. This can be easily provided for 
if we build in a presenter-receiver filtering system across the pathway for 
incoming signals from all the sense modalities, subject to the following 
conditions: the receiver can have its general sensitivity raised or lowered, and 
the presenter has selective volume controls, so that its various signals can be 
turned up independently, x7 Then the effect of distracted attention could 
work this way: paying special attention to one input (the visual and auditory 
input from the movie) would be accomplished in part by turning up its 
volume in the presenter. Then the receiver would compensate for this high 
volume by decreasing its sensitivity, having the effect of muffling everything 
else, including the pain signals. The same effect might be accomplished by the 
Melzack-Wall gate, but let's be generous and draw in a separate filtering 
system. 
Pain signals trigger a variety of 'spinal reflexes' causing relatively simple 
but swift muscular responses without the intervention of higher brain centers 
(and in some instances without passing through the substantia gelatinosa, the 
Melzack-Wall gate), and since distracted attention has little or no effect on 
these, we will put the filter only in the new high path, and draw in the reflex 
links ('R') to the motor output nerves without intervening links of 
sophisticated control. 
There are many transactions between the old low and new high paths. Of 
particular importance to us is the relation the reticular formation in the old 
low brain has to higher centers. The reticular activating system plays a major 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
427 
\ \ 
\ 
ANALYSIS 
RECEIVER 
'-'J 
4 PRESENTER 
q' 
I' 
d[------ 
SPEC.~ NON-SPEC.j__ 
',>._., [ TNALA 
OS ] 
l RET'COLAR 
I 
FORMATION 
MELZACK- 
t 
i GATE 
I NOCICEPTORS I 
role in governing sleep and waking, and determining the level of arousal 
generally; it also plays a role in directing attention, and thus can be 
considered a versatile alarm system. 
So far we have hardly touched on the effect of pain stimuli on 'higher 
centers,' so let us sketch in roughly what is most obvious about these effects. 
When we have a pain we believe we have a pain (at least normally) and pains 
can be remembered, usually, for some time. So in our control circle we will 
place a memory and belief box, and to be on the safe side, two arrows leading 
to it, one from the old low path and one from the new high path (further 
investigation might lead us to revise any of this, of course). Also, pains are 
abhorrent, at least usually. That is, the infliction of pain is a reliable 
behavior-modifier, tongue loosener, punishment. (Whether punishment is 
good for anything is another matter. Pain is a good way to punish.) So we 
should draw in a 'goals and desires' box, with appropriate inputs. (If the 
'aversive' effects of pain are subserved entirely by the old low path, we might 
not want an arrow from the new high path to the desire center, but again, 

428 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
let's be generous. No doubt even the most intellectual apprehension of pain 
stimuli could have some effect on one's desires, current or long-term.) 
It is a useful and oft-used myth, at least, that higher controls in human 
beings are accomplished by something like logical processing of the material 
in the belief and desire boxes, 18 so let us distinguish a ratiocination unit in 
the control area. We need this in any case, since one effect of pain stimuli on 
this function (as captured by our box) is not informational but noisy: pains 
interfere with our ability to concentrate, to solve problems, to think dearly so 
we should draw a 'noise' arrow to the ratiocination unit. (Perhaps we should 
draw noise arrows to other units as well, but let's not overcomplicate our 
diagram.) 
Finally, let us transmit the control center's effects on behavior through an 
action organizing unit (with the specially important speech synthesis unit 
drawn in) to the motor-effector controls and thence to the muscles. In 
addition to the control center's effects on behavior, we must put in the 
CONTROL 
NOISE 
PERCEPTUAL 
ANALYSIS 
RETICULAR 
FORMATION 
OLD LOW 
I' 
f 
SPEC. NON-SPEC. 
I 
I 
THALAMUS 
MELZACK- 
WALL 
GATE 
NOCICEPTORS 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
429 
arrows for various 'descending effects' on the input system, including those 
already alluded to: an inhibitory effect on the Melzack-Wall gate, a volume 
control on the filter, a 'perceptual set' or 'readiness' determiner to weight the 
analyzing machinery, and others not worth drawing in. Then of course there 
should be 'feedback' arrows throughout. That should be enough detail to 
handle the phenomena at least in outline. The sketchiness and idealization of 
this model should not be forgotten, of course. Some of the functions 
captured by these boxes may merge in single anatomical structures, and such 
distortions as are present in the model might seriously misrepresent the actual 
state of affairs to the point of requiring major revision of the model. In any 
case, however, we now have a fairly complicated and versatile model to play 
with; let us see how it runs when it comes to providing for the variety of pain 
phenomena. 
Why does it i~elp to rub or press the painful area, or to scratch an itch? 
Melzack and Wall claim that this increases A-fibre transmission, thus 
CONTROL 
NOISE 
ACTION 
MOTOR 
PERCEPTUAL 
ANALYSIS 
RETICULAR 
FORMATION 
.OLD LOW PATH 
® 
FILTER 
SPEC. NON-SPEC. 
! 
I 
I THALAMUS I 
MELZACK- 
WALL 
GATE 
MUSCLES 
NOCICEPTORS 

430 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
increasing the inhibition of the C-fibre stimulation in the substantia 
gelatinosa. A less commonly recognized home remedy for pain is - not to 
distract but - to concentrate one's attention on the pain. I discovered this for 
myself in the dentist's chair, thinking to take advantage of the occasion by 
performing a phenomenological investigation without the benefit of novacain, 
and have since learned that this is a highly elaborated technique of Zen 
Buddhism) 9 I recommend this enthusiastically. If you can make yourself 
study your pains (even quite intense pains) you will find, as it were, no room 
left to mind them (they stop hurting)- though studying a pain (e.g., a 
headache) gets boring pretty fast, and as soon as you stop studying them, 
they come back and hurt, which, oddly enough, is sometimes less boring than 
being bored by them and so, to some degree, preferable. I am not at all sure 
that what I just said 'makes sense;' that is, I am not at all sure that this loose 
talk about pains that cease and resume hurting, or even this loose talk about 
studying one's pains, is ontologically, metaphysically, scientifically, phenom- 
enologically sound, but it is nevertheless just what I want to say. That is the 
way I would put it if I were unself-conscious and unworried about 
committing some conceptual gaffe. And that is a crucial part of the problem 
of pain: we have a baffling variety of such untutored, unstudied accounts of 
pain phenomena, and it is no easier to give them all credence than it is 
to revise them by the lights of some procrustean theory about what pain 
experiences must be. But, to return to the effect of attention on pains, 
whatever the 'correct' philosophical analysis is of the variety of first person 
pain reports, it must have room for the fact that focussing attention can 
obtain relief (to put the matter neutrally for the moment). Melzack and Wall 
have a ready explanation of this phenomenon: focussing attention on one's 
pains may serve to raise the volume only on the A-fibre component of it, thus 
inhibiting the C-fibres at the Melzack-Wall gate. Their experiments tend to 
confirm this hypothesis, and suggest that analgesia by hypnosis or yoga 
methods has a similar explanation. 2° 
We 'locate' our pains, but this is not a single thing we do. On the one hand, 
we react more or less reflexively to jerk the injured part away from contact 
with harm, and that is accomplished through the old low path. But we also 
'can say' where our pains are, and this is presumably accomplished on the 
new high path with the aid of the specific projection system to the perceptual 
analysis areas of the cortex and thence through the control system to 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
431 
ultimate speech. Excitation of a specific peripheral nerve fibre at any point 
on its length normally produces a sensation of pain felt at its normal 
extremity. 'Phantom limb' is, of course, the most vivid manifestation of this 
phenomenon.21 
In 'referred pain' the pain location does not match the location of the 
trauma. This must be due to 'leakage' or 'short-circuits' at crossover points in 
the specific paI;hways, probably in the substantia gelatinosa. Oddly enough, 
however, administering novocain or other local anesthetic to the site where 
the pain is fe,!t diminishes the referred pain, and pressure on that area 
increases the pain. This can be accounted for if we suppose the leakage is not 
a simple turning-on of the wrong fibre, but an enhancement of a resting level 
of transmission. Under local anesthesia there would be nothing to enhance 
(since local anesthetics stop all transmission) and pressing the uninjured area 
would produce a higher pre-existing level to enhance. 
Now let us locate on our model the effects of various drugs, especially the 
anesthetics, which prevent all sensation, and the analgesics, which are specific 
for pain. Novocain and related local anesthetics act by completely stopping 
the transmission of nerve cells at their source. (In fact, they block nerve 
activity wherever they are injected. A 'spinal block' is a local anesthetic 
administered high in the pathway to the brain, creating a wide area of total 
but still 'local' anesthesia.) There are no local analgesics, but aspirin is unique 
among the common general analgesics in having a peripheral site of action. 2 2 
It antagonizes a metabolite, bradykinin, at the nociceptors; it is bradykinin 
that persists in stimulating the nociceptors after the initial traumatic event 
and thereby is responsible for persistent pain. Aspirin by antagonizing 
bradykinin thus prevents pain at the earliest opportunity. This is interesting 
because aspirin is also unique among analgesics in lacking the 'reactive 
disassociation' effect. All other analgesics (e.g., the morphine group and 
nitrous oxide in sub-anesthetic doses) have a common 'phenomenology.' 
After receiving the analgesic subjects commonly report not that the pain has 
disappeared or diminished (as with aspirin) but that the pain is as intense as 
ever though they no longer mind it. To many philosophers this may sound 
like some sort of conceptual incoherency or contradiction, or at least indicate 
a failure on the part of the subjects to draw enough distinctions, but such 
philosophical suspicions, which we will examine more closely later, must be 
voiced in the face of the normality of such first-person reports and the fact 

432 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
that they are expressed in the widest variety of language by subjects of every 
degree of sophistication. A further curiosity about morphine is that if it is 
administered before the onset of pain (for instance, as a pre-surgical 
medication) the subjects claim not to feel any pain subsequently (though 
they are not numb or anesthetized - they have sensation in the relevant parts 
of their bodies); while if the morphine is administered after the pain has 
commenced, the subjects report that the pain continues (and continues to be 
PahO, though they no longer mind it. 
Our model suggests that morphine and other analgesics must work on the 
old low l~ath while leaving the new high path relatively in order, and such is 
the case. While morphine, like anesthetic drugs generally, takes effect first at 
the higher, cortical levels of the brain and then descends to the old brain, the 
specific projections to the cortex are especially resistant to damping by drugs, 
so that the effects of these drugs is more pronounced on the old low aversive 
path than on the new high path of fine-grained perception. The timing- 
dependence feature of morphine might be explained this way: once old low 
pain signals have contributed to the 'set' of the perceptual analyzing 
machinery (via influences on the control center's 'descending effects' which 
would weight the interpretation machinery in favor of interpreting particular 
signal patterns as pain-transmitting), this cannot be quickly undone, even 
after the contribution from the old low path is eliminated by morphine. 
Lobotomized subjects similarly report feeling intense pain but not minding it, 
and in other ways the manifestations of tobotomy and morphine are similar 
enough to lead some researchers to describe the action of morphine (and 
some barbiturates) 
as "reversible pharmacological leucotomy 
[lobot- 
omy]". 23 
When we turn from local anesthesia and analgesia in conscious subjects to 
general anesthesia, the situation becomes more complicated. The major 
problem can be approached by way of a curious and terrible incident from 
the annals of medicine. Curare, the poison used by South American Indians 
on their blow-pipe darts, was purified (as d-tubocurarine) and introduced into 
medical research in the 1930's, and its action was soon well understood. 24 It 
is a paralytic that acts directly on all the neuromuscular junctions, the last 
rank effectors of the nervous system, to produce total paralysis and limpness 
of all the voluntary muscles. It has no central effect except for a slight 
enhancement effect on activity in the cortex. In the 1940's, however, some 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
433 
doctors fell under the misapprehension that curare was a general anesthetic, 
and they administered it as such for major surgery. The patients were, of 
course, quiet under the knife, and made not the slightest frown, twitch or 
moan, but when the effects of the curare wore off, complained bitterly of 
having been completely conscious and in excruciating pain, feeling every 
scalpel stroke but simply paralyzed and unable to convey their distress. The 
doctors did not believe them) s Eventually a doctor bravely submitted to an 
elaborate and ingenious test under curare, and his detailed confirmation of 
the subjects' reports was believed by his colleagues: curare is very definitely 
not any sort of anesthetic or analgesic) 6 
Recently a puzzle occurred to me: suppose that one were to add to curare 
a smidgin of amnestic, a drug that (we will hypothesize) has no effect on 
experience or memory during n hours after ingestion but thereafter wipes out 
all memory of those n hours. 27 Patients administered our compound, 
curare-cum-amnestic, will not later embarrass their physicians with re- 
countings of agony, and will in fact be unable to tell in retrospect from their 
own experience that they were not administered a general anesthetic. Of 
course during the operation they would know, but would be unable to tell 
us.28 At least most of our intuitions tell us that curare-cum-amnestic would 
not be an acceptable substitute for general anesthesia, even if it were cheaper 
and safer. 29 But now how do we know that general anesthetics in use today 
are not really curare-cum-amnestic? We know, in fact, that curare is routinely 
used in generaL1 anesthesia today. Most general anesthetics by themselves in 
safe doses do not entirely block reflex spasms, so curare or another 
curariform paralytic is administered to prevent muscle-tearing damage and 
thrashing about that could interfere with the surgeon's task. Moreover, a 
variety of drugs in the anesthesiologist's bag are known to be amnestics (see 
note 27). How do we know that these drugs have the further effect of 
producing genuine anesthesia or even analgesia? Absence of complaint or 
other behavioral manifestation, we have seen, is hardly sufficient grounds - 
though they are routinely and not unreasonably relied on in daily medical 
practice. To answer this question we will have to look more closely at the 
internal effects of the so-called general anesthetics, and at other, more 
indirect clues ~cbout their functions. 
There are a wide variety of general anesthetics, but they fall into groups, 
and if we take three important drugs as paradigms, we will have more than 

434 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
enough variation to suggest the problems: (1) nitrous oxide, or laughing gas, 
which is inhaled; (2) ether, one of many related volatile inhalants; (3) sodium 
pentothal (or thiopental sodium), an injected 'ultra-fast-acting' barbitu- 
rate.3 o These drugs are chemically very different, and have different effects 
on the central nervous system and the rest of the body. Moreover, in modern 
practice they are seldom used alone, but almost always are accompanied by 
pre-anesthetic medication, such as an analgesic (e.g., morphine), a sedative to 
combat anxiety and the nausea that often results from ether inhalation, or 
even a 'basal' anesthetic, which produces anesthesia sufficiently deep for 
preparation for surgery but too shallow for surgery. In spite of this variation 
we can impose some order by considering the traditional 'stages' and 'planes' 
of general anesthesia. In passing from full consciousness into the anesthetized 
state one moves through three of four marked stages. In the first, one is 
conscious but apt to have hallucinations or uncontrollable thoughts; the drug 
is acting on the neocortex (at least partly as an enhancer or stimulant). In the 
second or delirium stage one is unconscious (in some sense) but may laugh, 
shout, swear or thrash about. The drug's effects are descending through the 
brain, and one hypothesis is that the drug has reached the higher motor 
control centers and paralyzed them, 'releasing' lower motor activity. In the 
third stage, called surgical anesthesia, there are four planes, of increasing 
depth. Depending on the surgery to be done one will be kept in the 
shallowest permissible plane of surgical anesthesia, since the fourth stage, 
medullary paralysis, is a short prelude to respiratory failure and death. These 
temporal stages are all but undetectable with sodium pentothal, where stage 
three is reached in a few seconds, and their manifestations are largely 
obliterated by the effects of preanesthetic medication with ether or nitrous 
oxide (no one wants a hallucinating, thrashing patient to deal with, which is 
one reason for pre-anesthetic medications). So the importance for practice, if 
not pedagogy, of the traditional stages of anesthetic induction is virtually nil. 
The four planes of third-stage surgical anesthesia, however, have welt- 
recognized symptoms relied on by anesthesiologists in maintaining the proper 
level of anesthesia during surgery. And for all the differences among the 
drugs, one similarity is clear enough: in doses large enough to produce deep 
plane surgical anesthesia (or fourth stage medullary paralysis) all the drugs are 
analgesic and anesthetic if any drug could be, since their effect at those levels 
amounts to virtual shut-down of the entire central nervous system. Such 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
435 
barely reversible brain death will look plausibly pain-free (by being 
everything-free) to even the unrepentant interactionist, for there is almost 
nothing happening to interact with. This is small comfort to the skeptic, 
however, since because of their very danger such deep levels of anesthesia are 
shunned. In fact the direction of anesthetic practice is toward ever shallower, 
safer, more manageable anesthesia, with supplementary medication, such as 
curare, analgesics, sedatives and - yes - amnestics taking care of any loose 
ends uncontrolted by the shallow anesthetic. 3 
The persistence of reflex responses to painful stimuli under anesthesia is an 
obtrusive and unsettling fact, in need of disarming. ~2 Goodman and Gilman 
observe that at the second stage of anesthesia "painful procedures are 
dangerous because the response to such stimulations (including incidental 
dreams [!] ) is exaggerated and may lead to violent physical activity," (p. 32), 
and they note further that even at surgical levels, barbiturate anesthetics "do 
not adequately obtund the reflex responses to impulses which, in the 
conscious state, would be experienced as painful." (p. 127). Yet they assure 
us that analgesia in these circumstances is complete despite the occurrence of 
'behavior' that is held- by some schools of thought- to be well nigh 
'criterial' for pain. The presence of the reflexes shows that the paths between 
nociceptors and muscles are not all shut down. What special feature is absent 
from those paths whose presence is required for the occurrence of pain? The 
short answer routinely given is: consciousness. General anesthetics render one 
unconscious, and when one is unconscious one cannot feel pain, no matter 
how one's body may jerk about. What could be more obvious? But this short 
answer has the smell of a begged question. The principle appealed to (that 
consciousness is a necessary condition for feeling pain) does not have the 
status of a well-confirmed empirical hypothesis, or a 'law of nature,' and its 
utility evaporates if we try to construe it as an 'analytic truth.' Until an. 
analysis is giwm of the relatively gross, molar notions of consciousness and 
pain, the principle has no particular warrant, save what it derives from its 
privileged position as one of the experience-organizing, pretheoretically 
received truths of our common lore, and in that unsystematic context it is 
beyond testing. Until we have a theoretical account of consciousness, for 
instance, how are we to tell unconsciousness from strange forms of paralysis, 
and how are we to tell consciousness from zombie-like states of unconscious 
activity and reactivity? The paradigms of tmconsciousness that anchor our 

436 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
acceptance of this home truth principle are insufficiently understood to 
permit us to make the distinctions we need to make in this instance. 
I think it is fair to say that until very recently anesthesiologists hadno 
better defense for their defining professional claim than such an appeal to 
'intuitive' principle: 
How do you prevent pain? 
We give people drugs that render them unconscious. 
And how do you know they are really unconscious? 
Try to wake them up; you'll see. (Besides, when they do wake 
up, they don't recall any pain.) 
Today, fortunately, better answers can be given; answers that at least have 
the potential to form the framework of detailed and confirmable theories. 
The 'state of unconsciousness' produced by general anesthetics can be 
independently characterized, and its importance accounted for. Drugs that 
cause sleep or deeper levels of 'unconsciousness' are called hypnotics, and all 
general anesthetics are hypnotics. Moreover, they all achieve this effect by 
antagonizing- though in different ways- the normal functioning of the 
reticular formation, preventing (inter alia) the arousal of the neocortex. 3 a 
This shutting down of the reticular formation does not 'turn off' the cortex 
nor does it prevent stimuli from reaching it. It prevents or depresses 
'recruitment' by those stimuli; they arrive at the cortex, but do not produce 
the normal spreading ripple of effects; they die out. On any plausible account 
of cortical functioning this should prevent the completion of the process of 
perceptual analysis. We could of course claim, with the support of orthodoxy, 
that such an effect on the cortex 'produces unconsciousness' and we could 
then 'explain' the absence of pain in such circumstances by an appeal to our 
common sense principle that consciousness is a necessary condition for pain, 
but that would require us to explain just how and why failure of cortical 
recruitment amounts to or causes unconsciousness, which is a step in the 
wrong direction, a step away from detailed functional analysis toward the 
haven of vague and unsystematized preconception. The hypothesis that the 
successful completion of a process of perceptual analysis is a critical feature 
in our functional account of pain is, in contrast, a generator of a variety of 
plausible accounts of perplexing phenomena. We have already seen its utility 
in accounting for the morphine time-dependence phenomenon. It could also 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
437 
be invoked to account for the relation between the amnestic and anesthetic 
properties of some drugs. Brazier suggests that anesthesia may result from a 
derangement of some memory functions subserved by the hippocampus, 
producing a sGrt of continuous amnesia of the specious present. Such a 
'forgetting' of each passing moment would cause a complete disability of 
perceptual analysis and ultimate recognition, and, so goes the theory, a pain 
not recognized is no pain at all. 34 
Another application of the hypothesis accounts for the striking fact that 
soldiers who have been wounded in battle often exhibit no discomfort from 
their serious i~uries while awaiting treatment in the safety of a field hospital, 
but will complain bitterly of the pain of a clumsy venipuncture when a blood 
sample is taken. 3 s They are in a state of specific, not general analgesia, and 
the specificity :is relative not even to bodily location, but to the import of the 
stimulation. This capacity for import-sensitive analgesia has been exploited 
rather systematically by the Lamaze natural childbirth technique. Adherents 
of the Lamaze method claim that by giving the mother a meaningful task to 
perform, the input which would otherwise be perceived as pain is endowed 
with a complex action-directing significance; since the patient is not merely a 
passive or helpless recipient of this input, but rather an interested recipient, a 
user of the input, it is not perceived as pain, and again, since a pain not 
recognized as such is no pain at all, the Lamaze method actually promotes a 
reduction of pain in childbirth. 
The conterA-sensitivity of some forms of analgesia and the time- 
dependence of morphine's analgesic effect can only be explained by a theory 
that treats the experience of pain as somehow the outcome of a process of 
perceptual analysis. Then, once that process is grossly located (in the 
neocortex), we can determine a necessary condition for its successful 
completion (reticular formation arousal), and can provide some grounds for 
the belief we are loath to abandon: general anesthetics are not misnamed. 
They are not misnamed because they prevent the completion of a process 
that is empirically established as a normally necessary condition for pain. This 
invocation of perceptual analysis restores the new high path in the cortex to a 
position of importance in our account and suggests that activity in the old 
low path is important not because it is or amounts to pain, but because it is a 
major contributing condition of pain. 3 6 
This completes the survey of pain phenomena, and carries our functional, 

438 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
partly anatomical, flow-chart of pain as far as it can profitably be carried. The 
point of this extended exercise in speculative psychophysiology has been to 
flesh out a theory sketch to the point where one can plausibly claim to have 
an account that accommodates the data in all their variety. 
Now we can return to the philosophical question that motivated the 
exercise: is the resulting theory a theory of pain at all; does it capture pain so 
that any realization of the flow chart would properly be said to be capable of 
experiencing genuine pain? 
A related, but somewhat different question is this: can we locate pain, as 
distinct from its typical causes and effects, on the flow chart? The flow chart 
gives us a functional description at what I have called the sub-personal 
level. 3 ~ I have labelled the various boxes 'belief,' 'desire,' 'action' and so 
forth, but that was taking a liberty. The flow-chart deals directly not with a 
person's acts, beliefs, thoughts, feelings, but with the behind-the-scenes 
machinery that governs speech dispositions, motor subroutines, information 
storage and retrieval, and the like. It has been convenient to talk as if the 
objects of our attention, what we pay attention to, were impulse trains in the 
nervous system, to talk as if the muffled outputs from the filter were the 
diminished pains, to talk as if we recognize or fail to recognize a neural signal 
as a pain, but this is loose talk, and the conceptual confusions it invites are 
not inconsequential. When we retell the subpersonal story without taking 
these liberties we seem to be leaving something out. 
Suppose we want to know how an anesthetic about to be administered to 
us works. The doctor tells us that it prevents mechanisms in the brain from 
'interpreting' certain impulse trains arriving from the periphery. This, he says, 
in turn prevents the initiation of motor activity, blocks normal effects on 
long and short term information storage and goal structures, and.., permits 
surgery to proceed at safe levels of respiration and blood pressure. Yes, we 
reply, but does it stop the pain? If we are unsatisfied with the answer he has 
already given us, his further reassurance that of course the anesthetic does 
stop the pain is not yet another consequence of any theory of anesthesia he 
knows so much as a 'philosophical' dogna- quite reasonable, no doubt- 
that plays a useful role in his bedside manner. The sub-personal theory he 
relies upon, and perhaps helps to confirm or advance, can provide for the 
phenomena, it seems, whileremaining neutral about the 'philosophical' 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 439 
puzzles about pain. For instance, not only can it account for the effect of 
novocain and curare, it also can account for the presence of the 'reactive 
dissassociation' effect of morphine without taking a stand on whether the 
effect is properly described as the presence of pain in the absence of aversion 
or as the absence of pain in the presence of peculiar beliefs or speech 
dispositions. It can explain the placebo effect without settling the question: 
does placebo administration promote a belief that causes or amounts to the 
absence of pain? It can explain the success of the Lamaze method without 
committing itself to an account of what the success consists in: is it correct to 
say that the technique turns pains into painless sensations, or should we say it 
prevents certain pains from ever occurring at all? It can explain why 
concentrating on one's pain provides relief without settling the question of 
whether such concentration changes the object of attention, and if so, 
whether the object is so changed it is no longer a pain, or rather a pain one 
does not mind having, a pain that doesn't hurt. 
The sub-personal account can provide at least a sketchy suggestion of why 
hypnosis is sometimes an effective method of obtaining relief, but what, 
exactly, does hypnosis accomplish? Does it manage to prevent the pain that 
would otherwise occur from occurring, does it prevent its existence, or does it 
simply permit the subject to ignore or abide the pain? Or does it leave the 
subject in pain but make him think or act as if he were not? Can it possibly 
be that these are different ways of saying the same thing? Suppose someone is 
given the posthypnotic suggestion that upon awakening he will have a pain in 
his wrist. If the hypnosis works, is it a case of pain, hypnotically induced, or 
merely a case of a person who has been induced to believe he has a pain? If 
one answers that the hypnosis has induced real pain, suppose the post- 
hypnotic suggestion had been: on awakening you will believe you have a pain 
in the wrist. If this suggestion works is the circumstance just like the previous 
one? (Isn't believing you are in pain tantamount to being in pain?) Or doesn't 
hypnosis induce beliefs at all? Is it rather that in both cases the subject just 
acts as if (1)he were in pain, (2)he believed he was in pain? What is 
presumably true in any case is that the effect of the hypnosis was to distort 
or weight the perceptual analysis machinery so that it produced a certain 
output, the sort of output that normally produces all or most of the normal 
pain dispositions: dispositions to avow, dispositions to nurse the wrist, take 
aspirin, and perhaps even dispositions to respond to stimulation of the wrist 

440 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
with the classic 'spinal reflexes' (I do not know how deep hypnosis can 
reach - hypnotically induced 'pain' does not evoke the characteristic palmar 
skin resistance of pain, but may otherwise be indistinguishable). Even if we 
knew exactly which of the boxes in our flow-chart were affected by hypnosis, 
and how, we would not thereby have answers to our philosophical questions 
(except in the extreme cases: if hypnosis were to produce only a disposition 
to say 'I have a pain in my wrist' and no other manifestations of pain, or 
alternatively, if hypnosis produced an observable injury, with swelling, 
inflammation, bradykinin, etc., in the wrist, we would fired easy unanimity in 
our answers). 
The philosophic questions do not seem idle, but our sub-personal theory 
does not - at least not yet - provide leverage for answering them. The silence 
of the sub-personal account here is due simply to the fact that pain itself does 
not appear on our flow chart, which seems to concern itself solely with the 
causes and effects of pain. 38 As we trace through the chart, we find that 
causal contributions 
include nociceptor and C-fibre stimulation, T-cell 
activity, the processes of perceptual analysis and the contributions thereto of 
old low path activity; and among the effects we find muscle contraction, 
avoidance reactions, 
reports, beliefs, disruptive effects on thinking or 
reasoning, and powerful goal modifications. The absence of a 'pain' box 
might seem to be a simple omission, easily corrected. The most plausible 
place to insert a pain box is between the perceptual analysis box and the 
higher control centers. Isn't pain the result of perceptual analysis and the 
cause of our reactions to discomfort? Let us call the inserted box the pain 
center. Now what does it do? If one claims its function is simply to serve as 
the locus for the transmissions just mentioned, the go-between, then contrary 
to our suspicion, pain was already represented in our model; we simply had 
not drawn a line around it. If the point is rather that there is a separable and 
terrible something we had hitherto left out, how could we possible add it 
with this box? 
How do we get pain into the pain center? Here is a suggestion: there are 
two little men in the pain center, and when the light goes on one starts 
beating the other with chains. What is wrong with this? Not that we have 
introduced homunculi, for there are (somewhat less colorful) homunculi 
inhabiting all these boxes. That is a legitimate and useful way to comprehend 
flow.charting.3 9 What is wrong is that even if there were pain in the box, it 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
441 
would not be the person's pain, but the little man's. And, to be crass about it, 
who cares if the little men in one's brain are in pain? What matters is whether 
I am in pain. 40 
There is no way of adding a pain center to the sub-personal level without 
committing flagrant category mistakes, by confusing the personal and 
sub-personal levels of explanation. 41 We might toy with the idea that our 
pain center, somewhat like Descartes' notorious pineal gland, is the producer 
of epiphenomena, the echt pains that make all the difference (without of 
course making any causal difference). The standard rebuttal to this version of 
epiphenomenalism should suffice. Suppose there were a person of whom our 
sub-personal account (or a similar one) without the pain center were true. 
What are we to make of the supposition that she does not experience pain, 
because the sub-personal theory she instantiates does not provide for it? First 
we can make the behaviorist's point that it will be hard to pick her out of a 
crowd, for her pain behavior will be indistinguishable from that of normal 
people. But also, it appears she will not know the difference, for after all, 
under normally painful circumstances she believes she is in pain, she finds she 
is not immune to torture, she gladly takes aspirin and tells us, in one way or 
another, of the relief it provides. I would not want to take on the task of 
telling her how fortunate she was to be lacking the ]e ne sais quoi that 
constituted real pain. 
But that is a tendentious description of the case. Let us consider instead 
the hypothesis suggested by it. viz., that we have simply not seen the woods 
for the trees, that pain is not to be found in any one box of our flow-chart, 
but is a function or combination somehow of the elements already present. 
What function? The chief value of all this somewhat science-fictional 
flow-charting and compiling of odd phenomena - the reason I have spent so 
much time on it - is that it serves to drive wedges of contingency between 
features that are often thought to be conceptually inseparable, simply 
because they are usually coincident. What I am asserting is that the arrows on 
the flow-chart are the arrows of normal causal relation, and wherever we have 
seen fit to posit a particular relation or dependency, we can imagine a 
severing of the normal connections responsible for it. Some of this 
fragmentation has familiar manifestations, some is to be found only rarely, 
and some never occurs, so far as I know, though we can conceive of it 
occurring. 

442 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
We can locate our pains, for instance, but this is a complex ability of ours 
that could become discomposed on occasion. Anscombe considers such a 
case: 
you say that your foot, not your hand, is very sore, but it is your hand you nurse, and 
you have no fear of or objection to an inconsiderate handling of your foot, and yet you 
point to your foot as the sore part: and so on. But here we should say that it was 
difficult to guess what you could mean. 42 
Pains are also goal modifiers, but they might not be. That is, we can 
imagine a person who says he is in pain, locates the pain consistently, is in 
fact being beaten, writhes, cries, trembles, but is immune to torture. Is this 
really imaginable? Of course it is. Perhaps that is what masochists are. Or 
perhaps they have, as it were, a sign reversed going to the goal box, so they 
seek out pain instead of avoiding it, at least in certain circumstances. 43 
Pains are abhorrent, but what are we to make of the reports of subjects 
who are lobotomized or under morphine analgesia, who report pains, rank 
them in terms of greater and less intensity, but seem and claim not to mind 
the pains? Are they confused? They say they are in pain, but could they 
properly be said to believe they were in pain? It is not as if they are speaking 
parrot-fashion, nor do they exhibit massive conceptual confusions in other 
areas, so why can it not be that they do believe they are in pain? The only 
strong presumption against granting them this belief is that a good many 
'theories' of pain make us 'incorrigible' or 'privileged' about our pains, and 
this is often characterized by the stipulation that belief that one is in pain is a 
sufficient condition for being in pain. If we hold this view of incorrigibility 
and grant these subjects their belief, then they are in pain, but then pain is 
not always abhorrent, even when the subjects are experiencing, as they 
sometimes believe, very intense pain. One might try to claim that such people 
reveal by their very odd behavior that they do not understand the word 
'pain,' but that would be hard to support. Before the lobotomy or morphine 
administration, we can presume, they had a good command of English, 
including the word 'pain,' and there is no evidence, I think, to show that any 
of these treatments tends to produce lexical amnesia or other verbal 
confusions. 44 To be sure, they do not understand the word 'pain' the way 
some theories would say they ought to, but to bow to these theories would 
be to beg the question in the very description of the case. 
The ordinary use of the word 'pain' exhibits incoherencies great and small. 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 443 
A textbook announces that nitrous oxide renders one 'insensible to pain,' a 
perfectly ordinary turn of phrase which elicits no 'deviancy' startle in the 
acutest ear, but it suggests that nitrous oxide doesn't prevent the occurrence 
of pain at all, but merely makes one insensible to it when it does occur (as 
one can be rendered insensible to the occurrence of flashing lights by a good 
blindfold). Yet the same book classifies nitrous oxide among analgesics, that 
is, preventers of pain (one might say 'painkillers') and we do not bat an eye. 
Similarly, if 'pain is the antidote to morphine poisoning' then morphine 
cannot be said to prevent pain from occurring. Perhaps what the maxim really 
means is that normally painful stimulation is the antidote for morphine 
poisoning, but if that is what it means, that is not what it says, and what it 
says is easily understood, and understood to be good English. This particular 
slackness in our ordinary use has provided a playground for interminable 
philosophic disputation over the issue: can there be unfelt pains? I suggest 
that our flow-chart handles this traditional question by discrediting it. There 
can be, in principle, any combination of the normal 'causes and effects' of 
pain in the absence of any others, and intuitions will no doubt clash about 
which words to use to describe the results. Other philosophical questions 
about pain might have more interesting answers. 
Consider the commonplaces about differences in 'pain-threshold'. Some 
people, it is often claimed, can stand more pain than others: they have a high 
pain threshold. 4 s Suppose I am one of those with a low threshold, and 
undergo treatment (drugs, hypnosis, or whatever) supposed to change this. 
Afterwards I report it was a complete success. Here is what I say: 
(1) 
The treatment worked: the pain of having a tooth drilled is as 
intense as ever, only now I can stand it easily. 
Or I might say something different. I might say: 
(2) 
The treatment worked: having a tooth drilled no longer hurts as 
much; the pain is much less severe. 
Can we distinguish these claims? Of course. They obviously mean very 
different things. (;an I then know which claim is correct in my own case or in 
another's? Wittgenstein is sometimes supposed to have argued in the 
Philosophical Inw'sn'gations that I cannot be said to know such a thing - and 
maybe that there is nothing to know; the claims are, in some sense, 
equivalent. But I do not think that can be right, whether or not Wittgenstein 

444 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
argued for it (and I do not see that he did). Suppose after my treatment I 
report the results in the first manner. Someone then chides me: how do you 
know it's not (2)? Now if I say in reply that there is an inner quality of 
painfulness that I can recall my past experiences at the dentist's to have had, 
and if I now resurrect that quality from my memory, and compare it with the 
quality of my present experience, I can see that the present experience has 
that same quality, only I mind it less; then Wittgenstein has a case against me. 
That sort of supporting claim must be bogus. 46 I could not confirm for 
myself by such a combination of recall and introspection that (1) was the 
right way to talk. Yet all the same I could stick to my story. I could say: all I 
know is that that's the way I want to describe it - that's how it first occurred 
to me, and your skepticism hasn't changed my mind: I still want to say that. 
Nothing shows me I am in pain, and similarly nothing need show me that my 
pain is as intense as ever, though I mind it less. Such things I want to say 
count for something, but not, as we have just seen, for everything (we aren't 
required to accept the reports of morphine users or lobotomized subjects). 
Could I be supported in my conviction about threshold by further 
evidence? We might run a survey on those who had had the treatment, and 
find a consensus. Or we might find that I was an anomaly, or that there were 
two broad groups of reporters, whose memberships were predictable from 
some features of the subjects (age, blood type, social background, size of the 
cortex... ). Would a consensus confirm my story, or would it simply give us 
a general fact about pain-talk under certain conditions? The truth of the 
pain-talk would still seem open to question. Or, if one holds that the 
uniformity of this way of speaking is constitutive of the meaning of 'pain' 
and hence ensures the truth of all this pain-talk as truth-by-meaning then at 
least we can ask if, all things considered, this is an apt or perspicuous way of 
talking, of dividing up the world. One is inclined to think that there must be 
some reason for us to say one thing rather than another, even if these 
'grounds' are not available to us introspectively. It would not be appropriate 
for us to be so designed that our convictions on this matter were grounded in 
no distinction of interest at all, but then to what other grounds could one 
appeal but to internal, sub-personal grounds? Suppose for instance, we were 
to look inside me and find that the treatment had the effect of diminishing 
the effects on goal structures, current action-directing sub-routines, and 
memory, but left unchanged the intensity or magnitude of whatever causally 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
445 
earlier processes normally co-vary with intensity-of-pain-reported. This would 
support my way of talking at least indirectly, by showing that there is at least 
one interpretation of the open schema: 'the magnitude ofx is unchanged but 
the effect ofx on y is diminished' that is true. The truth of one interpretation 
could be called upon to help explain my desire to assert what might be 
another interpretation, even if we decline for various reasons to identify the 
referents of the different interpretations of 'x' and 'y'. Suppose, alternatively, 
that we find normal operation of all systems in the flow-chart after the 
perceptual analyzer, but a diminution in amplitude for some event or events 
earlier in the chain. This would seem in just the same way to support the 
second style of introspective report, and make my account suspect. But 
would it? Does the diminishing size of the retinal image of a receding figure 
make suspect the claims of perceptual size constancy? Only, perhaps, to those 
who hold extremely naive identity theories. Detailed isomorphisms between 
personal level talk of pains, beliefs, feelings, and actions and subpersonal level 
talk about impulses, trains, and their effects tempt the impatient to drive the 
silver spike of identity theory prematurely. The result is inevitably a theory 
that is easily refut:ed. 
The philosophical questions that an identity theory (or other 'philo- 
sophical' theory of pain) would be designed to answer are generated by our 
desire to put together an account that consistently honors all, or at any rate 
most, of our intuitions about what pain is. A prospect that cannot be 
discounted is that these intuitions do not make a consistent set. This would 
not be a particularly unsettling discovery if we could identify a few peripheral 
and unbuttressed intuitions as the culprits; they could be presumed to be 
mistaken or illusory, and dismissed, leaving a consistent core of intuitions as 
the raw material for philosophical analysis and system-building. Thus one 
might legislate a neat systematic relationship between sortal talk of pains and 
mass-term talk of pain, thereby establishing two distinct 'concepts of pain,' 
and ignore any intuitions inharmonious to that scheme however well attested 
to by ordinary usage. Recommending such a slight (and improving) revision 
of our ordinary concept would not be, arguably, doing violence to our 
ordinary concept. But if contradiction is more entrenched, a more radical 
approach is dictated. 
Consider the idea that being in pain is not any mere occurrence of stimuli, 
but an interpreted reception, a perception that is influenced by many prior 

446 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
cognitive and conative factors. Some will find this intuitive, but pre- 
theoretically it is hardly compelling. On the contrary, nothing is more 
'intuitive' to the sufferer than that there is little that is cognitive about pain, 
that what one wants relief from is not merely an undesirable species of 
perception, that in addition to one's state of consciousness, or perceptual or 
epistemic state, the pain is there, a brute presence, unanalyzable and 
independent. The apparent disharmony between these two blocs of intuitions 
can be turned into clear contradiction if theory is permitted to develop along 
traditional lines. The grammatical grounds for the contradiction have already 
been noted: it is equally ordinary to speak of drugs that prevent pains or 
cause them to cease, or to speak of drugs that render one insensitive to the 
pains that may persist. (Further instances of the latter notion in our ordinary 
conception of pain can be found in the discussions of people who are 
"congenitally insensitive to pain".47 Our prima facie obligation not to cause 
pain in others is surely understood not to exclude these unfortunate 
individuals from the class of subjects.) So ordinary usage provides support 
both for the view that for pains, esse est percipi, 48 and for the view that 
pains can occur unperceived. 
What kinds of objects of perception are pains: are they merely intentional 
objects, or have they an independent status? No one can defensibly claim to 
know. Neither introspection not physiological research can cast any light on 
the question, and philosophical analysis can plausibly support or attack either 
view for the simple reason that there are common intuitions and associated 
ways of speaking that support the contrary views. 49 If one takes such 
contradictory testimony to impeach the authority of such intuitions as 
determinants of our ordinary concept of pain, where else might one look for 
testimony? Not even contradiction can dislodge our shared intuitions from 
their role as best manifestations of-constitutive employments of-our 
ordinary concept. What must be impeached is our ordinary concept of pain. 
A better concept is called for, and since even the most rudimentary attempt 
at a unified theory of pain phenomena is led ineluctably to the position that 
pain occurs normally only as the result of a process of perceptual analysis, the 
esse est percipi position on pain promises to be more theoretically 
perspicuous, which, faced with the impasse of intuitions, is reason enough to 
adopt it. s° This suggests an identification of pain with events = whatever 
they are - that occur post-interpretation, so that if we can determine where, 
in our model, interpretation is completed, whatever issues from that will be 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
447 
pain (when the interpretation machinery so interprets). Setting aside the 
categorial crudities of that formulation, there are still problems, for the 
interpretation of events in such a system is not an atomic matter, but highly 
compound. Perception has not one product but many, operating at different 
levels and in different ways. Has the interpretation machinery interpreted a 
signal as a pain if it evokes a speech disposition to say one is in pain? Or must 
it also produce the normal or apposite effects on belief, memory, desire, 
non-verbal action, and so forth? Looking at all the various effects such an 
interpretation of signals could produce, we can answer the philosophic 
questions about pain only by deciding which effects are 'essential' to pain and 
which are not. 
What governs our decisions about essentiality, however, is our stock of 
pretheoretical intuitions, which we have seen to be in disarray. Having 
countenanced legislation to settle two such conflicts already, we still face 
incompatibility of well-entrenched intuitions, such as these: 
(1) 
Pains are essentially items of immediate experience or conscious- 
ness; the subject's access to pain is privileged or infallible or 
incorrigible. 
(2) 
Pains are essentially abhorrent or awful - 'Pain is perfect misery, 
the worst of evils... ' 
Efforts to capture both of these 'essential' features in a theory of pain are 
bound to fail; theories that contrive to maintain both of these claims do so 
only at the expense of equally well-entrenched claims from other quarters. To 
see this suppose we attempt to capture at least part of what is compelling 
about (1) by the thesis: 
(3) 
It is a necessary condition of pain that we are 'incorrigible' about 
pain; i.e., if you believe you are in pain, your belief is true; you 
are in pain. s 1 
Condition (3) says that belief that one is in pain is a sufficient condition of 
pain. Such belief may be sufficient, but if we are held to be incorrigible about 
other states of mind or sensations as well (as incorrigibilists generally hold) 
there must be some other, distinguishing feature of pains; that they are 
abhorrent or awful seems as good a candidate as any. But then from (3) and 
(4) 
It is a necessary condition of pain that pains are awful 

448 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
it follows that believing one is in pain is a sufficient condition for really 
experiencing or undergoing (and not merely believing one is experiencing or 
undergoing) something awful. But the belief itself is not the pain, and it is not 
awful. Surely it is logically possible to be in a dispositional state bearing all 
the usual earmarks of belief that one is in pain and yet not be experiencing or 
undergoing something awful. Not only is this logically possible, it is instanced 
routinely by morphine subjects and others. Then is there any way of denying 
that this consequence of (3) and (4) is false? There is a heroic line available. 
One could maintain that whatever dispositional state one was in, it could not 
properly be characterized as the state of belief that one was in pain unless one 
understood the concept of pain, and hence believed that pains were awful, 
and hence would never believe one was in pain unless one believed one was 
experiencing something awful; and then, since we are incorrigible about 
experience in general, one would never believe one was experiencing 
something awful unless one was experiencing something awful and, finally, 
since something undergone but not experienced (presuming that we can make 
sense of such a distinction) could not be awful (in the right sense), it really is 
quite defensible to claim that belief that one is in pain is sufficient condition 
for undergoing something awful, sz This line can 'save' (3) and (4) as 
conjoined necessary conditions of pain, but only at the expense of other 
intuitions about our access to our beliefs or our capacity to say when we are 
in pain. If asked ifI am in pain, I should say: "I am ifI believe that I am, but 
who knows if my apparent belief is a genuine belief?." On this view, those 
who sincerely report that under morphine their pains are intense but not 
awful are not mistaken in believing they are in pain when they are not (for 
that has just been deemed to be logically impossible) but in saying something 
they do not believe (but only believe they believe?). The counterintuitiveness 
of this result does not utterly disqualify the heroic line. There are any 
number of ways of cutting this Gordian knot, and this is one of them. One 
decides which intuitions must go, and builds one's theory accordingly. 
I do not recommend the course just considered, however. I recommend 
giving up incorrigibility with regard to pain altogether, in fact giving up all 
'essential' features of pain, and letting pain states be whatever natural kind 
states the brain scientists find (if they ever do find any) that normally 
produce all the normal effects. When that day comes we will be able to say 
whether masochists enjoy pare, whether general anesthetics prevent pain or 
have some other equally acceptable effect, whether there are unfelt pains, and 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKEA COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 449 
so forth. These will be discoveries based on a somewhat arbitrary decision 
about what pain is, and calling something pain doesn't make it pain. This is 
especially true of pain, for one of our intuitions about pain is that whether or 
not one is in pain is a brute fact, not a matter of decision to serve the 
convenience of the theorist. I recommend against trying to preserve that 
intuition, but if you disagree, whatever theory I produce, however predictive 
or elegant, will not be by your lights a theory of pain, but only a theory of 
what I illicitly choose to call pain. But if, as I have claimed, the intuitions we 
would have to honor were we to honor them all do not form a consistent set, 
there can be no true theory of pain, and so no computer or robot could 
instantiate the true theory of pain, which it would have to do to feel real 
pain. Human beings and animals could no more instantiate the true theory of 
pain (there being none), which lands us with the outrageous conclusion that 
no one ever feels pain. But of course we do. Human suffering and pain cannot 
be whisked out of existence by such an argument. The parochiality of the 
concept of pain protects us but not robots (or Martians or lower aninals) 
from the skeptical arguments, by fixing the burden of proof: an adequate 
theory of pain must have normal human beings as instantiations, a demand 
that presupposes the primacy, but not the integrity, of our ordinary concept 
of pain. 
What then is the conclusion? It is that any robot instantiation of any 
theory of pain will be vulnerable to powerful objections that appeal to 
well-entrenched intuitions about the nature of pain, but reliance on such 
skeptical arguments would be short-sighted, for the inability of a robot model 
to satisfy all our intuitive demands may be due not to any irredeemable 
mysteriousness about the phenomenon of pain, but to irredeemable inco- 
herency in our ordinary concept of pain. Physiological perplexities may defy 
the best efforts of theoreticians, of course, but philosophical considerations 
are irrelevant to the probability of that. If and when a good physiological 
sub-personal theory of pain is developed, a robot could in principle be 
constructed to instantiate it. Such advances in science would probably bring 
in their train wide-scale changes in what we found intuitive about pain, so 
that the charge that our robot only suffered what we artificially calledpain 
would lose its persuasiveness. In the meantime (if there were a cultural lag) 
thoughtful people would refrain from kicking such a robot. 
Tufts University 

450 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
NOTES 
Keith Gunderson, Mentality and Machines, 1971. 
2 A.M. Turing, Mind, 1950, reprinted in A. R. Anderson, ed., Minds and Machines, 
1964, and discussed by Gunderson, inter alia, in 'The Imitation Game,' in Anderson, and 
in Mind, 1964, and revised in Mentality and Machines. 
3 Cf. Gunderson, Mentality and Machines, p. 157: " ... emotion is different from its 
effects... " 
4 They would be - perhaps unwittingly - wrong if they made this claim, as we shall see. 
Stimulation of the C-fibres is neither a necessary nor sufficient condition for the 
occurrence of pain. (C-fibres are stimulated under general anesthesia, and need not be 
stimulated for neuralgia or central pain to occur.) The term 'C-fibres' seems however to 
have lost, for philosophers, its empirical anchoring in neuro-anatomy and become a 
philosopher's wild-card referring expression for whatever physical event 'turns out to be 
identical with' pain. 
5 Such an enterprise might be illuminated by a revival of the researches of the 
19th-century investigator Hahnemann, who botanized over seventy-three distinct 
phenomenological varieties of pain. (See F. Sauerbruch, Pain: Its Meaning and 
Significance, 1963, p. 74.) 
6 The distinction is not as clear-cut as it may first appear. Terry Winograd's natural 
language understanding program (See Terry Winograd, 'Understanding Natural Langu- 
age,' in Cognitive Psychology 3 (1972), 1-191.) 'manipulates' the 'objects in its 
environment' and answers questions about them. But its environment is entirely artificial 
and internal, like the environment of the swirling hurricane of our earlier example. 
When Winograd's device 'puts a cube on the table,' is it a doer or a describer? Moreover, 
if we view the theory we incorporate into a program as an uninterpreted theory, we are 
free to view the computer's behavior as satisfying one interpretation of the theory, so 
that any programmed computer can be viewed as instantiating (on one interpretation) 
the theory incorporated in its program. The tokens of computer behavior that on one 
interpretation are uttered descriptions of the behavior of some other entity instantiating 
the theory, can on another interpretation be viewed as themselves instances of behavior 
predicted by the theory. I owe this observation to Joseph Weizenbaum. 
Some of this fantasy has already been turned to fact. SIM ONE, a robot used in 
training medical students, blinks, breathes, has measurable blood pressure, coughs, 
twitches, and can become 'anesthetized.' See J.S. Denson and S. Abrahamson, 'A 
Computer-controlled Patient Simulator' Journ. Amer. Med. Assoc. 208 (1969), 504-8. 
See, e.g., Louis S. Goodman and Alfred Gilman, The Pharmacological Basis of 
Therapeutics, 2nd edition, 1955, p. 248. 
9 Herbert Simon, in The Sciences of the Artificial, 1969, points to the distinction that is 
occasionally drawn between 'artificial' and 'synthetic'; a green glass gem might be called 
an artificial sapphire, while a manufactured gem chemically identical to genuine sapphire 
would be called synthetic. (p. 4) 
0 On this, and many other matters Joseph Weizenbaum has provided me with 
illuminating suggestions. 
11 Cf. Paul Ziff, 'The Feelings of Robots,' Analysis 19 (1959), #3, Reprinted in 
Anderson, ed.~ Minds and Machines. 
~ See, in this regard, Stanley Cavell's suggestive paper, 'Knowing and Acknowledging," 
in Must ICe Mean What We Say?, 1969. 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
451 
i a Note that we can obtain the specificity of functional reaction to morphine and other 
drugs without accomplishing this in the same way, chemically, a human body does. 
~4 The difference in transmission speed is considerable: 100 meters per second versus 
less than two meters per second. If you stick a pin in your finger you can distinguish 
quite readily two resultant sensations in sequence: roughly, a pricking sensation followed 
swiftly by a 'deeper' pain. This tandem effect is generally thought to be explained by the 
difference in transmission speed. See R.A. Sternbach, Pain, A PsychophysioIogical 
Analysis, 1968, p. 30 for a discussion of the issue, and references. 
s George Pitcher discusses the philosophical implications of the Melzack-Wall theory in 
'The Awfulness of Pain,' J. Phil., July 23, 1970. The most recent and highly developed 
version of the Melzack-Wall theory is found in R. Melzack and P. D. Wall, 'Psycho- 
physiology of Pain,' in H. Yamamura, ed., Anesthesia and Neurophysiology, lnternat. 
Anesth. Clinics 8 (1970), #1. 
16 Lesions in the old low path are responsible for 'central pain' or neuralgia (pain with a 
central cause but peripheral 'location' - one does not necessarily feel a headache in 
central pain). 'Cortical representations' of pain are considered less 'important' by 
researchers generally. Cortical lesions seem almost never to produce central pain (and 
when they do, descending effects on the old low path are indicated). Penfield, in his 
research on stimu~.ation of the exposed cortex produced a wide variety of effects, but 
almost no pain. See V. Cassinari and C. A. Pagni, Central Pain: A Neurosurgical Survey 
(1969); and Wilder Penfield, The Excitable Cortex in Conscious Man (1958). Moreover, 
'direct stimulation of the reticular and limbic systems produces strong aversive drive and 
behavior typical of responses to naturally occurring painful stimuli.' (Melzaek and Wall, 
op. cit., p. 20,) 
7 Such volume control systems have been posited in the course of many different 
investigations in the brain sciences. Arguably such a system's existence has been 
physiologically conf'naued in cats. See Hernandez-Peon, Scherer and Jouvet, 'Modifi- 
cation of Electrical Activity in Cochlear Nucleus during "Attention" in Unanesthetized 
Cats,' Science 123 (1956), 331-32. 
a The myth is given a more skeptical treatment in my 'Brain Writing and Mind reading,' 
in Keith Gunderson, ed., Language, Mind and Knowledge, Minn. Studies in Phil. ScL, 
Vol. 7, 1975. 
9 A journalistic account of this technique can be found in Marilyn Ferguson, The Brain 
Revolution, 1973. 
2 o Can the Melzack-Wall theory also account for acupuncture anesthesia? It is not hard 
to speculate about mechanisms that could be added to the Melzack-Wall theory to 
accommodate the acupuncture effects, but I understand Wail is currently at least 
agnostic about the capacity of the theory to handle it. 
2 ~ To some extent pain locations need to be learned, though, and can be unlearned. In 
eases of limb amputation performed on children before they developed the use and 
coordination of the limb, phantom limb is rarely experienced. When amputation occurs 
just after birth phantom limb never occurs. See M. Simmel, 'Phantom Experiences 
Following Amputation in Childhood,' Journ. of Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 25 
(1962), 69-79. 
Moreover, locations can be 'mislearned.' A variety of pain commonly produced in jet 
pilots under certain high altitude conditions is positively located by them in either the 
cheeks or the teeth. Which location is reported depends not on variation in the 

452 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
physiological etiology of the pain (which is constant) but on whether or not the pilots 
have had recent painful dental work. 
22 Aspirin probably also has central analgesic effects. 
23 A. S. Keats and H. K. Beecher, 'Pain Relief with Hypnotic Doses of Barbiturates, and 
a Hypothesis,' J. PharmacoL, 1950. Lobotomy, though discredited as a behavior- 
improving psychosurgical procedure, is still a last resort tactic in cases of utterly 
intractable central pain, where the only other alternative to unrelenting agony is 
escalating morphine dosages, with inevitable addiction, habituation and early death. 
Lobotomy does not excise any of the old low path (as one might expect from its effect 
on pain perception), but it does cut off the old low path from a rich input source in the 
frontal lobes of the cortex. 
24 See A. R. Mclntyre, Curare: lts History, Nature and Clinical Use, 1947; and A. E. 
Bennett, 'The History of the Introduction of Curare into Medicine,' Anesth. and 
Analgesia, 1968, pp. 484-92. 
2 s The fact that most of the patients were infants and small children may explain this 
credibility gap. See Scott M. Smith, et aL, 'The Lack of Cerebral Effects of 
d-Tubocurarine,' Anesthesiology 8 (1947), 1, pp. 1-14. It has recently been confirmed 
that cases of surgery on curarized but incompletely anesthetized patients is not as rare 
today as one would hope. See Richard S. Blacher, 'On Awakening Paralyzed During 
Surgery: A Syndrome of Traumatic Neuroses', Journal of the American Medical 
Association 234 (Oct. 6, 1975), 67-8. 
26 Ibid. 
27 I know of no drug with just these powers, but a number of drugs used in anesthesia 
are known to have amnestic properties. Scopolamine is the strongest and most reliable 
amnestic (though it is still unreliable), but it has other effects as well: not anesthesia or 
analgesia, but it does create hallucinations and a sort of euphoria. Scopolamine and other 
amnesties are often prescribed by anesthesiologists for the purpose of creating amnesia. 
"Sometimes," I was told by a prominent anesthesiologist, "when we think a patient may 
have been awake during surgery, we give scopolamine to get us off the hook. Sometimes 
it works and sometimes not." Scopolamine was once widely used in conjunction with a 
sedative or morphine to produce the 'twilight sleep' then recommended for childbirth. 
One pharmacological textbook, in discussing this practice, uses the phrase "obstetrical 
amnesia or analgesia" as if amnesia and analgesia were much the same thing. (Goodman 
and Gilman, op. cit., p. 555.) 
2 s Unable in fact, not unable in principle. We could quite easily devise signalling systems 
triggered directly by activity in electrode-monitored motor neurons. My point is not that 
such a state is in principle indistinguishable from anesthesia; I simply want to consider 
what, aside from current behavioral evidence (and later memory report) is crucial in 
making the determination. 
29 I have found some people who proclaim their untroubled readiness to accept this 
substitute. I think they have been bewitched by Wittgensteinian logical behaviorism. 
30 Surveys of anesthesiology can be found in the standard medical school pharmacology 
texts, such as Goodman and Gilman, op. cir., or J.C. Krantz and C.J. Carr, The 
Pharmacological Principles of Medical Practice (7th edn., 1969, Williams and Wilkins, 
Baltimore). More up-to-date material on the physiology of anesthesia is contained in H. 
Yamamura, op. ciL 
31 For instance, the 1969 edition of Krantz and Carr describes the drawbacks of 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
453 
haiothane, a recent popular inhalant anesthetic, as follows: it produces incomplete 
muscle relaxation, and "it does not produce patent analgesic properties, so it is used with 
nitrous oxide for analgesia, and a curarfform [for paralysis] ." One might well wonder 
just what halothane's strengths are. 
32 When anesthesia (without curare) is so deep that reflexes are absent, the worry that 
this absence is due to a curariform effect of the anesthetic by itself has been laid to rest 
recently by experiments in which twitch responses were directly evoked in deeply 
anesthetized subjects by electrode stimulation of motor nerves. (Reported by S. H. Ngai, 
'Pharmacologic and Physiologic Aspects of Anesthesiology,' New England Journal of 
Medicine, Feb. 26, 1970, p. 541.) This reassuring datum is somewhat beside the point, 
however, since under common anesthetic practice, the reflexes are only obliterated by 
the accompanying curare. 
33 Some further details are of particular interest. Barbiturate anesthetics in sub-hypnotic 
doses are not anesthetic or analgesic at all, whereas nitrous oxide in sub-hypnotic doses is 
a reliable analgesic. This meshes well with our physiological account since nitrous oxide 
not only depresses the reticular formation but also depresses transmission between the 
thalamus and cortex, an effect barbiturates lack. Melzack and Wall report that in cats 
barbiturate anesthetics produce strong descending inhibitory effects to their gate system 
in the substantia gelatinosa. So some general anesthetics may overdetermine their 
essential effect, but being a hypnotic (suppressing general arousal) is sufficient. 
A more puzzling matter is the claim (e.g., by Goodman and Gilman) that 'pain is 
totally abolished before the onset of unconsciousness' in the first stage of anesthetic 
induction; a scalpel incision, they say, feels like a blunt instrument drawn across the 
skin[ One is entitled to view this claim with skepticism; surgical incisions during stage one 
anesthesia without other medication must be exceedingly rare occurrences in modern 
medicine, and for good reason, so presumably the grounds for the claim are anecdotal 
and not of recent vintage. But suppose the claim is in fact well grounded (at least true on 
occasion). At first blush it appears an embarrassment to our theory, since orthodoxy has 
it that only the cortex is affected during stage one anesthesia, and the effect on it is 
enhancement, not depression or blockade. How could cortical enhancement possibly 
produce analgesia? One possible answer: by evoking a hallucination (e.g., of a blunt 
instrument being drawn across the skin). The abnormal cortical activity of first stage 
anesthesia is known to evoke hallucinations, and hallucinations do have the power to 
overrule and obliterate competing veridical inputs (one's hallucinations are not simply 
superimposed on veridical perceptions), so if one were fortunate enough to hallucinate a 
harmless blunt instrument when the scalpel was plunged in, one would not feel pain. 
And, of course, one's being fortunate enough would not be fortuitous; the content of 
hallucinations is apparently guided by our deepest needs and desires, and what apter or 
deeper guiding desire than the desire to avoid pain? A similar account suggests itself for 
analgesia under hypnotic suggestion. 
34 Mary Brazier, "Effects of Anesthesia on Visually Evoked Responses,' in Yamarnura, 
op. eit. 
3 s H. K, Beecher, 'The Measurement of Pain,' Pharmacological Reviews, 1957 pp. 59- 
191. 
36 This forces us 'to acknowledge a far from negligible distinction between the pain we 
humans experience and the pain experienced by creatures that lack a neocortex (unless 
we want to maintain that only human beings and perhaps a few other 'higher' animals do 

454 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
experience pain). But it should already be obvious to us that there are tremendous 
functional differences between human and subhuman pain: no one is surprised that 
yoga, Zen Buddhism and Christian Science are ineffective anodynes for animals. What of 
anesthetic practice in veterinary surgery and animal experimentation, however? The 
hypothesis that 'saves' shallow anesthesia for human subjects is apparently inapplicable 
to animals without a neocortex. The curare incident should persuade us not to jump to 
complacent conclusions about this. Current thinking in veterinary anesthesiology 
closely follows human anesthesiology in most regards: the Melzack-Wall theory is 
featured, but the action of drugs on the reticular formation is regarded as central. The 
reticular formation plays about the same role in animals' brains, serving to arouse those 
higher perceptual areas that are precursors, phylogenetieally, of the human neocortex. 
Somewhat" disturbing, however, is the common use in animals of 'dissociative anesthetics' 
such as phencyciadine and ketamine, which do not depress the reticular formation, but 
produce a state like cataleptic stupor. These drugs have been discontinued for human 
administration because their anesthetic properties were called in doubt, and patients 
frequently reported horrible hallucinations (typically, of dying and then flying through 
outer space to Hell). A survey of the literature on animal pain (which I have only begun) 
could start with William V. Lumb and E. Wynn Jones, Veterinary Anesthesia, 1973. See 
also J.E. Breazille and R.L. Kitchell, 'Pain Perception in Animals,' Fed. Proc. 28 
(1969), 1379 and G. Corssen, et aL, 'Changing Concepts in Pain Control During Surgery: 
Dissociative Anesthesia with C1-581 [Ketamine] A Progress Report' in Anesthesia and 
Analgesia, 1968, x 47:6. 
37 See Contentand Consciousness, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1969, esp. Ch. 4. 
s Cf. Thomas Nagel's review of Content and Consciousness, J. Phil., April 20, 1972. 
39 In Content and Consciousness I disparaged theories that replaced the little man in the 
brain by a committee (e.g., on p. 87). This was a big mistake, for this is just how one gets 
to 'pay back' the 'intelligence loans' of Intentionalist theories (see my 'Intentional 
Systems,' J. Phil., Feb. 25, 1971). The trick is to turn the whole man into a committee 
of relative morons, each of which in turn is composed of still less versatile, less intelligent 
morons, until finally the heuristic value of Intentional characterization of subsystems 
diminishes to the point where one can abandon it. Thus the programmer starts with a 
flow chart of which he says things like 'this box wants to doA, and this other box keeps 
track of where B is .... ' A recent ingenious computer simulation of a woman in a 
psychoanalytic interview organized the individual functions of the subsystems in such a 
way that the woman's actions were determined by a well-organized, interacting group of 
'contexts (data locations or mini-worlds)' with such characteristically human tasks and 
responsibilities that they were aptly labelled Calvin, Freud, Cicero, Machiavelli and 
Leibniz. (John Clippinger, unpublished Ph. D. dissertation, Univ. of Pennsylvania.) Each 
context may have twenty or more programs. "These programs are not so much morons 
as they are specialists who work with specialists and are embedded in specialists" 
(personal communication from John Clippinger). The distinction between a moron and a 
specialist has always been vexed. A more detailed defense of homunculus theories is 
given in my 'Why the Law of Effect Will Not Go Away', Z Theory of Social Behaviour, 
1975, pp. 169-87. 
4o The reason I do not object to positing a homunculus that, e.g., infers on the basis of 
texture gradients, overlap and perspective clues that a particular object in my visual field 
is at a particular distance is that although there are grounds for claiming an inference-like 

WHY YOU CAN'T MAKE A COMPUTER THAT FEELS PAIN 
455 
process must be going on in me, it is clear enough that I do not draw the inference - so 
long as it gets drawn in me. But it is important that I be the subject of my pains. If the 
proper parts of me are for some purposes construable as homunculi, and ff on these 
construals these proper parts are occasionally the subject of pain (an unlikely turn for 
the theory to take, but not impossible), then those will not or need not be occasions 
when it is also the case that I am the subject of pain. 
41 "Indeed the concept [of a pain center] is pure fiction unless virtually the whole brain 
is considered to be the 'pain center' because the thalamus, the limbic system, the 
hypothalamus, the brain stem reticular formation, the parietal cortex, and the frontal 
cortex are all implicated in pain perception." Melzack and Wall, 'Pain Mechanisms: A 
New Theory,' Science I50 (1965), 975. 
42 G. E. M. Anscombe, Intention (Ithaca, 1963), p. 14. See also the discussion of this 
case in Kathryn Pyne Parson, 'Mistaking Sensations,' Phil. Review, April, 1970. 
,3 Roger Trigg, in Pain and Emotion (Oxford 1970), claims correctly I think, that it 
would be abnormal but not conceptually impossible to have a very intense pain but not 
dislike it. Trigg also offers a useful account of intensity of pain in which intensity is 
sharply distinguished from 'strength of dislike.' 
44 Trigg, op. cir., examines the hypothesis that leucotomes are too confused or imbecilic 
to know what they are answering. 
4 s Two different phenomena have been alluded to by this term. The pain-threshold 
measured by the Hardy-Wolff-Goodeil dolorimeter is presumed to be the minimal level 
of intensity at which a sensation type is deemed painful by the subject. (See J. D: Hardy, 
H.G. Wolff, and H. Goodell, Pain Sensations and Reactions, Williams and Wilkins, 
Baltimore, 1952, and also H. K. Beecher, op. cit., a classic critique of this experimental 
method of 'measuring pain'). 
In more common parlance, one's pain threshold is a maximum level of pain one can 
~tolerate,' whatever that may be held to mean in the circumstances. The common belief 
that there is a wide variation in people's tolerance for pain is expressed repeatedly in the 
medical literature (see, e.g., Asenath Petrie, Individuality in Pain and Suffering (Chicago 
i967)) but nowhere that I know of is there a careful attempt to confirm this by any 
objective tests. 
46 Such a claim might be phenomenologically sincere, but as a justification for my 
convictions about how to describe the result of treatment it is without merit. I owe to 
Lawrence Davis the suggestion that we mustn't rule out the possibility of having such an 
experience. 
47 See, e.g., L. D. Cohen, et aI., 'Case Report: Observations of a Person with Congenital 
Insensitivity to Pain,' J. Abnormal Social Psychol. 51 (1955), 333, and B. H. Kirman, et 
al., 'Congenital Insensitivity to Pain in an Imbecile Boy,' Developmental Medicine and 
Child Neurology 10 (1968), 57-63. 
4 ~ See, e.g,, George Pitcher, 'Pain Perception,' Phil. Review, July, 1970. 
49 See Pitcher, 'The Awfulness of Pain' loe. cir., where a debate is presented between the 
Affirmativist, who holds that all pains are unpleasant, and the Negativist, who denies 
this. Pitcher claims, correctly I believe, that this debate "has no winner" (p. 485). 
s o In 'Pain Perception,' loc. cit., Pitcher adopts a similarly pragmatic strategy, defending 
a 'perceptual' theory of pain that 'will strike many as bizarre' largely on grounds of 
theoretical cogency. 
5x Not all version.s of 'privileged access' (to pains and other items) would maintain, or 

456 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
imply, this thesis, but many do, and it should be clear in what follows that a parallel 
argument can be addressed against some important versions that do not. For instance, 
the view that ff one says, sincerely and with understanding, that one is in pain, one is in 
pain, succumbs even more directly to a version of my argument. One might think (and I 
used to claim) that Saul Kripke was committed to the incorrigibility thesis by his claim, 
in 'Naming and Necessity' (D. Davidson and G. Harman, eds., The Semantics of Natural 
Language, D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1972, p. 339): "To be in the same epistemic situation 
that would obtain if one had a pain is to have a pain; to be in the same epistemic 
situation that would obtain in the absence of a pain is not to have a pain" But Kripke 
denies that this claim entails anything like (3) (A. P. A. Eastern Division Meeting, 
December 29, 1974). This leaves Kripke's notion of epistemic situation obscure to me, 
and I would not hazard a guess about whether a version of my argument applies to his 
view. 
s 2 Pitcher discusses a similar argument in 'Pain Perception', pp. 387-88. 

