

Copyright © the Centre for Inquiry 2019
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Random House, an imprint and division of
Penguin Random House LLC, New York.
First published in Great Britain in 2019 by Bantam Press, an imprint of Transworld
Publishers.
RANDOM HOUSE and the HOUSE colophon are registered trademarks of Penguin
Random House LLC.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
Names: Hitchens, Christopher, author. | Dawkins, Richard, author. | Harris, Sam,
author. | Dennett, D. C. (Daniel Clement), author. | Fry, Stephen, writer of
foreword.
Title: The four horsemen : the conversation that sparked an atheist revolution /
Hitchens, Dawkins, Harris, Dennett ; foreword by Stephen Fry.
Description: First U.S. edition. | New York : Random House, [2019]
Identifiers: LCCN 2019004626 | ISBN 9780525511953 (hardback) | ISBN
9780525511960 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Atheism. | Hitchens, Christopher. | Dawkins, Richard | Harris,
Sam | Dennett, D. C. (Daniel Clement)
Classification: LCC BL2747.3 .H58 2019 | DDC 211/.8--dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019004626
Hardback ISBN 9780525511953
Ebook ISBN  9780525511960
randomhousebooks.com
Cover design: Rachel Ake

CONTENTS
COVER
TITLE PAGE
COPYRIGHT
FOREWORD
STEPHEN FRY
THE HUBRIS OF RELIGION, THE HUMILITY OF SCIENCE, AND THE INTELLECTUAL AND MORAL
COURAGE OF ATHEISM
RICHARD DAWKINS
Science is often accused of arrogantly claiming to know everything, but the
barb is capaciously wide of the mark.
LETTING THE NEIGHBOURS KNOW
DANIEL C. DENNETT
Any who search the transcription of our discussion for either a monolithic
shared creed or a contradiction suppressed for political reasons will come
up empty-handed.
IN GOOD COMPANY
SAM HARRIS
Is there a distinction between believing things for good reasons and
believing them for bad ones?
THE FOUR HORSEMEN: A DISCUSSION
RICHARD DAWKINS, DANIEL C. DENNETT, SAM HARRIS, CHRISTOPHER HITCHENS
DEDICATION
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

FOREWORD
STEPHEN FRY
‘Do you believe in God?’
‘A question of little value. Which god? Ganesh? Osiris? Jove?
Jehovah? Or one of the tens of thousands of animist gods worshipped
every day around the globe?’
‘Oh, very well then, if you’re going to get clever – any god.’
‘Do I believe in “any god”?’
‘Look, there’s a creation, isn’t there? Therefore there must be a
Creator. Nothing comes from nothing. Something must have started it
all.’
‘I’ll overlook your reckless use of “therefore” and go along with you,
out of interest. Just to see where it gets us.’
‘Well then.’
‘Well then, what?’
‘You’ve agreed there’s a Creator.’
‘Well, I haven’t agreed, but I’ve come along with you to see where
it’s going. Who is this Creator you have conjured up on the grounds
that they “must” exist?’
‘Well, we can’t say.’
‘And more important, who created this Creator?’
‘That’s just silly.’
‘But you’ve just told me that nothing comes from nothing and that
something must have started it all. Why am I not allowed to use this
principle to wonder where your Creator comes from?’
‘Well, you must admit that Love and Beauty can’t be explained by
science. That there’s something other…’

—
We have all had heated, sophomoric and ultimately futile
conversations like this as students – quibbling and quarrelling
earnestly about turtles-all-the-way-down regress and challenging each
other to prove the unprovable, long into the wine-fuelled night. We
have all listened to those of faith stating their position, first by
adducing half-understood scientific thinking and discovery—
‘Quantum physics itself shows that we can’t be certain of
anything.’
—then dropping them contemptuously:
‘Science doesn’t have all the answers. It can’t even explain what
most of the universe is made of! Anyway, they’re only theories.’
To this day, the ‘No true Scotsman’ fallacy is alive and well:
‘Buddhism has a lot to teach us, you know. It’s been shown to
have real psychological and cognitive value.’
‘You mean like those Buddhist monks who helped the
Burmese army ethnically cleanse the Rohingya to the point of
genocide?’
‘Oh, but they weren’t proper Buddhists.’
❖
Such scenes play out every day, and it is important that they should.
The rounds of punch and counterpunch may get wearisome,
aggressive and tiresomely circular, but let us never forget that this is a
big subject and the claims made by theists, religionists and believers
are the most momentous claims there can be. About anything. You
don’t have to boast a PhD or have read Thomas à Kempis, the Qur’an,
the Book of Mormon and the teachings of Siddhartha (or indeed On
the Origin of Species and Principia Mathematica) to be able to take
part in such wrangling and disputation. But boy, isn’t it wonderful
when you can eavesdrop on four who have. It warms the heart, tickles

the soul and fires up the synapses. And that is exactly what this book
allows us to do – listen in on four people who have thought hard and
fought hard (for they have been publicly battered and battled like few
intellectuals in our time) without losing their wit, humour and sense of
proportion.
So who are they, these Four Musketeers of the Mind? What do they
want with us and the world? Why should we care?
Let us meet them one by one.
SAM HARRIS (Aramis) is a neuroscientist, moralist, author and
enthusiastic exponent of Brazilian jiu-jitsu (a martial art most noted, I
am told, for its close grappling and ferocious ground fighting). He is
equally trained and proficient in forms of meditation that an
Englishman of my caste finds incomprehensible and deeply
embarrassing. I can’t even say the word ‘mindfulness’ without
blushing. Harris’s influential books The End of Faith and Letter to a
Christian Nation were followed by a later book and subsequent highly
popular podcast series called Waking Up, which focus on his great
interest in exploring how morality and spirituality can flourish outside
religious teaching.
DANIEL DENNETT (Athos) is a philosopher. Perhaps the best-known
philosopher alive. A few years ago, that would have been like calling
someone the best-known fluid dynamicist alive or the most famous
coleopterist the world has ever seen, but these days philosophy and its
branches are hot. More people are choosing it as an undergraduate
subject, it seems, than ever before. As a UC Berkeley alumni magazine
headline neatly phrased it, ‘Philosophy’s Popularity Soars: Devotees
Find It’s More Than “An Interesting Path to Poverty” ’. Professor
Dennett writes on the mind, evolutionary biology, free will and much
else besides. His book Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural
Phenomenon caused plenty of fluttering in academic, intellectual,
religious and political dovecots. His co-authorship with Asbjørn
Steglich-Petersen of The Philosophical Lexicon has alone guaranteed
him eternal glory. Like Einstein, Noah and the Kennedys, Professor
Dennett is a keen sailor.

RICHARD DAWKINS (d’Artagnan) is responsible for introducing
evolutionary biology and Darwinism to generations. His books The
Selfish Gene and The Blind Watchmaker, never out of print, continue
to inspire, inform and amaze. As the first holder of Oxford University’s
Simonyi Professorship for the Public Understanding of Science, he
acquired a worldwide reputation as a sceptic, ‘passionate rationalist’,
‘proud atheist’, and witty exposer of charlatanism and fakery couched
in pseudoscientific language. In all that time, he has pursued an
academic career as a leading ethologist and biologist. He gave our
language the word ‘meme’, and in his work as a scientist has hugely
expanded our understanding not just of the genotype but of the whole
evolutionary package that makes life, the phenotype. His Richard
Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science stands as a global
cynosure for free thought.
CHRISTOPHER HITCHENS (Porthos) was – and how it will always
grieve me to have to use the past tense – a journalist, essayist,
polemicist, contrarian, debater, political historian, author and thinker.
His 
preternaturally 
fluent 
articulacy, 
breadth 
of 
learning,
extraordinary recall, diablerie, sauciness, and panache raised his
mastery of debate to a level unmatched in his lifetime. We are
fortunate that this child of the 1960s and ’70s did at least make it into
the YouTube era; many of his coruscating flagellations of the dim-
witted, malevolent, ill-informed and unprepared live on in cyberspace
as well as in the pages of his many articles, essays and books.
❖
Richard Dawkins sets the context of this meeting of the Horsemen
very well indeed in his new contribution to this book, but it is worth
recalling how the Four had, between them, broken new ground in the
English-speaking world, opening up debate everywhere, empowering
humanism and secularism for a new generation, and giving voice to
the always lurking and now growing suspicion that the worst aspects
of religion, from faith-healing fakery to murderous martyrdom, could
not be separated from the essential nature of religion itself. They did

so with the publication of enormously influential books: Harris’s The
End of Faith, Dawkins’s The God Delusion, Dennett’s Breaking the
Spell and Hitchens’s God Is Not Great. These appeared against a
millennial 
background 
of 
growing 
Christian 
evangelical
fundamentalism in the United States and murderous jihadism in the
Islamic world.
The emperor had been parading about for centuries, and it was time
someone pointed and reminded the world that he was naked. The
response was, as might be imagined, intense. The four became media
stars to the extent that they were asked to comment and debate at all
times and in all places. But a counter-reformation followed.
Religionists of all stripes, most of whom appeared not to have read the
books,* fought back against these new voices:
‘The New Atheism is just like a religion.’
‘These New Atheists are fundamentalists themselves.’
‘How dare they affront and wound people for whom religion
is so great a solace, balm, and support?’
‘Lenin and Stalin imposed atheism in the USSR, and look
where that led.’
‘They define all of us according to the behaviour of the worst
of us.’
Such accusations – which are assertions, of course, not arguments,
with their resentful air of noble hurt – were brandished as if they
constituted a refutation of all that this New Atheism stood for. After
thousands of years of supremacy, suppression and censorship, the
champions of religion managed to transform themselves miraculously
into victims of cruel verbal abuse, snobbish bullying and intellectual
persecution. It is against such a background that this conversation
takes place.
Indeed, the first topic that Dawkins, Dennett, Harris and Hitchens
address is that very issue of ‘offence’ – how offence is taken by
religion’s guardians whenever their claims and practices are examined
in the forensic light of reason, history and knowledge. Reading the
Four Horsemen on this subject now, one realizes that all conversations
about any ideology or belief are subsets of the religious debate.
Questions of free speech, blasphemy, sacrilege and heresy have a

sharp relevance in our far-from-brave new world of culture wars,
denunciation, shaming, no-platforming, and the pestilential swarm of
Year Zero ills that has flown chattering, stinging and biting from the
Pandora’s Box of social media.
Yes, the Four Horsemen can be mordant and almost cruel in their
swatting of adversarial flies, but they always play by the rules. The
rules of all intellectual activity – whether scientific or non-scientific –
spin down to one golden precept: the testing of assertions on the anvils
of logic and verifiable fact. For an argument to obtain, it must make
sense rationally and empirically.
This does not cast the New Atheist as a cold, unfeeling Mr Spock.
Reason and experience recognize that many pious adherents are
sincere in their faith. While it is honourable and legitimate to
speculate as to the truth of the tenets of religious faith, there is no call
to mock or undermine the individually devout. Flaubert’s Coeur
simple, the old servant Félicité on her knees, telling the rosary and
looking up with reverent wonder at the stained-glass window above
the altar, is not ripe for scorn; but the dogma relayed from the Vatican
by the cardinal in his palace, dogma that keeps Félicité on her knees,
the palace stocked with wine, and the populace plied with nonsensical
edicts and eschatological threats… well, that is fair and necessary
game. Enquiries into the legitimacy of claims that spill out into the
public arena and influence education, law-making and policy have no
obligation to consider bruised feelings.
If the truth of the existence of God is a first-order matter, it is soon
dropped in debates and replaced with second-order questions:
Maybe faith and belief in divinity and an afterlife, even if
founded on claims for which there can be no evidence, may
nonetheless be considered a force for good?
Maybe they offer moral guides and ethical codes without
which the world would be a cruel and riotous place? Much of
what we live by is metaphor. Why shouldn’t we accept a
religious narrative irrespective of its truth – as a framework in
this relativist culture cursed by the disappearance of structure,
hierarchy, and meaning?

And what about the spiritual, the numinous immanence we
all feel? Can you really deny that there is a realm which reason
and numbers and microscopes cannot penetrate?
The Fearless Four dive right into all these second-order topics.
While not going so far as to allow for Stephen Jay Gould’s
unsatisfactory proposition of NOMA (Non-Overlapping Magisteria, an
idea that can be expressed as ‘Render unto science what is science’s,
and render unto religion all the rest’), we can see that each member of
the Four is happy to agree that the world, the cosmos, and our human
apprehension exhibit and experience the numinous. This is not any
kind of concession, for numen is (despite what some dictionaries
might suggest) no more suggestive of the existence of divinity than
lumen, or indeed any less attractive phenomena – cruelty, cancer and
flesh-eating bacteria, for example.
The glory of this gathering is that everything each player in the
quartet contributes on religion and atheism, science and sense, applies
with equal urgency to the troublesome topics of our present age.
Sitting in on these dialogues of Dawkins, Harris, Dennett and
Hitchens reminds us that open enquiry, free thinking and the
unfettered exchange of ideas yield real and tangible fruit. Who
imagined that the future of such obvious and surely ineluctable
enlightenment principles might in our lifetime be threatened –
threatened by shrieking intolerance from both sides of the old political
divide, but also by our own fear, indolence and misplaced courtesy?
This real danger is what makes the publication of this book so timely
and welcome. May new generations continue to be inspired by the
glamour and glory of the Four, and the valour and value of free
thought openly and gracefully exchanged.
One for all, and all for one!
* Compare and contrast with the Four Horsemen, whose breadth of scriptural and
theological knowledge is impressively on display in the pages to come.

THE HUBRIS OF RELIGION, THE HUMILITY OF SCIENCE, AND
THE INTELLECTUAL AND MORAL COURAGE OF ATHEISM
RICHARD DAWKINS
Between 2004 and 2007, five bestselling books became known –
notorious, in some circles – as the spearhead of a so-called New
Atheist movement. They were Sam Harris’s The End of Faith (2004)
and Letter to a Christian Nation (2006), Daniel Dennett’s Breaking
the Spell (2006), my The God Delusion (2006) and Christopher
Hitchens’s God Is Not Great (2007). For a time, Sam, Dan and I were
dubbed ‘the Three Musketeers’. Then, when Christopher’s broadside
arrived, we expanded into ‘the Four Horsemen’. We were not
responsible for those journalistic coinings but we didn’t disown them.
Nor did we collude with each other: there was no organized mustering
of the guns, although we had no objection to being bracketed together,
and we were happy to be joined by such respected authors as Ayaan
Hirsi Ali, Victor Stenger, Lawrence Krauss, Jerry Coyne, Michael
Shermer, A. C. Grayling and Dan Barker, among others.
In September 2007, the annual conference of the Atheist Alliance
International was held in Washington DC, Christopher Hitchens’s
home city. Robin Elisabeth Cornwell, on behalf of the Richard
Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science, took advantage of the
presence of all four ‘horsemen’ in the same place and organized a joint
conversation, to be filmed by our resident cinematographers. The plan
was that Ayaan Hirsi Ali would make a fifth, as lone horsewoman,
thereby taking our progression on from Three Musketeers through
Four Horsemen to Five Pillars of Wisdom. At the last minute, Ayaan
unfortunately had to make an emergency dash to the Netherlands,

where she had been a Member of Parliament. We missed her, and
were pleased that she joined the three surviving horsemen in 2012,
when the Global Atheist Convention in Melbourne staged a form of
reprise.*1 Her presence unsurprisingly stimulated a partial switch to
Islam as a topic.
Now, back to the original meeting in 2007. In the evening of 30
September, the four of us sat round a table in Christopher and Carol’s
airy, book-lined flat. Plied with cocktails, we had a two-hour
conversation followed by a memorable dinner. The film of our
discussion was made available on the YouTube channel of the Richard
Dawkins Foundation.*2 The foundation also launched the recording as
a pair of DVDs; the text that follows in this book is a transcript of our
conversation.
For me, the event was a vindication of my conviction that discussion
doesn’t always need a chairman or any basic disagreement or debate to
maintain interest and bear fruit. We didn’t even have a prepared
agenda. The conversation took its own course. Yet nobody hogged the
floor, and we segued seamlessly over a great number of topics. The two
hours seemed to fly by, and our own interest never flagged. Does the
unsteered conversation remain interesting to a third party? That is for
readers of this book to judge.
How different would our conversation be if we had it today, a decade
or so later? It’s impossible to overlook the obvious difference: no
Christopher Hitchens, our gracious host on that memorable evening.
How we would miss – do miss – that strong, mellifluous baritone, the
prodigious learning, the erudite quotations from literature and
history, the barbed yet gentlemanly wit, the eloquent cadences
impelled forward by such rhetorical skills as the dramatic pause after
rather than before the first word of a new sentence. I won’t say he
dominated our four-way conversation, but he certainly had a decisive
effect on the flow of it.
Rather than rehearse old themes, I thought I’d use this essay to
develop new points that I might make if we were to have another such
discussion today.
❖

Among the many topics we discussed in 2007 was how religion and
science compared in respect of humility and hubris. Religion, for its
part, stands accused of conspicuous overconfidence and sensational
lack of humility. The expanding universe, the laws of physics, the fine-
tuned physical constants, the laws of chemistry, the slow grind of
evolution’s mills – all were set in motion so that, in the 14-billion-year
fullness of time, we should come into existence. Even the constantly
reiterated insistence that we are miserable offenders, born in sin, is a
kind of inverted arrogance: such vanity, to presume that our moral
conduct has some sort of cosmic significance, as though the Creator of
the Universe wouldn’t have better things to do than tot up our black
marks and our brownie points. The universe is all concerned with me.
Is that not the arrogance that passeth all understanding?
Carl Sagan, in Pale Blue Dot,*3 makes the exculpatory point that our
distant ancestors could scarcely escape such cosmic narcissism. With
no roof over their heads and no artificial light, they nightly watched
the stars wheeling overhead. And what was at the centre of the wheel?
The exact location of the observer, of course. No wonder they thought
the universe was ‘all about me’. In the other sense of ‘about’, it did
indeed revolve ‘about me’. ‘I’ was the epicentre of the cosmos. But that
excuse, if it is one, evaporated with Copernicus and Galileo.
Turning, then, to theologians’ overconfidence, admittedly few quite
reach the heights scaled by the seventeenth-century archbishop James
Ussher, who was so sure of his biblical chronology that he gave the
origin of the universe a precise date: 22 October, 4004 BC. Not 21 or
23 October but precisely on the evening of 22 October. Not September
or November but definitely, with the immense authority of the Church,
October. Not 4003 or 4005, not ‘somewhere around the fourth or fifth
millennium BC’ but, no doubt about it, 4004 BC. Others, as I said, are
not quite so precise about it, but it is characteristic of theologians that
they just make stuff up. Make it up with liberal abandon and force it,
with a presumed limitless authority, upon others, sometimes – at least
in former times and still today in Islamic theocracies – on pain of
torture and death.
Such arbitrary precision shows itself, too, in the bossy rules for
living that religious leaders impose on their followers. And when it
comes to control-freakery, Islam is way out ahead, in a class of its own.

Here are some choice examples from the Concise Commandments of
Islam handed down by Ayatollah Ozma Sayyed Mohammad Reda
Musavi Golpaygani, a respected Iranian ‘scholar’. Concerning the wet-
nursing of babies, alone, there are no fewer than twenty-three
minutely specified rules, translated as ‘Issues’. Here’s the first of them,
Issue 547. The rest are equally precise, equally bossy, and equally
devoid of apparent rationale:
If a woman wet-nurses a child, in accordance to the conditions
to be stated in Issue 560, the father of that child cannot marry
the woman’s daughters, nor can he marry the daughters of the
husband whom the milk belongs to, even his wet-nurse
daughters, but it is permissible for him to marry the wet-nurse
daughters of the woman… [and it goes on].
Here’s another example from the wet-nursing department, Issue 553:
If the wife of a man’s father wet-nurses a girl with his father’s
milk, then the man cannot marry that girl.
‘Father’s milk’? What? I suppose in a culture where a woman is the
property of her husband, ‘father’s milk’ is not as weird as it sounds to
us.
Issue 555 is similarly puzzling, this time about ‘brother’s milk’:
A man cannot marry a girl who has been wet-nursed by his
sister or his brother’s wife with his brother’s milk.
I don’t know the origin of this creepy obsession with wet-nursing, but
it is not without its scriptural basis:
When the Qur’aan was first revealed, the number of breast-
feedings that would make a child a relative (mahram) was ten,
then this was abrogated and replaced with the number of five
which is well-known.*4
That was part of the reply from another ‘scholar’ to the following
recent cri de coeur from a (pardonably) confused woman on social
media:

I breastfed my brother-in-law’s son for a month, and my son
was breastfed by my brother-in-law’s wife. I have a daughter
and a son who are older than the child who was breastfed by my
brother-in-law’s wife, and she also had two children before the
child of hers whom I breastfed.
I hope that you can describe the kind of breastfeeding that
makes the child a mahram and the rulings that apply to the rest
of the siblings? Thank you very much.
The precision of ‘five’ breast feedings is typical of this kind of
religious control-freakery. It surfaced bizarrely in a 2007 fatwa issued
by Dr Izzat Atiyya, a lecturer at Al-Azhar University in Cairo, who was
concerned about the prohibition against male and female colleagues
being alone together and came up with an ingenious solution. The
female colleague should feed her male colleague ‘directly from her
breast’ at least five times. This would make them ‘relatives’ and
thereby enable them to be alone together at work. Note that four times
would not suffice. He apparently wasn’t joking at the time, although he
did retract his fatwa after the outcry it provoked. How can people bear
to live their lives bound by such insanely specific yet manifestly
pointless rules?
With some relief, perhaps, we turn to science. Science is often
accused of arrogantly claiming to know everything, but the barb is
capaciously wide of the mark. Scientists love not knowing the answer,
because it gives us something to do, something to think about. We
loudly assert ignorance, in a gleeful proclamation of what needs to be
done.
How did life begin? I don’t know, nobody knows, we wish we did,
and we eagerly exchange hypotheses, together with suggestions for
how to investigate them. What caused the apocalyptic mass extinction
at the end of the Permian period, a quarter of a billion years ago? We
don’t know, but we have some interesting hypotheses to think about.
What did the common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees look like?
We don’t know, but we do know a bit about it. We know the continent
on which it lived (Africa, as Darwin guessed), and molecular evidence
tells us roughly when (between 6 million and 8 million years ago).

What is dark matter? We don’t know, and a substantial fraction of the
physics community would dearly like to.
Ignorance, to a scientist, is an itch that begs to be pleasurably
scratched. Ignorance, if you are a theologian, is something to be
washed away by shamelessly making something up. If you are an
authority figure like the Pope, you might do it by thinking privately to
yourself and waiting for an answer to pop into your head – which you
then proclaim as a ‘revelation’. Or you might do it by ‘interpreting’ a
Bronze Age text whose author was even more ignorant than you are.
Popes can promulgate their private opinions as ‘dogma’, but only if
those opinions have the backing of a substantial number of Catholics
through history: long tradition of belief in a proposition is, somewhat
mysteriously to a scientific mind, regarded as evidence for the truth of
that proposition. In 1950, Pope Pius XII (unkindly known as ‘Hitler’s
Pope’) promulgated the dogma that Jesus’ mother Mary, on her death,
was bodily – i.e. not merely spiritually – lifted up into heaven. ‘Bodily’
means that if you’d looked in her grave, you’d have found it empty.
The Pope’s reasoning had absolutely nothing to do with evidence. He
cited 1 Corinthians 15:54: ‘then shall be brought to pass the saying that
is written, Death is swallowed up in victory’. The saying makes no
mention of Mary. There is not the smallest reason to suppose the
author of the epistle had Mary in mind. We see again the typical
theological trick of taking a text and ‘interpreting’ it in a way that just
might have some vague, symbolic, hand-waving connection with
something else. Presumably, too, like so many religious beliefs, Pius
XII’s dogma was at least partly based on a feeling of what would be
fitting for one so holy as Mary. But the Pope’s main motivation,
according to Dr Kenneth Howell, director of the John Henry Cardinal
Newman Institute of Catholic Thought, University of Illinois, came
from a different meaning of what was fitting. The world of 1950 was
recovering from the devastation of the Second World War and
desperately needed the balm of a healing message. Howell quotes the
Pope’s words, then gives his own interpretation:
Pius XII clearly expresses his hope that meditation on Mary’s
assumption will lead the faithful to a greater awareness of our
common dignity as the human family… What would impel

human beings to keep their eyes fixed on their supernatural end
and to desire the salvation of their fellow human beings? Mary’s
assumption was a reminder of, and impetus toward, greater
respect for humanity because the Assumption cannot be
separated from the rest of Mary’s earthly life.
It’s fascinating to see how the theological mind works: in particular,
the lack of interest in – indeed, the contempt for – factual evidence.
Never mind whether there’s any evidence that Mary was assumed
bodily into heaven; it would be good for people to believe she was. It
isn’t that theologians deliberately tell untruths. It’s as though they just
don’t care about truth; aren’t interested in truth; don’t know what
truth even means; demote truth to negligible status compared with
other considerations, such as symbolic or mythic significance. And yet
at the same time, Catholics are compelled to believe these made-up
‘truths’ – compelled in no uncertain terms. Even before Pius XII
promulgated the Assumption as a dogma, the eighteenth-century Pope
Benedict XIV declared the Assumption of Mary to be ‘a probable
opinion which to deny were impious and blasphemous’. If to deny a
‘probable opinion’ is ‘impious and blasphemous’, you can imagine the
penalty for denying an infallible dogma! Once again, note the brazen
confidence with which religious leaders assert ‘facts’ which even they
admit are supported by no historical evidence at all.
The Catholic Encyclopedia is a treasury of overconfident sophistry.
Purgatory is a sort of celestial waiting room in which the dead are
punished for their sins (‘purged’) before eventually being admitted to
heaven. The Encyclopedia’s entry on purgatory has a long section on
‘Errors’, listing the mistaken views of heretics such as the Albigenses,
Waldenses, Hussites and Apostolici, unsurprisingly joined by Martin
Luther and John Calvin.*5
The biblical evidence for the existence of purgatory is, shall we say,
‘creative’, again employing the common theological trick of vague,
hand-waving analogy. For example, the Encyclopedia notes that ‘God
forgave the incredulity of Moses and Aaron, but as punishment kept
them from the “land of promise” ’. That banishment is viewed as a
kind of metaphor for purgatory. More gruesomely, when David had
Uriah the Hittite killed so that he could marry Uriah’s beautiful wife,

the Lord forgave him – but didn’t let him off scot-free: God killed the
child of the marriage (2 Samuel 12:13–14). Hard on the innocent child,
you might think. But apparently a useful metaphor for the partial
punishment that is purgatory, and one not overlooked by the
Encyclopedia’s authors.
The section of the purgatory entry called ‘Proofs’ is interesting
because it purports to use a form of logic. Here’s how the argument
goes. If the dead went straight to heaven, there’d be no point in our
praying for their souls. And we do pray for their souls, don’t we?
Therefore it must follow that they don’t go straight to heaven.
Therefore there must be purgatory. QED. Are professors of theology
really paid to do this kind of thing?
Enough; let’s turn again to science. Scientists know when they don’t
know the answer. But they also know when they do, and they shouldn’t
be coy about proclaiming it. It’s not hubristic to state known facts
when the evidence is secure. Yes, yes, philosophers of science tell us a
fact is no more than a hypothesis which may one day be falsified but
which has so far withstood strenuous attempts to do so. Let us by all
means pay lip service to that incantation, while muttering, in homage
to Galileo’s muttered eppur si muove, the sensible words of Stephen
Jay Gould:
In science, ‘fact’ can only mean ‘confirmed to such a degree that
it would be perverse to withhold provisional assent.’ I suppose
that apples might start to rise tomorrow, but the possibility
does not merit equal time in physics classrooms.*6
Facts in this sense include the following, and not one of them owes
anything whatsoever to the many millions of hours devoted to
theological ratiocination. The universe began between 13 billion and
14 billion years ago. The sun, and the planets orbiting it, including
ours, condensed out of a rotating disk of gas, dust and debris about 4.5
billion years ago. The map of the world changes as the tens of millions
of years go by. We know the approximate shape of the continents and
where they were at any named time in geological history. And we can
project ahead and draw the map of the world as it will change in the
future. We know how different the constellations in the sky would

have appeared to our ancestors and how they will appear to our
descendants.
Matter in the universe is non-randomly distributed in discrete
bodies, many of them rotating, each on its own axis, and many of them
in elliptical orbit around other such bodies according to mathematical
laws which enable us to predict, to the exact second, when notable
events such as eclipses and transits will occur. These bodies – stars,
planets, planetesimals, knobbly chunks of rock, etc. – are themselves
clustered in galaxies, many billions of them, separated by distances
orders of magnitude larger than the (already very large) spacing of
(again, many billions of) stars within galaxies.
Matter is composed of atoms, and there is a finite number of types of
atoms – the hundred or so elements. We know the mass of each of
these elemental atoms, and we know why any one element can have
more than one isotope with slightly different mass. Chemists have a
huge body of knowledge about how and why the elements combine in
molecules. In living cells, molecules can be extremely large,
constructed of thousands of atoms in precise, and exactly known,
spatial relation to one another. The methods by which the exact
structures of these macromolecules are discovered are wonderfully
ingenious, involving meticulous measurements on the scattering of X-
rays beamed through crystals. Among the macromolecules fathomed
by this method is DNA, the universal genetic molecule. The strictly
digital code by which DNA influences the shape and nature of
proteins – another family of macromolecules which are the elegantly
honed machine-tools of life – is exactly known in every detail. The
ways in which those proteins influence the behaviour of cells in
developing embryos, and hence influence the form and functioning of
all living things, is work in progress: a great deal is known; much
challengingly remains to be learned.
For any particular gene in any individual animal, we can write down
the exact sequence of DNA code letters in the gene. This means we can
count, with total precision, the number of single-letter discrepancies
between two individuals. This is a serviceable measure of how long ago
their common ancestor lived. This works for comparisons within a
species – between you and Barack Obama, for instance. And it works
for comparisons of different species – between you and an aardvark,

say. Again, you can count the discrepancies exactly. There are just
more discrepancies the further back in time the shared ancestor lived.
Such precision lifts the spirit and justifies pride in our species, Homo
sapiens. For once, and without hubris, Linnaeus’s specific name seems
warranted.
Hubris is unjustified pride. Pride can be justified, and science does
so in spades. So does Beethoven, so do Shakespeare, Michelangelo,
Christopher Wren. So do the engineers who built the giant telescopes
in Hawaii and in the Canary Islands, the giant radio telescopes and
very large arrays that stare sightless into the southern sky; or the
Hubble orbiting telescope and the spacecraft that launched it. The
engineering 
feats 
deep 
underground 
at 
CERN, 
combining
monumental size with minutely accurate tolerances of measurement,
literally moved me to tears when I was shown around. The
engineering, the mathematics, the physics, in the Rosetta mission that
successfully soft-landed a robot vehicle on the tiny target of a comet
also made me proud to be human. Modified versions of the same
technology may one day save our planet by enabling us to divert a
dangerous comet like the one that killed the dinosaurs.
Who does not feel a swelling of human pride when they hear about
the LIGO instruments which, synchronously in Louisiana and
Washington State, detected gravitation waves whose amplitude would
be dwarfed by a single proton? This feat of measurement, with its
profound significance for cosmology, is equivalent to measuring the
distance from Earth to the star Proxima Centauri to an accuracy of one
human hair’s breadth.
Comparable accuracy is achieved in experimental tests of quantum
theory. And here there is a revealing mismatch between our human
capacity to demonstrate, with invincible conviction, the predictions of
a theory experimentally and our capacity to visualize the theory itself.
Our brains evolved to understand the movement of buffalo-sized
objects at lion speeds in the moderately scaled spaces afforded by the
African savanna. Evolution didn’t equip us to deal intuitively with
what happens to objects when they move at Einsteinian speeds
through Einsteinian spaces, or with the sheer weirdness of objects too
small to deserve the name ‘object’ at all. Yet somehow the emergent
power of our evolved brains has enabled us to develop the crystalline

edifice of mathematics by which we accurately predict the behaviour of
entities that lie under the radar of our intuitive comprehension. This,
too, makes me proud to be human, although to my regret I am not
among the mathematically gifted of my species.
Less rarefied but still proud-making is the advanced, and continually
advancing, technology that surrounds us in our everyday lives. Your
smartphone, your laptop computer, the satnav in your car and the
satellites that feed it, your car itself, the giant airliner that can loft not
just its own weight plus passengers and cargo but also the 120 tons of
fuel it ekes out over a thirteen-hour journey of seven thousand miles.
Less familiar, but destined to become more so, is 3D printing. A
computer ‘prints’ a solid object, say a chess bishop, by depositing a
sequence of layers, a process radically and interestingly different from
the biological version of ‘3D printing’ which is embryology. A 3D
printer can make an exact copy of an existing object. One technique is
to feed the computer a series of photographs of the object to be copied,
taken from all different angles. The computer does the formidably
complicated mathematics to synthesize the specification of the solid
shape by integrating the angular views. There may be life forms in the
universe that make their children in this body-scanning kind of way,
but our own reproduction is instructively different. This, incidentally,
is why almost all biology textbooks are seriously wrong when they
describe DNA as a ‘blueprint’ for life. DNA may be a blueprint for
protein, but it is not a blueprint for a baby. It’s more like a recipe or a
computer program.
We are not arrogant, not hubristic, to celebrate the sheer bulk and
detail of what we know through science. We are simply telling the
honest and irrefutable truth. Also honest is the frank admission of how
much we don’t yet know – how much more work remains to be done.
That is the very antithesis of hubristic arrogance. Science combines a
massive contribution, in volume and detail, of what we do know with
humility in proclaiming what we don’t. Religion, by embarrassing
contrast, has contributed literally zero to what we know, combined
with huge hubristic confidence in the alleged facts it has simply made
up.
But I want to suggest a further and less obvious point about the
contrast of religion with atheism. I want to argue that the atheistic

worldview has an unsung virtue of intellectual courage. I’ll begin with
what may seem like a digression.
Fred Hoyle’s The Black Cloud,*7 one of the best science-fiction
novels I have ever read (despite its obnoxious hero), does what good
science fiction should: while entertaining, it informs and widens
thought about real science. The black cloud is an alien creature of
superhuman intelligence which parks itself in orbit around the sun in
order to feed on solar energy. Scientists eventually establish
communication, and much drama ensues. As the novel reaches its
climax, they ask the cloud to pass on its knowledge, which is as far
beyond these physicists as their knowledge is beyond that of, say,
Aristotle. The cloud agrees but explains that the flashing-light code by
which it will impart its knowledge is best aimed at only one human at a
time. A brilliant young physicist called Dave Weichart volunteers for
the hot seat. Eventually he falls into a trance from which he never
recovers, and dies of an overheated brain. The same happens, after a
longer wrestle, to Christopher Kingsley, the astrophysicist hero of the
story. Human brains, even those of world-class physicists, are simply
not equipped to cope with superhuman knowledge.
The cloud departs for another part of the galaxy on an urgent
mission. It explains that, despite its gargantuan knowledge, there are
certain problems labelled as the Deep Problems, which are beyond
even its understanding. Like any good scientist, the superhuman black
cloud has the humility to know what it doesn’t know. The reason for its
departure is that a neighbouring black cloud, only a few light-years
away, announced that it had found a solution to the Deep Problems
(presumably something other than 42). Since that announcement, no
further communication has been received, and our cloud, as its nearest
neighbour, feels a duty to go and investigate whether the discoverer is
dead or survives to pass on the long-sought answer to the Deep
Problems. The reader is led to suspect that the neighbouring cloud
died from an elevated version of the lethal overheating that killed
Weichart and Kingsley.
What are the Deep Problems for us? What are the questions that
might forever be beyond our reach? In the early nineteenth century,
how complex life came to exist and diversify would have sprung first to
mind, but those questions have now been definitively answered by

Darwin and his successors. I suppose the remaining deep questions
are things like: ‘How does brain physiology produce subjective
consciousness?’ ‘Where do the laws of physics come from?’ ‘What set
the fundamental physical constants, and why do they appear fine-
tuned to produce us?’ and ‘Why is there something rather than
nothing?’ The fact that science can’t (yet) answer these questions
testifies to science’s humility. It most certainly doesn’t imply that
religion can. Science may or may not, during the next century or so,
solve these Deep Problems. And if science – including the science of
evolved superhuman aliens – can’t answer them, nothing can.
Certainly not theology.
But I said I was going to make a point about the intellectual courage
of the atheistic worldview, and I’ll do it in the context of the Deep
Problems. Why is there something rather than nothing? Our physicist
colleague Lawrence Krauss, in his book A Universe from Nothing,*8
controversially suggests that, for quantum-theoretic reasons, Nothing
(the capital letter is deliberate) is unstable. Just as matter and
antimatter annihilate each other to make Nothing, so the reverse can
happen. A random quantum fluctuation causes matter and antimatter
to spring spontaneously out of Nothing. Krauss’s critics largely focus
on the definition of Nothing. His version may not be what everybody
understands by nothing, but at least it is supremely simple – as simple
it must be, if it is to satisfy us as the base of a ‘crane’ explanation (Dan
Dennett’s phrase), such as cosmic inflation or evolution. It is simple
compared to the world that followed from it by largely understood
processes: the big bang, inflation, galaxy formation, star formation,
element formation in the interior of stars, supernova explosions
blasting the elements into space, condensation of element-rich dust
clouds into rocky planets such as Earth, the laws of chemistry by
which, on this planet at least, the first self-replicating molecule arose,
then evolution by natural selection and the whole of biology which is
now, at least in principle, understood.
Why did I speak of intellectual courage? Because the human mind,
including my own, rebels emotionally against the idea that something
as complex as life, and the rest of the expanding universe, could have
‘just happened’. It takes intellectual courage to kick yourself out of

your emotional incredulity and persuade yourself that there is no
other rational choice.
On a smaller scale, it recalls my emotional response to a really good
trick by a world-class conjuror: Jamy Ian Swiss, say, or Derren Brown,
or Penn and Teller. Emotion screams: ‘It’s a miracle! It’s just got to be
supernatural,’ almost drowning out the still small voice of reason: ‘No,
it’s just a trick, there really is a rational explanation.’ The still small
voice takes on the patient (as I imagine) Scottish tones of David
Hume: ‘Which is more probable, that the impossible has really
happened or that the conjuror has fooled you?’ You don’t have to
understand how the trick was done in order to take the courageous
leap of reason and say: ‘Hard as it is to swallow, I know it’s only a
trick. The laws of physics are secure.’
Move from the conjuring trick to the universe. Again, emotion
screams: ‘No, it’s too much to believe! You are trying to tell me the
entire universe, including me and the trees and the Great Barrier Reef
and the Andromeda Galaxy and a tardigrade’s finger, all came about
by mindless atomic collisions, no supervisor, no architect? You cannot
be serious. All this complexity and glory stemmed from Nothing and a
random quantum fluctuation? Give me a break.’ And again, reason
quietly and soberly replies: ‘Yes. Most of the steps in the chain are well
understood, although until recently they weren’t. In the case of the
biological steps, they’ve been understood since 1859. But more
important, even if we never understand all the steps, nothing can
change the principle that, however improbable the entity you are
trying to explain, postulating a creator god doesn’t help you, because
the god would itself need exactly the same kind of explanation.’
However difficult it may be to explain the origin of simplicity, the
spontaneous arising of complexity is, by definition, more improbable.
And a creative intelligence capable of designing a universe would have
to be supremely improbable and supremely in need of explanation in
its own right. However improbable the naturalistic answer to the
riddle of existence, the theistic alternative is even more so. But it needs
a courageous leap of reason to accept the conclusion.
This is what I meant when I said the atheistic worldview requires
intellectual courage. It requires moral courage, too. As an atheist, you
abandon your imaginary friend, you forgo the comforting props of a

celestial father figure to bail you out of trouble. You are going to die,
and you’ll never see your dead loved ones again. There’s no holy book
to tell you what to do, tell you what’s right or wrong. You are an
intellectual adult. You must face up to life, to moral decisions. But
there is dignity in that grown-up courage. You stand tall and face into
the keen wind of reality. You have company: warm, human arms
around you, and a legacy of culture which has built up not only
scientific knowledge and the material comforts that applied science
brings but also art, music, the rule of law, and civilized discourse on
morals. Morality and standards for life can be built up by intelligent
design – design by real, intelligent humans who actually exist. Atheists
have the intellectual courage to accept reality for what it is:
wonderfully and shockingly explicable. As an atheist, you have the
moral courage to live to the full the only life you’re ever going to get: to
fully inhabit reality, rejoice in it, and do your best finally to leave it
better than you found it.
*1 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sOMjEJ3JO5Q.
*2 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n7IHU28aR2E.
*3 Carl Sagan, Pale Blue Dot: A Vision of the Human Future in Space (New York:
Random House, 1994).
*4 https://islamqa.info/en/27280.
*5 http://www.catholic.org/encyclopedia/view.php?id=9745.
*6 Stephen Jay Gould, ‘Evolution as fact and theory’, in Hen’s Teeth and Horse’s
Toes (New York: W. W. Norton, 1994).
*7 Fred Hoyle, The Black Cloud (London: Heinemann, 1957).
*8 Lawrence M. Krauss, A Universe from Nothing: Why There is Something
rather than Nothing (New York: Free Press, 2012).

LETTING THE NEIGHBOURS KNOW
DANIEL C. DENNETT
It is easy to misjudge the effects of one’s public actions. It can be
tempting to overestimate their influence, taking undue credit for a
trend that was already simmering. Others have highlighted our
meeting as the catalyst for what might be called the Great Reaction
that is emptying churches around the world, but none of us has ever
endorsed that simple view, gratifying though it would be. Just as likely
is the opposite misjudgement: undervaluing the supportive role that
can be played by a few well-placed and well-timed declarations.
Memes can go viral today at near the speed of light, thanks to the new
transparency brought about by the worldwide adoption of the internet
and its supporting devices (and don’t forget radios and television).
MIT Media Lab professor Deb Roy and I highlighted these prospects
a few years ago in a Scientific American article comparing today’s
upheaval with the hugely creative but also destructive Cambrian
Explosion of 543 million years ago.*1 The Australian zoologist Andrew
Parker has advanced the hypothesis that a chemical change which
rendered the shallow ocean more transparent triggered that veritable
Olympiad of evolutionary arms races, both extinguishing ancient
branches and generating novel branches on the Tree of Life.*2
Whether or not Parker is basically right about the Cambrian
Explosion – and for what it is worth, I think he is – there can be little
doubt about the Internet Explosion we are experiencing today.
We can now see further, faster, and more cheaply and easily
than ever before – and we can be seen. And you and I can see

that everyone can see what we see, in a recursive hall of mirrors
of mutual knowledge that both enables and hobbles. The age-
old game of hide-and-seek that has shaped all life on the planet
has suddenly shifted its playing field, its equipment and its
rules. The players who cannot adjust will not last long.*3
Certainly the rise of the New Atheism was enabled in large measure by
this expansion of mutual knowledge. Some of your best friends may be
atheists, and you may know that, but now almost everybody knows
that almost everybody knows that some of almost everybody’s best
friends are atheists – which makes it much less daunting and
dangerous to ‘come out’ as an atheist. There is strength in numbers,
but much more strength when the numbers know roughly how
numerous they are. It permits a measure of coordination, which
doesn’t even have to be carefully reasoned out. It has recently been
shown that bacteria – which are about as uncomprehending as a living
thing can be – engage in quorum sensing, delaying their commitment
to a new simple strategy until they have detected enough allies in the
neighbourhood to mount a mass action.
There is another relatively subtle effect that can be achieved by
everyday folks. You don’t have to be politically powerful or famous or
eloquent or even notably influential in your community: you can be a
sacrificial anode. The term sounds both dangerous and religious, but
it is neither. It is well known among sailors and fishermen and others
who work on boats and ships, and it goes by other names: cathodic
protection system, or just zinc, or sometimes – a term I like because it
conjures up such shocking images – sacrificial plate. (Did you just
picture the head of John the Baptist on Salome’s serving platter?)
When a steel boat or ship with a bronze or brass propeller sits in salt
water, a battery of sorts is created, with electrons flowing
spontaneously from steel to the alloy, eating it away at an alarming
rate. A brand new solid-brass propeller can become pitted in a few
days and destroyed in a few months; painting it with some protective
shield is ineffective. The solution: bolt a small piece of zinc (other
metals will work, but zinc for various reasons is best) to the steel
(alternatively, thread a zinc nut of sorts on to the stainless steel
propeller shaft) and your problem is solved. The modest piece of zinc,

being galvanically more active than the brass or bronze alloy, ‘takes all
the heat’ (the current) and allows itself to be sacrificed in order to
protect the part that needs to do the heavy work. Once a year, you can
easily replace the almost-depleted piece of zinc with a new sacrificial
anode.
The political moral to be drawn from this analogy is obvious. If you
are, say, a US senator or representative, or other official whose
effectiveness would be seriously diminished by a reputation for
extremism (in any dimension or direction), it helps mightily to have
others a little further out there, visible and undaunted, who can
tolerate being seen as ‘too radical’ because their livelihoods and
security don’t depend (much) on such a reputation. Since those on
either side of any political divide are motivated to caricature and
exaggerate the opinions of the opposition, effective political advocacy
depends on being able to disavow slightly more galvanically active
opinions held by some of the folks on one’s own side of things.
There are limits, to be sure. As in any other arms race, there is a
dynamic interplay, and if polarization becomes too extreme – with
many people all too willing to be sacrificial anodes for their favourite
politicians – the value of the strategic principle evaporates. But here is
where the frank and open expression of one’s actual views – however
boring and middle-of-the-road they seem to you to be – can do some
valuable work. Just calmly letting the neighbours know that you are in
favour of x, disapprove of y, think z is not to be trusted – in short,
being not just an informed citizen but an informing citizen – can
substantially contribute to the reduction of polarization and the
gradual displacement of received opinion in the directions you favour.
The diversity of opinions among the four of us provides a good
example of these factors at work. For once in my life, I get to play
‘good cop’, because I believe that we should be concerned to preserve
the good that organized religions can do. Does religion ‘poison
everything’, as my dear, late friend Hitch insisted on saying?*4 Only in
a very attenuated sense, I think. Many things are quite harmless in
moderation and poisonous only in quantity. I understand why Hitch
emphasized this view; as a foreign correspondent he had much first-
hand, dangerous experience with the worst features of religion, while I
know of all that only at second hand – often from his reportage. I, in

contrast, have known people whose lives would be desolate and
friendless if it weren’t for the non-judgemental welcome they have
received in one religious organization or another. I regret the residual
irrationalism valorized by almost all religion, but I don’t see the state
playing the succouring, comforting role well, so until we find secular
successor organizations to take up that humane task, I am not in
favour of ushering churches off the scene. I would rather assist in
transforming these organizations into forms that are not caught in the
trap of irrational – and necessarily insincere – allegiance to patent
nonsense.
There are denominations that already have succeeded in this
maturation, and I applaud them. Richard and Sam have their variant
opinions on these matters, and we don’t hesitate to express our
disagreements to each other when they arise, but these are all – so far
as I know – respectful and constructive differences of opinion. Any
who search the transcription of our discussion for either a monolithic
shared creed or a contradiction suppressed for political reasons will
come up empty-handed. It is always amusing to hear us accused of
having our own ‘faith’, our own ‘religion’ – as if to say: ‘You atheists
are just as unpresentable as we religionists are!’ – when the only
shared dogma they can point to is our trust in truth, evidence and
honest persuasion. That is not blind faith but just the opposite: faith
continually tested, corrected and provisionally defended by the
testimony of our senses and our common sense. Unlike proselytizers
for any religion, we gladly accept the burden of proof for the positions
we defend, and we never retreat to any holy texts or ex cathedra
pronouncements.
*1 Daniel C. Dennett and Deb Roy, ‘Our transparent future’, Scientific American,
March 2015.
*2 Andrew Parker, In the Blink of an Eye: How Vision Sparked the Big Bang of
Evolution (New York: Basic Books, 2003).
*3 Dennett and Roy, ‘Our transparent future’, p. 67.
*4 Christopher Hitchens, God Is Not Great: How Religion Poisons Everything
(New York: Twelve Books, 2007).

IN GOOD COMPANY
SAM HARRIS
Ever since the phrase ‘the New Atheists’ appeared in print, I have
found myself celebrated or abused in the same breath with Richard
Dawkins, Daniel Dennett and Christopher Hitchens. Needless to say,
I’ve been greatly honoured by the association. It has, however,
conveyed a false sense that we often schemed together in person.
Although two or three of us would occasionally meet at conferences or
other events, the book you are about to read provides a transcript of
the only conversation the four of us ever had.
Christopher died in 2011, which gives this record a special
poignancy. There is no question that his absence has been keenly felt
in recent years. More times than I can count, strangers have come
forward to say, ‘I miss Hitch.’ Their words are always uttered in
protest over some fresh crime against reason or good taste. They are
spoken after a bully passes by, smirking and unchallenged, whether on
the left or on the right. They have become a mantra of sorts, intoned
without any hope of effect, in the face of dangerous banalities or lies.
Often, I hear in them a note of reproach. Sometimes it’s intended.
I, too, miss Hitch. But I will resist the temptation to offer further
eulogy here. After all, the time will come when the rest of us have also
left the stage. However, it seems that a record of our conversation will
remain. We filmed it almost as an afterthought. I’m very glad we did.
Treating Richard, Dan, Christopher and me as a four-headed atheist
has always elided significant differences of emphasis and opinion, but
it was fair enough on the important points: Is there a distinction
between believing things for good reasons and believing them for bad

ones? Do science and religion differ in the degree to which they
observe this distinction? Put this way, the debate is over before it even
begins.
However disparate our interests, each of us was acutely aware that
religious dogmatism hinders the growth of honest knowledge and
divides humanity to no necessary purpose. The latter is a dangerous
irony, of course, because one of religion’s most vaunted powers is that
it unites people. It does that too, but generally by amplifying tribalism
and spawning moralistic fears that would not otherwise exist. The fact
that sane men and women can often be found doing good for God’s
sake is no rejoinder here, because faith gives them bad reasons for
doing good when good reasons are available. These are points that
each of the four of us has made again and again, whether to applause
or to stony silence.
In truth, not much need be said to close the door on belief in an
omniscient, omnipotent and benevolent deity of the sort imagined by
Christians, Muslims and Jews. Open any newspaper, and what do you
find?
Today, a set of identical twin girls born with microcephaly in Brazil.
How does something like this happen? Their mother was bitten by a
mosquito carrying the Zika virus – which God, in his abundance, also
made. Among the many unhappy effects of this virus is to produce tiny
heads, tiny brains, and commensurately tiny lives for the offspring of
any woman unlucky enough to be infected.
Imagine the woman herself a few months ago, doing everything
within her power to prepare a happy life for her unborn daughters.
Where does she work? A factory. How often does she pray? Daily, no
doubt.
But at the crucial moment she sleeps. Perhaps she’s dreaming of a
world better than the one we live in. Picture a lone mosquito finding
her open window. Picture it alighting upon her exposed arm. Will an
omnipotent, omniscient and wholly benevolent God muster the
slightest defence? Not even a breeze. The mosquito’s proboscis pierces
her skin immediately. What are the faithful to believe at this point?
One suspects they know that their God isn’t nearly as attentive as he
would be if he actually existed.

So there was nothing to stop this tiny monster – descended from a
long line of monsters that have been spreading disease for some 200
million years – from drinking this woman’s innocent blood and, in
return for a meal, destroying the lives of her unborn girls.
The facts of a single case dismantle whole libraries of theological
hairsplitting and casuistry. And yet the horror compounds. Picture the
woman noticing the welt on her arm the next morning – just a minor
annoyance in a life soon to be filled with tragedy. Perhaps she’s heard
reports of Zika and knows how the virus is spread. Her prayers now
acquire a special fervour. To what end? Can the consolations of a faith
so utterly misplaced outweigh the irony of worshipping a deity this
impotent or evil – or, indeed, imaginary?
In the absence of God, we find true sources of hope and consolation.
Art, literature, sport, philosophy – along with other forms of creativity
and contemplation – do not require ignorance or lies to be enjoyed.
And then there is science – which, apart from its intrinsic rewards, will
be the true source of mercy in the present case. When a vaccine or a
cure for Zika is finally found, preventing untold misery and death, will
the faithful thank God for it?
No doubt they will. And so these conversations must continue…

THE FOUR HORSEMEN:
A DISCUSSION
RICHARD DAWKINS, DANIEL C. DENNETT, SAM HARRIS,
CHRISTOPHER HITCHENS
WASHINGTON DC – 30 SEPTEMBER 2007

PART I
RICHARD DAWKINS: One of the things we’ve all met is the accusation
that we are strident or arrogant or vitriolic or shrill. What do we
think about that?
DANIEL C. DENNETT: Yes. Well, I’m amused by it because I went out
of my way in my book to address reasonable religious people,*1 and I
test-flew the draft with groups of students who were deeply
religious. And indeed, the first draft incurred some real anguish. So I
made adjustments and made adjustments, and it didn’t do any good
in the end, because I still got hammered for being rude and
aggressive. And I came to realize that it’s a no-win situation. It’s a
mug’s game. The religions have contrived to make it impossible to
disagree with them critically without being rude.
DAWKINS: Without being rude.
DENNETT: You know, they sort of play the hurt-feelings card at every
opportunity, and you’re faced with the choice of, Well, am I going to
be rude? Or am I going to—
DAWKINS: Say nothing, yes.
DENNETT: —articulate this criticism? Or I mean am I going to
articulate it or am I just going to button my lip and—?
SAM HARRIS: Well, that’s what it is to trespass a taboo. I think we’re
all encountering the fact that religion is held off the table of rational
criticism in some kind of formal way, even by, we’re discovering, our
fellow secularists and our fellow atheists. It leaves people to their
own superstitions. Even if it’s abject and causing harm, don’t look
too closely at it.

DENNETT: That was of course the point of the title of my book; there
is this spell, and we’ve got to break it.
CHRISTOPHER HITCHENS: But if the charge of offensiveness in
general is to be allowed in public discourse, then without self-pity I
think we should say that we too can be offended and insulted. I
mean, I’m not just in disagreement when someone like Tariq
Ramadan,*2 accepted at the high tables of Oxford University as a
spokesman, says the most he’ll demand when it comes to the stoning
of women is a moratorium on it. I find that profoundly much more
than annoying. Not only insulting but actually threatening.
HARRIS: But you’re not offended. I don’t see you taking things
personally. You’re alarmed by the liabilities of certain ways of
thinking, as in Ramadan’s case.
HITCHENS: Yes, but he would say, or people like him would say, that
if I doubt the historicity of the prophet Mohammed, I’ve injured
them in their deepest feelings. Well, I am, in fact – and I think all
people ought to be – offended, at least in their deepest integrity, by,
say, the religious proposition that without a supernatural, celestial
dictatorship we wouldn’t know right from wrong.
HARRIS: But are you really offended by that? Doesn’t it just seem
wrong to you?
HITCHENS: No, I say only, Sam, that if the offensiveness charge is to
be allowed in general, and arbitrated by the media, then I think
we’re entitled to claim that much, without being self-pitying or
representing ourselves as an oppressed minority. Which I think is an
opposite danger, I would admit. Mind you, I also agree with Daniel
that there’s no way in which the charge against us can be completely
avoided, because what we say does offend the core, the very core, of
any serious religious person, in the same way. We deny the divinity
of Jesus, for example. Many people will be terrifically shocked and
possibly hurt. It’s just too bad.
DAWKINS: I’m fascinated by the contrast between the amount of
offence that’s taken by religion and the amount of offence that
people take against nearly anything else. Like artistic taste. Your

taste in music, your taste in art, your politics. You can be, not exactly
as rude as you like, but you can be far, far more rude about such
things. And I’d quite like to try to quantify that, to actually do
research about it. To test people with statements about their
favourite football team, or their favourite piece of music, or
something, and see how far you can go before they take offence. Is
there anything else, apart from, say, how ugly your face is
[laughter], that would give such—?
HITCHENS: Or your husband’s or wife’s or girlfriend’s faces. Well, it’s
interesting that you say that, because I regularly debate with a
terrible man called Bill Donohue of the Catholic League,*3 and he
actually is righteously upset by certain trends in modern art, which
tend to draw attention to themselves by blasphemy.
HARRIS: Piss Christ.
HITCHENS: Yes, for example, Serrano’s Piss Christ,*4 or the elephant
dung on the Virgin.*5 And indeed, I think it’s quite important that we
share with Sophocles and other pre-monotheists a revulsion to
desecration or to profanity. That we don’t want to see churches
desecrated.
DAWKINS: No, indeed not.
HITCHENS: Religious icons trashed, and so forth. We share an
admiration for at least some of the aesthetic achievements of
religion.
HARRIS: I think our criticism is actually more barbed than that. We’re
not merely offending people, we’re also telling them that they’re
wrong to be offended.
ALL: Yes.
HARRIS: Physicists aren’t offended when their view of physics is
disproved or challenged. This is just not the way rational minds
operate when they’re really trying to get at what’s true in the world.
Religions purport to be representing reality, and yet there’s this
peevish, and tribal, and ultimately dangerous response to having
these ideas challenged.

DENNETT: Well, and too, there’s no polite way to say to somebody—
HARRIS: ‘You’ve wasted your life!’
DENNETT: ‘—Do you realize you’ve wasted your life? Do you realize
you’ve just devoted all your efforts and all your goods to the
glorification of something that’s just a myth?’ Even if you say, ‘Have
you even considered the possibility that maybe you’ve wasted your
life on this?’ There’s no inoffensive way of saying that. But we do
have to say it, because they should jolly well consider it. Same as we
do about our own lives.
DAWKINS: Dan Barker’s*6 making a collection of clergymen who’ve
lost their faith but don’t dare say so, because it’s their only living. It’s
the only thing they know how to do.
HARRIS: Yes, I’ve heard from one of them, at least.
DAWKINS: Have you?
HITCHENS: I used to run into this when I was younger, in arguments
with members of the Communist Party. They sort of knew that it was
all up with the Soviet Union. Many of them had suffered a lot and
sacrificed a great deal and struggled manfully to keep what they
thought was the great ideal alive. Their mainspring had broken, but
they couldn’t give it up because it would involve a similar
concession. But certainly, if anyone had said to me, ‘How could you
say that to them about the Soviet Union? Didn’t you know you were
going to really make them cry and hurt their feelings?’ I would have
said, ‘Don’t be ridiculous. Don’t be absurd.’ But I find it in many
cases almost an exactly analogous argument.
DENNETT: When people tell me I’m being rude and vicious and
terribly aggressive in a way, I say, ‘If I were saying these things about
the pharmaceutical industry or the oil interests, would it be rude?
Would it be off limits? No.’
DAWKINS: Of course it wouldn’t.
DENNETT: Well, I want religion to be treated just the way we treat the
pharmaceuticals 
and 
the 
oil 
industry. 
I’m 
not 
against

pharmaceutical companies – I’m against some of the things they
do – but I just want to put religions on the same page with them.
HITCHENS: Including denying them tax exemptions, or, in the
English case, state subsidies.
DENNETT: Yes.
DAWKINS: I’m curious how religion acquired this charmed status that
it has, compared to other things. Somehow we’ve all bought into it,
whether we’re religious or not. And some historical process has led
to this immunization of religion, this hyper-offence-taking that
religion is allowed to take.
DENNETT: What’s particularly amusing to me, finally – and at first it
infuriated me, but now I’m amused – is that they’ve managed to
enlist legions of non-religious people who take offence on their
behalf.
DAWKINS: And how!
DENNETT: In fact, the most vicious reviews of my book have been by
people who are not themselves religious but they’re terribly afraid of
hurting the feelings of the people who are religious, and they
chastise me worse than anybody who’s actually religious.
DAWKINS: Exactly my experience.
HARRIS: And I think one of you pointed out how condescending that
view is. It’s like the idea of penitentiaries: Other people need them;
we must keep the felons safely confined.
There’s one answer to that question which may illuminate a
difference I have with, I think, all three of you. I still use words like
‘spiritual’ and ‘mystical’ without furrowing my brow too much, to the
consternation of many atheists. I think there is a range of experience
that’s rare and is only talked about – without obvious qualms – in
religious discourse. And because it’s only talked about in religious
discourse, it is just riddled with superstition, and it’s used to justify
various metaphysical schemes – which it can’t reasonably do. But
clearly people do have extraordinary experiences, whether they have
them on LSD or they have them because they sat alone in a cave for
a year, or because they just happen to have a nervous system that’s

especially labile. People can have self-transcending experiences, and
religion seems to be the only game in town when talking about those
experiences and dignifying them. So this is one reason it’s taboo to
criticize it, because we’re talking about the most important moments
in people’s lives and we appear to be trashing them, at least from
their point of view.
DAWKINS: Well, I don’t have to agree with you, Sam, in order to say
that it’s very good that you’re saying that sort of thing. Because it
shows that, as you say, religion is not the only game in town when it
comes to being spiritual. Just as it’s a good idea to have somebody
from the political right who’s an atheist, because otherwise there’s a
confusion of values, which doesn’t help us, and it’s much better to
have this diversity in other areas. But I think I sort of do agree with
you, but even if I didn’t, I’d think it was valuable to have that.
HITCHENS: If we could make one change, and only one, mine would
be to distinguish the numinous from the supernatural. You, Sam,
had a marvellous quotation in your blog from Francis Collins,*7 the
genome pioneer, who said whilst mountaineering one day he was
just overcome by the landscape and then went down on his knees
and accepted Jesus Christ.*8 A complete non-sequitur.
HARRIS: Exactly.
HITCHENS: It’s never even been suggested that Jesus Christ created
that landscape.
HARRIS: A frozen waterfall in three streams put him in mind of the
Trinity.
HITCHENS: Absolutely! We’re all triune in one way or another. We’re
programmed for that. That’s very clear. It wouldn’t ever have been a
four-headed God. [Laughter] You know that from experience.
But that would be an enormous distinction to make, and I think it
would clear up a lot of people’s confusion – that what we have in our
emotions, the surplus value of our personalities, aren’t particularly
useful for our evolution. Or we can’t prove they are. But they do
belong to us, all the same. They don’t belong to the supernatural and
are not to be conscripted or annexed by any priesthood.

DENNETT: It’s a sad fact that people won’t, in a sense, trust their own
valuing of their numinous experiences. They think it isn’t really as
good as it seems unless it’s from God, unless it’s some kind of a
proof of religion. No, it’s just as wonderful as it seems. It’s just as
important. It is the best moment in your life, and it’s the moment
when you forget yourself and become better than you ever thought
you could be, in some way, and you see, in all humbleness, the
wonderfulness of nature. That’s it! And that’s wonderful. But it
doesn’t add anything to say, ‘Golly, that has to have been given to me
by Somebody even more wonderful.’
DAWKINS: It’s been hijacked, hasn’t it?
HITCHENS: It’s also, I think, a deformity or shortcoming in the
human personality, frankly. Because religion keeps stressing how
humble it is, and how meek it is, and how accepting, almost to the
point of self-abnegation it is. But actually it makes extraordinarily
arrogant claims for these moments. It says, ‘I suddenly realized that
the universe was all about me. And felt terrifically humble about it.’
Come on! We can laugh people out of that, I believe. And I think we
must.
DENNETT: And I am so tired of ‘If only Professor Dennett had the
humility to blah, blah, blah.’ And humility, humility. [Laughter]
And this, from people of breathtaking arrogance.
HITCHENS: They shove one aside saying, ‘Don’t mind me, I’m on an
errand for God.’ How modest is that?
HARRIS: This is a point I think we should return to: this notion of the
arrogance of science. Because there is no discourse that enforces
humility more rigorously than science. Scientists in my experience
are the first people to say they don’t know. If you get scientists to
start talking outside their area of specialization, they immediately
start hedging their bets, saying things like, ‘I’m sure there’s someone
in the room who knows more about this than I do, and, of course, all
the data aren’t in.’ This is the mode of discourse in which we’re most
candid about the scope of our ignorance.
HITCHENS: Well, actually, a lot of academics come out with that kind
of false modesty. But I do know what you mean.

DAWKINS: Any academic should do that. The thing about religious
people is that they recite the Nicene Creed every week, which says
precisely what they believe. There are three Gods, not one. The
Virgin Mary, Jesus died, went to the… what was it? Down for three
days and then came up again – in precise detail, and yet they have
the gall to accuse us of being overconfident, and of not knowing
what it is to doubt.
DENNETT: I don’t think many of them ever let themselves
contemplate the question which I think scientists ask themselves all
the time: ‘What if I’m wrong?’ ‘What if I’m wrong?’ It’s just not part
of their repertory.
HITCHENS: Would you mind if I disagree with you about that?
DENNETT: No.
HITCHENS: A lot of the talk that makes religious people not hard to
beat, but hard to argue with, is precisely that they’ll say they’re in a
permanent crisis of faith. There is, indeed, a prayer: ‘Lord, I believe.
Help thou my unbelief.’ Graham Greene says the great thing about
being a Catholic was that it was a challenge to his unbelief.*9 A lot of
people live by keeping two sets of books.
DENNETT: Yes.
DAWKINS: Exactly.
HITCHENS: It’s my impression that a majority of the people I know
who call themselves believers, or people of faith, do that all the time.
I wouldn’t say it was schizophrenia; that would be rude. But they’re
quite aware of the implausibility of what they say. They don’t act on
it when they go to the doctor, or when they travel, or anything of this
kind. But in some sense they couldn’t be without it. But they’re quite
respectful of the idea of doubt. In fact, they try and build it in when
they can.
DAWKINS: Well, that’s interesting then. So when they’re reciting the
creed with its total sort of apparent conviction, this is a kind of
mantra which is forcing them to overcome doubt by saying, ‘Yes, I
do believe, I do believe, I do believe!’ Because really they don’t.

DENNETT: Sure. And—
HITCHENS: And of course, like their secular counterparts, they’re glad
other people believe it. It’s an affirmation they wouldn’t want other
people not to be making.
DAWKINS: Yes, yes.
HARRIS: Well, also there’s this curious bootstrapping move, where
they start with the premise that belief without evidence is especially
noble. This is the doctrine of faith. This is the parable of Doubting
Thomas. So they start with that and then add this notion, which has
been hurled at me in various debates, that the fact that people can
believe without evidence is itself a subtle form of evidence. Francis
Collins, whom you mentioned, brings this up in his book.*10 The fact
that we have this intuition of God is itself some subtle form of
evidence. And it’s a kind of kindling phenomenon: once you say it’s
good to start without evidence, the fact that you can proceed is a
subtle form of evidence, and then the demand for any more evidence
is itself a kind of corruption of the intellect, or a temptation, to be
guarded against, and you get a kind of perpetual-motion machine of
self-deception, once you can get this thing up and running.
HITCHENS: But they like the idea that it can’t be demonstrated,
because then there’d be nothing to be faithful about. If everyone had
seen the Resurrection and we all knew that we’d been saved by it,
well, then we would be living in an unalterable system of belief, and
it would have to be policed. Those of us who don’t believe in it are
very glad it’s not true, because we think it would be horrible. Those
who do believe it don’t want it to be absolutely proven so there can’t
be any doubt about it, because then there’s no wrestling with
conscience, there are no dark nights of the soul.
HARRIS: There was a review of one of our books, I don’t remember
which, but it made exactly that point: what a crass expectation on
the part of atheists that there should be total evidence for any of this.
There would be much less magic if everyone was compelled to
believe by too much evidence. Actually, this was Francis Collins.

HITCHENS: Well, a friend of mine – Canon Fenton of Oxford,*11
actually – said that if the Church validated the Holy Shroud of Turin,
he personally would leave the ranks. [Laughter] Because if they were
doing things like that, he didn’t want any part of it. I didn’t expect,
when I started off my book tour, to be as lucky as I was; Jerry
Falwell*12 died on my first week on the road. That was amazing. And
I didn’t expect Mother Teresa*13 to come out as an atheist.
[Laughter] But reading her letters, which I now have, it’s rather
interesting. She writes that she can’t bring herself to believe any of
this. She tells all her confessors, all her superiors, that she can’t hear
a voice, can’t feel a presence, even in the Mass, even in the
sacraments. No small thing. They write back to her, saying, ‘That’s
good, that’s great, you’re suffering, it gives you a share in the
Crucifixion, it makes you part of Calvary.’ You can’t beat an
argument like that. The less you believe it, the more it’s a
demonstration of faith.
HARRIS: The more you prove it’s true.
HITCHENS: Yes, and the struggle, the dark night of the soul, is the
proof in itself. So, we just have to realize that these really are non-
overlapping magisteria. We can’t hope to argue with a mentality of
this kind.
DENNETT: We can do just what you’re doing now. That is, we can say,
‘Look at this interesting bag of tricks that have evolved. Notice that
they are circular, that they’re self-sustaining, that they could be
about anything.’ And then you don’t argue with them, you simply
point out that these are not valid ways of thinking about anything.
Because you could use the very same tricks to sustain something
which was manifestly fraudulent.
And in fact, what fascinates me is that a lot of the tricks have their
counterparts with con artists, who use the very same forms of non-
argument, the very same non sequiturs, and they make, for instance,
a virtue out of trust. And as soon as you start exhibiting any
suspicion of the con man, he gets all hurt on you and plays the hurt-
feelings card, and reminds you how wonderful taking it on faith is.

There aren’t any new tricks; these tricks have evolved over countless
years.
HITCHENS: And one could add the production of bogus special effects
as well. One of the things that completely convicts religion of being
fraudulent is the belief in the miraculous. The same people will say,
‘Well, Einstein felt a spiritual force in the universe,’ when what he
said was the whole point about it is that there are no miracles. There
are no changes in the natural order, that’s the miraculous thing.
They’re completely cynical about claiming him.
HARRIS: And every religious person makes the same criticism of
other religions that we do. They reject the pseudo-miracles and the
pseudo-claims and certainties of others. They see the confidence
tricks in other people’s faith. And they see them rather readily. Every
Christian knows that the Qur’an can’t be the perfect word of the
creator of the universe and that anyone who thinks it is hasn’t read it
closely enough. We make a very strong case when we point that out,
and point out also that whatever people are experiencing in church
or in prayer, no matter how positive, the fact that Buddhists and
Hindus and Muslims and Christians are all experiencing it proves
that it can’t be a matter of the divinity of Jesus or the unique sanctity
of the Qur’an.
DENNETT: Because there are seventeen different ways of getting
there.
HITCHENS: By the way, on that tiny point, and I hope this is not a
digression, it’s useful to bear in mind that when you get, as I did this
morning on ABC News, the question, ‘Well, wouldn’t you say
religion did some good in the world, and there are good [religious]
people?’ – and you never don’t get that argument, and by the way
there’s no reason you shouldn’t – you say, ‘Well, yes, I have indeed
heard it said that Hamas provides social services in Gaza.’
[Laughter] And I’ve even heard it said that Louis Farrakhan’s group
gets young black men in prison off drugs.*14 I don’t know if it’s
true – I’m willing to accept it might be. It doesn’t alter the fact that
the one is a militarized terrorist organization with a fanatical anti-
Semitic ideology and the second is a racist, crackpot cult. I have no

doubt that Scientology gets people off drugs, too. But my insistence,
always, with these people is that if you will claim it for one, you must
accept it for them all. Because if you don’t, it’s flat-out dishonest.
HARRIS: Or you can invent an ideology, which, by your mere
invention in that moment is obviously untrue, and which would be
quite useful if propagated to billions.
HITCHENS: That’s right.
HARRIS: You could say, ‘Here is my new religion. Demand that your
children study science and math and economics and all of our
terrestrial disciplines to the best of their abilities, and if they don’t
persist in those efforts, they’ll be tortured after death by seventeen
demons.’ [Laughter] This would be extremely useful, far more useful
than Islam. And yet what are the chances that these seventeen
demons exist? Zero.
DAWKINS: There’s a slipperiness, too, isn’t there, about one way of
speaking to sophisticated intellectuals and theologians and another
way of speaking to congregations and, above all, children. And I
think we’ve all of us been accused of going after the easy targets, the
Jerry Falwells of this world, and ignoring the sophisticated
professors of theology. I don’t know what you feel about that, but
one of the things I feel is that the sophisticated professors of
theology will say one thing to each other and to intellectuals
generally, but will say something totally different to a congregation.
They’ll talk about miracles, they’ll talk about—
DENNETT: Well, they won’t talk to a congregation.
DAWKINS: Well, archbishops will.
DENNETT: Yes, but when the sophisticated theologians try to talk to
the preachers, the preachers won’t have any of it. [Laughs]
DAWKINS: Well, that’s true of course, yes.
DENNETT: You’ve got to realize that sophisticated theology is like
stamp collecting. It’s a very specialized thing, and only a few people
do it.
DAWKINS: And of negligible influence.

DENNETT: They take in their own laundry, and they get all excited
about some very arcane details, and their own religions pay almost
no attention to what they’re saying. A little bit of it does, of course,
filter in. But it always gets beefed up again for general consumption,
because what they say in their writings, at least from my experience,
is eye-glazing, mind-twisting, very subtle things that have no
particular bearing on life.
HITCHENS: Oh, no, I must insist! [Laughter] I must say a good word
here for Professor Alister McGrath,*15 who in his attack on Richard
said it wasn’t true, as we’ve always been told and most Christians
believe, that Tertullian said, ‘Credo quia absurdum’ – ‘I believe it
because it’s ridiculous.’ No, it turns out – and I’ve checked this now,
although I don’t know this from McGrath – that in fact Tertullian
said the impossibility of it is what makes it believable.*16 That’s a
fine distinction, I think. [Laughter] And very useful for training
one’s mind in the finer points. In other words, the likelihood that
something could have been made up is diminished by the
incredibility of it. Who would try and invent something that was that
unbelievable?
That actually is, I think, a debate perfectly well worth having. What
I say to these people is this: You’re sending your e-mail, or your
letter, to the wrong address. Everyone says, ‘Let’s not judge religion
by its fundamentalists.’ All right. Take the Church of England, two of
whose senior leaders recently said that the floods in North Yorkshire
were the result of, among other things, homosexual behaviour – not
in North Yorkshire, presumably.*17 Probably in London, I’m
thinking. [Laughter]
DENNETT: God’s aim is a little off. [Laughter]
HITCHENS: One of these, the Bishop of Liverpool,*18 was apparently
in line to be the next Archbishop of Canterbury. Now, this is
extraordinary. This is supposed to be the mild and reflective and
thoughtful 
and 
rather 
troubled 
Church, 
making 
fanatical
pronouncements. Well, I want to hear what Alister McGrath is going
to write to these bishops. Is he going to say, ‘Do you not realize what
complete idiots you’re making of yourselves and of our Church?’ Did

he do that? If he did it in private, I’m not impressed. He has to say it
in public. Why are they telling me that I [can’t] judge the Church by
the statements of its bishops? I think I’m allowed to.
DAWKINS: The academic theologians, bishops and vicars will attack
us for taking scriptures – or for accusing people of taking
scriptures – literally: ‘Of course we don’t believe the Book of Genesis
literally!’ And yet they do preach about what Adam and Eve did, as
though Adam and Eve did exist – as though they somehow have a
licence to talk about things which they know, and anybody of any
sophistication knows, are fictions. And yet they will talk to their
congregations, their sheep, about Adam and Eve as though they did
exist, as though they were factual. And a huge number of people in
those congregations actually think they did exist.
DENNETT: Can you imagine any one of these preachers saying, as
such a topic is introduced, ‘This is a sort of theoretical fiction. It’s
not true, but it’s a very fine metaphor’? No. [Laughs]
DAWKINS: They kind of, after the fact, imply that that’s what they
expect you to know.
DENNETT: Yes, but they would never announce it.
HARRIS: Another point there is that they never admit how they have
come to stop taking it literally. You have all these people criticizing
us for our crass literalism – we’re as fundamentalist as the
fundamentalists – and yet these moderates don’t admit how they
have come to be moderate. What does moderation consist of? It
consists of having lost faith in all of these propositions, or half of
them, because of the hammer blows of science and secular politics.
DENNETT: And the crass literalism of the critics.
HARRIS: Religion has lost its mandate on a thousand questions, and
moderates argue that this is somehow a triumph of faith – that faith
is somehow self-enlightening. Whereas it’s been enlightened from
the outside; it’s been intruded upon by science.
HITCHENS: On that point, which I was wanting to raise myself, about
our own so-called fundamentalism, there’s a cleric in Southwark, the
first person I saw attacking you [Richard] and me in print as being

just as fundamentalist as those who blew up the London
Underground. Do you remember his name?
DAWKINS: I don’t remember his name.
HITCHENS: He’s a very senior Anglican cleric in the Diocese of
Southwark.*19 I went on the BBC with him. I asked him, ‘How can
you call your congregation a flock? Doesn’t that say everything about
your religion? That you think they’re sheep?’ He said, ‘Well, actually
I used to be the pastor in New Guinea, where there aren’t any sheep.’
Of course, there are a lot of places where there are no sheep – the
Gospel’s quite hard to teach as a result. [Laughter] He said, ‘We
found out what the most important animal to the locals was, and I
remember very well my local bishop rising to ask the Divine One to
“Behold these swine”.’ [Laughter] His new congregation.
But this is a man who deliberately does a thing like that. That’s as
cynical as you could wish, and as adaptive as the day is long. And he
says that we who doubt it are as fundamentalist as people who blow
up their fellow citizens on the London Underground. It’s
unconscionable. Thus, I don’t really mind being accused of ridiculing
or treating with contempt people like that. I just, frankly, have no
choice. I have the faculty of humour, and some of it has an edge to it.
I’m not going to repress that for the sake of politeness.
DENNETT: Would you think it would be good to make a distinction
between the professionals and the amateurs? I share your
impatience with the officials of the churches – the people who have
this as their professional life. It seems to me that they know better.
The congregations don’t know better, because it’s maintained that
they should not know better. I do get very anxious about ridiculing
the belief of the flock, because of the way in which they have ceded
to their leaders, they’ve delegated authority to their leaders, and they
presume their leaders are going to do it right. Who stands up and
says, ‘The buck stops here’? Well, it seems to me it’s the preachers
themselves, it’s the priests, it’s the bishops. And we really should
hold their feet to the fire.
For instance, just take the issue of creationism. If somebody in a
fundamentalist church thinks that creationism makes sense because
their pastor told them so, well, I can understand that and excuse

that. We all get a lot of what we take to be true from people whom
we respect and whom we view as authorities. We don’t check
everything out. But where did the pastor get this idea? And I don’t
care where he got it. He or she is responsible because their job is to
know what they’re talking about, in a way that the congregation is
not.
DAWKINS: We have to be a little bit careful not to sound
condescending when we say that. In a way, it’s reflecting the
condescension of the preacher himself.
HITCHENS: Yes. Because I’ll take things that you and Richard say on
human natural sciences – not without wanting to check, but I’m
often unable to – but knowing that you are the sort of gentlemen
who would have checked. But if you say, ‘The bishop told me it so I
believe it,’ you make a fool of yourself, it seems to me – and one is
entitled to say so. Just as one is entitled, when dealing with an
ordinary racist, to say that his opinions are revolting. He may know
no better, but that’s not going to save him from my condemnation.
And nor should it. And exactly, I think it’s condescending not to
confront people, as it were, one by one or en masse. Public opinion
is often wrong. Mob opinion is almost always wrong. Religious
opinion is wrong by definition. We can’t avoid this—
I wanted to introduce the name ‘H. L. Mencken’*20 at this point,
now a very and justly celebrated American writer. Not particularly to
my taste – much too much of a Nietzschean and what really was
once meant by ‘social Darwinist’ at one stage. But why did he win the
tremendous respect of so many people in this country in the 1920s
and ’30s? Because he said that the people who believe what the
Methodists tell them, and what William Jennings Bryan*21 tells
them, are fools. They’re not being fooled; they are fools. They should
—
DENNETT: Shame on them for believing this.
HITCHENS: Yes, they make themselves undignified and ignorant. No
mincing of words there, and a great admixture of wit and evidence
and reasoning. It absolutely works. The most successful anti-

religious polemic there’s probably ever been in the modern world –
in the twentieth century, anyway.
HARRIS: I think we just touched upon an issue that we should
highlight: this whole notion of authority. Because religious people
often argue that science is just a series of uncashed cheques and
we’re all relying on authority: ‘How do you know that the
cosmological constant is… ?’ whatever it is. So, differentiate between
the kind of faith-placing in authority that we practise without fear in
science, and in rationality generally, and the kind of faith-placing in
the preacher or the theologian, which we criticize.
DAWKINS: But what we actually do when we, who are not physicists,
take on trust what physicists say, is that we have some evidence that
suggests that physicists have looked into the matter – that they’ve
done experiments, that they’ve peer-reviewed their papers, that
they’ve criticized each other, that they’ve been subjected to massive
criticism from their peers in seminars and in lectures.
DENNETT: And remember the structure that’s there, too; it’s not just
that there’s peer review. But it’s very important that [science is]
competitive. For instance, when Fermat’s last theorem was proved
by—
DAWKINS: Andrew Wiles.
DENNETT:—Andrew Wiles, the reason that those of us who said,
‘Forget it, I’m never going to understand that proof,’ the reason that
we can be confident that it really is a proof is that—
HARRIS: Nobody wanted him to get there first. [Laughter]
DENNETT: —every other mathematician who was competent in the
world was very well motivated to study that proof.
DAWKINS: To find it, yes.
DENNETT: And believe me, if they grudgingly admit that this is a
proof, it’s a proof. And there’s nothing like that in religion – nothing
like that!
HITCHENS: No religious person has ever been able to say what
Einstein said – that if he was right, the following phenomenon

would occur off the west coast of Africa during a solar eclipse. And it
did, within a very tiny degree of variation. There’s never been a
prophecy that’s been vindicated like that. Or anyone willing to place
their reputation and, as it were, their life on the idea that it would
be.
DAWKINS: I was once asked at a public meeting, ‘Don’t you think that
the mysteriousness of quantum theory is just the same as the
mysteriousness of the Trinity or transubstantiation?’ And the answer
of course is, [it] can be answered, in two quotes from Richard
Feynman. One, Richard Feynman said, ‘If you think you understand
quantum theory, you don’t understand quantum theory.’ He was
admitting that it’s highly mysterious. The other thing is that the
predictions in quantum theory experimentally are verified to the
equivalent of predicting the width of North America to the width of
one human hair. And so, quantum theory is massively supported by
accurate predictions, even if you don’t understand the mystery of the
Copenhagen interpretation, whatever it is. Whereas the mystery of
the Trinity doesn’t even try to make a prediction, let alone an
accurate one.
HITCHENS: It isn’t a mystery, either.
DENNETT: I don’t like the use of the word ‘mystery’ here. I think
there’s been a lot of consciousness-raising in philosophy about this
term, where we have the so-called new mysterians. These are people
who like the term ‘mystery’. Noam Chomsky*22 is quoted as saying
there are two kinds of questions – problems and mysteries.
Problems are solvable, mysteries aren’t.*23 First of all, I just don’t
buy that. But I buy the distinction, and say there’s nothing about
mystery in science. There are problems; there are deep problems.
There are things we don’t know; there are things we’ll never know.
But they aren’t systematically incomprehensible to human beings.
The glorification of the idea that these things are systematically
incomprehensible I think has no place in science.
HITCHENS: Which is why I think we should be quite happy to revive
traditional terms in our discourse, such as ‘obscurantism’ and
‘obfuscation’, which is what they really are. And to point out that

these things can make intelligent people act stupidly. John
Cornwell,*24 who’s just written another attack on yourself, Richard,
actually, and who is an old friend of mine, a very brilliant guy, wrote
one of the best studies of the Catholic Church and fascism that has
been published. In his review of you, he says that Professor Dawkins
should just look at the shelves of books there are on the Trinity, the
libraries full of attempts to solve this problem, before he’s certain.
But none of the books in those religious libraries solve it either. The
whole point is that it remains insoluble, and is used to keep people
feeling baffled and inferior.
DAWKINS: I want to come back to the thing about mystery in physics.
Because isn’t it possible that with our evolved brains – because we
evolved in what I call Middle World, where we never have to cope
with either the very small or the cosmologically very large – we may
never actually have an intuitive feel for what’s going on in quantum
mechanics. But we can still test its predictions. We can still actually
do the mathematics and do the physics to actually test the
predictions – because anybody can read the dials on an instrument.
DENNETT: Right. I think what we can see is that what scientists have
constructed, over the centuries, is a series of tools – mind tools,
thinking tools, mathematical tools and so forth – that enable us to
some degree to overcome the limitations of our evolved brains. Our
Stone Age, if you like, brains. And overcoming those limitations is
not always direct. Sometimes you have to give up something. Yes,
you’ll just never be able, as you say, to think intuitively about this.
But you can know that even though you can’t think intuitively about
it, there’s this laborious process by which you can make progress.
And you do have to cede a certain authority to the process, but you
can test that. And it can carry you from A to B in the same way that if
you’re a quadriplegic an artificial device can carry you from A to B. It
doesn’t mean you can walk from A to B, but you can get from A to B.
DAWKINS: That’s right. And the bolder physicists will say, ‘Well, who
cares about intuition? I mean, just look at the maths.’
DENNETT: Yes, yes, that’s right. They are comfortable with living with
their prostheses.

HARRIS: Well, the perfect example of that is dimensions beyond
three, because we can’t visualize the fourth dimension or the fifth.
But it’s trivial to represent them mathematically.
DENNETT: And now we teach our undergraduates how to manipulate
n-dimensional spaces, and to think about vectors in n-dimensional
spaces. And they get used to the fact that they can’t quite imagine
them. What you do is, you imagine three of them and wave your
hand a little bit, and say, ‘More of the same.’ But you check your
intuition by running the math, and it works.
DAWKINS: Say you’re a psychologist looking at personality, and you
say there are fifteen dimensions of personality, and you could think
of them as being fifteen dimensions in space. And anybody can see
that you can imagine moving along any one of those dimensions
with respect to the others, and you don’t actually have to visualize
fifteen-dimensional space.
DENNETT: No, and you give up that demand. And you realize, ‘I can
live without that. It would be nice if I could do that, but, hey, I can’t
see bacteria with the naked eye, either. I can live without that.’
HITCHENS: I was challenged on the radio the other day by someone
who said that I believed in atoms on no evidence, because I’d never
seen one. Not since George Galloway said to me that he’d never seen
a barrel of oil…*25 [Laughter] But you realize that people, at this
point, are wearing themselves right down to their uppers. I mean,
they’re desperate when they say—
I don’t want us to make our lives easier, but it makes the argument
a little simpler: we are quite willing to say there are many things we
don’t know. But what Haldane,*26 I think it was, said is that the
universe is not just queerer than we suppose, it’s queerer than we
can suppose. We know there’ll be great new discoveries. We know
we’ll live to see great things. But we know there’s a tremendous
amount of uncertainty. That’s the whole distinction. The believer has
to say, not just that there is a God – the Deist position that there
may be a mind at work in the universe, a proposition we can’t
disprove – but that they know that mind.
HARRIS: Exactly.

HITCHENS: And can interpret it. They’re on good terms with it. They
get occasional revelations from it. They get briefings from it. Now,
any decent argument, any decent intellect, has to begin by excluding
people who claim to know more than they can possibly know. You
start off by saying, ‘Well, that’s wrong to begin with. Now, can we get
on with it?’ So, theism is gone in the first round. It’s off the island.
It’s out of the show.
HARRIS: That’s a footnote I wanted to add to what Dan was saying.
Even if mystery is a bitter pill we have to swallow in the end and we
are cognitively closed to the truth at some level, that still doesn’t give
any scope to theism.
DENNETT: Absolutely not, because it’s just as closed to them as it is to
—
HARRIS: Exactly. And yet they claim perfect inerrancy of revelation.
HITCHENS: And also, they can’t be allowed to forget what they used to
say when they were strong enough to get away with it. Which is,
‘This is really true in every detail, and if you don’t believe it—’
HARRIS: We’ll kill you. [Laughs]
HITCHENS: We’ll kill you, and it may take some days to kill you, but
we will get the job done. They wouldn’t have the power they have
now, if they hadn’t had the power they had then.
DENNETT: And you know, what you just said, Christopher, actually I
think strikes terror, strikes anxiety, in a lot of religious hearts.
Because it just hasn’t been brought home to them that this move of
theirs is just off limits. It’s just not the game; you can’t do that. And
they’ve been taught all their lives that you can do that – that it’s a
legitimate way of conducting a discussion. And here suddenly we’re
just telling them, ‘I’m sorry, that is not a move in this game. In fact,
it is a disqualifying move.’
HARRIS: Precisely the move you can’t be respected for making.
HITCHENS: Adumbrate the move for me a bit, if you would. Say what
you think that move is.

DENNETT: Somebody plays the faith card. They say, ‘Look, I am a
Christian, and we Christians, we just have to believe this, and that’s
it.’ At which point – and I think this is the polite way of saying it –
you say, ‘Well, OK, if that’s true, you’ll just have to excuse yourself
from the discussion, because you’ve declared yourself incompetent
to proceed with an open mind.’
HITCHENS: OK, that’s what I hoped you were saying.
DENNETT: If you really can’t defend your view, then, sorry, you can’t
put it forward. We’re not going to let you play the faith card. Now, if
you want to defend what your Holy Book says in terms that we can
appreciate, fine. But because it says it in the Holy Book – that just
doesn’t cut any ice at all. And if you think it does, you’re clearly –
first of all, that’s just arrogant. It is a bullying move, and we’re just
not going to accept it.
HARRIS: And it’s a move that they don’t accept, when done in the
name of another faith.
DENNETT: Exactly.
HITCHENS: In which case, could I ask you something – all three of
you, who are wiser than I on this matter. What do we think of Victor
Stenger’s book that says we cannot scientifically disprove the
existence of God?*27 Do you have a view of this?
DENNETT: Which God? I haven’t read the book.
HITCHENS: Any. Either a creating one or a supervising one, and
certainly an intervening one – I think that’s fairly exhaustive. My
view has always been that since we have to live with uncertainty,
only those who are certain [should] leave the room before the
discussion can become adult. Victor Stenger seems to think that now
we’ve got to the stage where we can say with reasonable confidence
that it is disproved. Or that it’s not vindicated. I just thought it
would be an interesting proposition. Because it matters a lot to me
that our opinions are congruent with uncertainty.
HARRIS: I think the weakest link is this foundational claim about the
texts – this idea that we know the Bible to be the perfect word of an
omniscient deity. That is an especially weak claim. And it really is

their epistemological gold standard. It all rests on that. If the Bible
isn’t a magic book, Christianity evaporates. If the Qur’an isn’t a
magic book, Islam evaporates. And when you look at the books and
ask yourself, ‘Is there the slightest shred of evidence that this is the
product of omniscience? Is there a single sentence in here that
couldn’t have been uttered by a person for whom a wheelbarrow
would have been emergent technology?’ you have to say no. If the
Bible had an account of DNA and electricity and other things that
would astonish us, then OK, our jaws would drop and we’d have to
have a sensible conversation about the source of this knowledge.
HITCHENS: Dinesh D’Souza*28 – by the way, one of the much more
literate and well-read and educated of our antagonists; I’m going to
be debating him soon – makes this statement in his new book:*29 He
says that in Genesis, which people used to mock, it says, ‘Let there
be light,’ and then only a few staves later you get the sun and the
moon and the stars. How could that be? Well, that’s actually,
according to the big bang, that would be right.
DAWKINS: Yes, but that’s not impressive.
HITCHENS: The bang precedes the galaxies, believe me. [Laughter]
HARRIS: Well, I try to demonstrate this cast of mind in a very long
endnote in The End of Faith where I show that with the eyes of faith,
you can discover magical prescience in any text. I literally walked
into the cookbook aisle of a bookstore, randomly opened a
cookbook, found a recipe for, I think it was, wok-seared shrimp with
ogo relish or something, and then came up with a mystical
interpretation of the recipe. Anyone can do this. You can play
connect-the-dots with any crazy text and find wisdom in it.
HITCHENS: Well, Michael Shermer*30 did that with the Bible Code,
hidden messages in the Bible. Very, very good. You can absolutely
write yesterday’s headlines from it, any time you like.
HARRIS: I have a question for the three of you. Is there any argument
for faith? Any challenge to your atheism that has given you pause?
That has set you back on your heels, where you felt you didn’t have a
ready answer?

DENNETT: [Laughs] I can’t think of any.
DAWKINS: I think the closest is the idea that the fundamental
constants of the universe are too good to be true. And that does seem
to me to need some kind of explanation if it’s true. Victor Stenger
doesn’t think it is true, but many physicists do. It certainly doesn’t in
any way suggest to me a creative intelligence, because you’re still left
with the problem of explaining where that came from. And a creative
intelligence who is sufficiently creative and intelligent enough to
fine-tune the constants of the universe to give rise to us has got to be
a lot more fine-tuned himself than—
HITCHENS: Why create all the other planets in our solar system dead?
[Laughs]
DAWKINS: Well, that’s a separate question.
HITCHENS: Bishop Montefiore*31 was very good at this – he was a
friend of mine. He said you had to marvel at the conditions for life
and the knife edge on which they are, as though it is a knife edge.
Yes, our planet is, a lot of it, too hot or too cold.
HARRIS: Right, and riddled with parasites.
HITCHENS: And it’s completely too hot or too cold, as it were, and
that’s just one solar system, the only one we know about where there
is life. Not much of a designer. And, of course, you can’t get out of
the infinite regress. But no, I’ve not come across a single persuasive
argument of that kind. But I wouldn’t have expected to, because, as I
realized when I thought one evening, they never come up with
anything new. Well, why would they? Their arguments are very old
by definition. And they were all evolved when we knew very, very
little about the natural order.
The only argument that I find at all attractive – and this is for faith
as well as for theism – is what I suppose I would call the apotropaic,
when people say, ‘All praise belongs to God for this. He’s to be
thanked for all this.’ That is actually a form of modesty – it’s a
superstitious one. That’s why I say ‘apotropaic’. But it’s avoiding
hubris. It’s also, for that reason, obviously pre-monotheistic.

Religion does, or can, help people to avoid hubris, I think, morally
and intellectually.
DAWKINS: But that’s not an argument that it’s true.
HITCHENS: No, no. There aren’t, and cannot be, any such arguments.
HARRIS: Well, maybe I should broaden this question.
DENNETT: No, no, wait a minute. I can give you several discoveries
which would shake my faith right to the ground.
HITCHENS: Rabbits in the Precambrian.*32
DAWKINS: No, no, no.
HARRIS: I’m looking for an argument not so much for the plausibility
of religious belief but one that suggests that what we’re up to –
criticizing faith – is a bad thing.
DAWKINS: Oh, that’s much easier. Somebody could come up with an
argument that says that the world is a better place if everybody
believes a falsehood.
DENNETT: Oh, that. Yes.
HARRIS: Is there any context in your work or in dialogue with your
critics where you feel that such an argument has given you pause?
DENNETT: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Not so much in Breaking the Spell, but
when I was working on my book on free will, Freedom Evolves, I
kept running into critics who were basically expressing something
very close to a religious view – namely, free will is such an important
idea that if we gave up the idea of free will, people would lose the
sense of responsibility and we would have chaos. And you really
don’t want to look too closely. Just avert your eyes; do not look too
closely at this issue of free will and determinism. And I thought
about that explicitly in the environmental-impact category. OK,
could I imagine that my irrepressible curiosity could lead me to
articulate something, true or false, which would have such
devastating effects on the world that I should just shut up and
change the subject? I think that’s a good question, which we all
should ask – absolutely! I spent a lot of time thinking hard about

that, and I wouldn’t have published either of those two books if I
hadn’t come to the conclusion that it was not only, as it were,
environmentally safe to proceed this way but obligatory. I think you
should ask that question. I do.
DAWKINS: Before publishing a book, but not before deciding for
yourself, ‘Do I think that this is true or not?’ One should never do
what some politically motivated critics often do, which is to say,
‘This is so politically obnoxious that it cannot be true.’
DENNETT: Oh, yes.
DAWKINS: Which is a different—
DENNETT: Which is a different thing entirely. No, no.
HITCHENS: It would be like discovering that you thought the bell
curve on white and black intelligence was a correct interpretation of
IQ. You could say, ‘Now what am I going to do?’ Fortunately, these
questions don’t, in fact, present themselves in that way.
HARRIS: I’ll tell you one place where it’s presented itself to me. I think
it was an op-ed in the L.A. Times – I could be mistaken. But
someone argued that the reason the Muslim population in the US
isn’t radicalized the way it is in western Europe is largely the result
of the fact that we honour faith so much in our discourse that the
community has not become as insular and as grievance-ridden as it
has in western Europe. Now, I don’t know if that’s true, but if it were
true, that could give me a moment’s pause.
HITCHENS: That would be of interest. James Wolfensohn,*33 lately of
the World Bank, recently the negotiator on Gaza, says he firmly
believes that he had tremendous influence for good with the Muslim
Brotherhood and Hamas because he was an Orthodox Jew. If so, I
think it would be disgusting – and he shouldn’t have had the job in
the first place. Because we know one absolute thing for certain about
that conflict, which is that it’s been made infinitely worse by the
monotheisms. If it were only a national and territorial dispute, it
would have been solved by now. But his self-satisfaction in saying so,
even if it were true, would turn me even more against him.

*1 Daniel C. Dennett, Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon (New
York: Viking Adult, 2006).
*2 Tariq Ramadan (b. 1962): Swiss Islamic academic and writer; Professor of
Contemporary Islamic Studies at Oxford University.
*3 Bill Donohue (b. 1947): US sociologist; President of the Catholic League for
Religious and Civil Rights.
*4 Andres Serrano (b. 1950): US artist and photographer.
*5 The Holy Virgin Mary (1996) by British artist Christopher Ofili (b. 1968).
*6 Daniel Barker (b. 1949): US atheist activist and former Christian preacher; joint
President of the Freedom from Religion Foundation. Dan Barker’s collection was
one of the strands later woven into ‘The Clergy Project’: see
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Clergy_Project.
*7 Francis Collins (b. 1950): US geneticist and physician; Director of the National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md.
*8 https://www.samharris.org/blog/item/the-strange-case-of-francis-collins.
*9 Graham Greene (1904–91): English novelist; converted to Catholicism just
before his marriage; later described himself as a ‘Catholic atheist’.
*10 Francis Collins, The Language of God (New York: Free Press, 2006).
*11 John Fenton (1921–2008): Anglican priest and theologian; Canon of Christ
Church, Oxford, 1978–91.
*12 Jerry Falwell (1933–2007): US Southern Baptist pastor and evangelist; co-
founder in 1979 of the Moral Majority.
*13 Agnes Gonxha Bojaxhiu (1910–97), known as Mother Teresa: Catholic nun and
missionary; founder in 1950 of the order of the ‘Missionaries of Charity’.
*14 Louis Walcott, later Farrakhan (b. 1933): US black nationalist and leader of the
US religious group Nation of Islam.
*15 Alister McGrath (b. 1953): Northern Irish priest and theologian; Andreas
Idreos Professor of Science and Religion at Oxford University.
*16 ‘Certum est, quia impossibile’: De Carne Christi, 5.
*17 See https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1556131/Floods-are-
judgment-on-society-say-bishops.html, in which the Rt Rev. Graham Dow (b.
1942), Bishop of Carlisle 2000–9, is quoted to this effect.
*18 James Jones (b. 1948): Anglican priest; Bishop of Liverpool 1998–2013.
*19 Colin Slee (1945–2010): Anglican cleric; Provost of Southwark from 1994;
Dean from 2000 to his death.
*20 Henry Louis Mencken (1880–1956): US writer and scholar of American
English.
*21 William Jennings Bryan (1860–1925): US Democratic politician and orator;
anti-evolution activist, representing the World Christian Fundamentals
Association at the Scopes trial of 1925.

*22 Noam Chomsky (b. 1928): US linguist and multidisciplinary scholar; highly
influential in study of mind and language.
*23 Steven Pinker, How the Mind Works (New York: W. W. Norton, 1997), p. ix.
*24 John Cornwell (b. 1940): British academic and writer; works include Hitler’s
Pope (1999), a critical work on Pope Pius XII.
*25 In May 2005, British anti-war activist and MP George Galloway (who would
debate with Christopher Hitchens in September on the Iraq War) was alleged to
have profited from the UN’s oil-for-food programme in Iraq, which he denied in
testimony before a US Senate committee, saying: ‘I am not now, nor have I ever
been, an oil trader – and neither has anyone on my behalf. I have never seen a
barrel of oil, owned one, bought one, sold one…’
*26 John Burdon Sanderson (J. B. S.) Haldane (1892–1964): British, later Indian,
scientist and statistician.
*27 Victor Stenger (1935–2014): US particle physicist, philosopher and popular
science writer. Works include God: The Failed Hypothesis. How Science Shows
that God Does Not Exist (New York: Prometheus, 2007), in which he came as
close as anyone has done to saying that the existence of God has been disproved.
*28 Dinesh D’Souza (b. 1961): US Indian political commentator, writer and film-
maker; president of The King’s College, a Christian school in New York, 2010–
12.
*29 Dinesh D’Souza, What’s So Great About Christianity (Washington DC:
Regnery, 2007).
*30 Michael Shermer (b. 1954): US science writer and historian of science; founder
of the Skeptics Society. For ‘Michael Shermer decodes the Bible Code’ (23 July
2007), see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lk3VgQgxiqE.
*31 Hugh Montefiore (1920–2005): English Anglican priest and theologian; Bishop
of Kingston, 1970–8; Bishop of Birmingham, 1978–1987.
*32 Said to have been J. B. S. Haldane’s response when asked what could shake his
belief in evolution.
*33 James Wolfensohn (b. 1933): Australian American lawyer, financier and
economist; president of the World Bank Group, 1995–2005; UN/Quartet special
envoy for Gaza disengagement, 2005–6.

PART II
HARRIS: Two issues converge here. One is the question, ‘What do we
want to accomplish?’ What do we reasonably think we can
accomplish? And then there’s this article of faith that circulates,
unfortunately, even among people of our viewpoint, that you can’t
argue anyone out of their beliefs.
So is this a completely fatuous exercise? Or can we actually win a
war of ideas with people? Judging from my e-mail, we can. I’m
constantly getting e-mail from people who have lost their faith and
were, in effect, argued out of it. And the straw that broke that
camel’s back was either one of our books, or some other process of
reasoning, or the incompatibility between what they knew to be true
and what they were told by their faith. I think we have to highlight
the fact that it’s possible for people to be shown the contradictions
internal to their faith, or the contradiction between their faith and
what we’ve come to know to be true about the universe. The process
can take minutes or months or years, but they have to renounce
their superstition in the face of what they now know to be true.
DAWKINS: I was having an argument with a very sophisticated
biologist who’s a brilliant expositor of evolution and still believes in
God.*1 I said, ‘How can you? What’s this all about?’ And he said, ‘I
accept all your rational arguments. However, it’s faith.’ And then he
said this very significant phrase to me: ‘There’s a reason that it’s
called faith!’ He said it very decisively, very – almost – aggressively:
‘There’s a reason that it’s called faith.’ And that was, to him, the
absolute knock-down clincher. You can’t argue with it, because it’s
faith. And he said it proudly and defiantly, rather than in any sort of
apologetic way.

HITCHENS: Well, you get it all the time in North America from people
who say you’ve got to read William James*2 and to be able to judge
other people’s subjective experiences, which is something that’s by
definition impossible to do. ‘If it’s real to them, why can’t you
respect it?’ This wouldn’t be accepted in any other field of argument
at all. The impression people are under is the critical thing about
them.
I had a debate with a very senior Presbyterian in Orange County. I
asked him – because we were talking about biblical literalism, of
which he wasn’t an exponent – but I asked him, ‘Well, what about
the graves opening at the time of the Crucifixion, according to
Matthew? And everyone getting out of their graves in Jerusalem and
walking around greeting old friends in the city?’ I was going to ask
him, ‘Doesn’t that rather cheapen the idea of the Resurrection of
Jesus?’ But he mistook my purpose: he thought I wanted to know if
he believed that had happened. And he said that as a historian,
which he also was, he was inclined to doubt it, but that as a
Presbyterian minister he thought it was true. Well, all right then.
See, for me, it was enough that I got him to say that. I said, ‘In that
case, I rest my case. I don’t want to say any more to you now. You’ve
said all I could say.’
HARRIS: Well, there’s one other chip I’d like to put on the table here.
There’s the phenomenon of someone like Francis Collins, or the
biologist you just mentioned – someone who obviously has enough
of the facts on board, and enough of a scientific education, to know
better and still does not know better, or professes not to know
better.
I think we have a cultural problem here. This was brought home to
me at one talk I gave. A physics professor came up to me at the end
of the talk and told me that he had brought one of his graduate
students who was a devout Christian and who was quite shaken by
my talk, and all I got of this report was that this was the first time his
faith had ever been explicitly challenged. So it’s apparently true to
say that you can go through the curriculum of becoming a scientist
and never have your faith challenged, because it’s taboo to do so.
And now we have engineers in the Muslim world who can build
nuclear bombs and who still think it’s plausible that you can get to

paradise and get seventy-two virgins. And we have people like
Francis Collins who think that on Sunday you can kneel down in the
dewy grass and give yourself to Jesus because you’re in the presence
of a frozen waterfall, and on Monday you can be a physical
geneticist.
HITCHENS: Well, according to our friend Pervez Hoodbhoy,*3 the
great Pakistani physicist, there are people who think you can use the
jinns, the devils, and harness their power for a reactor.
HARRIS: It’s almost tempting to fund such a project.
DENNETT: I think it may be easier than we’re supposing to shake
people’s faith. There’s been a moratorium on this for a long time.
We’re just the beginning of a new wave of explicit attempts to shake
people’s faith, and it’s bearing fruit. And the obstacles, it seems to
me, are not that we don’t have the facts or the arguments. It’s the
strategic reasons for not professing it, not admitting it, not
admitting it to yourself, not admitting it in public because your
family’s going to view it as a betrayal. You’re just embarrassed to
admit that you were taken in by this for so long.
It takes, I think, tremendous courage to just declare that you’ve
given that all up. And if we can find ways to help people find that
courage and give them some examples of people who have done this
and they’re doing just fine – they may have lost the affections of a
parent or something like that. They may have hurt some family
members – but still I think it’s a good thing to encourage them. I
don’t think we should assume that we can’t do this. I think we can.
DAWKINS: Yes, and it’s almost patronizing to suggest that we
couldn’t. On the other hand, I think we all know people who seem to
manage this kind of split-brain feat of, as Sam says, believing one
thing on a Sunday and then something totally contradictory, or
incompatible, in the rest of the week. And there’s nothing, I suppose,
neurologically wrong with that; there’s no reason why one shouldn’t
have a brain that’s split in that kind of way.
DENNETT: But it is unstable in a certain way. And I’m sure you’re
right that people do this, and they’re very good at it. And they do it
by deflecting attention from it. Let’s start focusing attention—

DAWKINS: But how can you live with a contradiction in your—?
DENNETT: By forgetting that you’re doing this and by not attending to
it. I think what I would love to do is to invent a memorable
catchphrase or term that would rise unbidden in their minds when
they caught themselves doing that. And then they would think, ‘Oh,
this is one of those cosmic shifts that Dennett and Dawkins and
Harris and Hitchens are talking about. Oh, right! And they think this
is somehow illicit.’ Just to create a little more awareness in them of
what a strange thing it is that they’re doing.
HITCHENS: I’m afraid to say that I think that cognitive dissonance is
probably necessary for everyday survival. Everyone does it a bit.
DENNETT: You mean tolerating cognitive dissonance?
HITCHENS: No, practising it. Take the case of someone who’s a
member of MoveOn.org.*4 They think the United States government
is a brutal, militaristic, imperial regime. It crushes the poor and
invades other people’s countries. But they pay their taxes, and it’s
very, very rare that they don’t. They send their children to [public]
school. They do their stuff. You know, they don’t act all the time as if
10 per cent of what they believe is true. Partly because it would be
impossible. Say, with people in the 1950s, members of the John
Birch Society, who thought President Eisenhower was a communist.
OK? You get up in the morning, you believe that: the White House is
run by the Kremlin. But then you have to go and get the groceries,
and do all that stuff.
HARRIS: Too many commitments. Yes.
DAWKINS: You still have to go and do it.
HITCHENS: But you absolutely wouldn’t be challengeable in your
belief. It’d be very, very important to you. But there’d be no way in
your life, your real life, of vindicating or practising the opinion that
you have. And I’m sure that the same is true of people who say,
‘Well, I shouldn’t really prefer one child to another, or one parent to
another, but I do. I’m just not going to act as if I do.’ All kinds of
things like this. Senator Craig*5 saying he’s not gay. Thinking in his

own mind that he’s absolutely sure he’s not, but he can’t manage his
life by saying he is or he isn’t.
So, a question I wanted to ask was this. We should ask ourselves
what our real objective is. Do we in fact wish to see a world without
faith? I think I would have to say that I don’t. I don’t either expect to,
or wish to, see that.
HARRIS: What do you mean by faith?
HITCHENS: Faith, as often as it’s cut down or superseded or
discredited, replicates, it seems to me, extraordinarily fast, I think
for Freudian reasons – principally to do with the fear of extinction or
annihilation.
HARRIS: You mean faith in supernatural paradigms?
HITCHENS: Yes. Wish thinking. And then the other thing is: would I
want this argument to come to an end, with all having conceded,
‘Hitchens really won that round. Now nobody in the world believes
in God’?
Now, apart from being unable to picture this, [Laughter] I’m not
even completely certain that it’s what I want. I think it is rather to be
considered the foundation of all arguments about epistemology,
philosophy, biology, and so on – that it’s the thing you have to
always be arguing against. The other explanation.
DAWKINS: I find that an extraordinary thing to say. I don’t
understand what you’re saying. I mean, I understand you’re saying
that it will never work, but I don’t understand why you wouldn’t
wish it.
HITCHENS: Because – I think, a bit like the argument between
Huxley*6 and Wilberforce*7 or Darrow*8 and William Jennings
Bryan – I want it to go on.
DAWKINS: Because it’s interesting.
HITCHENS: I want our side to get more refined and theirs to be ever
more exposed. But I can’t see [this happening] with one hand
clapping.
HARRIS: You don’t want it to go on with the jihadists?

HITCHENS: No, but I don’t have a difference of opinion with the
jihadists.
HARRIS: Well, you do, in terms of the legitimacy of their project.
HITCHENS: No, not really. There’s nothing to argue about with that. I
mean, there it’s a simple matter: I want them to be extirpated. That’s
a purely primate response with me – recognizing the need to destroy
an enemy in order to assure my own survival. I have no interest at all
in what they think. We haven’t yet come to your question about
Islam, but I have no interest at all in what jihadists think. I’m only
interested in refining methods of destroying them. A task for which,
by the way, one gets very little secular support.
HARRIS: Yes, that’s notable.
HITCHENS: Most atheists don’t want this fight. The most important
one is the one they want to shirk. They’d far rather go off and dump
on Billy Graham.*9 Because on that, they know that there’s no
danger.
DENNETT: I think that because we find the idea of exterminating
these people is abhorrent, and we think that besides, it will—
HITCHENS: No, I said ‘extirpating’.
DENNETT: Extirpate.
HITCHENS: 
Complete 
destruction 
of 
the 
jihadist 
forces.
Extermination, I think, applies more to a species.
DAWKINS: But, Christopher, going back to your point: It sounds as
though you like argument. You like having – it’s almost the theatre
of having – an intellectual argument, which would be lost.
HITCHENS: Well, I would rather say ‘the dialectic’, Richard. In other
words, one learns from arguing with other people. And I think all of
us around this table have probably enhanced or improved our own
capacities as reasoners in this context.
DAWKINS: But there are plenty of other things to reason about.
Having won the battle against religion, we can go back to science or
whatever it is we practise, and we can argue and reason about that.

And there’s plenty of arguments, that are really worthwhile
arguments, to be had.
HITCHENS: It will always be the case that some will attribute their
presence here to the laws of biology and others will attribute their
presence here to a divine plan that has a scheme for them.
DAWKINS: Well, that’s what—
HITCHENS: You can tell a lot, in my view, about people from which of
these views they take. And as we all know, only one of those views
makes sense. But how do we know that? Because we have to contrast
it with the opposite one, which is not going to disappear.
HARRIS: Let me make an analogy here. You could have said the same
thing about witchcraft at some point in recent history.
HITCHENS: Yes.
HARRIS: You could say that every culture has had a belief in witches,
a belief in the efficacy of magic spells, witchcraft is just ubiquitous
and we’re never going to get rid of it, and we’re fools to try. Or we
can try only as a matter of dialectic, but witchcraft is going to be with
us for ever. And yet witchcraft has vanished, almost without
exception. I mean you can find certain communities where—
HITCHENS: Not at all. Not at all. Witchcraft is completely
ineradicable and spreads like weeds, often under animists and
Christians.
DENNETT: Not in the Western world.
HARRIS: I mean frank witchcraft. The witchcraft of the evil eye, and
instead of medicine you have—
HITCHENS: You think you’ve got rid of that?
HARRIS: Fundamentally, we’ve gotten rid of that. Yes.
DAWKINS: In any case, don’t you want to get rid of it?
HITCHENS: There’s currently a campaign to get Wiccans registered to
be buried in Arlington Cemetery.

HARRIS: I’m talking about a willingness to kill your neighbours
because you think there’s some causal mechanism by which they,
through their evil intent, could have destroyed your crops
psychically, or cast an evil eye upon your child. This comes with
ignorance of medical science.
HITCHENS: Yes, it does.
HARRIS: You don’t know why people get sick, and you suspect your
neighbour of ill intent, and then witchcraft fills the void there.
HITCHENS: I wouldn’t say in such a case that one didn’t wish to be
without it, that we’ve lost something interesting to argue with.
HARRIS: But we’re not dealing with the claims of witches intruding
upon medical practices. Don’t go to alternative medicine and
acupuncture here. I’m talking about real witchcraft, medieval
witchcraft.
HITCHENS: Actually I was about to do that very thing. And the
Washington Post publishes horoscopes every day.
HARRIS: Astrology is yet another matter.
DENNETT: Yes, but astrology is a pale—
HITCHENS: Let’s take them out of it. Astrology is not going to be
eradicated.
DENNETT: OK. Well, but it doesn’t need to be eradicated.
DAWKINS: But you’re confusing whether it’s going to be eradicated
and whether you want it to be eradicated. And it sounds as though
you don’t want it to be eradicated, because you want something to
argue against. And something to sharpen your wits on.
HITCHENS: Yes, I think that is in fact what I want.
DENNETT: But in fact, instead of thinking about eradication, why not
think about it the way an evolutionary epidemiologist would, and
say, ‘What we want to do is encourage the evolution of avirulence.
We want to get rid of the harmful kind. I don’t care about
astrology – I don’t think it’s harmful enough. I mean, it was a little
scary when Reagan was reportedly using astrology to make

decisions, but that, I hope, anomalous case aside, I find the
superstition that astrology is important to be relatively harmless. If
we could only relegate the other enthusiasms to the status of
astrology, I’d be happy.
HITCHENS: Well, look, you don’t like my answer. But I think the
question should be – it is going to be asked of us; it was asked of me
today, actually, on TV. They said, ‘Do you wish no one was going to
church this morning in the United States?’
DENNETT: What’s your answer?
HITCHENS: Well, I’ve given mine, and Richard has disagreed. But the
answer I gave this morning was that I think people would be much
better off without false consolation, and I don’t want them trying to
inflict their beliefs on me. They’d be doing themselves and me a
favour if they gave it up. So perhaps in that sense I contradict
myself. I mean, I wish they would stop it, but then I would be left
with no one to argue with. And I certainly didn’t say that I thought if
they would only listen to me they’d stop going, OK? So, there are two
questions here.
But I’d love to hear: would you like to say that you look forward to
a world where no one has any faith?
DAWKINS: Yes, I want to answer this. Whether it’s astrology or
religion or anything else, I want to live in a world where people think
sceptically for themselves, look at evidence. Not because astrology’s
harmful; I guess it probably isn’t harmful. But if you go through the
world thinking that it’s OK to just believe things because you believe
them without evidence, then you’re missing so much. And it’s such a
wonderful experience to live in the world and understand why
you’re living in the world, and understand what makes it work,
understand about the real stars, understand about astronomy, that
it’s an impoverishing thing to be reduced to the pettiness of
astrology.
And I think you can say the same of religion. The universe is a
grand, beautiful, wonderful place, and it’s petty and parochial and
cheapening to believe in jinns and supernatural creators and

supernatural interferers. I think you could make an aesthetic case
that you’d want to get rid of faith.
HITCHENS: I could not possibly agree with you more.
DENNETT: But let’s talk about priorities. If we could just get rid of
some of the most pernicious and noxious excesses, what would be
the triumphs you would go for first? What would really thrill you as
an objective reached? Let’s look at Islam. And let’s look at Islam as
realistically as we can. Is there any remote chance of a reformed,
reasonable Islam?
DAWKINS: Well, the present savage Islam is actually rather recent,
isn’t it?
DENNETT: You have to go back quite a way, I think, to get the—
HARRIS: Only up to a point. And again, whether or not we’re
equipped to deliver it, we’re not the most persuasive mouthpieces
for this criticism. It takes someone like Ayaan Hirsi Ali,*10 or a
Muslim scholar, someone like Ibn Warraq,*11 to authentically
criticize Islam and have it be heard by people, especially the secular
liberals of the sort who don’t trust our take on this. But it seems to
me that you have distinct historical periods in the history of Islam.
You have a caliphate, or a Muslim country where Islam reigns and is
unmolested from the outside, and then Islam can be as totalitarian
and happy with itself as possible, and you don’t see the inherent
liabilities of its creed. The political scientist Samuel Huntington*12
said, ‘Islam has bloody borders.’ It’s at the borders that we’re
noticing this problem; it’s at the borders of Islam and modernity.
There is a conflict between Islam and modernity. But, yes, you can
find instances in the history of Islam where people weren’t running
around waging jihad, because they had successfully waged jihad.
DENNETT: But what about women in that world?
DAWKINS: Exactly. The suffering of women within those borders.
DENNETT: Even in the best of times.
HARRIS: Of course.

HITCHENS: But there’s obviously some kind of syncretism. We know
quite a lot now. There have been some wonderful books, María
Menocal’s book on Andalucía, for example,*13 – on periods when
Islamic civilization was relatively at peace with its neighbours and
doing a lot of work of its own on matters that were not jihadist. And
I saw, myself, during the wars post-Yugoslavia, the Bosnian Muslims
behaving far better than the Christians, either Catholic or Orthodox.
They were the victims of religious massacres and not the
perpetrators of them, and they were the ones who believed the most
in multiculturalism. So it can happen. You could even meet people
who said they were atheist Muslims, or Muslim atheists.
DENNETT: Wow!
HITCHENS: In Sarajevo, you could, yes. Which is a technical
impossibility. But the problem is this, whether we think, as I
certainly very firmly do believe, that totalitarianism is innate in all
religion because it has to want an absolute, unchallengeable, eternal
authority.
DENNETT: In all religions.
HITCHENS: Must be so. The Creator whose will can’t be challenged.
Our comments on his will are unimportant. His will is absolute, and
applies after we’re dead as well as before we’re born. That is the
origin of totalitarianism. I think Islam states that in the most
alarming way, in that it comes as the third of the monotheisms and
says: ‘Nothing further is required. This is the last. There have been
previous words from God; we admit that. We don’t claim to be
exclusive, but we do claim to be final. There’s no need for any further
work on this point.’
HARRIS: ‘And we do claim that there is no distance between theology
and civil matters.’
HITCHENS: That is the worst thing in our world. In our world, surely
the worst thing that anyone can say is, ‘No further inquiries needed.
You’ve already got all you need to know. All else is commentary.’
That is the most sinister and dangerous thing, and that is a claim
Islam makes that others don’t make in quite the same way.

DENNETT: Well, let me play devil’s advocate for a moment on that
point.
HITCHENS: There’s no regard for Islam in Christianity or Judaism,
but there is [regard for these other faiths] in Islam. They accept all
the bits of Judaism. They love Abraham and his willingness to
sacrifice his son. They love all that. They absolutely esteem the
Virgin Birth, the most nonsensical bits of Christianity. They think all
that is great. ‘You’re all welcome to join, but we have the final word.’
That’s deadly. And I think our existence is incompatible with that
preaching.
DENNETT: Let me just play devil’s advocate for a moment, so at least
we’re clear what the position is.
HITCHENS: I’d rather speak for the devil pro bono myself. [Laughter]
DENNETT: We can all speak for the devil. I’m sure a lot of people
think we’re doing just that.
I, for one, think that the fact that something is true is not quite
sufficient for spreading it about, or for trying to discover it. The idea
that there are things that we should just not try to find out is an idea
that I take seriously. And I think we at least have to examine the
proposition that there’s such a thing as knowing more than is good
for us.
Now, if you accept that so far, then a possibility we have to take
seriously – even when we reject it, we should reject it having taken it
seriously – is the Muslim idea that indeed the West has simply gone
way too far, that there’s lots of knowledge that isn’t good for us. It’s
knowledge that we were better off without. And the fact is that many
Muslims would like to turn the clock back. They can’t, of course. But
I have a certain sympathy for a Muslim who says, ‘Well, yeah, the
cat’s out of the bag. It’s too late. It’s a tragedy. You in the West have
exposed truths to yourselves, and now you’re forcing them on us –
truths that the species would be better off not knowing.’
HITCHENS: I’m absolutely riveted by what you say. I’d really love an
instance, in theory or practice, of something you think we could
know but could forbid ourselves to know. Because that is harder for
me to imagine in a world without faith, I must say.

HARRIS: Well, you brought up the bell curve. If there were reliable
differences in intelligence between races or genders—
HITCHENS: But I don’t think any of us here do think that that’s the
case. You must have thought of something you could believe but
wish you didn’t know.
DENNETT: Oh, I don’t think it’s hard to dream up things which, if they
were true, it might be better for the human race to go on not
knowing them.
HITCHENS: Could you concretize it just a little more? I’m completely
fascinated.
DAWKINS: The hypothetical is one thing. But Christopher’s asking,
‘Have you ever suppressed something that—?’
HITCHENS: Was there something you had in mind?
DENNETT: No. No, I haven’t.
DAWKINS: No.
HITCHENS: Can you imagine yourself doing so, by the way? I can’t.
DENNETT: Oh, I can imagine it. I hope it never comes up.
HARRIS: Take the synthesizing of bioweapons. Should Nature publish
the recipe for smallpox?
DENNETT: Yes, exactly. There’s all those—
HITCHENS: Well, all right. But that wouldn’t be a knowledge of which
we should remain innocent. That would be more like a capacity.
HARRIS: Certainly you can conceive of a circumstance where someone
can seek knowledge the only conceivable application of which would
be unethical, or the dissemination of which would put power in the
wrong hands. But, actually, you brought up something which I think
is crucial here. Because it’s not so much the spread of seditious
truths to Islam or to the rest of the world that I think we’re guilty of
in the eyes of our opponents. It’s that we don’t honour facts that
aren’t easily quantified or easily discussed in science. The classic
retort to all of us is, ‘Prove to me that you love your wife’ – as though
this were a knock-down argument against atheism: you can’t prove

it. Well, if you unpack that a little bit, you can prove it. You can
demonstrate it. We know what we mean by ‘love’. But there is this
domain of the sacred that is not easily captured by science, and
scientific discourse has ceded it to religious discourse.
DENNETT: Well, and artistic discourse.
HARRIS: Yes.
DENNETT: Which is not religious, necessarily.
HARRIS: But I would argue it’s not even well captured by art, in the
same way that love is not well captured by art. And compassion isn’t.
You can represent them in art, but they’re not reducible to art. You
don’t go into the museum and find compassion in its purest form.
And I think there’s something about the way we, as atheists, merely
dismiss the bogus claims of religious people that convinces religious
people that there’s something we’re missing. And I think we have to
be sensitive to this.
HITCHENS: Absolutely. That’s why they bring up the argument about
when has secularism ever built anything like Durham Cathedral or
Chartres, or produced devotional painting or the music of—
DENNETT: Bach.
HITCHENS: I guess it would have to be Bach, yes.
HARRIS: But I think we have answers to that.
HITCHENS: Yes, we do.
HARRIS: And you provide a very good answer: If there had been
secular patronage of the arts at that point, then (1) we can’t know
that Michelangelo was actually a believer, because the consequences
of professing your unbelief back then was death. And (2), if we had a
secular organization to commission Michelangelo, we would have all
that secular artwork.
HITCHENS: I didn’t actually say that the corollary held.
HARRIS: Which?
HITCHENS: I think it’s true that we can’t know, with devotional
painting and sculpture, whether the patronage did or didn’t have a

lot to do with it. But I can’t hear myself saying, ‘If only you had a
secular painter, he would have done work just as good.’ I don’t know
why – and I’m quite happy to find that I don’t know why – I can’t
quite hear myself saying it.
DAWKINS: What? That Michelangelo, if he’d been commissioned to
do the ceiling of a museum of science, wouldn’t have produced
something just as wonderful?
HITCHENS: In some way, I’m reluctant to affirm that, yes.
DAWKINS: Really? I find it very, very easy to believe that.
HITCHENS: That could be a difference between us. I mean, with
devotional poetry – I don’t know very much about painting and
architecture, and some of the devotional architecture, like, say, St
Peter’s, I don’t like anyway and knowing that it was built by a special
sale of indulgences doesn’t help, either. With devotional poetry, like,
let us say, John Donne*14 or George Herbert,*15 I find it very hard to
imagine that it’s faked or done for a patron.
DAWKINS: Yes, I think that’s fair enough.
HITCHENS: It would be very improbable that people wrote poetry like
that to please anyone.
DAWKINS: But in any case, what conclusion would you draw? If
Donne’s devotional poetry is wonderful, so what? That doesn’t show
that it represents truth in any sense.
HITCHENS: Not in the least. My favourite devotional poem is Philip
Larkin’s ‘Church Going’.*16 One of the best poems ever written. It
exactly expresses… I wish I had it here; well, actually I do have it
here; if you like I can read it. But I wouldn’t trust anyone who
believed any more, or any less, than Larkin does when he goes to a
wayside Gothic church in the English countryside. Who felt – I don’t
say ‘believed’; I shouldn’t say ‘believed’ – who felt any more than he
does. He’s an atheist. Or who felt any less. There’s something serious
about this poem. And something written into the human personality
as well as the landscape. But it goes without saying that it says
nothing about the truth of religion.

DENNETT: I don’t see how this is anything other than a special case.
Other special cases of which would be that you just couldn’t – I can’t
think of a perfect example – Only by being lost at sea for two years in
a boat, say, and surviving, that’s the only way you could conceivably
write an account of that. It could not be fiction. And it’s glorious,
wonderful art. And it’s right. That can be true, and we just accept it.
That’s true. And Donne’s poetry: only very extreme circumstances
could make it possible, and we can be grateful, perhaps, that those
extreme circumstances existed and made it possible.
HARRIS: In his case, yes. But you wouldn’t recommend being lost at
sea to everyone.
DENNETT: No, no.
HITCHENS: No. I wouldn’t recommend the worldview in ‘Death Be
Not Proud’*17 to anyone, either. The sonnet is wonderful, but it’s
complete gibberish if you look only at the words. It’s the most
extraordinary gibberish, if you look only at the words. But there’s an
x factor involved, which I’m quite happy to both assume will persist
and will need to be confronted.
HARRIS: Right. You raised this issue, though, of whether or not we
would wish the churches empty on Sundays, and I think you were
uncertain whether you would. And I think I would agree. I would
want a different church. I would want a different ritual, motivated by
different ideas. But I think there’s a place for the sacred in our lives,
but under some construal that doesn’t presuppose any bullshit. I
think there’s a usefulness to seeking profundity as a matter of our
attention.
HITCHENS: Sure.
HARRIS: And our neglect of this area, as atheists, at times makes even
our craziest opponents seem wiser than we are. And it takes
someone like Sayyid Qutb,*18 who is as crazy as it gets – he was
Osama bin Laden’s favourite philosopher. He came out to Greeley,
Colorado, around 1950 and spent a year in America and noticed that
his American hosts were spending all their time gossiping about
movie stars and trimming their hedges and coveting each other’s

automobiles, and he came to believe that America, or the West, was
so trivial in its preoccupations and so materialistic that it had to be
destroyed. Now, this shouldn’t be construed as my giving any
credence to his worldview, but he had a point. There is something
trivial and horrible about the day-to-day fascinations of most people,
most of the time. There is a difference between using your attention
wisely, in a meaningful way, and perpetual distraction. And
traditionally only religion has tried to enunciate that difference. And
I think that’s a lapse in our—
DAWKINS: I think you’ve made that point, and we’ve accepted it, Sam.
Going back to the thing about whether we’d like to see churches
empty: I think I would like to see churches empty. What I wouldn’t
like to see, however, is ignorance of the Bible.
HITCHENS: No, very right!
DAWKINS: Because you cannot understand literature without
knowing the Bible. You can’t understand art, you can’t understand
music, there are all sorts of things you can’t understand, for
historical reasons – but those historical reasons you can’t wipe out.
They’re there. And so even if you don’t actually go to church and
pray, you’ve got to understand what it meant to people to pray, and
why they did it, and what these verses in the Bible mean, and what
this—
HARRIS: But is it only that? Just the historical appreciation of our
ancestors’ ignorance?
DAWKINS: You can more than just appreciate it. You can lose yourself
in it, just as you can lose yourself in a work of fiction without
actually believing that the characters are real.
DENNETT: But you’re sure you want to see the churches empty? You
can’t imagine a variety of churches, maybe by their lights an
extremely denatured church: a church which has rituals and loyalty
and purpose and music, and they sing the songs and they do the
rituals, but where the irrationality has simply been laundered out.
DAWKINS: Oh, OK, so you go to those places for funerals and
weddings—

DENNETT: Yes, and also—
DAWKINS: —and you have beautiful poetry and music.
DENNETT: And also perhaps for—
DAWKINS: Group solidarity.
DENNETT: Group solidarity, to create some project which is hard to
get off the ground otherwise.
HITCHENS: I think there’s one more tiny thing. I haven’t been
tempted to go to church since I was a very small boy, but one reason
that makes it very easy to keep me out of church is the use of the
New English Bible.
DAWKINS: Oh, and how! Yes! [Laughter]
HITCHENS: There’s really no point in going. I can’t see how anyone
does go, and I can see why people stay away. They’ve thrown away—
HARRIS: All the poetry. Yes.
HITCHENS: —a pearl richer than all their tribe.
DAWKINS: Absolutely.
HITCHENS: They don’t even know what they’ve got. It’s terrible. If I
were a lapsed Catholic and I brooded about how I wanted my funeral
to be, which is not something I’d—
DENNETT: You’d only want the Latin Mass.
HITCHENS: Yes!
DENNETT: Absolutely.
DAWKINS: But there’s another issue there, which, of course, is that
when it becomes intelligible, the nonsense becomes more
transparent, and so if it’s in Latin, it can survive much better. It’s
sort of like a camouflaged insect. It can get through the barriers
because you can’t see it. And when it’s translated into not just
English but modern English, you can see it for what it is.
DENNETT: But now, seriously: Do you therefore delight in the fact
that churches are modernizing their texts and using the—

DAWKINS: No, I don’t. It’s an aesthetic point. No, I don’t.
HITCHENS: That’s the worst of both worlds.
DENNETT: That’s what it seems to me. Yes.
HITCHENS: And we should be grateful for it. We didn’t do this to
them. [Laughter]
DENNETT: That’s right. We didn’t impose this on them, they did it to
themselves.
HARRIS: We weren’t clever enough.
HITCHENS: We don’t blow up Shia mosques, either. We don’t blow up
the Bamiyan Buddhas. We don’t desecrate. We would, for the
reasons given by Sophocles in Antigone, have a natural resistance to
profanity and desecration. We leave it to the pious to destroy
churches and burn synagogues or blow up each other’s mosques.
And I think that’s a point that we ought to, we might, spend more
time making. Because I do think it is feared of us – which was my
point to begin with – that we wish for a world that’s somehow empty
of this echo of music and poetry and the numinous, and so forth.
That we would be happy in a Brave New World. And, since I don’t
think it’s true of any of us—
DAWKINS: No. No, it’s not.
DENNETT: No, definitely.
HITCHENS: I think it’s a point we might spend a bit more time
making. That the howling wilderness of nothingness is much more
likely to result from holy war or religious conflict or theocracy than it
is from a proper secularism, which would therefore I think, have to
not just allow or leave or tolerate or condescend to or patronize but
actually, in a sense, welcome the persistence of something like faith.
I feel I’ve put it better now than I did at the beginning.
HARRIS: Well, what do you mean by ‘something like faith’?
DENNETT: How like faith?
HITCHENS: Something like the belief that there must be more than
we can know.

DENNETT: Well, that’s fine.
HARRIS: Dan Dennett believes that. That’s not faith.
DENNETT: Yes, sure!
HARRIS: We know there’s more than we presently know and are likely
to know.
HITCHENS: That was my original point in saying that if we could find
a way of enforcing the distinction between the numinous and the
superstitious, we would be doing something culturally quite
important. Richard and I debated at the Methodist Central Hall with
Scruton*19 and that rather weird team who kept on saying – Scruton,
particularly – ‘Well, what about good old Gothic spires,’ and so
forth. I said, ‘Look, I wrote a book about the Parthenon. I’m
intensely interested in it. I think everyone should go there, everyone
should study it, and so forth. But everyone should abstain from the
cult of Pallas Athena. Everyone should realize that probably what
that beautiful sculptural frieze depicts may involve some human
sacrifices. Athenian imperialism wasn’t all that pretty, even in the
Age of Pericles.’ The great cultural project, in other words, may very
well be to rescue what we have of the art and aesthetic of religion
while discarding the supernatural.
DENNETT: And I think acknowledging the evil that was part of its
creation in the first place. That is, we can’t condone the beliefs and
practices of the Aztecs, but we can stand in awe of, and want to
preserve, their architecture and many other features of their culture.
But not their practices [laughs] and not their beliefs.
DAWKINS: I was once a guest on a British radio programme called
Desert Island Discs, where you have to choose the eight records
which you’d take to a desert island and talk about them. And one of
the ones I chose was Bach’s Mache dich, mein Herze, rein.
Wonderful, wonderful sacred music.
DENNETT: Beautiful.
DAWKINS: And the woman questioning me couldn’t understand why I
would wish to have this piece of music. Beautiful music, and its

beauty is indeed enhanced by knowing what it means. But you don’t
actually have to believe it; it’s like reading fiction.
DENNETT: Exactly.
DAWKINS: You can lose yourself in fiction, and be totally moved to
tears by it, but nobody would ever say you’ve got to believe that this
person existed or that the sadness that you feel really reflected
something that actually happened.
HITCHENS: Yes. Like the Irish bishop who said that he’d read
Gulliver’s Travels and for his part he didn’t believe a word of it.*20
[Laughter] It’s the best of locus classicus, I think – of all of that.
Clearly, we’re not cultural vandals, but maybe we should think about
why so many people suspect that that’s what we are. If I were to
accept one criticism that these people make, or one suspicion that I
suspect they harbour, or fear that they may have, I think that that
might be the one: that it would be all chromium and steel and—
DENNETT: And no Christmas carols and no menorahs and no—
DAWKINS: Anybody who makes that criticism couldn’t possibly have
read any one of our books.
DENNETT: Well, that’s another problem, too. And of course it isn’t
just our books, it’s so many books. People don’t read them. They just
read the reviews, and they decide that’s what the book is about.
HITCHENS: We’re about to have the Christmas wars again, of course;
this being the last day of September. You can feel it all coming on.
But whenever it comes up, when I go on any of these shows to
discuss it, I say it was Oliver Cromwell*21 who cut down the
Christmas trees and forbade… It was the Puritan Protestants, the
ancestors of the American fundamentalists, who said Christmas
would be blasphemy.
DAWKINS: Yes. It’s the Bamiyan Buddhas again.
HITCHENS: Do you at least respect your own traditions? Because I do.
I think Cromwell was a great man in many other ways as well.
Christmas is actually a pagan festival.
HARRIS: We were all outed with our Christmas trees last year.

DENNETT: Yes.
DAWKINS: I have not the slightest problem with Christmas trees.
DENNETT: We had our Christmas card, with our pictures of—
HITCHENS: It’s a good old Norse booze-up. And why the hell not?
DENNETT: Well, but it’s not just that.
HITCHENS: I like solstices as much as the next person.
DENNETT: We have an annual Christmas carol party, where we sing
the music. And all the music with all the words, and not the secular
Christmas stuff.
DAWKINS: And why not?
DENNETT: And it’s just glorious stuff. That part of the Christian story
is fantastic – it’s just a beautiful tale! And you can love every inch of
it without believing it.
DAWKINS: I once, at lunch, was next to the lady who was our
opponent at that debate in London.
HITCHENS: Rabbi Neuberger.*22
DAWKINS: Rabbi Neuberger. And she asked me whether I said grace
in New College when I happened to be senior fellow. And I said, ‘Of
course I say grace. It’s a matter of simple courtesy.’ And she was
furious that I should somehow be so hypocritical as to say grace.
And I could only say, ‘Well, look, it may mean something to you, but
it means absolutely nothing to me. This is a Latin formula which has
some history, and I appreciate history.’ Freddie Ayer,*23 the
philosopher, also used to say grace, and what he said was, ‘I won’t
utter falsehoods but I have no objection to uttering meaningless
statements.’ [Laughter]
HITCHENS: That’s very good. The Wykeham Professor.
DAWKINS: The Wykeham Professor, yes.
HITCHENS: Did we answer your question on Islam?
HARRIS: I don’t know. Well, I’ll ask a related question. Do you feel
there’s any burden we have, as critics of religion, to be evenhanded

in our criticism of religion, or is it fair to notice that there’s a
spectrum of religious ideas and commitments and Islam is on one
end of it and the Amish and the Jains and others are on another end,
and there are real differences here that we have to take seriously.
DENNETT: Well, of course we have to take them seriously, but we
don’t have to do the network-balancing trick all the time. There are
plenty of people taking care of pointing out the good stuff, and the
benign stuff. And we can acknowledge that and then concentrate on
the problems. That’s what critics do. Again, if we were writing books
about the pharmaceutical industry, would we have to spend equal
time on all the good they do? Or could we specialize in the
problems? I think it’s very clear.
DAWKINS: I think Sam’s asking more about—
HARRIS: Well, we could criticize Merck if they were especially
egregious compared to some other company. If we were focusing on
the pharmaceutical industry, not all pharmaceutical businesses
would be culpable to the same degree.
DENNETT: Yes, right, well, so then the question is what? Is there
something wrong with just—
DAWKINS: Sam’s asking about whether we should be evenhanded in
criticizing the different religions, and you’re talking about
evenhandedness regarding good versus bad.
HITCHENS: Whether all religions are equally bad.
DAWKINS: Yes, whether Islam is worse than Christianity.
HARRIS: It seems to me that we fail to enlist the friends we have on
this subject when we balance this. It’s a media tactic, and it’s almost
an ontological commitment of atheism, to say that all faith claims
are in some sense equivalent. The media says the Muslims have their
extremists and we have our extremists. There are jihadists in the
Middle East and we have people killing abortion doctors. And that’s
just not an honest equation. The mayhem that’s going on under the
aegis of Islam just cannot be compared to the fact that we have two
people a decade who kill abortionists. And this is one of the
problems I have with the practice of atheism: it hobbles us when we

have to seem to spread the light of criticism equally in all directions
at all moments, whereas we could, on some questions, have a
majority of religious people agree with us.
A majority of people in the United States clearly agree that the
doctrine of martyrdom in Islam is appalling and not at all benign,
and liable to get a lot of people killed, and that it is worthy of
criticism. Likewise the doctrine that souls live in Petri dishes: even
most Christians, 70 per cent of Americans, don’t want to believe
that, in light of the promise of embryonic stem-cell research. So it
seems to me that once we focus on particulars, we have a real
strength in numbers, and yet when we stand on the ramparts of
atheism and say it’s all bogus, we lose 90 per cent of our neighbours.
DAWKINS: Well, I’m sure that’s right. On the other hand, my concern
is actually not so much with the evils of religion as with whether it’s
true. And I really do care passionately about the fact of the matter: is
there, as a matter of fact, a supernatural creator of this universe?
And I really care about that bogus belief. And so, although I also care
about the evils of religion, I am prepared to be evenhanded, because
they all make this claim, it seems to me, equally.
HITCHENS: I would never give up the claim that all religions are
equally false. And for that reason: because they’re false in preferring
faith to reason. And latently at least, they’re equally dangerous.
DAWKINS: Equally false, but surely not quite equally dangerous.
Because—
HITCHENS: No. Latently, I think so.
DAWKINS: Latently, maybe. Yes.
HITCHENS: Because of the surrender of the mind. The eagerness to
discard the only thing we’ve got that makes us higher primates: the
faculty of reason. That’s always deadly.
DENNETT: I’m not sure that—
DAWKINS: It’s potentially dangerous.
HITCHENS: The Amish can’t hurt me, but they can sure hurt the
people who live in their community if they have a little totalitarian

system.
HARRIS: But not quite in the same way.
HITCHENS: The Dalai Lama claims to be a god king, a hereditary
monarch, an inherited god, in essence. It’s a most repulsive possible
idea. And he runs a crummy little dictatorship in Dharamsala. And
praises the nuclear tests. It’s limited only by his own limited scope –
the same evil is present.
HARRIS: But if you added jihad to that, you’d be more concerned.
HITCHENS: Well, look, every time I’ve ever debated with Islamists
they’ve all said, ‘You’ve just offended a billion Muslims,’ as if they
spoke for them. As if, and there’s a definite threat to this, a menace,
a military tone to what they say. In other words, if they’d said,
‘You’ve just offended me as a Muslim,’ that doesn’t sound quite the
same, does it? If they were the only one who believed in the prophet
Mohammed. No, no, it’s a billion. And, by the way, what’s implied in
that is, ‘Watch out!’ I don’t care. If there was only one person who
believed that the prophet Mohammed had been given dictation by
the Archangel Gabriel, I’d still say what I was saying.
HARRIS: Right, but you wouldn’t lie awake at night.
HITCHENS: And it would be just as dangerous that they believed that.
Yes, it would. Because it could spread. The belief could become more
general.
HARRIS: But in the case of Islam, it has spread, and it’s spreading,
and so its danger is not only potential but actual.
DAWKINS: Yes. I can see no contradiction. You’re talking about
different things.
HITCHENS: Yes, but over space and time, all that, I think,
tremendously evens out. I mean, I didn’t expect, and I’m sure
neither did you, that in the sixties there would be such a threat from
Jewish fundamentalism. Relatively small numbers, but in a very
important place, a strategic place, in deciding to try and bring on the
Messiah by stealing other people’s land and trying to bring on the
end. It’s numerically extremely small, but the consequences that it’s

had have been absolutely calamitous. We didn’t use to think actually
that Judaism was a threat in that way at all, until the Zionist
movement annexed the Messianic, or fused with it – because the
Messianists didn’t use to be Zionists, as you know. So you never
know what’s coming next.
HARRIS: Well, that I certainly agree with.
HITCHENS: And I agree that I’m not likely to have my throat cut at
the supermarket by a Quaker. But the Quakers do say, ‘We preach
non-resistance to evil.’ That’s as wicked as a position as you could
possibly have.
HARRIS: Given the right context, yes.
HITCHENS: What could be more revolting than that? Saying you see
evil and violence and cruelty and you don’t fight it.
DENNETT: Yes, they’re free riders.
HITCHENS: Yes. Read Franklin*24 on what the Quakers were like at
the crucial moment, in Philadelphia, when there had to be a battle
over freedom, and see why people despised them. I would have then
said that Quakerism was actually quite a serious danger to the
United States. So, it’s a matter of space and time. But no, they’re all
equally rotten, false, dishonest, corrupt, humourless and dangerous,
in the last analysis.
HARRIS: There’s one point you made here that I think we should say a
little more about, which is that you can never quite anticipate the
danger of unreason. When your mode of interacting with others and
the universe is to affirm truths you’re in no position to affirm, the
liabilities of that are potentially infinite. To take a case that I raised a
moment ago, stem-cell research, you don’t know in advance that the
idea that the soul enters the zygote at the moment of conception will
turn out to be a dangerous idea. It seems totally benign, until you
invent something like stem-cell research, where it stands in the way
of incredibly promising, life-saving research. You can almost never
foresee how many lives dogmatism is going to cost, because its
conflicts with reality just erupt.

HITCHENS: Well, that’s why I think the moment where everything
went wrong is the moment when the Jewish Hellenists were
defeated by the Jewish Messianists – the celebration now benignly
known as Hanukkah. That’s where the human race took its worst
turn. A few people re-established the animal sacrifices, the
circumcision and the cult of Yahweh over Hellenism and philosophy.
And Christianity’s a plagiarism of that. Christianity would never
have happened if that hadn’t happened and nor would Islam. I have
no doubt there would have been other crazed cults and so forth, but
there might have been a chance to not destroy Hellenistic
civilization.
HARRIS: You’d still have the Dalai Lama to worry about.
HITCHENS: Well, it’s not a matter of numbers, it’s a matter of, if I may
say so, memes and infections. I would have certainly said in the
1930s that the Catholic Church was the most deadly organization,
because of its alliance with fascism, which was explicit and open and
sordid. Much the most dangerous church. But I would not now say
that the Pope is the most dangerous of the religious authorities. No
question that Islam is the most dangerous religion, and probably
because it doesn’t have a papacy that can tell it to stop something,
make an edict saying—
HARRIS: Yes. No top-down control.
HITCHENS: By all means, yes. But I would still have to say that
Judaism is the root of the problem.
HARRIS: Although it’s only the root of the problem in light of the
Muslim fixation on that land. If the Muslims didn’t care about
Palestine, we could have the settlers trying to usher in the Messiah
all they want. There would have been no issue. It’s only the conflict
of claims on that real estate. Both sides are at fault, but the only
reason why 200,000 settlers could potentially precipitate a global
conflict is because there are a billion people who really care whether
those settlers tear down the Al-Aqsa mosque and—
HITCHENS: Which it’s their dream to do. Because they have the belief
that one part of the globe is holier than another – than which no
belief could be more insane or irrational or indecent. And so just a

few of them, holding that view and having the power to make it real,
is enough to risk a civilizational conflict, which civilization could
lose. I think we’ll be very lucky if we get through this conflict without
a nuclear exchange.
HARRIS: That leads us to a very good topic. What are our most
grandiose hopes and fears here? What do you think could be
accomplished in the lifetime of our children? What do you think the
stakes actually are?
DENNETT: And how would you get there?
HARRIS: And is there something we could engineer, apart from mere
criticism? Are there practical steps? With a billion dollars, what
could we do to effect some significant change of ideas?
HITCHENS: I feel myself on the losing side politically and on the
winning side intellectually.
DENNETT: You don’t see anything to do?
HITCHENS: In the current zeitgeist, I don’t think we would be accused
of undue conceit if we said of ourselves, or didn’t mind it being said
of us, that we’ve been opening and carrying forward and largely
winning an argument that’s been neglected for too long. And that’s
certainly true in the United States and Britain at this moment, it
seems to me. But in global terms I think we’re absolutely in a tiny,
dwindling minority that’s going to be defeated by the forces of
theocracy.
HARRIS: So you’re betting against us?
HITCHENS: I think they’re going to end up by destroying civilization.
I’ve long thought so. But not without a struggle.
DENNETT: Well, of course you may be right, because it can be a single
catastrophe.
HITCHENS: That’s my big disagreement with Professor Dawkins: I
think it’s us, plus the 82nd Airborne and the 101st,*25 who are the
real fighters for secularism at the moment, the ones who are really
fighting the main enemy. And I think probably, among secularists,
that must be considered the most eccentric position you could

possibly hold. That’s tooth-fairy belief among those people. I believe
it to be an absolute fact. It’s only because of the willingness of the
United States to combat and confront theocracy that we have a
chance of beating it. Our arguments are absolutely of no relevance.
HARRIS: You may have many more takers, although not on the
territory of Iraq. I mean, it may be that we need the 82nd Airborne
to fight a different war in a different place, for the stated purpose.
HITCHENS: Voilà! By all means, there are reservations to be
expressed by me, which I’ll happily give you. But in principle, I think
that’s a very important recognition.
DAWKINS: Unfortunately we’re running out of time.
HITCHENS: And possibly tape. [Laughter]
DAWKINS: I think we’ve had a wonderful discussion.
DENNETT: Yes, great.
DAWKINS: Thank you very much.
DENNETT: We’ve got a lot to think about.
*1 Kenneth R. Miller (b. 1948), professor of biology and Royce Professor for
Teaching Excellence, Brown University.
*2 William James (1842–1910): US philosopher and psychologist; author of The
Varieties of Religious Experience (New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1902).
*3 Pervez Hoodbhoy (b. 1950): Pakistani nuclear physicist; promoter of free
speech, education and secularism in Pakistan.
*4 US progressive public policy advocacy group, formed in 1998.
*5 Larry Craig (b. 1945): former US Republican Senator for Idaho (1991–2009).
Arrested for ‘lewd conduct’ in June 2007; subsequently pleaded guilty to a lesser
charge of ‘disorderly conduct’; stated that he was not, nor ever had been, gay.
*6 Thomas Henry Huxley (1825–95): English biologist and champion of Darwinian
evolution, notably at the 1860 debate on the subject held by the British
Association in Oxford, where he spoke in opposition to Samuel Wilberforce.
*7 Samuel Wilberforce (1805–73): Anglican cleric; Bishop of Oxford from 1845;
took part in the 1860 debate on evolution, opposing Darwin’s assertion that
humans and apes shared common ancestors.
*8 Clarence Darrow (1857–1938): US lawyer; defended the teacher John Scopes in
the ‘Scopes trial’ of 1925, in opposition to Bryan.

*9 Billy Graham (1918–2018): US Southern Baptist minister and evangelist,
renowned for the large indoor and outdoor rallies at which he preached.
*10 Ayaan Hirsi Ali (b. 1969): Dutch American scholar and activist; born in
Somalia; vocal critic of Islam and advocate of the rights of Muslim women. See p.
2 above.
*11 The pen name of an anonymous critic of Islam; one of the founders in 1998 of
the Institute for the Secularisation of Islamic Society.
*12 Samuel Huntington (1927–2008): US political scientist and presidential
adviser; propounded in 1993 his theory of ‘the clash of civilizations’, presented in
book form as The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order
(1996).
*13 María Rosa Menocal, The Ornament of the World: How Muslims, Jews and
Christians Created a Culture of Tolerance in Medieval Spain (Boston: Little,
Brown, 2002).
*14 John Donne (1572–1631): English poet and cleric; Dean of St Paul’s Cathedral
from 1612; wrote both secular and religious poetry and prose.
*15 George Herbert (1593–1633): Welsh poet and cleric; Canon of Lincoln
Cathedral from 1626.
*16 Philip Larkin (1922–85): English poet and writer; librarian of Hull University
from 1955. ‘Church Going’ appears in his 1955 volume The Less Deceived.
*17 Also known as ‘Sonnet X’: poem by John Donne, part of the Divine Meditations
sequence, composed in 1609 and first published (posthumously) in 1633.
*18 Sayyid Qutb (1906–66): Egyptian Islamic radical; leader of the Muslim
Brotherhood.
*19 Roger Scruton (b. 1944): English conservative philosopher and writer.
*20 Letter from Jonathan Swift to Alexander Pope, 17 November 1726.
*21 Oliver Cromwell (1599–1658): English radical Protestant, soldier and
politician; leader of Parliamentary forces in Civil Wars; Lord Protector of the
English Commonwealth, 1653–8.
*22 Julia Neuberger (b. 1950): British rabbi and member of the House of Lords;
senior rabbi of the West London Synagogue from 2011.
*23 Alfred Jules Ayer (1910–89), known as A.J. or ‘Freddie’ Ayer: British
philosopher; works include Language, Truth and Logic (1936), in which he
propounded the ‘verification principle’; Wykeham Professor of Logic at Oxford
from 1959.
*24 Benjamin Franklin (1706–90): leading figure of the American Enlightenment
and one of the Founding Fathers of the United States; member of the Committee
of Five that drafted the Declaration of Independence in 1776; President of
Pennsylvania, 1785–8.
*25 Airborne infantry divisions of the US Army, specializing in air assault
operations; active in Iraq and Afghanistan.

For Hitch

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science, a division
of the Center for Inquiry, expresses its deep gratitude for the generous
contributions of Richard Dawkins, Daniel Dennett, Stephen Fry, Sam
Harris, the late Christopher Hitchens and his widow, Carol Blue, to the
making of this book.
This endeavour benefited from having the best professionals in the
field guide its publication. John Brockman and his tremendous team
at Brockman, Inc., including Max Brockman, Russell Weinberger and
Michael Healey, supported the project from idea to fruition, and
enlisted publishers around the world to bring it to life. Two top
editors, Hilary Redmon of Penguin Random House US and Susanna
Wadeson of Penguin Random House UK, greatly influenced the book’s
development and design, and were delightful to work with.
A special thank you to Sara Lippincott for her eagle-eyed and skilled
copyediting, and her expert work finalizing a transcript that was
challenging at best. And another to Gillian Somerscales, for her
additional exacting copyediting and clarifying comments. We
appreciate the assistance of CFI intern Andy Ngo.
We also wish to acknowledge the extraordinary contributions of the
Four Horsemen, as well as the remarkable Stephen Fry, to the vital
cause of reason and science. They have changed the world for the
better.
Robyn E. Blumner
President and CEO, Center for Inquiry
Executive Director, Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and
Science

What’s next on
your reading list?
Discover your next
great read!
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.
Sign up now.

