Chapter 11
What Is Dreaming for, If Anything?
Daniel C. Dennett
One of the charges leveled against adaptationism (most famously by Gould and
Lewontin 1979, in their attack on “just-so stories”) is that we adaptationists jump to
our “panglossian” hypotheses without due consideration, let alone testing, of
alternative explanations of the phenomena under discussion. The charge is not
without merit, but I have always viewed it as pointing to a foible of adaptationists,
not a fundamental ﬂaw in adaptationism. So as a devout adaptationist, one of my
duties is to police the brethren for just such lapses. Allan Hobson provides a nice
instance, since he is cautious and circumspect in his consideration of the claim that
dreaming has an important function to perform, and then he still overlooks or
underplays alternatives. First, I will note what Hobson has to say about the
(apparent) function of dreaming. Then, I will list just a few alternative hypotheses,
to illustrate my point, and ask whether Hobson has given us any evidence that rules
them out. According to Hobson:
It makes good sense to prepare the brain for subsequent waking and the physiology of REM
sleep manifests abundant signs of an activation state favoring the massive and parallel
connectivity essential to the binding of the multiple cognitive processes that are required to
explain the extraordinary unity of waking consciousness. For this reason, I refer to REM
sleep dreaming as a proto-conscious state.
It does indeed “make good sense” but that is not enough. We need to see that
disrupting/removing REM sleep has a deleterious effect, and even showing that
would not be a slam dunk for function, since however we suppress REM, it may be
a side-effect of suppression, rather than the lack of REM, that causes whatever
decrement in cognitive competence we observe. What we really need is an account
of just what REM sleep does to “integrate” the brain, and that could only
be speculative at this time. It is certainly tempting to suppose, as Hobson does, that
D.C. Dennett (*)
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA
e-mail: Daniel.Dennett@tufts.edu
N. Tranquillo (ed.), Dream Consciousness, Vienna Circle Institute Library 3,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-07296-8_11, © Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
113

REM sleep constitutes an elaborate program for sensorimotor integration, emotion evoca-
tion, and scenario construction. It may be hard to prove but it is hard to believe that these
features are not in the service of waking consciousness. The fact that this state recurs every
night of our lives underscores that assertion.
It underscores the assertion, but leaves plenty of room for alternatives. For
instance:
(a) Dreaming in infancy has a function, but dreaming in adulthood is simply a
vestige of a phenomenon that did indeed play a crucial organizing role in the
early days of every infant’s (or ﬂedgling’s) neural development. What func-
tion? REM in the womb is (roughly) what Hobson says REM is in the adult: the
spontaneous, endogenous activity that shapes functional structures in the
absence of current sensory input, a sort of practice perception off-line that
helps prepare the neophyte brain for the real world. But once the brain has a
regular diet of sensory input to structure it, the off-line activation becomes
obsolete but is harmless and so not worth suppressing. It recedes in duration to
only 1.5 h a day on average, a fraction of its duration in infancy. On this
hypothesis, adult dreaming is rather like adult thumbsucking, a functionless
habit that was itself a byproduct of an infantile imperative of considerable
functional importance.
(b) Same as A, except that REM is not in fact so functional during infancy and
gestation. It is simply that the brain gets “turned on” in development before it
has anything to work with, so it idles vigorously, not doing any harm, but also
not doing much if any pre-birth organization, having so little to go on, aside
from quite a lot of auditory, tactile and vestibular input.
(c) REM could also be, as Hobson suggests, a byproduct of some neural process
involved in thermoregulation. The fact that it has evolved twice is an important
datum, but we should be cautious about leaping beyond “byproduct” to “func-
tion.” Again, we’d want to know how REM supported thermoregulation before
taking this giant step.
We also need to be cautious about back-extrapolating our connotations of adult
dreaming onto the infant and fetal phenomena—a sort of intraspeciﬁc anthropo-
centric bias! Just because we human adults report dreams that are brimming with
fascinating content is not a particularly good reason to infer that infants (or birds)
are “enjoying the show” during their REM periods. But on what grounds, other than
bloody-minded philosophical skepticism (more on that below), would lead us to
reserve judgment about infant experience during their REM periods? For one thing,
the existence of a feedback loop between (adult) human communication and REM,
nicely established by Hobson. As he notes, it is quite possible to train yourself to
have lucid dreams, or to wake up and write down dream narratives when they occur.
This loop is of course entirely absent in dogs and birds and other languageless
REMsters, including pre-linguistic human infants. How could this capacity to be
trained have arisen in prehistory and how could it have shaped the phenomenon of
dreaming in turn? Here is one way in which dreaming (with content, with narra-
tives, as a proto-conscious experience) could have evolved:
114
D.C. Dennett

In phase one, there is REM sleep, as described in A or B, and it has some interesting side
effects in our ancestors once they begin to develop language: youngsters occasionally blurt
out words or longer fragments of speech on awakening (or they talk in their sleep) and their
parents respond with interest (curiosity and concern) and this creates the feedback loop that
encourages further such blurting, which elaborates and crystallizes over time into dream
reportage. There might be a long period (phase two) when only a few people ever exhibit
these symptoms even though they all have REM sleep. During this phase there would not be
a word for “dream” or a concept of dreaming, and it would be a bit of a stretch to say that
dreaming was, already, a phenomenon in this early human world, not just because they
didn’t have a word for it, but because the feedback loop was not yet well enough elaborated
to generate anything worth calling dreams. In a similar spirit, we can envisage a time when
our ancestors had not yet managed to invent/discover the phenomena of homesickness or
fame or war or pornography.
From this perspective, which could be ﬂeshed out in a variety of ways, there is a
signiﬁcant amount of content shaping by the demand characteristics of parental
(and then self-) curiosity, not unlike the folie a` deux elaborations of what used to be
called Multiple Personality Disorder but is now ofﬁcially known as Dissociative
Identity Disorder (Humphrey and Dennett 1989). The reward (to put it crudely) of
attention can, as Hobson shows, reach down beneath the surface of verbal expres-
sion and begin to modulate the processes that feed verbal expression, opening the
ﬂoodgates to more and more tellable dreams. So we would have something of a
continuum between REM episodes with no organized content at all, REM episodes
that create vague content-laden hunches, emotional squalls of one ﬂavor or another,
for instance, and on to fully ripened dream experiences. The capacity to “recollect”
dreams would thus be an artifact of cultural conditioning rather than a functional
enhancement of an underlying functional process. Dreams wouldn’t have to be for
anything—except for telling, and that activity could be a culturally infectious habit,
harmless and even entertaining, and hence hard to extinguish.
It would be true of any of these hypotheses that children in learning to speak also
are learning to dream, a process in which the opportunity/task of recalling their
dreams when awake plays an encouraging role. Then cultural evolution or conta-
gion could take over, and we’re on the yellow brick road to seers and shamans,
prophets and interpreters, Jung and Freud.
This brings us close to Hobson’s challenge to me to clarify my position on
Norman Malcolm’s notorious hypothesis about dreams. A re-reading of my 1975
paper “Are Dreams Experiences?” (Dennett 1978) shows that I never defended
Norman Malcolm’s “hypothesis that dream reports reﬂect mental activity associ-
ated with the awakening process rather than antecedent REM or NREM sleep
physiology.” (Hobson, personal communication) Rather, I used Malcolm’s outra-
geous but ingenious proposal to expose some of the otherwise tacit and underap-
preciated assumptions that must be taken on board by dream researchers—
assumptions that Hobson and others have indeed committed to, without, perhaps,
recognizing that they subtly undermine some “common sense” ideas about dreams
and indeed all conscious experience.
Chief among these, no doubt, is the quite standard image of dreams as experi-
ences that occur in strict narrative sequence, quite like a movie running in the head
11
What Is Dreaming for, If Anything?
115

while the sleeper has REM. The fact that on awakening dreamers report such
putative episodes is undeniable, but not as conclusive as some would suppose.
There are, for instance, temporal anomalies (from the point of view of this standard
image), and these appear paradoxical until you abandon the standard image and
acknowledge that the temporal properties of neural events and the temporal prop-
erties represented by neural events are entirely independent, in principle, no matter
how closely yoked they are in waking life—aside from such interesting and telltale
cases as color phi, metacontrast and the cutaneous rabbit (Dennett 1991). The basic
physics of living in the world, with events occurring not just in sequence, but
continuously, without major hiatuses or leaps in time and space, disciplines our
everyday waking perception by imposing deadlines for behavioral control. This is a
major feature of conscious experience, and dream processes, occurring under a
more relaxed regime, need not obey these constraints. These processes still must
reside in the evolved, trained machinery of the perceptual systems of the brain, and
here Hobson’s model of a partly chaotic, noise-driven (instead of information-
driven) elaboration of normal perceptual analysis processes is a nice conﬁrmation
and detailed elaboration of my sketchier version, in the prelude, “How are Hallu-
cinations Possible?” to Consciousness Explained (Dennett 1991, esp. pp. 10–16.)
Hobson stresses, and I concur, that the line between conscious and proto-
conscious or non-conscious is not to be drawn in a principled way. That in itself
is such a departure from everyday thinking about consciousness and experience that
Malcolm stands almost vindicated, if we interpret him as defending the thesis that
dreams are not experiences in the ordinary sense of the term. (Remember, he was an
Ordinary Language philosopher writing in 1959.) I do not want to defend
Malcolm’s antique view (Malcolm 1959), since the last half century of research,
especially by Hobson, has deepened our understanding tremendously, and Malcolm
was blinkered by his veriﬁcationism. As I noted in 1975, Malcolm hugely
underestimated the power of models and theories (Dennett 1975). My brand of
veriﬁcationism is, I think, more supple, and more attuned to the demands of actual
science: we must be cautious when the urge arises to export conclusions couched in
ordinary language from scientiﬁc investigations. Hobson is cautious; he recognizes
that he has a considerable diplomatic task confronting him, clearing away the
rubbish of several obsolete creeds that still impede communication: the “functional
vs. organic” dichotomy, the anti-neurophysiological bias of many psychologists
and therapists, and the granddaddy of them all: Freud. I applaud his polemics
against all these prejudices, but I do wonder sometimes whether he has outlived
his adversaries. Are there really inﬂuential Freudians still out there dragging their
heels? Since in the ﬁeld I know from the inside, philosophy of mind, I see Hobson
sometimes pounding on an open door, I have some grounds for this suspicion.
Brain-mind uniﬁcation has pretty well gone to ﬁxation among philosophers, with
dualism now the renegade position, the outlier—which means, I fear, that a few
young philosophers are tempted to endorse it just to be naughty and notorious (such
is our ﬁeld, alas).
In general, Hobson’s philosophical views on the nature of the mind and con-
sciousness would be welcomed as reassuringly mainstream by my fellow
116
D.C. Dennett

philosophers. They ought to be discomﬁted, however, by a few signs in Hobson’s
essay of what I think of as overgenerous applications of the principle of charity. In
several instances Hobson takes himself to be addressing philosophers’ concerns
when in fact his comments, sound in themselves, don’t reach any targets in
philosophy land, only because philosophers are not talking about anything as
interesting as the topic he is discussing. They are talking about a trivial artifactual
puzzle of their own devising. For instance, Hobson’s “Hard Problem” is not the
philosophers’ Hard Problem, thank goodness. The philosophers’ Hard Problem is
couched in such a way that no amount of brilliant theory about how the brain
accomplishes one cognitive competence or another even approaches it. (Roughly,
any problem you can solve is, by deﬁnition, one of the easy problems! The
philosophers’ Hard Problem systematically eludes all of cognitive neuroscience.
Enough said.) Another instance that makes me cringe is his remark about
“Dennett’s zombie country.” No, philosophers’ zombies are not like “automatons”
as Hobson imagines—those are the zombies of folklore. Philosophers’ zombies are
a much sillier idea: folks who are excellent company, lively, creative, lovable, as
knowledgeable and sensitive as you could want—but there’s nobody home. (This is
well nigh impossible to imagine, but many philosophers have persuaded themselves
that they can imagine it, and that their ability to do this feat of imagination is a
Major Problem for the sciences of the mind.) When I inveigh against the Zombic
Hunch (Dennett 2005), I am not criticizing the idea of automaton-like elements in
our brains; I actually support that idea in detail (cf. Christof Koch’s proposals on
this score). Hobson doesn’t in fact have anything to say about philosophers’
zombies, I’m happy to report, since the topic is too embarrassing to merit
consideration.
References
Dennett, D. C. (1975). Are dreams experiences? Philosophical Review, 73, 151–171. reprinted in
Dennett, 1978.
Dennett, D. C. (1978). Brainstorms: Philosophical essays on mind and psychology. Montgomery:
Bradford Books.
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Consciousness explained. Boston: Little, Brown.
Dennett, D. C. (2005). Sweet dreams: Philosophical obstacles to a science of consciousness.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gould, S. J., & Lewontin, R. (1979). The spandrels of San Marco and the panglossian paradigm: A
critique of the adaptationist programme. Proceedings of the Royal Society, B205, 581–598.
Humphrey, N., & Dennett, D. C. (1989). Speaking for our selves: An assessment of multiple
personality disorder. Raritan: A Quarterly Review, IX, 68–98. reprinted in Dennett, 1998.
Malcolm, N. (1959). Dreaming. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
11
What Is Dreaming for, If Anything?
117

Nicholas Tranquillo
Editor
Dream Consciousness
Allan Hobson’s New Approach to the Brain
and Its Mind

Editor
Nicholas Tranquillo
Harvard Medical School
Salem
New Hampshire
USA
ISSN 1571-3083
ISBN 978-3-319-07295-1
ISBN 978-3-319-07296-8 (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-07296-8
Springer Cham Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2014945251
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or
information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts
in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁcally for the purpose of being
entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication
of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the
Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from
Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center.
Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt
from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for
any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with
respect to the material contained herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

