JULIAN JAYNES'S SOFTWARE ARCHEOLOGY
DANIEL DENNETT
Daniel Dennett received his B .A. from Harvard and his D.Phil, from Oxford. Following
academic positions at the University of California at Irvine, at Harvard, and at Oxford,
he joined the Department of Philosophy at Tufts University, where he is currently
Professor of Philosophy. Dr. Dennett has also held the position of Fellow at the Center
for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences at Stanford University. He lectures widely
in North America, Great Britain and Europe. His publications include books such as
Brainstorms, The Mind's I (with Douglas Hofstadter), and most recently Elbow Room,
and journal articles on the issues of mind, consciousness, self, hallucinations, and even
grey matter. He has also written numerous reviews of theories of prominent phil-
osophers, linguists, and psychologists, such as Passing the Buck to Biology on Noam
Chomsky and Why do we think what we do about why we think what we do? on Nelson
Goodman.
What a philosopher would usually do on an
occasion like this is to begin to launch into a
series of devastating arguments, criticisms, and
counter-examples, and I am not going to do that
today, because in this instance I don't think it
would be very constructive. I think first it is very
important to understand Julian Jaynes's project,
to see a little bit more about what the whole
shape of it is, and delay the barrage of nitpicking
objections and criticisms until we have seen what
the edifice as a whole is. After all, on the face of
it, it is preposterous, and 1 have found that in
talking with other philosophers my main task is
to convince them to take it seriously when they
are very reluctant to do this. I take it very
seriously, so I am going to use my time to try to
describe what I take the project to be. Perhaps
Julian will disavow the version of Julian Jaynes I
am going to present, but at least the version I am
going to present is one that 1 take very seriously.
Now, another thing that philosophers usually
do on these occasions is demand definitions of
consciousness, of mind, and of all the other
terms. I am not going to do that either, because I
don't think that would be constructive at this
point. If I thought I could bring his entire project
crashing down with one deft demand for an
impossible definition, I would do it, but I don't
think so.
Perhaps this is an autobiographical con-
fession: I am rather fond of his way of using these
terms; I rather like his way of carving up con-
sciousness. It is in fact very similar to the way
that I independently decided to carve up con-
sciousness some years ago.
So what then is the project? The project is, in
one sense, very simple and very familiar. It is
bridging what he calls the "awesome chasm"
between mere inert matter and the inwardness, as
he puts it, of a conscious being. Consider the
awesome chasm between a brick and a brick-
layer. There isn't, in Thomas Nagel's (1974)
famous phrase, anything that it is like to be a
brick. But there is something that it is like to be a
bricklayer, and we want to know what the condi-
tions were under which there happened to come
to be entities that it was like something to be in
this rather special sense. That is the story, the
developmental, evolutionary, historical story
that Jaynes sets out to tell.
Now, if we are going to tell this story at all,
obviously we are going to have to stretch our
imaginations some, because if we think about it
in our habitual ways, without trying to stretch
our imaginations, we just end up with a blank; it
is just incomprehensible. Sherry Turkle (1984),
in her new book about computers, The Second
Self, talks about the reactions small children
have to computer toys when they open them up
and look inside. What they see is just an absurd
little chip and a battery and that's all. They are
baffled at how that could possibly do what they
have just seen the toy do. Interestingly, she says
they look at the situation, scratch their heads for
a while, and then they typically say very know-
ingly: "It's the battery!" (A grown-up version of
the same fallacy is committed by the philosopher
John Searle, 1980, when he, arriving at a similar
predicament, says: "It's the mysterious causal
powers of the brain that explain conscious-
ness.") Suddenly facing the absurdly large gap
between what we know from the inside about
consciousness and what we see if we take off the
top of somebody's skull and look in can provoke
Canadian Psychology / Psychologic Canadienne, 1986, 27:2
149

150
Canadian Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne, 1986, 27:2
such desperate reactions. When we look at a
human brain and try to think of it as the seat of all
that mental activity, we see something that is just
as incomprehensible as the microchip is to the
child when she considers it to be the seat of all
the fascinating activity that she knows so well as
the behaviour of the simple toy.
Now, if we are going to do this work at all, if
we are going to try to fill this gap, we are going to
have to talk about consciousness, because that is
what is at one edge of this large terrain. It is
fascinating to me to see how reluctant, how
uncomfortable, most scientifically minded
people are in talking about consciousness. They
realize that some day they will have to talk about
consciousness — unless they are going to do
what the behaviourists tried so unconvincingly to
do, just dismiss the problem as not really there.
If you can't quite face "feigning anaesthesia"
for the rest of your days, you are going to have to
admit that consciousness is a phenomenon that
needs explaining. We are going to have to talk
about the ephemeral, swift, curious, metaphori-
cal features of consciousness.
Many people say: "Some day, but not yet.
This enterprise is all just premature." And others
say: "Leave it to the philosophers (and look what
a mess they make of it)." 1 want to suggest that it
is not premature, that in fact there is no alter-
native but to start looking as hard as we can at
consciousness first. If we don't look at con-
sciousness and get clear about what the destina-
tion is, and instead try to work our way up by just
thinking about how the brain is put together, we
won't know where we are trying to get to from
where we are and we will be hopelessly lost. This
is commonly referred to as the defence of the
top-down strategy, and in looking at Jaynes's
book again this morning I find that in his intro-
duction he has one of the clearest and most
perspicuous defences of the top-down approach
that I have ever come across:
We can only know in the nervous system what we
have known in behavior first. Even if we had a
complete wiring diagram of the nervous system,
we still would not be able to answer our basic
question. Though we knew the connections of
every tickling thread of every single axon and
dendrite in every species that ever existed, together
with all its neurotransmitters and how they varied
in its billions of synapses of every brain that ever
existed, we could still never — not ever — from a
knowledge of the brain alone know if that brain
contained a consciousness like our own. We first
nave to start from the top, from some conception of
what consciousness is, from what our own intro-
spection is. (Jaynes, 1976b, p. 18)
When I try to make this idea clear to other
people I sometimes use a somewhat threadbare
analogy with computers. If you want to know
what a chess-playing computer does, forget
about trying to understand it from the bottom up.
If you don't understand the conceptual domain in
which the topic is chess — moves and strategy—
you'll never make sense of what happens by
building up from an analysis of the registers and
logico-arithmetic operations in the central pro-
cessing unit. (I am going to put this comparison
with computers to a number of other uses in
talking about Jaynes's work.)
If we are going to use this top-down approach,
we are going to have to be bold. We are going to
have to be speculative, but there is good and bad
speculation, and this is not an unparalleled
activity in science. An area of great fascination
in science is the speculative hypothesis-spinning
about the very origins of life, of the first self-
replicating creatures, in the primordial soup.
That sort of research has to be speculative; there
simply are no data imaginable anywhere in the
world today, nor are there experiments that could
tease out with any certainty how that process
began, but if you let your imaginations wander
and start speculating about how it might have
begun, you can put together some pretty interest-
ing stories. Soon you can even begin to test some
of them. Although I know that this enterprise is
looked askance upon by many hard-headed sci-
entists, it is certainly one that I would defend as a
valuable part of our scientific enterprise more
largely seen.
The dangers of this top-down approach of
course are many. Speculation is guided largely
by plausibility, and plausibility is a function of
our knowledge, but also of our bad habits, mis-
conceptions, and bits of ignorance, so when you
make a mistake it tends to be huge and embar-
rassing. That's the price you pay in playing this
game. Some people have no taste for this, but we
really can't do without it. Those scientists who
have no taste for this sort of speculative exercise
will just have to stay in the trenches and do
without it, while the rest of us risk embarrassing
mistakes and have a lot of fun.
Consider the current controversy in biology
between the adaptationists and their critics,
Stephen J. Gould and Richard Lewontin (1979)

Consciousness
151
at Harvard. Gould and Lewontin shake an angry
and puritanical finger at the adaptationists for
their "just-so stories," their "panglossian"
assumptions, their willingness to engage in spec-
ulation where the only real test seems to be how
imaginative you can be and how plausible a story
you can tell. But see Dennett (1983). One of the
responses that one can make is that there is no
alternative; the fossil record is simply not going
to provide enough information to provide a
rigorous, bottom-up, scientific account of all the
important moments in the evolution of species.
The provable history has to be embellished and
extrapolated with a good deal of adaptationists'
thinking. What we need is a just-so story. This
term comes, of course, from Kipling and is used
as a term of abuse by Gould and Lewontin, but I
am happy to say that some of those who are
unblushing adaptationists have simply adopted
it. They say, in effect: "That's right; what we are
doing is telling just-so stories, and just-so stories
have a real role to play in science."
Now, when Julian Jaynes tells his story he
doesn't say that it is a just-so story. He doesn't
say it is just a sort of guess at how it might have
been. He claims to be telling the historical truth
as best as he can figure it out.
But he is also clever enough to realize that if
he doesn't have the details just right, then some
other story which is in very important respects
rather like it must be true. So the whole account
is put together by a rather interesting amalgam of
aprioristic thinking about how it had to be, his-
torical sleuthing, and inspired guesswork. He
uses aprioristic reasoning to establish that we
have to have travelled from point A to point B by
some route — where and when the twists come is
an interesting empirical question. He flavours
and deepens and constrains his aprioristic think-
ing about how it had to be with whatever he can
find about how it was and he lets his imagination
go as fertile as he can and clutches at whatever
straws he can find in the "fossil record."
Now, it is good to be "modular" when you do
this sort of theorizing, and Jaynes's account is
remarkably modular. On page 221 of his book he
presents a summary of seven factors which go
into his account: (l)the weakening of the
auditory by the advent of writing; (2) the inher-
ent fragility of hallucinatory control; (3) the
unworkableness of gods in the chaos of historical
upheaval; (4) the positing of internal cause in the
observation of difference in others; (5) the
acquisition of narratization from epics; (6) the
survival value of deceit; and (7) a modicum of
natural selection.
He has given us seven factors in this passage,
and I think he would agree that you could throw
out any one of them and replace it with some-
thing that simply did the same work but was
historically very different; his theory would sur-
vive otherwise quite intact. Moreover, there are
many details in his theory which are, as he has
noted today, optional. There are ideas which are
plausible, indications of the detailed way that his
account might run, but if they turn out to be
wrong they can be jettisoned with small damage
to the fabric of the whole theory.
I will just mention a few that are favourites of
mine. He claims, for example, that there is a
little evidence to suggest that in the period when
bicameral people and conscious people coex-
isted, there was a policy of killing obdurately
bicameral children, which may in fact have
hastened the demise of the bicameral type. This
possible policy of "eugenics" may have given
the cultural evolutionary process he is describ-
ing a biological (or genetic) boost, speeding up
the process. You don't need it (to make the just-
so story work), but there is a little evidence
to suggest something like that might have
happened.
Another of his optional modules is the idea
that the reason that the Greeks placed the mind in
the breast (in the "heart") is that when you have
to make decisions you go into a stressful state
which makes you breathe harder and may even
make your pulse quicken. You notice the turmoil
in your breast and this leads to a localization
fallacy. Jaynes suggests that's why some of the
Greek terms for mind have their roots as it were
in the chest instead of in the head. That might be
true. It might not, but it's another of the optional
modules.
I don't know if Jaynes would agree with me
about how much optionality there is in his sys-
tem. The module I would be most interested in
simply discarding is the one about hallucina-
tions. Now you might think that if you throw out
his account of hallucinations you haven't got
much left of Jaynes's theory, but in fact I think
you would, although he would probably resist
throwing that part away.
This, then, is why I think it is a mistake, as I
said at the outset, simply to bash away at the
weakest links in sight, because the weakest links
are almost certainly not correct — but also not
critical to the enterprise as a whole.

152
Canadian Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne, 1986, 27:2
I want to turn now to an explanation of what 1
find most remarkable about Julian Jaynes's just-
so story, by comparing it with another (and this
was in fact touched upon by one of the earlier
questions). In the 17th century Thomas Hobbes
(1651) asked himself where morality came
from. If you look at what he called the state of
nature — if you look at animals in the wild, at
lions hunting and killing wildebeests, for
instance — there is no morality or immorality to
be seen there at all. There is no good or evil.
There is killing, there is pain, but there is no
"ought," there is no right, there is no wrong,
there is no sin. But then look at us; here we see
the institution of morality permeating the entire
fabric of our lives. How did we get from there to
here? Hobbes had the same sort of problem as the
problem that Jaynes is facing, and his answer of
course was a famous just-so story. Back in the
old days, he says, man lived in the state of nature
and his life was "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish
and short." Then there was a sort of crisis and
people got together in a group and they formed a
covenant or compact, and out of this morality
was born. Right and wrong came into existence
as a consequence of that social contract.
Now, as history, it is absurd. Hobbes didn't
think otherwise. His just-so story was quite
obviously a thought experiment, a rational
reconstruction or idealization. The last thing
Hobbes would have done would have been to
look through cuneiform records to see exactly
when this particular momentous occasion hap-
pened.
But now consider the following objection to
Hobbes's account, but first applied to Julian
Jaynes's work. In a review of Jaynes's book some
years ago, Ned Block (1981) said the whole
book made one great crashing mistake, what we
sometimes call a "use mention" error: confus-
ing a phenomenon with either the name of the
phenomenon or the concept of the phenomenon.
Block claimed that even if everything that Jaynes
said about historical events were correct, all he
would have shown was not that consciousness
arrived in 1400 B.C., but that the concept of
consciousness arrived in 1400 B.C. People were
conscious long before they had the concept of
consciousness, Block declared, in the same way
that there was gravity long before Newton ever
hit upon the concept of gravity. The whole book
in Block's view was simply a great mistake.
Concept does not equal phenomenon. You can't
ride the concept of the horse!
Well, now, has Jaynes made that mistake?
Let's ask if Hobbes made the same mistake.
Hobbes says that morality came into existence
out of the social contract. Now one might say,
"What a stupid mistake Hobbes has made!
Maybe the concepts of right and wrong didn't
exist before the contract of which he speaks, but
certainly right and wrong themselves did. That
is, people did things that were nasty and evil
before they had the concepts of it."
Right and wrong, however, are parts of moral-
ity, a peculiar phenomenon that can't predate a
certain set of concepts, including the concepts of
right and wrong. The phenomenon is created in
part by the arrival on the scene of a certain set of
concepts. It is not that animals just haven't
noticed that they are doing things that are evil and
good. Lacking the concept, they are not doing
anything right or wrong; there isn't any evil or
good in their world. It's only once you get in a
certain conceptual environment that the phe-
nomenon of right and wrong, the phenomenon of
morality, exists at all.
Now, I take Jaynes to be making a similarly
exciting and striking move with regard to con-
sciousness. To put it really somewhat paradox-
ically, you can't have consciousness until you
have the concept of conciousness. In fact he has a
more subtle theory than that, but that's the basic
shape of the move.
These aren't the only two phenomena, moral-
ity and consciousness, that work this way.
Another one that Jaynes mentions is history, and
at first one thinks, "Here's another use-mention
error!" At one point in the book Jaynes suggests
that history was invented or discovered just a few
years before Herodotus, and one starts to object
that of course there was history long before there
were historians, but then one realizes that in a
sense Jaynes is right. Is there a history of lions
and antelopes? Just as many years have passed
for them as for us, and things have happened to
them, but it is very different. Their passage of
time has not been conditioned by their recogni-
tion of the transition, it has not been conditioned
and tuned and modulated by any reflective con-
sideration of that very process. So history itself,
our having histories, is in part a function of our
recognizing that very fact. Other phenomena in
this category are obvious: you can't have base-
ball before you have the concept of baseball, you
can't have money before you have the concept of
money.
1 have used up as much time as I should use,

Consciousness
153
but I am going to say a few more words. If you
want to pursue the interesting idea that con-
sciousness postdates the arrival of a certain set of
concepts, then of course you have to have in your
conceptual armamentarium the idea that con-
cepts themselves can be preconscious, that con-
cepts do not require consciousness. Many have
held that there is no such thing as the uncon-
scious wielding of concepts, but Jaynes's account
of the origins of consciousness depends on the
claim that an elaboration of a conceptual scheme
under certain social and environmental pressures
was the precondition for the emergence of con-
sciousness as we know it. This is, to my mind,
the most important claim that Jaynes makes in
his book. As he puts it, "The bee has a concept
of the flower," but not a conscious concept. We
have a very salient theoretical role for something
which we might as well call concepts, but if you
don't like it we can call them schmoncepts,
concept-like things that you don't have to be
conscious to have.
For instance, computers have them. They are
not conscious — yet — but they have lots of
concepts, and in fact one way of viewing arti-
ficial intelligence is as the attempt to design
conceptual systems for those computers to use.
In fact this is the way people in artificial intel-
ligence talk all the time. For instance, they may
note that they have to give a robot some concept
of an obstacle so that it can recognize this and
that as an obstacle in its environment. Having
figured out what concepts to give the robot or the
computer, you do some fancy software design,
and then you say: Here's how we have realized
the concept of causation, or obstacle, or the
passage of time, or other sources of information
or whatever. The idea of unconscious concepts
is, as a computer scientist would say, a "win-
ning" idea, and if it is hard for you to get used to
it, then at least my recommendation (along with
Jaynes) would be: try harder because it is a very
useful idea.
After all, one way of casting this whole ques-
tion (the way that I usually think about it) is not
"How do we get from the bricks, amoebas, and
then apes to us?" but "How in the world could
you ever make a conscious automaton, how
could you make a conscious robot?" The answer,
I think, is not to be found in hypotheses about
hardware particularly, but in software. What you
want to do is design the software in such a way
that the system has a certain set of concepts. If
you manage to endow the system with the right
sort of concepts, you create one of those logical
spaces that Jaynes talks about.
This in fact is a ubiquitous way of talking in
the field of artificial intelligence. Consider for
instance the idea of LISP. LISP is a programming
language. Once you have LISP, your whole
vision of how a computer is put together, and
what you can do with it, changes dramatically.
All sorts of things become possible that weren't
possible before. Logical spaces are created that
didn't exist before and you could never find them
in the hardware. Such a logical space is not in the
hardware, it is not in the "organs"; it is purely at
the software level. Now Jaynes, in his largest and
most dispensable optional module, ties his entire
theory to the structure of the brain and I am
fascinated to know whether there is anything in
that. But I am quite content to jettison the whole
business, because what I think he is really talking
about is a software characterization of the mind,
at the level, as a computer scientist would say, of
a virtual machine.
The underlying hardware of the brain is just
the same now as it was thousands of years ago (or
it may be just the same), but what had to happen
was that the environment had to be such as to
encourage the development, the emergence, of
certain concepts, certain software, which then
set in motion some sort of chain reaction. Jaynes
is saying that when the right concepts settled into
place in the preconscious "minds" of our ances-
tors, there was a sort of explosion, like the explo-
sion in computer science that happens when you
invent something like LISP. Suddenly you dis-
cover a new logical space, where you get the
sorts of different behaviours, the sorts of new
powers, the sorts of new problems that we recog-
nize as having the flavour of human consciousness.
Of course, if that is what Jaynes's theory really
is, it is no wonder he has to be bold in his
interpretation of the tangible evidence, because
this isn't just archeology he is doing: this is
software archeology, and software doesn't leave
much of a fossil record. Software, after all, is
just concepts. It is abstract and yet, of course,
once it is embodied it has very real effects. So if
you want to find a record of major "software"
changes in archeological history, what are you
going to have to look at? You are going to have to
look at the "printouts," but they are very indi-
rect. You are going to have to look at texts, and
you are going to have to look at the pottery shards
and figurines as Jaynes does, because that is the
only place you are going to find any trace. Now,

154 
Canadian Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne, 1986, 27:2
of course, maybe the traces are just gone, maybe 
have come after language. That, 1 think, is an
the "fossil record" is simply not good enough. 
absolutely wonderful idea, and if Jaynes is com-
Jaynes's idea is that for us to be the way we are 
pletely wrong in the details, that is a darn shame,
now, there has to have been a revolution — 
but something like what he proposes has to be
almost certainly not an organic revolution, but a 
right; and we can start looking around for better
software revolution — in the organization of our 
modules to put in the place of the modules that he
information processing system, and that has to 
has already given us.

