4
The Baldwin Effect: A Crane, Not a Skyhook
Daniel Dennett
1
Introduction
In 1991, I included a brief discussion of the Baldwin effect in my account of
the evolution of human consciousness, thinking I was introducing to non-
specialist readers a little-appreciated, but no longer controversial, wrinkle
in orthodox neo-Darwinism. I had thought that Hinton and Nowlan
(1987) and Maynard Smith (1987) had shown clearly and succinctly how
and why it worked, and had restored the neglected concept to grace. Here
is how I put it then:
If we give individuals a variable chance to hit upon (and then “recognize” and “cling
to”) the Good Trick in the course of their lifetimes, the near-invisible needle in the
haystack . . . becomes the summit of a quite visible hill that natural selection can
climb. . . . Over generations, the competition becomes stiffer: eventually, unless you
are born with (or very nearly with) the Good Trick, you are not close enough to
compete. If it weren’t for the plasticity, however, the effect wouldn’t be there, for “a
miss is as good as a mile” unless you get to keep trying variations until you get it
right.
Thanks to the Baldwin effect, species can be said to pretest the efﬁcacy of partic-
ular different designs by phenotypic (individual) exploration of the space of nearby
possibilities. If a particularly winning setting is thereby discovered, this discovery
will create a new selection pressure: organisms that are closer in the adaptive land-
scape to that discovery will have a clear advantage over those more distant. This
means that species with plasticity will tend to evolve faster (and more “clearsight-
edly”) than those without it. (Dennett 1991: 186)
I now discover that there are still “Baldwin skeptics” (Downes, Godfrey-
Smith, chaps. 2 and 3, respectively, this volume) who do not so much doubt
the possibility of the Baldwin effect as doubt its importance as what I have
called a crane: “a subprocess or special feature of a design process that can

be demonstrated to permit the local speeding up of the basic, slow process
of natural selection, and that can be demonstrated to be itself the pre-
dictable (or retrospectively explicable) product of the basic process” (Den-
nett 1995: 76). This is what I claimed:
It shows how the “blind” process of the basic phenomenon of natural selection can
be abetted by a limited amount of “look-ahead” in the activities of individual or-
ganisms, which create ﬁtness differences that natural selection can then act upon.
(Ibid.: 80)
So the question is: Does the Baldwin effect really occur, and if it does,
how much “local lifting” can it do? Can it make a signiﬁcant difference in
the trajectories through Design Space that species have traversed? Part of
the problem is a relatively unimportant wrangle about naming and bound-
aries: shouldn’t the Baldwin effect be named after somebody else, and is the
Baldwin effect just a special case of Waddington’s (or somebody else’s) “ge-
netic assimilation,” and if so, how special is it, if at all? The rest of the prob-
lem concerns the soundness or realism of the (idealized, oversimpliﬁed)
models and explanations, and the more directly empirical question of
whether in fact there are demonstrated cases of Baldwin effects in nature.
As so often happens in evolutionary controversies, the empirical questions
of most interest have to be traded in for something more practical if we
want to test them experimentally. We’d love to know about the role of
language-learning abilities in H. sapiens and its ancestors, but we have to
settle for the more modest learning (if that’s not too strong a term) abilities
of something like E. coli or D. melanogaster if we want to look at hundreds
or thousands of generations. I expect that experiments will eventually shed
light on this, if they haven’t already done so (I confess that I am not up to
date on the literature), but in the meantime, several commentators have ex-
pressed objections to the more strictly theoretical discussions that I want to
answer.
2
Peering Through the Fog of Battle
These theoretical objections are valuable because they expose a vein of mis-
direction that continues to haunt evolutionary thinking a century and more
after Baldwin mounted his campaign to claim the discovery as his own.
That campaign ﬁnally succeeded more than a half century after it started,
70
Daniel Dennett

when George Gaylord Simpson (1953) dubbed it the Baldwin effect, but it
was presumably a pyrrhic victory, since, as Downes (chap. 2, this volume)
notes, Simpson coined the term “in order to argue it did not exist as an in-
dependent factor from natural selection.” In fact, Simpson does not so
much argue for this deﬂationary conclusion as simply express his (expert)
opinion. He demonstrates that the Baldwin effect is possible, calling it “an
interesting, but, I would judge, relatively minor outcome of the theory”
(Belew and Mitchell 1996: 107), and goes on to remark that Waddington’s
genetic assimilation represents “a broader principle of which the Baldwin
effect may be considered a special case” (ibid.). The last sentence of Simp-
son’s short paper reveals that his main target in writing the paper has been
to dump cold water on a misguided enthusiasm: “It does not, however,
seem to require any modiﬁcation of the opinion that the directive force in
adaptation, in the Baldwin effect or in any other particular way, is natural
selection” (108).
From the outset, Baldwin had advertised the effect as an instance of what
Downes calls “mind-directed” evolution, and it was gullibility about this
prospect that Simpson was trying to squelch; but Baldwin’s own account
(see especially his discussion of the possible mechanisms of “selection” in
what he calls “neurogenetic” modiﬁcations, p. 61 in Belew and Mitchell
1996) shows that he was always alert to the requirement that his commit-
ment to Darwinism obliged him to postulate a crane, not a skyhook (“a
‘mind-ﬁrst’ force or power or process, an exception to the principle that all
design, and apparent design, is ultimately the result of mindless, motiveless
mechanicity,” Dennett 1995: 76). Baldwin’s own presentation of the issue
was thus Janus-faced: he seemed to promise a skyhook to the eager buyers
but was careful to deliver an orthodox crane, a fact underappreciated by
some who took up the cause. Godfrey-Smith closes his paper by noting that
Simpson, in his eagerness to preserve orthodoxy from contamination, also
seems to have overshot his target somewhat in the opposite, compensatory
direction: “the dichotomy is either false, or else Simpson is wrong that a
causal connection of the kind he describes is not compatible with main-
stream Darwinism.”
The same tug of war distorts the rhetorical setting of Stephen Downes’s
latter day skepticism: if the Baldwin effect is “just” a special case of genetic
assimilation, then it is not a “new evolutionary mechanism” (Downes, this
A Crane, Not a Skyhook
71

volume) and hence no big deal; if, on the contrary, it is supposed to be an
alternative to natural selection, an independent source of “mind-directed
evolution,” then it is (deservedly) suspect and contentious. My claim con-
tinues to be that the Baldwin effect is not at all an alternative to natural se-
lection, but it is nonetheless an important extrapolation from, or extension
of, orthodox theory that potentially can explain the origins of many of the
most challenging adaptations. And so when Downes goes on to say (this
volume) “It may be safer to say that the non-Waddington style concept of
genetic assimilation may account for a subclass of phenomena labeled as
Baldwin effects,” he is not disagreeing with me, with Dawkins, with Dea-
con, or with Simpson. That is the bland position that we, too, take.
Downes (this volume) tries to manufacture a conﬂict between my claim
that this provides a limited “look-ahead” and my agreement with Williams
(and orthodoxy) that there is no foresight in natural selection, but this
charge of inconsistency readily collapses: design explorations by pheno-
typic trial and error are just as mechanical and nonmiraculous as explo-
rations by genetic natural selection; they just occur more swiftly and at less
cost, and once design improvements are thereby discovered, genetic assim-
ilation can incorporate them gradually into the genome. I wonder: does
Downes think that the existence of genetic engineers is a problem for or-
thodox neo-Darwinism? These people now second-guess evolution on a
broad front (with mixed results, of course, but surely it is better than a coin
toss, better than random). How are these people capable of any foresight
when they do this? Are they themselves gods, not products of natural selec-
tion? Of course not. It is obvious, I would have thought, that this look-
ahead is itself the product of conscious and deliberate human reasoning and
analysis, which is itself a product of earlier evolutionary processes. Our ca-
pacity to look ahead is as uncontroversially real as our capacity to breathe
and metabolize. It had to evolve.
Moreover, contrary to Downes’s discussion, my point has always been
to stress that learning is just a particular case (not in any other way special)
of ontogenetic adaptation. The continuity between learning and other pur-
ported varieties of self-redesign is taken as given in the circles in which I
converse; learning is adaptive, functional change of one’s cognitive (or con-
trol) mechanisms, as contrasted with one’s digestive mechanisms, repro-
ductive mechanisms, and so on. Hence no part of my purpose was to
72
Daniel Dennett

propose any sort of threshold distinguishing learning as a distinct phenom-
enon. (Godfrey-Smith, chap. 3, this volume, follows the same familiar
policy when he says he is “going to use ‘learning’ as a short-hand for all fac-
ultative mechanisms for acquiring traits.”) Wherein lies the importance of
the Baldwin effect, then, if it is “just” business-as-usual ontogenetic adap-
tive plasticity leading the way to genetic adaptation?
It is not that the Baldwin effect accounts for otherwise inexplicable dif-
ferences in tempo in evolution, but that it accounts, as Maynard Smith so
crisply shows, for the evolution, in sexually reproducing species, of traits
that theory would otherwise declare to be all but unevolvable—those nee-
dles in a haystack that would otherwise be invisible to natural selection.
The importance of this issue does not loom large for either Godfrey-Smith
or Downes. I don’t know why. Perhaps it is because they, like many others,
have been taught at least to feign discomfort when adopting the adapta-
tionist perspective, or perhaps because they have not encountered much of
the bizarre skepticism regarding the evolution of language (and “language
acquisition devices”) that has haunted the corridors of linguistics and phi-
losophy of mind over the years. Putting the best interpretation on this skep-
ticism (that is to say, ignoring the sometimes highly tempting diagnosis of
closet Creationism), it amounts to a general conviction that something as
specialized as the imagined “language acquisition device” is just such a nee-
dle in the haystack, something that could not evolve gradually but would
have to be an almost miraculous saltation, a cosmic accident of good
luck—what a Creationist would call a gift from God. Nonsense, say we
Baldwin effect supporters. A practice that is both learnable (with effort)
and highly advantageous once learned can become more and more easily
learned, can move gradually into the status of not needing to be learned at
all. It is instructive to note the parallel between this battleﬁeld and the
ground on which Waddington mounted his campaign for genetic assimila-
tion: how could the embryonic callosities on ostrich legs (and human soles)
be explained by orthodox Darwinism without appeal to Lamarckian mech-
anisms? In both cases, the initial, superﬁcially plausible incredulity or skep-
ticism must give way to an appreciation that evolution has a few more tricks
up its sleeve than heretofore imagined; there arepaths of (non-Lamarckian)
orthodoxy leading from adaptative phenotypic adjustments to inherited
genetic arrangements.
A Crane, Not a Skyhook
73

3
Trade-offs between Learning and “Instinct”
As Godfrey-Smith and others have noted, the purported outcome of Bald-
win effects is reduced phenotypic plasticity (for the trait in question), so
the Baldwin effect cannot be trundled out to explain the evolution of learn-
ing. Nevertheless, there is need for an account of the relationship between
selection pressures in favor of enhanced learning abilities and selection
pressures in favor of driving a new trick into the genome. Consider the gen-
eralized case in which the Baldwin effect is supposed to operate.
When a new Good Trick is discovered (by some member or members of
a population), any genetic variation in the population that makes the learn-
ing swifter or more probable should have a ﬁtness advantage, other things
being equal. Different sorts of variation may happen to exist simultane-
ously in the gene pool, operating in two quite different ways:
(A) giving a leg up: starting the individual off in a state closer in learning
space to the mature practice, so there’s simply less to learn (this is the Hin-
ton and Nowlan variation); and
(B) putting more spring in the legs: enhancing the learning capacity itself, so
that the “lifting” distance is more swiftly and surely covered (this is varia-
tion in learning ability or adaptability).
Of these two “opposite” paths—one heading toward creating a new “in-
stinct” and the other heading toward creating greater “general intelli-
gence”—which will be favored? Presumably the incidental costs and
beneﬁts in each case will tip the scales one way or the other, and this is plau-
sibly a highly sensitive variable. If the Good Trick has a fairly stereotypic set
of releasers and conditions in the prevailing environment, and there are few
otherGood Tricks in the neighborhood it behooves one to learn, then prob-
ably the path to adding a new instinct is favored. In a more volatile envi-
ronment, the costs of working harder to get the Good Trick may have
enough incidental side payoffs to favor maintaining, and enhancing, the
learning machinery instead. In some circumstances a species would be
wise/lucky to “pay” for this increased learning speed by moving the
neonate fartheraway, in learning space, from the Good Trick. This tidy pic-
ture is no doubt complicated in reality by dozens of other effects that might
swamp this underlying consideration: perhaps a particular anatomical de-
74
Daniel Dennett

tail in some brains makes certain sorts of learning (or instinct) particularly
expensive; perhaps there’s an interaction with metabolism or growth rate
or who knows what else. In any event, this saddle in Design Space must
have often confronted species, for we see a host of instances in which what
is ﬁxed and instinctual in one species is variable but learnable in another.
Godfrey-Smith makes the point that Hinton and Nowlan’s model has a
particularly strong idealization in it, which he calls the Waddington re-
quirement: “the genetic path leading through better and better learners is
also a path leading to a well-adapted nonlearner” (this volume). The learn-
ing space is simply declared to be superimposed on the genetic space, so that
there is a one-to-one mapping of mutations onto lessons-learned. This sim-
pliﬁes the phenomenon, since it treats the paths of learning and genetic
transition as common and interchangeable; an organism can be n bits away
from the Good Trick, a distance that can be traversed by any combination
of learning and mutation. “As one traverses genetic space through geno-
types that are more and more effective at learning a given behavior, one is
also moving closer to genotypes that tend to produce the behavior without
need for learning” (this volume). This may seem to be a huge and deeply
unwarranted oversimplifying assumption, since it ignores what might seem
to be a very real, even likely possibility: in order to “traverse genetic space”
in the direction of more and more effective learning, you might have to
leapfrog around in actual genetic distances. There is no guarantee, it might
seem, that genotypes that are neighbors in genetic space are also similar in
learning space. But in fact, Hinton and Nowlan’s simpliﬁcation is, so far as
I can see, innocent, since it generalizes over the more realistic cases. To see
this, suppose that there are, in some instance, three genetically distinct
peaks in the adaptive landscape (rather distant from each other in genetic
space)—three “different ways” to have an instinct for a speciﬁc behavior
that is, at the outset, a learned behavior of some value. If there is selection
pressure for learning the Good Trick one way or another, there will be si-
multaneous selection pressure felt on the slopes of all three peaks. The fact
that there is no gradual upward path connecting all regions of genetic space
to a single summit (Hinton and Nowlan’s idealization) means only that
there is no guarantee that there aren’t suboptimal dead-end paths that must
be traversed and then eventually discarded (unless a dimorphism or multi-
morphism happens to be stable). But we can be sure that there are local
A Crane, Not a Skyhook
75

gradients in favor of heightened ease-of-learning because, if we imagine
holding the learning mechanism constant (whatever it is), any small change
in genetic space that changes the starting point in a way that happens to
shorten the distance in learning space must be simultaneously a (small) step
in the right direction both genetically and phenotypically. If there are no
such changes, then, of course, there will be no genetic assimilation, but it
does not seem extravagant to suppose that there will often be a winding up-
ward path of small steps in genetic space that have the effect of shortening
the distance in learning space one way or another. Where the genetic path
stops, leaving the rest of the redesign trajectory to individual learning, is
then a matter that can vary indeﬁnitely.
A thought experiment can highlight the point at issue.1 Imagine an ob-
sessive Skinnerian who has joined forces with an evolutionary biologist in
order to create a subspecies of African gray parrots with the innate instinct
for uttering, without any special training, without so much as hearing an
exemplar, “Boo Chomsky!” There is plenty of genetic diversity among
African gray parrots, and no doubt some of it is in the desired direction of a
bird who would be born wanting to utter “Boo Chomsky!” at its earliest
opportunity, but how on earth could the birds with these alleles be identi-
ﬁed? How could evolution, even with a helping hand from our artiﬁcial se-
lector, ﬁnd the leverage to steer a lineage in this direction? This is where the
Baldwin effect comes to the rescue. We know that African gray parrots, like
mynah birds and a few other species, are particularly trainable, and even
self-trainable, aural mimics, so there is no question that any Skinnerian
who set himself the task of creating a ﬂock of parrots who all said “Boo
Chomsky!” would soon be able, by the “shaping” method of operant con-
ditioning, to create an avian chorus of adult birds with just this talent.2
Having done so, he could begin, with the help of the evolutionary biologist,
to raise the bar: only those birds who were particularly trainable, the cham-
pion learners of this phrase, would be allowed to reproduce in the next gen-
eration. There would be, as we have just seen, no guarantee that this would
head in the right direction. It might be that there was no way to select for the
talent for saying “Boo Chomsky!” (path A) that wasn’t just selecting for
virtuoso trainability in general (path B). But if there were any variability
down path A, if (in other words) some of the accessible genotypes were not
better learners in general but just more likely to learn to say “Boo Chom-
76
Daniel Dennett

sky!” (and perhaps a few other phrases unimagined and untested by the
selectors) easier than their rivals, they would be identiﬁed by this new se-
lection pressure that comes into existence only when the learned adult
competence is discernible in the population. They could then be selected for
exactly this proclivity, which could, in due course, go all the way to a hair-
trigger utterance of “Boo Chomsky!” in need of no training at all.
Is this impossible? Who knows? It may just be, perhaps, that in the Vast
catalogue of possible but as yet unrealized African gray parrot genomes,
not a single one yields a bird (under normal developmental conditions) that
squawks “Boo Chomsky” as soon as it squawks anything. But if there is
even one such genome, the beauty of the Baldwin effect is that it shows that
there is no theoretical reason to rule out the otherwise astonishing feat of
ﬁnding such a genetic needle in the haystack. Anyone who was tempted to
assert that there is simply no way for natural selection to produce an
African gray parrot whose “instinctual call” is “Boo Chomsky!” would be
ignoring a path of orthodoxy, an unappreciated mechanism, but not a new
or revolutionary one. This thought experiment of mine will have to sufﬁce
for the time being as my response to Downes’s challenge for me to produce
an actual example of “phenomena that do not succumb to standard evo-
lutionary explanations” (this volume). If any funding agency wants me to
turn my thought experiment into a real experiment, I’m sure I can still ﬁnd
a behaviorist or two who would enjoy coming out of retirement and setting
this in motion. It will take quite a few years, and be quite expensive, but it
might be worth it, if it would convince the diehard skeptics. The important
point is that the chances of selectively breeding such a bird depend on the
bird’s having enough of a “mind” to be trainable to utter the sounds. There
might also be an unrealized genome in the Vast catalogue of possible blue
jay genomes that would yield the same vocalization instinct, but it is hard
even to imagine a feasible path that could take us there, since there would
be no adaptive slope to guide our search.
I take it that I am so far just elaborating the standard presumption about
how the Baldwin effect works, not breaking new ground. But I have learned
to be cautious about this. Is Godfrey-Smith right that Deacon, in his discus-
sion of the Baldwin effect, has added a new mechanism? Now it is my turn
to play skeptic; I think Deacon is right about the heightened selection pres-
sure brought about by the prevalence of the Good Trick in the population,
A Crane, Not a Skyhook
77

but I thought that was implicit all along in the earlier discussions—in
Hinton and Nowlan, in Maynard Smith, and in my own remark (quoted
above): “Over generations, the competition becomes stiffer: eventually, un-
less you are born with (or very nearly with) the Good Trick, you are not
close enough to compete.” Perhaps Deacon spelled it out better, or perhaps
he has indeed proposed a new mechanism, but if so, I don’t yet see what it is.
Finally, I was puzzled by Downes’s dismissive suggestion regarding the
evolution of lactose tolerance among people engaged in herding: “The
relevant details are probably best spelled out in the molecular biology of en-
zyme production.” But surely the difference between human subpopula-
tions that plays the major role in explaining the observed differences in
“enzyme production” is the large difference in diet, which is itself explained
by a food-gathering practice that is learned, not genetically transmitted.
This is not yet the Baldwin effect, but it is deﬁnitely an instance, contrary to
what Downes says, of “mind directing evolution” in the bland but impor-
tant sense of a learned, culturally transmitted practice having dramatic ge-
netic consequences. Moreover, the case is pretty strong for an indirect
Baldwin effect arising from such practices in another species involved in
them. A border collie puppy hardly has to be taught to herd sheep—its in-
stinctual skills are merely honed by training (unlike, say, the children of
Basque shepherds who are not similarly genetically equipped with herding
instincts!). What drove the evolution of herding instincts in border collies?
The learned human Good Trick of animal husbandry. Dogs that could
more readily learn to herd had a huge selective advantage, but only because
of their interactions with their foresighted, looking-ahead “masters.” In
this case, it was the “mind-directed” activities of another species that cre-
ated the gradients up which ﬁrst unconscious, and later, artiﬁcial selection
could drive the genomes of those wolf-kins.3
Acknowledgments
I am indebted to Mateo Mameli and Stephen Downes for valuable discussion on an
earlier draft of this paper.
Notes
1. Since devising this case, I have been delighted to discover that a strikingly simi-
lar example with a slightly different emphasis was invented over a century ago by
78
Daniel Dennett

Spalding (1873) quoted in Avital and Jablonca (2000): 321, a striking case of con-
vergent evolution. Spalding’s version has some variations of its own that are partic-
ularly amusing, since he supposes that sexual selection maintains the instinct long
after the death of the Crusoe, the behaviorist trainer in his version. This is genuine
possibility, I think.
2. A better technique that classical operant conditioning would be the ingenious
imitation method used by Pepperberg (2000) in training her virtuoso vocalizer,
Alex, who watches a rival being trained and competes for her attention and ap-
proval. But for the sake of my example it is important to recognize that the “ﬂock”
of parrots may be kept isolated from each other; the Baldwin effect depends on in-
dividual trainability and discernible differences therein, not on imitation or social
learning, which are further effects of considerable power.
3. On the relation of unconscious and artiﬁcial selection (Darwin’s terms) to nat-
ural selection, see Dennett (2001).
References
Avital, E. and E. Jablonka (2000). Animal Traditions: Behavioural Inheritance in
Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Baldwin, J. M. (1896). A new factor in evolution. American Naturalist 30:
441–451, 536–553. Reprinted in Belew and Mitchell (1996).
Belew, R. K. and M. Mitchell (eds.) (1996). Adaptive Individuals in Evolving Pop-
ulations: Models and Algorithms. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
Dawkins, R. (1982). The Extended Phenotype. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little, Brown.
Dennett, D. (1995). Darwin’s Dangerous Idea. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Dennett, D. (2001). The evolution of culture. Monist 84 (3): 305–324.
Hinton, G. E. and S. J. Nowlan (1987). How learning can guide evolution. In Belew
and Mitchell (1996), pp. 447–454.
Maynard Smith, J. (1987). Natural selection: When learning guides evolution. Na-
ture 329: 761–762. Reprinted in Belew and Mitchell (1996).
Pepperberg, I. M. (2000). The Alex Studies: Cognitive and Communicative Abili-
ties of Grey Parrots. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Simpson, G. G. (1953). The Baldwin effect. In Belew and Mitchell (1996), pp.
99–110.
Spalding, D. (1873). Instinct with original observations on young animals. MacMil-
lan’s Magazine 27: 282–293. (Reprinted with an introduction by J. B. S. Haldane in
1954 in the British Journal of Animal Behaviour 2: 1–11.)
A Crane, Not a Skyhook
79

Evolution and Learning
The Baldwin Effect Reconsidered
edited by Bruce H. Weber and David J. Depew
A Bradford Book
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

2003 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any elec-
tronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information
storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher.
This book was set in Sabon by Achorn Graphic Services Inc. and was printed and
bound in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Evolution and learning : the Baldwin effect reconsidered / edited by Bruce H.
Weber and David J. Depew.
p.
cm. — (Life and mind)
Based on a conference held in Nov. 1999 at Bennington College.
“A Bradford book.”
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-262-23229-4 (hc. : alk. paper)
1. Genetic psychology. 2. Learning, Psychology of. 3. Baldwin, James Mark,
1861–1934. I. Weber, Bruce H. II. Depew, David J., 1942– . III. Series.
BF701 .E59
2003
155.7—dc21
2002031992

