Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Topoi 
DOI 10.1007/s11245-017-9508-2
A History of Qualia
Daniel C. Dennett1 
 
© Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2017
made on behalf of One True God. What could be more 
obvious? [2001, p. 1]
What they are doing, pretty clearly, is availing them-
selves of a familiar way of speaking and writing that is not 
so much “sociological” or “anthropological” as “literary”: 
A history of Odysseus or Paul Bunyan or Santa Claus could 
be an entirely creditable work of scholarship and explanation 
written by someone who knew full well, and was happy to 
acknowledge, that their topic was a fictional character, not 
a real person. When the topic is God, however, there is a 
long established tradition of eschewing that acknowledg-
ment, out of sincere agnosticism (perhaps, in a few cases) or 
diplomacy or even fear of ostracism. We can highlight this 
convenient and familiar silence by contrasting it with Dawk-
ins’ (2006) forthright—and shocking to many—description 
of the God of the Old Testament as “the most unpleasant 
character in all fiction [my emphasis].”1 We know where 
Dawkins stands. Jehovah, thank goodness, is just a fictional 
character, not a real supernatural Lord and Master.
When it comes to speaking and writing about qualia, 
there is a similar ambiguity, which I long ago attempted to 
expose, but my joking title, “Quining Qualia” (1984), appar-
ently misled many into thinking that I wasn’t really saying 
that qualia were as fictional as leprechauns (about which 
books could be written, of course)—or if I really meant it, 
I was obviously wrong. (“What could be more obvious?”) 
Abstract  The philosophers’ concept of qualia is an artifact 
of bad theorizing, and in particular, of failing to appreciate 
the distinction between the intentional object of a belief (for 
instance) and the cause(s) of that belief. Qualia, like Santa 
Claus and the Easter Bunny, have a history but that does not 
make them real. The cause of a hallucination, for instance, 
may not resemble the intentional object hallucinated at all, 
and the representation in the brain is not rendered in special 
subjective properties (qualia).
Keywords  Qualia · Intentional objects · Causes · 
Humphrey · Nicholas
Several authors have written books about the history of God. 
Are they asserting the existence of God, or talking about the 
idea of God or the concept of God? Or what? Karen Arm-
strong (1993), a former nun, published A History of God: 
The 4000-Year Quest of Judaism, Christianity and Islam in 
1993. It seems that she may be an atheist, but she doesn’t 
say. Rodney Stark (2001), a sociologist of religion, opens 
his 2001 book, One True God: Historical Consequences 
of Monotheism with a passage that brandishes the same 
ambiguity:
All of the great monotheisms propose that their God 
works through history, and I plan to show that, at least 
sociologically, they are quite right: that a great deal 
of history—triumphs as well as disasters—has been 
 *	 Daniel C. Dennett 
	
Daniel.dennett@tufts.edu
1	
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, 
MA 02155, USA
1  See Dan Barker’s (2016) detailed and scholarly book inspired by 
it, God: The Most Unpleasant Character in All Fiction, which glee-
fully cites the biblical verses supporting Dawkins’ verdict that this 
character is “jealous and proud of it; a petty, unjust, unforgiving 
control-freak; a vindictive, bloodthirsty ethnic cleanser; a misogynis-
tic, homophobic, racist, infanticidal, genocidal, filicidal, pestilential, 
megalomaniacal, sadomasochistic, capriciously malevolent bully.”

	
D. C. Dennett 
1 3
For more than 30 years philosophers and cognitive scientists 
have continued to insist that they knew what they were talk-
ing about when they talked about qualia, and knew that they 
were perfectly real. In fact, they often assert, it is the undeni-
able existence of qualia that makes the Hard Problem hard! 
According to those who think this way, I wasn’t explaining 
consciousness in 1991, I was trying to explain it away. Haha. 
It is time to stop joking, and take this way of speaking seri-
ously, and see how it can beguile very good thinkers (or their 
readers) into missing an opportunity to make real progress 
on consciousness.
I will use Nicholas Humphrey’s essay “The Invention of 
Consciousness” (this issue) to demonstrate what I mean. I 
agree with, and have been instructed by, most of what Hum-
phrey says in this essay. I may in fact agree with everything 
here except some of his expository tactics and choice of 
language, which I think court misunderstanding by being 
overly diplomatic, giving illusory comfort to those whose 
views he is in fact subverting vigorously.
1  What are Intentional Objects Made of?
The non-committal way of speaking exemplified by Arm-
strong and Stark is de rigueur when our topic is what Bren-
tano (1874) called intentional objects. According to myth, 
Ponce de Leon was searching for the Fountain of Youth—
something that doesn’t exist. Since there is no known factual 
basis for that myth, let’s consider a slightly less famous, 
but historically impeccable, case: Sir Walter Raleigh con-
ducted several expeditions in search of El Dorado, the city 
of gold, in South America. One could write a book about 
El Dorado, full of scholarly truth, and never get around to 
acknowledging to the reader that it doesn’t actually exist. 
The book would be about real things—real people and real 
brains (or minds, if you like), real treks, real books and con-
versations, real maps, real con artists and impostors, real 
disappointments. And while it is true that Raleigh really 
had an idea in his mind of El Dorado (we might say, loosely 
speaking), that mental state was not the object of his quest. 
He already had it! He wasn’t seeking an idea in his mind; 
he was seeking a city. And what was El Dorado made of? 
Marble? Gold? Adobe? It—the intentional object—wasn’t 
made of anything. A fictional object can be truly said to 
“have” plenty of properties—real properties: Santa’s coat is 
red, and his beard is white, and his belly is large and round 
(properties I have, too—except for the red coat). El Dorado 
“had” whatever real properties Raleigh believed it had; it 
didn’t exist, but Raleigh was so convinced that it existed he 
was prepared to devote a large portion of his life to finding 
it. This non-existent (“intentionally inexistent”) El Dorado 
was the intentional object of some of Sir Walter Raleigh’s 
most important beliefs and desires.
What should we say, then, about the intentional objects 
of normal, veridical beliefs and perceptions? Normally, if I 
believe there is a red apple on the table in front of me, my 
belief is caused by a red apple in front of me. The apple 
exists, and is red, and is the indirect, distal cause of my 
belief. (It causes events in my eyes and visual cortex which 
cause me eventually to go into the mental state of believing 
that there is a red apple in front of me.) That belief is not red 
or round or juicy; it is about something red and round and 
juicy. Nor are the proximal causes of that belief red or round 
or juicy. The intentional object of the belief is a red apple in 
front of me, not the idea of a red apple in my mind, and this 
is a belief that I can express by speaking of that apple or by 
reaching out, grabbing it and taking a bite (while ignoring 
the unripe apple beside it, etc.). There is little harm in the 
ordinary practice of simply identifying the intentional object 
of a true belief, perception or other mental state with the real 
object that plays the—typically indirect—stabilizing causal 
role in the creation and maintenance of that mental state, 
as long as we remember that when the intentional object is 
fictional—non-existent, hallucinated, fantasized—there is 
no role for a substitute real object, an inner real object that 
“has all the same properties” to be among the more proximal 
causes of the mental state. There is a role for a system of 
stabilizing internal representations, but they represent the 
properties of the fictional object in roughly the same way the 
sentences of a novel represent the properties of a fictional 
character. Seeing a real red apple for real does not require 
the brain to render a “directly seen” phenomenal/subjective 
red apple that intervenes between the piece of fruit and the 
belief. Hallucinating a red apple doesn’t require an inner 
rendering either.
I have learned that this is a very counter-intuitive idea 
for most people to accept. It sure seems that when one hal-
lucinates a red apple, this must involve the real existence (in 
some “dimension” or “arena” that might not be physical) of 
something that is (in some perhaps special, subjective sense) 
red and round, an object created in the mind by whatever it is 
that creates hallucinations. It is that object, that phenomenon 
that one is talking about when one talks about the contents 
of one’s conscious experience. I am insisting that this is a 
mistake, not the indubitable deliverance of introspection and 
reflection. What you are doing when you make this mistake 
is confusing the intentional object of your belief with the 
proximal cause of your belief. You are “authoritative” about 
the intentional object of your belief in the same way a nov-
elist is authoritative about the characters in her novel, but 
you have precious little access to, or knowledge about, the 
proximal cause[s] of those beliefs.
If asked why I say there is a red apple in front of me, I 
can reply, sincerely, that I see it with my own eyes, right 
now. That is a claim about causation. If I am right, then 
there is in front of me a physical object with such-and-such 

A History of Qualia﻿	
1 3
physical properties, including the “lovely” property red 
(Dennett 1991), a dispositional property that can only be 
defined relative to a class of normal observers. But I might 
be wrong; I might be hallucinating, for instance, or tricked 
by a parabolic mirror, something I could discover on my 
own for reaching out for the apple. So while we are usually 
right in our beliefs about what is causing our other beliefs 
(and our beliefs about our beliefs, etc.), we have no “privi-
leged access” that guarantees the truth of such beliefs about 
causes. And if you believe that your belief that there is a 
red apple in front of you is proximally caused by a “phe-
nomenal” red apple-representation produced by your visual 
system to be the immediate source of your belief, you may 
well be mistaken. (I am sure you are, but it is my goal in this 
paper to show you that I might be right, so I won’t assume 
that I am right from the outset.) Sir Walter Raleigh’s stable, 
highly developed, obsessed-about beliefs about El Dorado 
were not caused by a real city of gold. We can be quite 
sure of that. Who knows what tangled network of folklore, 
deception, wishful thinking, and even indigestion may be 
implicated? [Recall Ebenezer Scrooge’s address to the cause 
of his current vision of Marley’s ghost: “You may be an 
undigested bit of beef, a blot of mustard, a crumb of cheese, 
a fragment of an underdone potato.” (Dickens 1843)]2.
What was in Raleigh’s head that anchored, proximally 
caused, subserved, … the beliefs and desires he had about 
this El Dorado? Here we must tread carefully, because while 
the actual physical, causal goings-on in his brain were noth-
ing Raleigh had any beliefs about—unless he was an ama-
teur cognitive neuroscientist centuries ahead of his time—he 
had, no doubt, plenty of beliefs about his “ideas” about El 
Dorado, his yearnings for it, his anticipatory imaginings of 
it, and so on. To say he had access to all these “ideas” is to 
say that, without any extensive amateur cognitive neurosci-
ence he could distinguish, report, describe them in quite 
stable fashion. That is, he had beliefs about these apparent 
inner happenings that could guide his further actions, includ-
ing reports about them (expressive of those beliefs). These 
beliefs had their own intentional objects, of course, and, as 
before, he was incorrigible—the ultimate authority—about 
the properties “had” by those intentional objects, but he was 
not incorrigible about which of these intentional objects, 
if any, were real, and which had causes that were not at all 
what he would expect them to be.
2  Where are the Qualia?
Qualia are the intentional objects of many of the reflective 
or introspective beliefs that one may have about one’s own 
mental states. What could be more obvious? In that tone 
of voice, talking about intentional objects, it is clear that 
people do think about, talk about, wonder about, delight in, 
… their qualia. It is just as undeniable a fact as the fact that 
Sir Walter Raleigh was searching for El Dorado. What is not 
obvious is that qualia are real, that qualia exist. If they are 
not real, they pose no more challenge to Modern Science 
than Raleigh’s El Dorado. The Hard Problem (Chalmers 
1995, 1996) would turn out to be no problem at all, or rather, 
it would disintegrate (as I have long urged) into a host of 
“easy” problems about how people could be seduced into 
thinking that their qualia were real, which will require us to 
ask, and answer, a host of questions about what is actually 
happening in people’s brains that makes them carry on as 
they do.
Isn’t this “behavioristic”? Yes, in the very bland and non-
ideological sense that all science is behavioristic. Meteorol-
ogy is behavioristic in this sense: once you’ve explained all 
the meteorological behavior, you’ve explained all the phe-
nomena. The “behavior” in this formulation includes every-
thing that happens in the brain, described at every level that 
is useful, including whatever modulates emotional states, 
generates preferences, raises or lowers thresholds, turns on 
orientation responses, triggers memory retrievals, adjusts 
judgments, obtunds pains, distracts attention, heightens 
libido or aggression or submissive responses, along with 
whatever processes drive and guide the production of verbal 
reactions, either to oneself or to others, fully articulated or 
half-fleshed out with actual words.
Consider my favorite metaphorical depiction of con-
sciousness, Saul Steinberg’s New Yorker cover depicting 
the man looking at the painting he takes to be by Braque (It 
can be found on the cover of Dennett 2005). This virtuosic 
thought balloon is an incomplete catalogue of the sequence 
of behaviors that might occur in a few seconds while he 
peruses the painting. They are not musculo-skeletal behav-
iors but internal, covert behaviors, and the one property they 
share that elevates them into the catalogue, beating out the 
competition of all the other cognitive-emotional-metabolic 
behaviors occurring inside the man’s skull, is that they are 
“accessible” to the man, and indirectly to us, since he can 
report them, comment on them, describe them, and so forth, 
according to the heterophenomenological protocol (Dennett 
1991).
Here is where the footing gets slippery. In order for these 
internal behaviors, these things happening in the brain, to 
occupy this status of accessibility, they must be the reliable 
causes, shapers, modulators of the beliefs he expresses when 
he tells us what it’s like to be him at this time. But these 
2  See my “How and why does consciousness seem the way it 
seems?” (2015) for further development of related points.

	
D. C. Dennett 
1 3
internal things are not to be identified with the intentional 
objects of those beliefs since the intentional objects of those 
beliefs may be fictions, as unreal as Santa Claus (who is not 
the cause of anybody’s beliefs about Santa Claus, by virtue 
of having the debilitating property of non-existence). This 
is the heart of Illusionism (Frankish 2016; Dennett 2016). 
It is one thing to identify the red round apple that causes 
my belief that there is a red round apple present as both 
the distal cause and the intentional object of that belief; it is 
another thing to identify the internal neural state that causes 
my belief that that I am currently experiencing a red quale 
conjoined with a round quale as both the intentional object 
and the proximal cause of that belief, because that cause is 
neither red nor round, we can be sure of that.
We could claim this identity if we were willing to adopt 
a certain tendentious attitude, like the attitude of the Freud-
ian critic who insists that the evil female character in the 
author’s novel is really the author’s mother, much as the 
author might deny it. The critic thinks that it is no coinci-
dence that the fictional character and the author’s mother 
share a variety of characteristics, and that this somehow 
explains—causally explains—some of the content present 
in the author’s novel. In fact, the case for identifying the 
internal neural cause of a belief with the intentional object 
of that belief might be rather more compelling than the case 
of the psychoanalyzed novelist since a lot of circumstantial 
evidence would support the identity in spite of the huge dif-
ference in properties. An example: I invite you to imagine a 
bright blue capital “A” against a black background, and you 
comply. I tell you that the “A” you then tell me about—it’s 
in a serif font, and the blue is October-sky blue, not baby 
blue—is actually no more blue than its representation in this 
Word file is blue. It might, however, actually be (if you squint 
right and look in the right place with your cerebroscope) 
A-shaped! That is, the internal neural representation of the 
capital A—the actual proximal cause of your introspective 
belief that you are imagining a capital A—might indeed 
avail itself of something along the lines of a retinotopic 
map, which would involve a real roughly A-shaped pattern 
of real excitation in some part of your visual cortex! Using 
spatial properties to represent spatial properties is sometimes 
a very good trick, but whether this trick is being used by 
your brain is an open, empirical question about which you 
have no privileged access whatever. See, e.g., the Shepard/
Kosslyn/Pylyshyn debate over mental imagery for more on 
this. Pylyshyn (2002) (including the commentary) is a good 
overview. And what neurally represents the blue? Some pat-
tern of firings that links the representation of the A shape 
with a host of dispositions, memories, preferences, affective 
responses, gathered together as your neural representation 
of that shade of sky-blue. Something like that is the natural-
istic surrogate for the dualistic phantom blue-quale that we 
tend to imagine on display in the Cartesian Theater (Dennett 
1991). But how could such an impersonal, boring pattern 
of neural firing take the place of a glorious, life-affirming, 
glowing, heart-breakingly lovely subjective patch of blue? 
By coming equipped with many of the triggers that initiate 
positive affective responses, dispositions to wax poetical, 
confidence-boosters, and so forth. (The difference between 
imagining the shade of blue and actually seeing the shade 
of blue is, in my opinion, a matter of degree, not kind. More 
on this below.) The affect is built in, a feature of the rep-
resentations designed by evolution to accompany the mere 
identification of the surface property involved. (Evolution 
doesn’t have to smear the representations with jam to make 
them yummy, or douse them with vinegar to make them 
yucky; their sequelae are those that are the apt reactions to 
the yummy or yucky properties they represent.)
3  Nicholas Humphrey’s Inventions
Now we are ready to see how Humphrey makes these 
points—for I think he agrees with almost all that I have just 
said, if not with my ways of putting it. He begins by noting 
two different meanings of “invention”—a device or process, 
or a “falsehood, designed to please or persuade”: He then 
claims that “consciousness is an ‘invention’ in both these 
senses.” (Humphrey 2017).
That is to say, consciousness is:
1. A cognitive faculty, evolved by natural selection, 
designed to help us make sense of ourselves and our 
surroundings.
But, on another level, consciousness is:
2. A fantasy, conjured up by the brain, designed to 
change how we value our existence.
Exactly, on both counts. As I have put it (Dennett 1991, 
2016, 2017), consciousness is a user-illusion, a brilliant sim-
plification of the noisy tumult of causation and interaction 
(at the molecular and cellular levels, for instance) that needs 
to be prudently and swiftly sampled in order for a brain to 
do its work of controlling a large complex body through a 
challenging, changing world. Consciousness is the brain’s 
user-illusion of itself, or more accurately, it is a whole mani-
fold of user-illusions for various components of the brain 
that have various different jobs of discrimination and control 
to accomplish. When we banish the homunculus from the 
Cartesian Theater and blow up the theater, the distributed, 
scattered agencies that do all the work need ways of passing 
information and influence around. This involves not trans-
ducing the informative events (the signals, if you will) into 
a different medium, the imagined MEdium of consciousness, 
but translating or transforming the signals into neural repre-
sentations that are well-suited to permit representation-users 

A History of Qualia﻿	
1 3
to extract what they need. (See the lengthy description and 
discussion of this translation process in Shakey, the early 
robot, in Dennett 1991.)
But, on further examination, what about the second 
sense? What fantasy is Humphrey talking about? One 
might think he was talking about the menagerie of inten-
tional objects that populates our waking life, the “things” we 
think about, savor, yearn for, are repulsed by. Some of these 
intentional objects are perfectly real things in the world—red 
apples and frightful tigers and awesome sunsets—and some 
are mere figments of imagination, which are not made of 
“figment” any more than Sherlock Holmes is made of “fic-
toplasm.” But in fact he is talking about a more restricted set 
of intentional objects: the “things” we savor or hate “more 
directly” (it seems) when we direct our attention inward and 
have beliefs about, premonitions about, yearnings for par-
ticular sensations, those inner goings-on that accompany, 
modify, enrich many if not all of our perceptual beliefs and 
desires. Humphrey says.
the fantasy I’m talking about is the kitchen-garden 
of qualia-soaked intentional objects that make up the 
subjective world of sensation, and nothing else. … 
Perceptions, as such, don’t have a qualia-dimension, 
it’s not like anything to perceive there’s an apple that 
is red. But sensations almost always do have it, it is like 
something to sense red light on my retina. (personal 
communication, 2017)
I think this resurrects a division between pragmatic, busi-
nesslike cognition and ecstatic, emotion-laden affect that has 
outlived whatever usefulness it ever had. Humphrey says in 
his essay (this volume) “I’ll argue that qualia make little if 
any contribution to the cognitive faculty. However they lie at 
the very heart of the fantasy.” I, in contrast, think qualia—in 
the sense I think Humphrey could adopt quite comfortably—
play a huge role in cognition “proper.” We can see the sorts 
of contribution they make in such minimal phenomena as 
the utility of color-coding in diagrams (which exploits the 
visual system’s competence and appetite for color discrimi-
nation), or rhyming mnemonics (which exploits the auditory 
system’s talent at detecting and insatiable desire for aural 
patterns). I share Humphrey’s admiration for the brain’s 
inveterate valancing of well nigh all its inputs, approving 
some stimulus arrays with an A+ or B−, while branding 
others as D− at best, and flunking still others. Indeed it was 
Humphrey who first opened my eyes to this perspective. 
When we see the brain as never indifferent about what is 
going on in it, we begin to get a sense of how control of 
mental life actually happens: by competition and coalition 
among valenced (“emotional”) neural activities. There is no 
boss in the brain figuring out what to think about next. There 
is sometimes a virtual boss, suppressing some thoughts and 
working hard to concentrate on others, but as we all know, 
this is a mature and intermittent achievement, not part of the 
underlying operating system of the mind.
But when I say qualia are playing these important causal 
roles, I mean, of course, the internal, proximal causes of the 
beliefs expressed by introspectors when they tell us what it 
is like. Sensations have qualia the way El Dorado was made 
of gold. And perhaps this is what Humphrey means when he 
says qualia make little contribution to the cognitive faculty: 
most of the contributions that matter are made—are at least 
set in motion—before any articulation of the narrative into a 
drama. “Unfelt pains” suffered while asleep still manage to 
keep our limbs in good positions to avoid joint damage, and 
an adrenaline rush is initiated by limbic fear-discrimination 
well before there is an intentional object of the fear in the 
subject’s conscious experience.
Now we get to a problem paragraph:
No one would or could wish qualia out of existence. 
Indeed there will have been times for all of us when 
conscious experience is about little else. A science of 
consciousness that leaves qualia out is not just ignor-
ing the elephant in the room, it is ignoring the elephant 
that is the room. (Humphrey 2017)
But of course I, for one, do wish qualia out of existence! 
That is, my attitude towards qualia is exactly the same as 
my attitude towards Sherlock Holmes, the Loch Ness Mon-
ster and the Abominable Snowman: I’m delighted that these 
intentional objects are a topic of folklore, entertaining and 
instructive for many purposes, but I really don’t want any-
body to believe they are real. If they do, they are suffering 
from a delusion that might bring them to harm. (Belief in 
qualia, in contrast, is fairly innocuous, perhaps at worst an 
embarrassing delusion to suffer, especially if one is a cogni-
tive scientist convinced that those damn qualia are sneaking 
away, untrapped and untaxonomized, leaving an awful hole 
in one’s model.)3
Note that I am not denying the existence of the per-
ceptual properties of things in the world: colors, sounds, 
aromas, textures, liquidity and solidity and the like, any 
more than I am denying the existence of dollars, pounds 
sterling or euros. These are real things in the world, as 
real as real can be, and they are not properties of mental 
events but properties represented by mental events. And 
unlike many other properties (roughly, what Boyle and 
Locke called the primary properties) these “secondary” 
3  I am always amused by cognitive scientists working on conscious-
ness who modestly aver that they are not trying to solve the Hard 
Problem, something they are content to postpone indefinitely. If they 
think qualia are real, they should be ashamed of such abdication of 
scientific duty, or at least chagrinned to admit they are not tackling 
the important issues. But maybe this is just a convenient temporizing 
move, waiting for philosophers to get their act together.

	
D. C. Dennett 
1 3
properties owe their very existence and identity to their 
being represented by mental events. Hume aptly drew our 
attention to the mind’s “great propensity to spread itself 
on external objects” (Treatise of Human Nature, 1739, I, 
xiv) but this wonderful expression wears its metaphorical 
intent on its sleeve; Hume was not making the preposter-
ous suggestion that minds somehow projected colors onto 
the near surfaces of objects, for instance, in the manner 
of some spectral lighthouse beam. A more sympathetic 
reading of Hume’s insight is that the mind has a propensity 
to treat objects in the world as having properties that are 
nicely attuned to the needs and predilections of the mind’s 
owner, affordances, as Gibson (1966, 1979) would say. 
Affordances are real properties, ubiquitously instantiated 
in the world, and minds are good at detecting them. (See 
Dennett 2015, 2017, for extensive discussions of this.) 
But because they are identified or defined in terms of the 
proclivities of (normal) minds of one species or another—
usually us H. sapiens—they can be identified as examples 
of the benign illusions of our evolved user-illusion.
Here is a riddle: how are red things like opportunities? 
And the answer is that red things in the world depend for 
their redness on things that happen in our heads, but not 
red things that happen in our heads; likewise opportunities 
wouldn’t be opportunities if it weren’t for things that happen 
in our heads, but those things aren’t opportunities! (See Den-
nett 1991, pp. 379–380, on lovely and suspect properties.)
Humphrey does not want to be a Realist about qualia, 
but has his qualms about Illusionism. “Illusionism under-
mines—and in many people’s eyes devalues—the mystery 
of human experience.” (Humphrey 2017) That is not, I 
think, a weighty objection; I can conjure up circumstances 
in which I would want to preserve a holy lie, a sacred, 
life-saving (or at least life-enhancing) falsehood that I 
would want to promulgate paternalistically, but I don’t 
think embracing the shocking truth about the unreality of 
qualia should be any more unsettling than giving up belief 
in Nessie or yetis or mermaids. After all, “qualia” is a 
“technical” term devised by philosophers, and its unmask-
ing should be no more distressing than the loss of the ether 
or centrifugal force. Colors will still be real and ravishing, 
aromas will still haunt our memories, pains will still be 
abhorrent, and the ubiquitous quest for orgasms will dwarf 
Sir Walter Raleigh’s famous obsession.
Humphrey, after noting in passing that Stan Dehaene 
“oddly enough, is something of a ‘qualia denier’”(Humphrey 
2017) deftly avoids qualia Realism himself:
Even if we were to know in detail how a conscious 
experience is created neuron by neuron, from red 
light touching the retina through to the subject making 
claims about [my emphasis] red qualia, we still would 
not know what this is good for. (Humphrey 2017)
Here he leaps without comment over qualia as an inter-
vening (real) variable in the path from retina to report, a 
good sign of his appreciation that he doesn’t need qualia to 
be real properties of events in the brain (or mind) in order 
to inquire, appropriately, what might be the evolutionary 
reason for qualia-beliefs to be caused in our minds. Then 
he accurately skewers both Fodor and Searle, who make 
the defining mistake of qualia Realists. They are like the 
(one presumes imaginary) critics of Sir Walter Raleigh 
who could manage to marvel at how Raleigh could ever 
be driven to such lengths by something—El Dorado—that 
didn’t even exist. Not a mystery. But then I come to a turn 
in Humphrey’s argument that perplexed me at first:
How does exposure to qualia change people’s psy-
chology? What beliefs and attitudes are generated? 
How does it affect people’s ideas about who and what 
they are, and what kind of world they live in? (Hum-
phrey 2017)
His phrase “exposure to qualia” must be unpacked care-
fully. Frankish (2016, p. 29) finds a reading that Humphrey 
endorses:
Humphrey proposes that sensations occur when 
internalized evaluative responses to stimuli (‘senti-
tions’) interact with incoming sensory signals to cre-
ate complex feedback loops, which, when internally 
monitored, seem to possess otherworldly, phenom-
enal properties.
It is the internal monitoring of those feedback loops, 
creating higher-order beliefs about what is going on inside 
oneself, that generates the fantastic intentional objects. 
“By lifting sensory experience onto that mysterious, non-
physical plane, qualia deepen and enrich your sense of 
your own presence. You find yourself living in thick time.” 
(Humphrey 2017).
I am not persuaded. I think Humphrey has built in a 
gratuitous step, perhaps an improvement on the standard 
naïve line about qualia, but still one step too many. Sir 
Walter Raleigh was, apparently, living in thick time, with 
a deep and rich sense of his quest, and it certainly didn’t 
owe anything to any beliefs of his about El Dorado being 
fairy land or made of ectoplasm or anything like that; he 
thought it was real and made of real gold. The human fas-
cination with gold is itself a fine topic for research; unlike 
our love of honey, for instance, it does not have a direct 
and obvious evolutionary rationale. But I don’t think any 
doctrines of immateriality play a role in gold’s psychologi-
cal importance to us. I similarly have not been convinced 
by Humphrey that belief in immateriality, or paradoxical 
“impossibility,” plays a role in persuading us to care about 
our lives and how we live them. This is how he puts it:

A History of Qualia﻿	
1 3
Even though it’s your own brain that creates the qualia, 
you can’t but project the special qualities of sensations 
[my emphasis] out onto the objects of perception in the 
outside world. In doing so, you spread a kind of fairy-
dust around you. You enchant the world. Take away 
this magic paintbrush, and the world would lose much 
of its significance. You’d find it a less awesome place, 
less fun, less promising. (Humphrey 2017)
We may think our sensations have “special qualities” but 
in fact, I am claiming, our sensations (considered as events 
in our brains) are better seen as representing, not having, 
special qualities—affordances—of things in the world. Sen-
sations, considered as intentional objects, not the causes of 
our beliefs in sensations, are wonderfully useful illusions. 
“Projecting” those qualities must mean endowing the things 
in the world with those properties, skewed as they are in 
favor of their user-friendliness to us. Things in the world 
really do have those wonderful (or awful, or boring or excit-
ing, …) qualities, a fact as much about us as about them. 
Those properties are not properties of conscious states; 
they are properties of things in the world of which we are 
conscious. And when we wax introspective and direct our 
attention to “things” happening in us—Humphrey’s senti-
tions—we find “them” to be sensations with qualia, a useful 
illusion we can learn to set aside, much as we set aside the 
illusion of centrifugal force.
Finally, Enoch Lambert has raised a shrewd diagnosis of 
my difficulties convincing people about my line on inten-
tional objects:
“not all intentional objects are created equal” … There 
is a huge difference between the intentional object rep-
resented by Raleigh’s pronouncements of his inten-
tions to find El Dorado and, say, Raleigh’s hallucina-
tion of “seeing” El Dorado in the valley below at the 
end of an exhausting journey. People think there are 
obvious psychological differences here and want to 
explain them via properties of the representations [my 
emphasis]. (Personal correspondence, 2017)
Yes, and people are not wrong to look to the properties 
of the representations, but they typically look in the wrong 
place for those properties! The properties that explain this 
huge and obvious difference are functional/causal proper-
ties of the embedding of those neural representations in the 
brain, not the magical properties of qualia. We can creep up 
on Lambert’s nice case of Raleigh’s hallucination by look-
ing first at simpler cases. What are the differences between 
thinking about a blue capital A on a black background, going 
to the trouble of imagining one, hallucinating one, and actu-
ally seeing one? In each case we have an intentional object, 
but we also have rough and ready ways of distinguishing 
them without any help from cognitive neuroscientists. The 
merely thought-about A can be very sketchy; we may not 
bother settling on a font or a particular shade of blue and 
still sincerely maintain that we did indeed think about a blue 
capital A on a black background. The imagined A must be 
maintained, deliberately, with some effort, but is readily 
transformed in color or shape by “an act of will” (of which 
we have no deeper knowledge). The hallucinated A is quite 
persistent, but tends to depart under any serious scrutiny. 
(Doubting Thomas knew what he was doing.) The seen A is 
robust under almost all conditions of further investigation. 
Importantly, there can be penumbral cases in which one is 
unsure for some period of time which category of intentional 
object one is attending to. That’s an important part of what 
we know “from the inside” and it does not include anything 
about qualia, except as the unmagical properties of the inten-
tional objects we are thinking about.
This strongly suggests that the human brain can be stim-
ulated to generate representations that vary hugely in the 
amount of recoverable, “accessible” detail they invoke. It 
is close to impossible for anything other than a red, round 
apple to sustain the information-requiring investigation that 
is possible in principle, and unless we are in a funhouse 
or other bizarre environment, we take the testimony of our 
senses at face value. Hallucinations work (when they do) 
because they are rare; someone who trips regularly on LSD 
is not fooled by the hallucinations, enchanting though they 
may be. The dividing line between imagining and halluci-
nating is also vague; listening to some blowhard at a party 
and suddenly becoming transfixed by his resemblance to a 
braying donkey, a conviction that you cannot shake and that 
interferes with your ability to follow the conversation, is 
not quite a hallucination, but close. And even at the sparser 
levels of detail, such representations can have their affec-
tive effects, and sometimes these effects are amplified, not 
obtunded, by their displacement from reality. Some people 
are more aroused by pornography than by engagement in 
real sex, which, one supposes, may involve too much infor-
mation about one’s circumstances. So I just got you to think 
about sex, but reflecting on that sentence probably does not 
arouse you; being provoked by it to engage in a sexual fan-
tasy is another matter.
Now back to Lambert’s example. That Raleigh believes 
in El Dorado and is searching for it, and utters questions and 
assertions and imperatives that refer to it, etc., is plenty of 
grounding for an intentional object: Raleigh’s El Dorado, 
which may differ substantially from somebody else’s El 
Dorado (the way Santa Claus differs from Père Noël). When 
Raleigh hallucinates his quest at the end of a long day, he 
may well “discover” things about El Dorado that had never 
occurred to him: the city is smaller than he had imagined, 
the roofs are tiled with terra cotta, not gold, and there is a 
giant statue of Queen Elizabeth I in the central square! But 
now what might happen? He might rush back to his base 

	
D. C. Dennett 
1 3
camp, never doubting his hallucination and adding his “eye-
witness testimony” to the content of his intentional object, El 
Dorado. Or he might pause, marveling at all the new details, 
but when he tries to take notes for his journal, they disappear 
in the mist, or seem to have changed from what they were 
a few seconds ago. He may discover that he was—or still 
is—hallucinating, and this gives him a new and different El 
Dorado as intentional object: the El Dorado he hallucinated 
in the jungles of South America. This intentional object is 
hugely different from the intentional object that led him on 
his quest, but not in having qualia where his earlier inten-
tional object did not.
There is another theme lurking in Humphrey’s claims 
that I want to expose to the light, but not try to settle. Is 
our penchant for introspection, the high probability that at 
some point in our lives we will reflect on what it is like to 
be us and wonder about this, a key ingredient in our ability 
to stay alive and procreate? Humphrey seems to be suggest-
ing it is, but it seems to me that whether or not animals and 
insects can love their lives as much as we can love ours, their 
instinct for self-preservation and reproduction is if anything 
more imperious than our own.
References
Armstrong K (1993) A history of God: the 4000-year Quest of Judaism, 
Christianity and Islam. Ballentine, New York
Barker D (2016) God: the most unpleasant character in all fiction. Ster-
ling, New York
Brentano F (1874) Psychologie vom Empirischen Standpunkt, Leipzig
Chalmers DJ (1995) Facing up to the problem of consciousness. J Con-
scious Stud 2:200–219
Chalmers DJ (1996) The conscious mind: in search of a fundamental 
theory. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Dawkins R (2006) The God delusion. Bantam Press, London
Dennett D (1991) Consciousness explained. Little, Brown, Boston
Dennett D (2005) Sweet dreams: philosophical obstacles to a science 
of consciousness. MIT Press, Cambridge MA
Dennett D (2015) Why and how does consciousness seem the way 
it seems? In: Metzinger T, Windt JM (eds) Open mind: 10(T). 
MIND Group, Frankfurt Am Main. doi:10.15502/9783958570245
Dennett D (2016) Illusionism as the obvious default theory of con-
sciousness. J Consc Studies 23(11–12):65–72
Dennett D (2017) From bacteria to bach and back: the evolution of 
minds. Norton, New York
Dickens C (1843) A Christmas carol in prose, being a ghost-story of 
Christmas. Chapman & Hall, London
Frankish K (2016) Illusionism as a theory of consciousness. J Consc 
Studies 23(11–12):11–39
Gibson JJ (1966) The problem of temporal order in stimulation and 
perception. J Psychol 62(2):141–149
Gibson JJ (1979) The ecological approach to visual perception. 
Houghton Mifflin, Boston
Hume D (1739) A treatise of human nature. John Noon, London
Humphrey N (2017) The invention of consciousness. Topoi. 
doi:10.1007/s11245-017-9498-0
Pylyshyn ZW (2002) Mental imagery: in search of a theory. Behav 
Brain Sci 25(2):157–182
Stark R (2001) One true god: historical consequences of monotheism. 
Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton

