This article was downloaded by: [University of California, San Francisco]
On: 10 March 2015, At: 20:27
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer
Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Artifact
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/saif20
WHOLE-BODY APOPTOSIS
Daniel C. Dennett a
a Tufts University , MA, USA
Published online: 02 Jul 2008.
To cite this article: Daniel C. Dennett (2008) WHOLE-BODY APOPTOSIS, Artifact, 2:3-4, 153-156, DOI: 10.1080/17493460802012447
To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17493460802012447
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications
on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever
as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this
publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy
of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor
and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other
liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the
use of the Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction,
redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.
Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

WHOLE-BODY APOPTOSIS
Daniel C. Dennett, Tufts University, MA, USA
In order to minimize the prolonged debility of old age, we should be designed to die abruptly and
painlessly at some randomly determined time between 85 and 90 years old. This might help us
trade the goal of living for as long as possible with the goal of living as well as possible.
Life is full of misery, loneliness and
suffering  and it’s all over much too
soon. (Woody Allen)
Anybody who has lived through the ordeal of
watching an elderly parent die by inches knows
that this is no way to end one’s life. Given that
death is (still) inevitable, which would you
prefer for your last months on earth: being
struck by lightning at some point before you
began losing your faculties, or an indefinitely
long period of decline, during which you would
gradually become unable to perform the simple
actions of life and participate meaningfully in
conversation
or
decision-making?
Almost
everyone I have talked to strongly prefers the
sudden-death option, but lightning almost
never strikes, and many thinking people have
a reasonable distaste for any contrived depar-
ture  suicide or assisted euthanasia  that
necessarily involves decision-making by them-
selves or others. Why? Because wherever there
are such decisions to be made, about quality of
life, or degree of impairment or suffering, there
are inevitable opportunities for undesirable
motives to creep into the mix: greed or
impatience or  on the side of the soon-to-
die  guilt about staying alive beyond one’s
allotted span. Any practice that became wide-
spread and socially acceptable would, one
fears, carry with it an irresistible pressure
towards too much self-consciousness of the
wrong sort. As the philosopher Kurt Baier
once quipped, echoing Socrates, ‘‘The unexa-
mined life is not worth living, but the over-
examined life is nothing to write home about
either’’. We don’t want to end our days
wondering if everyone around us is glancing
at their watches and sizing up our remaining
faculties against some unstated but all too
present threshold. The recognition that one
has ‘‘lost a step’’ on the various playing fields
of life is bad enough without having to
consider how it affects the bottom line on the
great spreadsheet of one’s life.
So it would be better, would it not, for the
power of decision and the concomitant obliga-
tion of making a reasonable judgment to be
taken out of the hands of everyone else 
family, friends, ‘‘society’’  and oneself. How
could this be accomplished? How could we
engineer lightning strikes without specific hu-
man intervention and without chaos? By
designing and installing in everyone a robust
system of whole-body apoptosis. Apoptosis is
programmed cell-death. As Wikipedia notes:
Apoptosis is a process of deliberate life
relinquishment by a cell in a multicellu-
lar organism. It is one of the main types
of programmed cell death (PCD), and
involves an orchestrated series of bio-
chemical events leading to a character-
istic cell morphology and death. The
apoptotic process is executed in such a
way as to safely dispose of cell corpses
and fragments.
In contrast to necrosis, which is a form of
traumatic cell death that results from
acute cellular injury, apoptosis is carried
out in an orderly process that generally
confers advantages during an organism’s
life cycle. For example, the differentiation
of fingers and toes in a developing
human embryo requires cells between
Correspondence: Daniel C. Dennett,
Co-Director, Center for Cognitive Studies,
Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155-7059,
USA. E-mail: daniel.dennett@tufts.edu
ISSN 1749-3463 print/ ISSN 1749-3471
DOI: 10.1080/17493460802012447
# 2008 Taylor & Francis
Keywords:
apoptosis,
choice,
death, euthanasia, longevity
153
//ARTIFACT VOL 2 ISSUE 34 2008
Downloaded by [University of California, San Francisco] at 20:27 10 March 2015 

the fingers to initiate apoptosis so that
the digits
can separate. Between 50
billion and 70 billion cells die each day
due to apoptosis in the average human
adult. For an average child between the
ages of eight and 14, approximately 20
billion to 30 billion cells die a day. In a
year, this amounts to the proliferation
and subsequent destruction of a mass of
cells
equal
to
an
individual’s
body
weight.
We could arrange to have a human body
switch itself off quite abruptly and painlessly
at a time to be determined. Almost nobody
would want to know to a near certainty the
exact day and hour of their death, and the
reasons why are made vivid in any number of
death-row
dramas.
So
a
humane
system
should introduce a substantial element of
randomness, elongating the bell-shaped curve
of programmed death-knells over a period of,
say, five years. Then you would know to a
moral certainty that if you hadn’t already
died of some other cause, then at some
unpredictable time between, say, your eighty-
fifth and ninetieth birthday, you would quite
suddenly drop in your tracks, perhaps in the
middle of a golf swing, or while trying to
finish writing your latest novel, or even while
making love.
The implications and repercussions of such
an attempt to engineer programmed body-
death into ourselves and our descendants are
mind-boggling. We can begin to get some grip
on the pros and cons by sketching out the
specs for a simple version that may need
substantial tweaking:
Whole-body apoptosis 1.0. We install in
every human being and in every subse-
quent human embryo a system that
ensures
the
swift,
painless
death
at
some randomly determined time between
the age of 85 and 90, if death from some
other cause has not already occurred.
How could we accomplish this? The techni-
cal details are important, since each conceiva-
ble means to this end has some drawbacks or
weaknesses associated with it, and we can
expect these to be magnified by all manner of
human disagreement. It is quite possibly true 
let’s think about it  that the ethical and
political problems that would beset any such
system would make it essentially unimplemen-
table: you can’t get there from here without
committing some ethically unacceptable or
politically infeasible act. In that case, we’ll be
stuck with our current dismal ways of dying,
but let’s explore the territory to see what might
be possible.
The technical project divides quite naturally in
two: providing a system for the already alive,
and genetically engineering a system for subse-
quent embryos.
The latter is a problem for ‘‘evo-devo’’
(evolutionary-developmental) biologists, who
are beginning to understand the cascades of
biological clocks that turn on and off various
developmental processes. We know quite a lot
about how our biochemistry arranges the
timing of such events as puberty and meno-
pause, and we even know that human culture
has already ‘‘interfered’’ successfully with such
a process in the distant past. Unlike all other
mammals, many of us human adults can digest
raw milk, because natural selection has pro-
duced a gene that turns off the machinery that
would otherwise turn off the production of
lactase at weaning. So common is this genetic
revision in our species that we refer to those
who lack it as ‘‘lactose intolerant’’ instead of
referring to the rest of us as, say, ‘‘digestively
infantile’’! It was the human practice of dairy-
ing, culturally evolved and transmitted, that
provided the selection pressure for this geneti-
cally transmitted adaptation.
What natural selection can accomplish over
a
few
thousand
years
(agriculture
began
roughly 10 thousand years ago) ought to be
within the grasp of genuinely intelligent de-
signers over a few decades. I see no reason why
we could not now genetically engineer an
enzymatic time-bomb that would reliably ex-
plode at some time late in life. Perhaps it would
suddenly start spewing endocurarins into the
bloodstream, stopping all voluntary muscle
movement and hence suffocating the body
more effectively than any pillow. (We are
making up the term ‘‘endocurarin’’, inspired
by the naming of endorphins, endogenously
created opioids that produce such phenomena
as the runner’s high. Curare, the legendary
blow-pipe dart poison that swiftly paralyzes
the muscles leading to asphyxiation, led to the
development of muscle relaxants for surgery 
D-tubocurarine, for instance  that would kill
the patient were it not for the respirator that
accompanies its administration.) Might some
genes be designed to generate endogenous
curare? Could we perhaps import the relevant
genes from poisonous plants or frogs and
adapt them to serve this purpose in our bodies?
(We can already make a tobacco plant that
glows in the dark because it has firefly genes
spliced into its genome.)
Or perhaps we could engineer a gene that,
when triggered by a biological clock, would
produce some kind of endogenous nerve gas, or
something that would lead to a catastrophic
collapse of blood vessels, causing a massive
stroke and brain death. I leave further explora-
tion of these and other alternative physiological
death-delivery systems to the experts, noting
only a few of the obvious desiderata: the
method employed should be highly reliable,
inscrutable (there is no practical way of assay-
ing the system to figure out exactly when you
will die), utterly non-toxic earlier in life, as
tamper-proof as possible, and with no seriously
debilitating genetic side-effects. (We will explore
the myriad non-genetic side effects of such a
system in due course.)
What, then, about those already living?
What, for instance, would I choose to have
administered to me, now, in order to achieve
this effect at some point roughly 20 years down
the road (I am 65 as I write this). The simplest
//ARTIFACT VOL 2 ISSUE 34 2008
154
Downloaded by [University of California, San Francisco] at 20:27 10 March 2015 

system,
perhaps,
would
be
a time-release
poison capsule of the sort now well known to
medicine, but with a 20-year ( randomB
1800 days) fuse. This could be implanted like
a pacemaker, and surrounded by tamper-
proofing (if you try to remove it surgically, it
blows up prematurely). Better might be the
injection of a bio-engineered drug that would
begin accumulating something in the blood-
stream that would suddenly (after 20 years
plus) go haywire. Needless to say, the reliability
and non-toxicity of any such introduction
would have to be very, very high before I
would volunteer for it, but I imagine it would
be only moderately more momentous a life
decision than a vasectomy, or undergoing some
optional surgery with a low probability of a
fatal outcome. We are becoming used to
making such decisions, and for good reason.
They reliably solve important life problems
with acceptable levels of risk.
But how many others would share my
attitude? What public service campaigns, edu-
cational programs, political debates and dis-
cussions
could
conceivably
engender
a
majority, let alone a consensus, to adopt such
a system? (I am going to set aside, for now, the
interesting and important economic issues
concerning health insurance and life insurance,
and the impact such a system would have on
them, since I want to stress that this is not a
proposal designed primarily to save the tax-
payers money or preserve the inheritances of
the living, but a proposal designed to reduce
the large and inevitably growing amount of
pointless suffering that our other technologies
have in store for us if we don’t change some-
thing.) Given what we know about the con-
troversies surrounding fluoridated water and
compulsory vaccination programs, we can
expect a firestorm of debate about any such
proposals. But those campaigns also teach us a
great deal about how to present such issues 
and how not to do it. The ‘‘tampering with
God’s will’’ objection is getting ever more
threadbare and unconvincing with overuse,
and people are beginning to appreciate the
benefits
of
intervention,
and
adjust
their
principles and creeds to accommodate it.
‘‘Aha!’’ say the diehards (as we may come to
call them). ‘‘We now see that we were right to
dig in our heels about all these earlier techno-
logical enhancements! They paved the way for
this horror of horrors: programmed death!’’
But technology that they have already come to
accept continues to make unprogrammed death
ever harder to contemplate and endorse  think
of poor Terri Shiavo  so I think the diehards
will attract less and less supporters.
What, aside from tradition masquerading as
‘‘principle,’’ stands against such an innovation?
Who would be harmed by it? People who
otherwise would have lived healthy lives till
they were a hundred? This raises a sensitive
issue about which people may disagree: is 85
too young or too old? Only a few decades ago,
spry 90-year-olds were quite rare, but not
today. Should the programmed kill-by date be
moved up to 95 or even 100? That would give
quite a few healthy oldsters a few more years of
life worth living, but also would fail to kick in
soon enough to forestall a lot of suffering.
How do we balance the increase of suffering
against the non-suffering lives of a few?
Clearly, there is no point in adopting such a
system unless it actually does cut down most
people ‘‘in their prime’’! If you would prefer to
die by lightning bolt while you are still effective
and healthy, the price you must be willing to
pay is foregoing some years or months that
would have been just as effective and healthy as
your last days. We haven’t had any experience
thinking of our lives in terms of diminishing
returns, and many will no doubt still feel that
more days of life, no matter how painful and
confused, is always better than less. But
perhaps we can begin to contemplate, and
take seriously, the idea that just because we
could arrange to live to be 100 (or 120!) we
really have no right to use up so much more
than our fair share of the world’s resources and
amenities.
This is a new and unsettling way of thinking
of your life, and it is hard to say how people
would adjust their expectations to the recogni-
tion of the realities of the system. Would
people plan to go out in a blaze of glory?
Would those who could afford it set aside just
enough to tide them over (in health) for a few
years, and then give away the rest, so that they
would get to enjoy the delight and gratitude of
their heirs? Would people start a tradition of
having 85th-birthday-party extravaganzas that
celebrated the life and deeds of people in much
the way funerals do today, but with the not-
yet-departed one present? And what would the
lame-duck period after 85 be like? One would
still have all one’s rights, and could go right on
working or playing as one chose, perhaps
living a bit more riskily, perhaps not. It should
be remembered that we already know that
we’re all going to die, and quite soon, if we’re
in our eighties. This innovation would sharpen
an existing anticipation, not create something
entirely new.
One of the most interesting objections I have
provoked in recent discussions is the sugges-
tion that this policy, if adopted, would rob us
of precious opportunities to prove our strength
by enduring suffering. One friend told me that
she never appreciated her mother at all until
she nursed her through an agonizing death and
saw her indomitable will and dignity under
horrible conditions. If this policy had been in
force, her mother would have died unappre-
ciated. But that suffering is a huge social cost
to pay for such occasional redemptions, I
would say. Besides, the same line of thought
could be used to disallow the pain-killers now
routinely given in whatever doses are needed to
do the trick, on the grounds that we were
depriving these poor souls of golden opportu-
nities to prove their fortitude to skeptical
family members and other onlookers. Yes,
there would be less employment for end-of-
life caregivers who now find their life’s mean-
ing in taking care of semi-comatose, incon-
tinent, incommunicative old folks. Some might
155
//ARTIFACT VOL 2 ISSUE 34 2008
Downloaded by [University of California, San Francisco] at 20:27 10 March 2015 

be dismayed by the waning of this tradition,
but not many, I surmise. And there would still
be plenty of suffering to witness and relieve,
since nothing in this proposal would guarantee
that people wouldn’t die terribly prolonged
deaths at age 60 or 70 or 80 of all manner of
diseases and conditions.
Another objection has often arisen, put very
well by a referee for this journal:
Dennett observes that ‘‘spry 90-year-
olds’’ are less rare today than several
decades ago, but goes on to offer a
diminishing returns argument that says
that (a) dying in one’s prime is a price
worth paying to avoid a lingering, painful
and confused end, and (b) that living to
120 or so would involve using up more
than our fair share of the world’s re-
sources and amenities. However (a) & (b)
are somewhat separable: if the person is
increasingly impaired then extending life
to 120
(for example)
would involve
declining quality of life and (perhaps)
wasteful consumption of resources. On
the other hand if the person remains
healthy and active then they have gained
30 years of good quality life compared
with the fate of previous generations.
Arguing that a healthy 30 years should
be abbreviated to save resources looks
like a complex job from a moral stand-
point, and in any event if the person is
healthy then they might well be produc-
tive, generating a net social gain for the
extra years, just as major extensions to
lifespan have had adaptive benefits in
past human evolution. To be reasonable
it looks like the programmed lifespan
must fairly closely match the healthy
lifespan. Implementing such a system,
however, requires estimating 80 (or per-
haps even 120) years into the future, in
the face of the possibility that in the
meantime new developments might pro-
long healthy life further. Workarounds
that address the problem might be pos-
sible (perhaps capacity to reset approx-
imate time of death?), but this adds
significant extra complexity.
Yes, indeed, we could use technology to
fine-tune
the
system,
to
monitor
various
plausible measures of quality of life in both
individuals and populations, so that apoptosis
could more optimally track actual mean rates
of decline  or even rates of decline in
individuals  so that apoptosis could be
customized
in
any of
a
dozen
ways.
A
mathematical model of expected healthcare
savings under variable regimes of apoptosis
has already been sketched. But while these
might be possible, and might be desirable
improvements, they cut against the spirit of
my proposal, which is to use technology to
remove this issue from our decision-making
options and the incessant monitoring that
would rationally follow in its wake. To give a
heightened sense of the flavour of my propo-
sal,
consider
how
you
would
feel
about
adopting elaborate falling-in-love-monitoring
technology, which could take the guesswork
out of romance (and prove its value by a
diminished divorce rate, yadda yadda yadda).
We should pause to take seriously  very
seriously  the prospect of protecting some
aspects of our lives and deaths from manage-
ment, and thereby reframing our landscape of
decisions. Why should we devote so much of
our R&D budget to finding ways of extending
life? We aren’t similarly obsessed with ways of
making our descendants taller or stronger or
smarter. Knowing that you could expect only
so many years of life might focus your mind,
and will, wonderfully.
The idea of whole-body apoptosis opens up
vertiginous vistas on the meaning of life and
suffering, the unexamined assumption that
more is always better than less, and the
prospect
of
being able
to
live
out
your
remaining days relatively confident that your
survivors will not have to set aside memories
of a pathetic decline in order to get to the
memories of you that matter. What would
you trade for that? I’d trade any number of
years over 85.
//ARTIFACT VOL 2 ISSUE 34 2008
156
Downloaded by [University of California, San Francisco] at 20:27 10 March 2015 

