Consciousness cannot be separated
from function
Michael A. Cohen1 and Daniel C. Dennett2
1 Vision Sciences Laboratory, Department of Psychology, William James Hall, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA
2 Center for Cognitive Studies, Department of Philosophy, Tufts University, Medford, MA, 02155, USA
Numerous theories of consciousness hold that there are
separate neural correlates of conscious experience and
cognitive function, aligning with the assumption that
there are ‘hard’ and ‘easy’ problems of consciousness.
Here, we argue that any neurobiological theory based on
an experience/function division cannot be empirically
conﬁrmed or falsiﬁed and is thus outside the scope of
science. A ‘perfect experiment’ illustrates this point,
highlighting the unbreachable boundaries of the scien-
tiﬁc study of consciousness. We describe a more
nuanced notion of cognitive access that captures per-
sonal experience without positing the existence of inac-
cessible conscious states. Finally, we discuss the criteria
necessary for forming and testing a falsiﬁable theory of
consciousness.
The hard problem of consciousness is an impossible
problem
A goal of neuroscience is to locate the neural correlates of
consciousness: the minimal set of neuronal events leading
to subjective awareness (see Glossary) [1–3]. Numerous
inﬂuential theories hold that conscious experience has its
own neural underpinnings that can be separated from all
cognitive functions (i.e. attention, working memory, lan-
guage, decision making, motivation etc.). Different theories
equate consciousness with different correlates: recurrent
activation between cortical areas [4–7], coalitions of ‘win-
ning’ neurons [8–10], special microactivations distributed
throughout the brain [11–13] or activity in the ventral
stream [14]. Although the details of these theories vary,
they all assert that conscious experience and cognitive
functions have distinct neural correlates (Box 1).
This alleged division between experience and function is
often mapped onto the distinction between the ‘hard’ and
‘easy’ problems of consciousness [3]. Under this view, the
hard problem is answering the question of how phenome-
nal experience arises from physical events in the brain,
whereas the easy problems are characterizing the mecha-
nisms supporting cognitive functions. In this article we
argue that, from an empirical perspective, the ‘hard prob-
lem’ is actually an impossible problem that inherently
isolates consciousness from all current and future avenues
of scientiﬁc investigation. All theories of consciousness
based on the assumption that there are hard and easy
problems can never be veriﬁed or falsiﬁed because it is the
products of cognitive functions (i.e. verbal report, button
pressing etc.) that allow consciousness to be empirically
studied at all. A proper neurobiological theory of conscious-
ness must utilize these functions in order to accurately
identify which particular neural activations correlate with
conscious awareness.
A motivation behind dissociative theories is the belief
that theories associating awareness with access [15–17]
cannot explain the richness of phenomenology. In other
words, it is claimed that ‘phenomenology overﬂows access’
([7], p. 487): we experience more than can possibly be
captured by cognitive mechanisms that are known to have
strict limits. Visual attention [18,19], working memory
[20,21], dynamic tracking [22,23] and many other such
processes have well-established capacity limits. Phenome-
nology, however, is claimed to have no such limitations. It
is thought that when we look out onto the world we do not
only see a few attended items; we see the whole world.
Thus it is argued that although we are conscious of a
variety of inputs we have access to only a small subset
of these experiences [4,7,10,13].
Here, we analyze the data used to support the claim that
phenomenology overﬂows access and show how these
results can be accounted for under a pure access/functional
view of consciousness. We then argue that dissociative
theories are inherently unfalsiﬁable and beyond the scope
of science, because inaccessible conscious states are intrin-
sically off-limits to investigation. With this in mind we end
by describing the necessary components of a proper scien-
tiﬁc theory of consciousness.
Evidence supporting the dissociation
What data support the view that consciousness occurs
independently of, and can be experimentally dissociated
Opinion
Glossary
Access consciousness: conscious states that can be reported by virtue of high-
level cognitive functions such as memory, attention and decision making.
Awareness: the state of perceiving, feeling or experiencing sensations.
Easy problem of consciousness: understanding the mechanisms that support
relevant functions such as language and attention.
Hard problem of consciousness: explaining phenomenal consciousness (e.g.
the feeling of ‘what it is like’ [60]).
High versus low-level brain regions: in this context, the distinction between high
and low-level brain regions roughly correspond to sensory and non-sensory
(functional) regions. More speciﬁcally, ‘low-level’ regions are involved in the
processing and discrimination of visual stimuli, whereas ‘high-level’ regions are
involved in attention, language, and decision-making.
Phenomenal consciousness: the subjective aspect of experiencing the world
(e.g. the experience of seeing the color red).
Corresponding authors: Cohen, M.A. (michaelthecohen@gmail.com);
Dennett, D.C. (daniel.dennett@tufts.edu).
358
1364-6613/$ – see front matter  2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2011.06.008 Trends in Cognitive Sciences, August 2011, Vol. 15, No. 8

from, higher-level functions (i.e. access)? The most fre-
quently cited experiments use Sperling’s partial report
paradigm [24–27]. After being brieﬂy shown a display of
9–12 letters, participants can only report some of the items
through free recall. However, if cued to report a subset of
the letters, they can report the entire subset and thus seem
to have consciously perceived all of the items. According to
dissociative theories, these results demonstrate that
although we have access to only a few items we are
nonetheless conscious of the identities of them all [4–7].
Although the partial report results are crucial to argu-
ments for dissociating consciousness and function, they can
be explained without this separation [27]. Participants can
identify cued items because their identities are stored
unconsciously until the cue brings them to the focus of
attention. Before the cue, participants are conscious only of
the few letters they attend to and the impression that there
are other items on the display whose identities they do not
know (Figure 1). Once the cue is presented, they are able to
access an unconscious representation before it decays and
successfully recall the letters presented.
Although Sperling’s results can be explained by appeal-
ing to consciousness without access, this is not the only
explanation or the clearest. Indeed a more nuanced notion
of access and cognitive function can readily explain both
the phenomenology and the results of these experiments.
A multi-access model
Those who argue for experience without access [4–14,
28,29] emphasize the introspective experience of seeing
Box 1. Example dissociative theories
The partitioning of conscious experience from cognitive function is
common in neurobiological theories of consciousness. Three repre-
sentative theories are described below.
Local recurrency. The best-known theory that embraces the
separation between experience and function is the local recurrency
theory put forth by Lamme [4,5] and Block [6,7]. According to this
theory, visual information is processed in the cortex by an initial
feedforward sweep in which representations of motion, color and
shape are formed [61,62]. Although representations at this stage can
be rather detailed, no conscious experience accompanies this
processing. Such experiences only arise as a result of sustained RP
between visual areas. However, the experiences that accompany RP
are independent of all cognitive functions, especially attention [4].
Indeed, this theory explicitly maintains that local recurrency is the
neural correlate of one and only one form of consciousness:
phenomenal consciousness [28]. Access consciousness, which com-
prises functions such as working memory, language production and
so on, is achieved when RP extends into the frontal cortex and
engages higher-level functions.
Microconsciousness. Zeki’s theory of microconsciousness states that
consciousness is not a unified state but is instead distributed in space
and time [11–13]. Rather than emphasizing the flow of information
between regions, like the local recurrency theory, this theory focuses on
the activation of ‘essential nodes’ throughout the cortex. Each node
represents different bits of information (e.g. color or motion) and the
activation of each node generates its own microconsciousness. We
have the impression of a unified consciousness because each of these
individual representations is bound to others, post-experientially, to
form an accessed macroconsciousness [13]. It is at this macrolevel that
functions such as language and decision making operate on the
distributed experiences and lead to subjective reports. Thus, the micro/
macro distinction again dissociates conscious experience and cognitive
function [29].
Coalitions of neurons. Crick and Koch proposed that conscious-
ness stems from ‘winning’ coalitions of neurons (sustained activa-
tion of a collection of neurons that are dedicated to the processing
and representation of a particular stimulus or event) [8]. Under this
view, coalitions supporting one representation compete with coali-
tions supporting other representations [9]. Only after a winning
coalition becomes conscious can attention be diverted to it.
Oftentimes, only one coalition ‘wins’ at a time, leading to a relatively
tight correlation between consciousness and attention. However,
this correlation is not perfect. Koch and colleagues have written
extensively about the existence of consciousness without attention
[63,64,69,70], recently claiming that consciousness without attention
is a form of phenomenal consciousness as described by Block and
Lamme [10].
All of these theories have distinctive strengths, and some
plausibility, but they also share a fundamental flaw: they posit the
existence of conscious states that even the individual him or herself
does not realize he or she is having. Highlighting this flaw might
provide impetus for revision and improvement of these theories:
rejecting the one shared feature of them all and leaving the other
features to be sorted out empirically.
[(Figure_1)TD$FIG]
While 
 you’re 
most
While reading this, you’re not
conscious of most of the letters.
While reading this, you’re not
conscious of most of the letters.
While reading this, you’re not
conscious of most of the letters.
Time 1
Time 3
Time 2
(a) Normal text
(b) Multi-access
(c) Strict access
= fixation location
While xxxxx xxx, xxxxx xxxx
xxxxxxxx xx xxxx xx xxx xxxxx.
xxxx xxxxxx  xxxx, you’re not
xxxxxxxx xx xxxx xx xxx xxxxx.
xxxx xxxxxx  xxxx, xxxx xxxx
xxxxxxxx xx  most xx xx xxxxx.
TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences 
Figure 1. How much is consciously perceived at a given psychological moment? Those who argue for dissociating consciousness and function do so because they claim
that awareness overflows conscious access. (a) In this case, the identities of all the letters on the screen are perceived. (b) However, McConkie and Rayner have shown that
when uniform Xs replace the nonfixated words of text, participants do not realize this has happened [65,66]. (c) If there is no other text on the screen besides the fixated
word, then participants will notice this instantly. This elegantly demonstrates that although people are aware of the ‘presence’ of nonattended items in this case, they are
actually not aware of the ‘identities’ of those items.
Opinion
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
August 2011, Vol. 15, No. 8
359

a more vivid, detailed world than can be reported. The
world beyond focused attention is not in total ‘darkness’:
when staring intently at a single item, one is still aware of
some aspects of the scene around it [30,31]. Such a claim is
obviously true. Dissociative theorists cite this fact as the
primary example of phenomenology overﬂowing access.
However, this is not a problem for theories that identify
consciousness with function.
The world beyond focal attention is not in darkness
because when attention is not entirely engaged by a pri-
mary task, and it is unclear if attention can ever be entirely
engaged using psychophysical techniques, excess atten-
tional resources are automatically deployed elsewhere
[32–35]. Thus, certain items are processed through focal
attention, whereas others are processed via distributed
attention [36,37]. Focal attention often leads to high reso-
lution percepts whereas the percepts from distributed
attention are at a lower resolution but with certain basic
elements preserved [36–48] (Figure 2). It is inaccurate to
say that information outside the focus of attention receives
zero attention. Information not processed by focal atten-
tion can nevertheless be the target of other types of
attention: distributed, featural, spatial, internal and so
on [49].
Is this degraded visual information an example of phe-
nomenology overﬂowing access? Indeed, the degraded in-
formation is consciously perceived. However, the function
supporting this perception is simply distributed, rather
than focal, attention. In fact, when attention is engaged in
a sufﬁciently difﬁcult task, observers can fail to perceive
even coarse and degraded information, such as the gist of a
scene, because of inattentional blindness [50]. This infor-
mation is undoubtedly accessed because observers explic-
itly report seeing more than what is focally attended (the
idea that such information is indeed accessed has been
recognized by Block, see [7], p. 487).
Once it is recognized that distributed attention leads to
degraded but accessed percepts, the motivation for claim-
ing that this degraded information is an example of inac-
cessible conscious states disappears. The world beyond
focused attention is not in darkness because there are
functional resources (in this case, multiple forms of atten-
tion) dedicated to processing that information (Figure 1c).
Is there more to phenomenology?
Dissociative theories claim that there is phenomenology
over and above the accessed information previously de-
scribed. However, various empirical results cast doubt
upon this claim. In a modiﬁed version of the Sperling
paradigm, where letters are sometimes unexpectedly
replaced with pseudo-letters, participants still claim to
see only letters [51]. Another example of this phenomenon
can be seen in Figure 2. When participants are instructed
to ﬁxate at the center of a screen, two images can be
successively presented in the same location, with a blank
image brieﬂy separating the two, and the drastic changes
between the images go unnoticed (a phenomenon known as
change blindness). If participants are conscious of the
identities of all elements in the scene, as has been repeat-
edly claimed by dissociative theorists, then participants
should instantly notice the pseudo-letters or the scrambled
image. The fact that they do not suggests that participants
are overestimating the contents of their own experience.
Even though people do not notice these changes, the
illusion of seeing more still needs to be explained. Why is it
that people overestimate the richness of their conscious
perceptions [52]? The nature of this illusory experience still
needs to be explained and should be the focus of future
empirical work. Functionalist accounts can study this by
varying the prior expectations and conﬁdence levels of
participants in a variety of paradigms [27,51]. Dissociative
theories, meanwhile, ‘explain’ this illusion by relying on
[(Figure_2)TD$FIG]
TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences 
Figure 2. Only foveated items are perceived in full color and at high resolution. As stimuli move further into the periphery, they gradually lose their color and fidelity
[67–70]. However, although the quality of unattended or unfoveated stimuli is severely degraded, certain basic features and statistics are preserved. In the above example, a
natural scene is presented (left) next to an image in which the quality of the image is systematically degraded from the center of the image (the blue fish) towards the
periphery. When these two images are presented in rapid succession and with a blank gap in between, observers fixating at the center of the image are unable to detect the
differences between the images and claim that they are identical. Observers do not notice that a single isolated percept is so degraded because they are able to move their
eyes throughout a scene with so little effort that this behavior is often overlooked [31].
Opinion
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
August 2011, Vol. 15, No. 8
360

inaccessible conscious states that, as the next section
describes, inherently prevent the possibility of conﬁrma-
tion or falsiﬁcation.
The perfect experiment
Currently, no experimental results uniquely support the
existence of consciousness independent of function and
access. Could future experiments accomplish this? We
argue that all theories of consciousness that are not based
on functions and access [4–14] are not scientiﬁc theories.
Consider perhaps the most drastic experiment possible,
the ‘perfect’ experiment: imagine that, in the future, sur-
geons are able to isolate the parts of the visual cortex that
represent color while wholly preserving their activation
patterns. After this surgery, the areas involved in color
perception (visual area V4, inferotemporal cortex etc.)
behave normally but are simply unable to project to higher
brain areas [53–57]: perfect isolation. Although the color
areas are isolated, all other visual areas (e.g. motion,
luminance, object recognition etc.) are untouched and proj-
ect to higher-level regions in a normal manner (Figure 3).
Such a clean separation of one aspect, color, of visual
perception is profoundly unrealistic but this idealization
provides a simpliﬁcation that is revealing of the key ﬂaw in
theories that dissociate function from consciousness.
According to all the theories discussed above, or possible
theories based on the experience/function divide, whatever
is necessary for color consciousness will be preserved in
these color areas. If these theories are mutually exclusive,
then we can imagine a different participant for each par-
ticular theory. All that matters is that we do not allow
these isolated areas of a supposed type of phenomenal
consciousness to interact with other cognitive functions.
When shown a colored apple what will our hypothetical
participants say? They will surely not say that they see any
colors because the areas responsible for processing color
have been isolated from higher-level areas, including lan-
guage production. They will be able to identify the object as
an apple because visual areas responsible for all other
aspects of visual cognition are intact and connected to
these higher-level regions. Thus, they are simply color-
blind. We can imagine them saying, ‘I know you say my
color areas are activated in a unique way, and I know you
believe this means I am consciously experiencing color but
I’m looking at the apple, I’m focused on it, and I’m just not
having any experience of color whatsoever’ (Box 2).
Moreover, imagine that, before the surgery, that partic-
ular shade of red would reliably agitate or excite the
patient. Would the patient have such feelings now and
say something like, ‘I don’t see red but I notice that I’ve
gotten a little tense’? As described here, the patient would
not because such affective, emotional or ‘limbic’ reactions
are themselves the types of functions that we are isolating
from the color area. To be excited or calmed or distracted by
a perceptual state of red discrimination is already to have
functional access to that state, however coarse-grained or
[(Figure_3)TD$FIG]
Isolated “color areas”:
normal input and activation,
no projections.
TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences 
Figure 3. A graphic depiction of the perfect experiment. When presented with a red apple there will be normal activation of the color areas of the brain but without
projections to higher–level areas. Other areas of the brain (e.g. object representation and identification, language production etc.) will function normally, so the patient will
be able to report that he or she sees an apple but an apple that has no colors.
Box 2. What if we gave the isolated color area the ability to
communicate?
Is it possible that even though the subject is not conscious of red,
the isolated color area itself is experiencing color (similar to the way
the right hemisphere of split-brain patients is often described) [11]?
What would happen if we supplied a reporting mechanism for the
isolated color area?
Imagine the reporting mechanism is nothing more than the
simple hardware needed to actually transmit a message (e.g. a
speaker). If this device were connected to the color area, then it
seems clear that there would be no reports of color consciousness.
The cognitive functions needed to select a particular thought, decide
how best to describe it, and to execute that action are still absent,
preventing any type of response from being formed or conveyed.
Whereas if the color area were connected to a more sophisticated
reporting mechanism that was endowed with these functions there
would probably be reports of color consciousness. However, this is
not because the color area is experiencing its own isolated
consciousness; rather, it is because the color area is now connected
to the functions that are crucial for consciousness. By connecting
the color area to a mechanism endowed with the relevant functions,
the previously unconscious color information can now be accessed
by a broader cognitive system.
Opinion
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
August 2011, Vol. 15, No. 8
361

incomplete, because such a reaction can obviously affect
decision making or motivation (Box 3).
In spite of this frank denial by subjects, theories that
posit dissociation between consciousness and function
would necessarily assume that participants of the ‘perfect
experiment’ are conscious of the apple’s color but simply
cannot access that experience. After all, the conditions
these theories stipulate for phenomenal consciousness of
color are all met, so this experiment does not disprove the
existence of isolated consciousness; it merely provides
another particularly crisp example of consciousness with-
out access.
However, there is a crucial problem with this logic. If
this ‘perfect experiment’ could not deﬁnitively disprove
dissociative theories, then what could? The subject man-
ifests all the functional criteria for not being conscious of
color so what would ground the claim that the subject
nevertheless enjoys a special kind of consciousness: phe-
nomenal
consciousness
without
access
consciousness
(Box 2)?
The domain of a science of consciousness
What the perfect experiment demonstrates is that science
necessarily relies on cognitive functions in order to inves-
tigate consciousness. Without input from subjects, input
that is the product of such functions, theorists are left to
deﬁne consciousness based on certain types of activation
that are independent of a subject’s own experience. It has
been claimed that separating consciousness from other
cognitive functions is required because it ‘is a prerequisite
for using the term [consciousness] at all’ ([5], p. 500).
What does it mean to study consciousness without
function? Inevitably, theories motivated by this view will
deﬁne consciousness in their own way (local recurrency,
microconsciousness, coalitions of neurons, etc.) and say
that whenever that criterion is met, consciousness must
occur. But how do we set this criterion?
For example, what reason is there to think that local
recurrency is conscious experience? Could local recurrency
simply be a form of unconscious processing? It cannot be
based on subjective reports because these reports are the
direct result of cognitive functions. When an observer says,
‘But in the Sperling display I don’t just see a few letters on
the screen, I see all the letters,’ there is no reason to believe
that such an experience occurs independent of function.
The fact that the observer is reporting on this visual
experience proves that the experience has been accessed by
the broader cognitive system as a whole. Lamme writes,
‘You cannot know whether you have a conscious experience
without resorting to cognitive functions such as attention,
memory or inner speech’ ([5], p. 499). If this is true, then
what reason is there to think this particular type of acti-
vation should be classiﬁed as correlating with conscious
experience? What does it mean to have a conscious experi-
ence that you yourself do not realize you are having? In the
face of such clear grounds for doubting such a conscious
experience, dissociative theories need to provide a reason
for claiming that these isolated types of activation involve
any kind of consciousness.
The future of scientiﬁc theories of consciousness
It is clear, then, that proper scientiﬁc theories of conscious-
ness are those that specify which functions are necessary
for consciousness to arise. A true scientiﬁc theory will say
how functions such as attention, working memory and
decision making interact and come together to form a
conscious experience. Any such theory will need to have
clear and testable predictions that can in principle be
veriﬁed or falsiﬁed. Most importantly, such theories will
not claim that consciousness is a unique brain state that
occurs independently of function; instead, the focus will be
placed on the functions themselves and how they interact
and come together to form consciousness.
There are several theorists who have already realized
the need for functions in developing theories of conscious-
ness. Dehaene and colleagues [16] have put forth a global
neuronal workspace model that claims consciousness is
deﬁned by the orientation of top-down attention, long-
distance feedback loops that extend into parietofrontal
networks, and conscious reportability. Similarly, Kouider
and colleagues [27] have discussed at great length how
information that is in consciousness relies on a hierarchy of
representational levels. Under this view, each level corre-
sponds to different cognitive mechanisms responsible for
different units of representation.
It is important to stress that both of these theories are
merely the beginning, rather than the end, of the study of
consciousness. There is still much work to be done in
regards to how these functions and mechanisms interact.
In Dehaene et al.’s theory, for example, a more thorough
and speciﬁc understanding of the type of parietofrontal
activation [16] and how it relates to the formation of
memories and decisions is still necessary. The upshot of
function-based theories is that they make claims about
consciousness that can be tested and examined scientiﬁ-
cally.
Although there are certainly those who disagree with
the speciﬁcs of the theories put forth by Dehaene et al. and
Kouider et al. [4–14], these are disagreements that can
eventually be settled through more rigorous examination
and testing. The same cannot be said of theories that
maintaining that consciousness occurs independent of
Box 3. Access when there is no behavioral output
How does the relationship between access, function and conscious-
ness apply if a person cannot move or give any type of behavioral
response? Consider patients with locked-in syndrome. Patients with
this condition are conscious but cannot move due to paralysis of all
muscles except (usually) the eyes and eyelids. This small volitional
movement is the only means by which they can communicate.
Imagine, however, that even this behavior is disabled so the patient
is still fully conscious but completely paralyzed: perfectly locked-in.
This is an important case for understanding the functional view:
behavioral outcomes are not its defining component. People can
still consciously experience the world without there ever being any
behavioral result that follows from those experiences. What is
important is that there are enough high-level functions engaged
with that information such that the patient could volitionally act
upon those experiences if he or she so desired and was not
paralyzed. In this case, even though the patient cannot move, the
patient can do things such as attend to what he or she is hearing or
store selected bits of information in working memory. This patient
being conscious is perfectly consistent with the functional account
of consciousness because those functions are fully preserved.
Opinion
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
August 2011, Vol. 15, No. 8
362

function. As the perfect experiment illustrates, such theo-
ries inherently prevent any future avenue for scientiﬁc
research.
Concluding remarks
Understanding the necessary relation between function
and experience reveals that the so-called hard problem
of consciousness should be reclassiﬁed. Far from being a
formidable obstacle to science, it achieves its apparent
hardness by being systematically outside of science, not
only today’s science but any science of the future that
insists on dissociating consciousness from the set of phe-
nomena that alone could shed light on it. This is not to
suggest that consciousness is a mystery that the human
mind cannot comprehend [58]. It is simply that whatever
mysteries and puzzles might continue to bafﬂe us, we
should not cripple our attempts at understanding by adopt-
ing a concept of consciousness that systematically blocks
all avenues of further research.
The issues raised here generalize beyond the speciﬁc
theories discussed [4–14]. Any theory wherein the neural
correlates of conscious experience are separate from the
neural correlates of cognitive function is ultimately doomed.
No matter the speciﬁcs of the theory – C-ﬁbers ﬁring,
grandmother cells, winning coalitions, microconsciousness,
recurrent processing (RP) and so on – it is always possible in
principle to isolate this activation. Such imagined isolation,
however, actually removes the experience in question from
further testing, scrutiny and veriﬁcation. Although these
theories might provide considerable insight into the forma-
tion of internal representations of the sensory and percep-
tual world, that is not enough to explain one’s personal
awareness. A proper theory of consciousness cannot exclu-
sively focus on how the brain forms and maintains repre-
sentations. Such a theory must also explain in functional
terms how those representations are experienced and
accessed by the multiple functions constituting an observer
[59]. Theories that do not acknowledge this are fundamen-
tally incapable of explaining the full scope of consciousness.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate
Research Fellowship (M.A.C.). Special thanks to Justin Junge´ for
extensive discussion and comments on the project. Thanks to Arash
Afraz and Maryam Vaziri Pashkam for helpful discussions, and to Ray
Jackendoff, Sid Kouider, Ken Nakayama, Jordan Suchow, and two
anonymous reviewers for comments on the manuscript. Thanks to
Jeremy Freeman for providing the images for Figure 2.
References
1 Crick, F. and Koch, C. (1995) Are we aware of neural activity in primary
visual cortex. Nature 375, 121–123
2 Crick, F. and Koch, C. (1990) Towards a neurobiological theory of
consciousness. Semin. Neurosci. 2, 263–275
3 Chalmers, D.J. (2000) What is a neural correlate of consciousness? In
Neural
Correlates
of
Consciousness:
Empirical
and
Conceptual
Questions (Metzinger, T., ed.), pp. 17–39, MIT Press
4 Lamme, V.A. (2003) Why visual attention and awareness are different.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 7, 12–18
5 Lamme, V.A. (2006) Towards a true neural stance on consciousness.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 10, 494–501
6 Block, N. (2005) Two neural correlates of consciousness. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 9, 46–52
7 Block, N. (2007) Consciousness, accessibility, and the mesh between
psychology and neuroscience. Behav. Brain Sci. 30, 481–499
8 Crick, F. and Koch, C. (2003) A framework for consciousness. Nat.
Neurosci. 6, 119–126
9 Koch, C. (2004) The Quest for Consciousness: A Neurobiological
Approach, Roberts & Company
10 Koch, C. and Tsuchiya, N. (2007) Phenomenology without conscious
access is a form of consciousness without top-down attention. Behav.
Brain Sci. 30, 509–510
11 Zeki, S. (2003) The disunity of consciousness. Trends Cogn. Sci. 7,
214–218
12 Zeki, S. and Bartels, A. (1999) Toward a theory of visual consciousness.
Conscious. Cogn. 8, 225–259
13 Zeki, S. (2001) Localization and globalization in conscious vision. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 24, 57–86
14 Goodale, M. (2007) Duplex vision: separate cortical pathways for
conscious perception and the control of action. In The Blackwell
Companion to Consciousness (Velmans, M. and Schneider, S., eds),
pp. 580–588, Blackwell
15 Baars, B.J. (1989) A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness, Cambridge
Univ. Press
16 Dehaene, S. et al. (2006) Conscious, preconscious, and subliminal
processing: a testable taxonomy. Trends Cogn. Sci. 10, 204–211
17 Dennett, D.C. (1991) Consciousness Explained, Little Brown
18 Awh, E. and Pashler, H. (2000) Evidence for split attentional foci. J.
Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 26, 834–846
19 McMains, S.A. and Somers, D.C. (2004) Multiple spotlights of
attentional selection in human visual cortex. Neuron 42, 677–686
20 Luck, S.J. and Vogel, E.K. (1997) The capacity of visual working
memory for features and conjunctions. Nature 390, 279–281
21 Alvarez, G.A. and Cavanagh, P. (2004) The capacity of visual short-
term memory is set both by visual information load and by number of
objects. Psychol. Sci. 15, 106–111
22 Pylyshyn,
Z.W.
and
Storm,
R.W.
(1988)
Tracking
multiple
independent targets: evidence for a parallel tracking mechanism.
Spat. Vis. 3, 179–197
23 Cavanagh, P. and Alvarez, G.A. (2005) Tracking multiple targets with
multifocal attention. Trends Cogn. Sci. 9, 349–354
24 Sperling,
G.
(1960)
The
information
available
in
brief
visual
presentation. Psychol. Monogr. 74, 1–29
25 Landman, R. et al. (2003) Large capacity storage of integrated objects
before change blindness. Vision Res. 43, 149–164
26 Sligte, I. et al. (2008) Are there multiple visual short-term memory
stores? PLoS ONE 3, 1–9
27 Kouider, S. et al. (2010) How rich is consciousness? The partial
awareness hypothesis. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14, 301–307
28 Block, N. (1995) On a confusion about the function of consciousness.
Behav. Brain Sci. 18, 227–287
29 Zeki, S. (2007) A theory of microconsciousness. In The Blackwell
Companion to Consciousness (Velmans, M. and Schneider, S., eds),
pp. 580–588, Blackwell
30 Wolfe, J.M. (1999) Inattentional amnesia. In Fleeting Memories:
Cognition of Brief Visual Stimuli (Coltheart, M., ed.), pp. 71–94,
MIT Press
31 O’Regan, J.K. and Noe¨, A. (2001) A sensorimotor account of vision and
visual consciousness. Behav. Brain Sci. 24, 939–1031
32 Yi, D.J. et al. (2004) Neural fate of ignored stimuli: dissociable
effects of perceptual and working memory load. Nat. Neurosci. 7,
992–996
33 Lavie, N. (1995) Perceptual load as a necessary condition for selective
attention. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 21, 451–468
34 Cartwright-Finch, U. and Lavie, N. (2006) The role of perceptual load
in inattentional blindness. Cognition 102, 321–340
35 Schwartz, S. et al. (2005) Attentional load and sensory competition in
human vision: modulation of fMRI responses by load at ﬁxation during
task-irrelevant stimulation in the peripheral visual ﬁeld. Cereb. Cortex
15, 770–786
36 Chong, S.C. and Treisman, A. (2003) Representation of statistical
properties. Vision Res. 43, 393–404
37 Alvarez, G.A. (2011) Representing multiple objects as an ensemble
enhances visual cognition. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 122–131
38 Oliva, A. and Schyns, P.S. (2000) Diagnostic colors mediate scene
recognition. Cogn. Psychol. 41, 176–210
39 Alvarez, G.A. and Oliva, A. (2008) The representation of ensemble
visual features outside the focus of attention. Psychol. Sci. 19, 678–685
Opinion
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
August 2011, Vol. 15, No. 8
363

40 Alvarez, G. and Oliva, A. (2009) Spatial ensemble statistics: efﬁcient
codes that can be represented with reduced attention. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 106, 7345–7350
41 Ariely, D. (2001) Seeing sets: representation by statistical properties.
Psychol. Sci. 12, 157–162
42 Chong, S.C. and Treisman, A. (2005) Statistical processing: computing
the average size in perceptual groups. Vision Res. 45, 891–900
43 Halberda, J. et al. (2006) Multiple spatially overlapping sets can be
enumerated in parallel. Psychol. Sci. 17, 572–576
44 Dakin, S. and Watt, R. (1997) The computation of orientation statistics
from visual texture. Vision Res. 37, 3181–3192
45 Parkes, L. et al. (2001) Compulsory averaging of crowded orientation
signals in human vision. Nat. Neurosci. 4, 739–744
46 Atchley,P.andAndersen,G.(1995)Discriminationofspeeddistributions:
sensitivity to statistical properties. Vision Res. 35, 3131–3144
47 Watamaniuk, S. and Duchon, A. (1992) The human visual system
averages speed information. Vision Res. 32, 931–941
48 Haberman, J. and Whitney, D. (2007) Rapid extraction of mean
emotion and gender from sets of faces. Curr. Biol. 17, R751–R753
49 Chun, M.M. et al. (2011) A taxonomy of external and internal attention.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 62, 73–101
50 Cohen, M.A. et al. Natural scene perception requires attention.
Psychol. Sci. (in press)
51 De Gardelle, V. et al. (2009) Perceptual illusions in brief visual
presentations. Conscious. Cogn. 18, 569–577
52 Levin, D.T. et al. (2000) Change blindness: the metacognitive
error of overestimating change-detection ability. Vis. Cogn. 7,
397–412
53 Pascual-Leone, A. et al. (2001) Fast backprojections from the motion to
the primary visual area necessary for visual awareness. Science 292,
510–512
54 Haynes, J. et al. (2005) Visibility reﬂects dynamic changes of effective
connectivity between V1 and fusiform cortex. Neuron 46, 811–821
55 Boehler, C.N. et al. (2008) Rapid recurrent processing gates
awareness in primary visual cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
105, 8742–8747
56 Super, H. et al. (2001) Two distinct modes of sensory processing
observed in monkey primary visual cortex (V1). Nat. Neurosci. 4,
304–310
57 Bullier, J. (2001) Feedback connections and conscious vision. Trends
Cogn. Sci. 5, 369–370
58 McGinn, C. (1999) The Mysterious Flame: Conscious Minds in a
Material World, Basic Books
59 Jackendoff, R. (1987) Consciousness and the Computational Mind, MIT
Press
60 Nagel, T. (1974) What is it like to be a bat? Philos. Rev. 4, 435–450
61 Lamme, V.A. and Roelfsema, P.R. (2000) The distinct modes of vision
offered by feedforward and recurrent processing. Trends Neurosci. 23,
571–579
62 Lamme (2000) Neural mechanisms of visual awareness: a linking
proposition. Brain Mind 1, 385–406
63 Koch, C. and Tsuchiya, N. (2007) Attention and consciousness: two
distinct brain processes. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 16–22
64 Tononi, G. and Koch, C. (2008) The neural correlates of consciousness –
an update. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1124, 239–261
65 McConkie, G.W. and Rayner, K. (1975) The span of effective stimulus
during a ﬁxation in reading. Percept. Psychophys. 17, 578–586
66 Rayner, K. (1975) The perceptual span and peripheral cues in reading.
Cogn. Psychol. 7, 65–81
67 Newton, J.R. and Eskew, R.T., Jr (2003) Chromatic detection and
discrimination in the periphery: a postreceptoral loss of color
sensitivity. Vis. Neurosci. 20, 511–521
68 Hecht, E. (1987) Optics, Addison Wesley
69 Wandell, B.A. (1995) Foundations of Vision, Sinauer
70 Azzopardi, P. and Cowey, A. (1993) Preferential representation of the
fovea in the primary visual cortex. Nature 361, 719–721
Opinion
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
August 2011, Vol. 15, No. 8
364

