DANIEL C. DENNETT 
COMMENTS 
ON RORTY 
One of the most interesting experiences you can have is to be told by 
someone else just what you are doing or have done. There is the jolt of a 
different perspective, the mixed reaction you feel on learning that 
someone else has been paying attention, the conflicting rush of 
judgments: "He's rightt That's it exactly I", "He's wrong! I never did !", 
"So that's what I was trying to do." 
I find Professor Rorty's bird's-eye view of the history of philosophy 
of mind both fascinating and extremely useful, full of insight and 
provocation, and, of course, flattering. Rorty proceeds by deliberate and 
knowing oversimplification - often a useful tactic - and since it is a 
useful tactic on this occasion, it would be particularly counter- 
productive for me to succumb to the powerful temptation to plow 
seriatim through his account restoring all the complications he has so 
deftly ignored. My first reaction, though, is that the momentum he builds 
up in the course of his interpretations leads to a certain overshooting of 
the mark. Also, like many other revolutionaries before him, Rorty has 
trouble deciding whether to declare victory, declare that victory is 
inevitable, or implore you to join in a difficult and uncertain struggle 
against the powers of darkness. I ask myself: Am I a nominalist? Do I 
declare the death of theories of the mind? Am I - or should I be - a 
Village Verificationist after all? I always seem to want to answer: not 
quite. 
Since I, as an irremediably narrow-minded and unhistorical analytic 
philosopher, am always looking for a good excuse not to have to read 
Hegel or Heidegger or Derrida or those other chaps who don't have 
the decency to think in English, I am tempted by Rorty's performance 
on this occasion to enunciate a useful hermeneutical principle, the 
Rorty Factor: 
Take whatever Rorty says about anyone's views and 
multiply it by .742. 
After all, if Rorty can find so much more in my own writing than I put 
there, he's probably done the same or better for Heidegger - which 
means I can save myself the trouble of reading Heidegger; I can just 
read Rorty's Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (Princeton Uni- 
Synthese 53 (1982) 349-356. 0039-7857[82/0532-0349 $00.80 
Copyright (~) 1982 by D. Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, Holland, and Boston, U.S.A. 

350 
DANIEL 
C. DENNETT 
versity Press, 1979) and come out about 40% ahead - while enjoying 
my reading at the same time. 
On second thought, however, I recognize that this is a very bad 
line of reasoning - and would be a bit of backsliding on my part if I 
were to fall for it, for I agree (74.2%) with Rorty about the nature of 
the herrneneutical enterprise, and join with him in cheering the 
plummeting stock - if not yet declared bankruptcy - of the idea of 
privileged representations. I could thus hardly suppose I could 
endorse his claim that we now can see that there are no privileged 
representations, and in the next breath withold for myself some 
authorial privilege about what my own view is or has been, or about 
what I have been trying to show. So if I find myself issuing cor- 
rectives and trying to throw wet blankets on some of Rorty's more 
inflammatory interpretations, it is just as possible that I am a short- 
sighted and spaghetti-legged Rortian revolutionary in spite of myself as 
that he has succumbed to enthusiasm in his attempt to draw morals 
from recent work. Balancing the prima facie presumption in favor of 
authorial authority is the well-known fact that people battling it out in 
the trenches seldom have a clear perspective on what they've ac- 
complished, or even what the deeper point of their skirmishes might 
be. 
However all that may be, I am happy to find myself in broad and 
deep agreement with Rorty about some major and probably con- 
troversial claims in his talk, and I will take a moment now to endorse 
some specific points - not meaning by my silence on others that I 
disagree with them, of course. 1 I think Rorty is right on target about 
Ryle, both about the nature of Ryle's genuinely revolutionary con- 
tribution, and also about just where we must forsake Ryle. Rorty's 
analysis of the bad old days of Broad's style of scholasticism, and 
more recent scholasticisms, is also a theme I applaud wholeheartedly. 
His analysis of the "jerky movement" from logical behaviorism to 
central state materialism to functionalism is an accurate and revealing 
description of that trajectory, I think, though of course the fact that 
Rorty and I both experienced that jerky movement from the inside, as 
it were, gives us no privileged sense of what that motion was like. 
(See Rorty's comments on my own paper in this issue for a demoli- 
tion of this "pre-Galilean" vision of motion and an ingenious analogy 
between that view of motion and Searle's and Nagel's view of the 
mind.) 

COMMENTS 
ON RORTY 
351 
Before I read Rorty's paper I was only dimly aware of the relation 
he notices between the Rylean revolt against dualism and the earlier, 
failed, epistemological revolt. Seeing Ryle in this context helps 
explain, and support, the pivotal role in Ryle's revolution of the 
realization that the experientially direct or immediate is an epis- 
temically mixed bag, containing every grade of inferentially mediated 
- 
and hence vulnerable - cognition. To see this as a fundamental and 
historically novel point of convergence in Ryle, Wittgenstein, Sellars 
and Quine is, I think, to see all four in a good light, revealing both the 
value and the idiosyncracy of their individual paths to this shared 
ground. 
All paths to this insight are concealed by a very powerful illusion. 
That there is a special directness, an asymmetry between our relation 
to our own thoughts and our relation to the thoughts of others, is an 
obvious - a very obvious - fact, the sort of fact that tempts people 
like Searle to lay down the law. Seeing in the end what this asym- 
metry amounts to, seeing that it does not, in the end, give us each 
some parochial domain of papal infallibility - seeing that no epis- 
temological bedrock at all can be found in this quarter is, as Rorty 
shows, the enabling insight of the tradition he and I place ourselves 
in. 2 
To insist that there is no such epistemological bedrock to be found 
here is, of course, only to insist on a special case of the doctrine that 
Quine and Wittgenstein - and others - were advancing in general, but 
seeing how one could manage to be a good Wittgensteinian or Quinean 
in the special case of presumed knowledge of one's own mind has 
taken some doing. In particular, we have had to come up with a 
detailed and plausible diagnosis of the undismissable first-person 
asymmetry - a diagnosis which even acknowledges that it is an 
epistemological asymmetry, but one that yields no foundations. That 
diagnosis is still, alas, controversial, and a cloud on the horizon of 
Rorty's revolution that I think he underestimates. 
I attribute this underestimation to Rorty's failure - or refusal - to 
distinguish two quite different senses of intuition. On the one hand 
there are introspective intuitions, supposedly marvelous, incorrigible, 
inward glances or items of pre-linguistic knowledge - restricted in 
subject matter to one's own mental states or activities. The Given 
consists of gift-wrapped intuitions, in this sense of the term. On the 
other hand there are the intuitions one often permits oneself to speak 

352 
DANIEL 
C. DENNETT 
of in the context of "pretheoretical intuitions" or "intuitions of 
grammaticality", or the intuitions relative to which some claim or 
discovery is deemed "counterintuitive". Many who scoff at the Given 
have been willing and eager to countenance this latter class of 
judgements, which may be about anything at all - well-formedness, 
justice, quantum mechanics - and are typically supposed to be 
defeasible but unignorable at the outset. 3 Note that in the dogmatic 
passage from Searle that Rorty quotes, the intuitions Searle views as 
bedrock are not themselves introspective intuitions. "Thermostats 
don't have beliefs" is not, apparently, in the same league as "I am 
being appeared to redly and roundly" or "I am in pain". 
It would be great fun if Searle and Nagel could be abruptly 
dismissed as Neanderthal throwbacks, benighted holders of pre- 
Galilean views of the Given, but it won't wash. I would think that 
Rorty would be at least mildly perplexed to notice in this regard that 
one of his (and my) heroes, Wilfrid Sellars - no friend of the Given, 
as Rorty makes clear - has been absolutely driven by the other sort of 
intuitions to propose a fundamental revision of all science (not just 
psychology and biology, but all of physics) in order to handle qualia, 
the raw feels or qualitative states. It is not that Sellars thinks he has 
an infallible introspective source of knowledge of his own qualitative 
states, but that in spite of his denial that he does, he still finds an 
overwhelmingly compelling intuitive case for finding something frank- 
ly missing in the sort of view of the mind Rorty and I both espouse. 
So to the extent that Nagel and Searle have, let us say, Sellarsian 
intuitions in addition to their misguided allegiance to the Given (in the 
language game we're playing, they are guilty of this until proven 
innocent), the demolition of the Given will not remove all sources for 
their view. 
Now I am myself baffled and dismayed by SeUars' infatuation with 
raw feels, 4 and I agree with Rorty that Putnam's simple - if cryptic - 
observation that "qualitative character just is the realization" is the 
right first step to take to answer the Sellarsian qualms about qualia, 
but it is not as if there weren't work to do in making this claim 
palatable. 5 The work is neither "just" scientific nor "just" philoso- 
phic; it is a rather wonderful mixture. And it should not be forgotten 
that scientists studying the physical realizations of experiences are 
just as baffled by qualia as any philosopher or layperson can be. 
Rorty sometimes gives the no doubt unintended impression that 

COMMENTS 
ON RORTY 
353 
science has its act together, that scientists are cheerful and un- 
perplexed imperialists pushing back the boundaries of terra incognita, 
but of course scientists are people too, and whatever philosophers 
can offer the man in the street can be offered in much the same spirit, 
and to at least as great an effect, to scientists. This comes out 
particularly clearly, I think, in reflection on Rorty's bold claim (pp. 
331-2) "To think of knowledge as a matter of being disposed to utter 
true sentences about something, rather than in terms of the metaphor 
of acquaintance.., is to enable us to stop thinking of ourselves as 
divided into two parts, a mental part and a physical part." Setting 
aside cavils about the narrowness of this dispositional analysis (dis- 
positions to utter sentences are surely the palest, Schankian shadows 
of the disposition we really want to talk of), suppose we all succeeded 
- layman and scientist alike - in convincing ourselves of the truth and 
beauty of this forward step in our understanding of knowledge. We all 
become dispositionalists (of some as yet unspecified sort) about the 
nature of knowledge. Having made the philosophers' contribution 
(throwing out the representational theory of knowledge, which wag a 
miscontribution of earlier philosophers), we turn the rest of the job 
over to science. 
We turn to the scientists and ask them to tell us how any thing (any 
living or non-living physical system) can have those dispositions to 
utter, act, etc. As Fodor never tires of pointing out, the only answer 
anybody in science or elsewhere has ever seriously proposed is: such 
a thing would have to be or contain a system of... representations. 
But now are we back to all the earlier horrors of representational 
theories of the mind? Have we broken the mirror of nature only to 
find that behind it is... another mirror? No. This is not a case of the 
more things change the more they're the same thing. (In what follows 
I will appear to be disagreeing with what Rorty says in 'Contempoary 
Philosophy of Mind', but in the main I can be better interpreted as 
reminding Rorty, and the reader, of what he himself says in Chapter 
V of Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature.) 
The advance from the old representational theory of mind through 
dispositionalism (of some sort) to a new brand of representationalism 
is - or could well prove to be - real progress, for the questions have 
been importantly changed; bad questions, as Rorty often puts it, being 
replaced by better questions. First, the new questions are about 
scientific - not "merely philosophic" - problems that seem to call for 

354 
DANIEL 
C. DENNETT 
- and promise - solutions, not merely dissolutions. Bogus mysteries 
have been set aside in favor of real, but explorable, mysteries. An 
essential philosophic advance permitting this transfiguration of the 
issues is exactly the abandonment of privileged representations in the 
new vision - though as we shall see this very strength can often be 
made to appear to be the main weakness of the new vision. 
The representations posited by the new cognitivism are not deemed 
to be the ultimate and underived and incorrigible font of all meaning 
or intentionality. Indeed, oddly enough, although they are claimed to 
be explicitly and literally in the heads of believers, intenders, and 
talkers, they are granted just about the same status accorded such 
derivative vehicles of meaning as books and maps and the other 
representational prostheses of our culture. Just as the semantical or 
hermeneutical interpretation of a scrap of text found incised on a wall 
or scribbled on a page depends on attributions of intentionality - 
belief and desire and so forth - to the users and makers of the text, so 
the semantical interpretation of a bit of "mental" representation in 
the brain - a found inscription in the language of thought - depends 
on exactly the same family of intentional attributions. Just as we use 
books and uttered sentences to communicate with each other, we use 
our own brains to communicate with ourselves - past and future 
selves as well as proper parts of our current selves. 6 
The idea of internal representations with only derivative, pragmatic 
intentionality or semanticity can seem to be a weakness. Consider 
the all too familiar line of reasoning that concludes that no computer 
ever really means anything at all, every really believes or knows or 
intends or decides. Of course - runs this theme - it has internal states 
in lavish and intricate profusion, and we outsider observer-user-inter- 
preters can endow some of these states with a derivative meaning of 
sorts, in virtue of the use to which we put these computers. But a 
computer is really just a sort of automated book or blackboard, a 
symbol storehouse whose symbols have only the meaning we inter- 
preters assign them. Implied in this argument is that we uninterpreted 
interpreters are the Ursprung of all real meaning, the unmoved 
movers, to pursue Rorty's comparison with Aristotelian ideas about 
motion still further. 
What the new view invites us to consider, on the contrary, is that 
there are no uninterpreted interpreters, no privileged representers. An 
implication of the view crudely expressed by the slogan that our 

COMMENTS ON RORTY 
355 
brains are organic computers is that just like computers their states 
can be interpreted via a sort of hermeneutical procedure by outside 
observers to have content - and that's as strong a sort of content as 
their states can - or could - have. We are both the creators and the 
creatures of such interpretation, and are nothing beyond the reach of 
that activity. 
This pronouncement sends a shudder of fear through many people, 
as they see their very reality as persons challenged by what appears 
to be militant instrumentalism and verificationism. Rorty feeds that 
fear by observing, provocatively: "Is it important for our self-image 
to think of ourselves as knowers - distinguished from the brute 
creation in being intelligent, in acting from knowledge rather from 
habit or instinct, in being able to contemplate things far away in space 
and time." Indeed it is important for our self-image; it is also true. 7 
That is, it is as true as the vision we have only gradually achieved of 
the earth going around the sun. If one can take all such "discoveries" 
and then in principle relativize such visions to "interests" and "lan- 
guage games" - something I remain agnostic about in spite of the 
Rortian, Putnamian, Kuhnian and Gadamerian rhetoric - then at least 
let us never stop reminding ourselves that our vision of ourselves as 
knowers and carers is no worse off, epistemically, than our vision of 
water as HE0. 
I no longer find it polemically useful to insist that I am not any sort 
of verificationist; with Professor Rorty cheering me on (and Putnam 
offering similar encouragements in recent remarks), I am ready to 
come out of the closet as some sort of verificationist, but not, please, a 
Village Verificationist; let's all be Urbane Verificationists. 8 
NOTES 
I cannot let pass one sharp disagreement. Rorty claims (p. 336) that any complex 
entity can be viewed as having functional states. I use to think something like that was 
worth saying, but now I think not. What Rorty's analysis of functional states in terms 
of fine and course-grainedness leaves out is the normative element in any properly 
motivated functionalist characterization, the designedness which gives us leverage for 
distinguishing signal from noise, operation from malfunction. Darwin dethroned desig- 
nedness as an ultimate metaphysical mark of the divinity of the living (the most 
profound revolt against dualism the world has ever seen); in dethroning designedness 
he did not eliminate it. It is precisely the exploitation of design assumptions that makes 
functionalist language games worth playing - that gives them the predictive punch we 
value in them. 

356 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
2 It is worth noting, I think, that both Rorty and I took a long time getting this point 
into focus for ourselves, in spite of helping and provoking - and misunderstanding - 
each other. See my Content and Consciousness, (Boston: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 
1969) chs. V and VI, and Rorty's 'Incorrigibility as the Mark of the Mental,' J. Phil. 67 
(1970): 10, 'Dennett on Awareness,' Phil. Studies 23 (1972): 153-62, and 'Functionalism, 
Machines and Incorrigibility,' J. Phil. 69 (1972): 203-20. 
3 Quine, for instance, defends his practice in a footnote in Word and Object (Cam- 
bridge, Mass: M.I.T. Press, 1960): "Twice I have been startled to find my use of 
'intuitive' misconstrued as alluding to some special and mysterious avenue of know- 
ledge. By an intuitive account I mean one in which terms are used in habitual ways, 
without reflecting on how they might be defned or what presuppositions they might 
conceal" (p. 36). Rorty himself makes unstudied use of the term "counterintuitive" in 
Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (Princeton, NJ.: Princeton Univ. Press, 1979), p. 193, 
and does not chastise me in these pages when he quotes me as noting what "intuition 
proclaims" (p. 337). 
4 See my 'Wondering Where the Yellow Went', a commentary on Sellars' Carus 
Lectures, in The Monist 64 (1981): 102--8. 
5 In 'Quining Qualia', an unpublished paper currently undergoing revision, I attempt 
this task. 
6 I discuss these claims more fully in 'Three Kinds of Intentional Psychology,' in R. 
Healey, ed., Reduction, Time and Reality (Cambridge C.U.P., 1981), pp. 37-61, and 
'True Believers: the Intentional Strategy and Why It Works', in Scientific Explanation, 
ed., A.F. Heath (London: O.U.P., 1981) (the 1979 Herbert Spencer Lectures), and in 
'Beyond Belief', in Andrew Woodfield, ed., Thought and Object: Essays on In- 
tentionality (London: O.U.P., 1981). 
7 How this can be an objective, but nevertheless instrumentalistic, fact about ourselves 
is the main topic of my 'True Believers.' 
8 As on many other occasions, I am indebted to Bo Dahlbom for insightful suggestions and 
comments on an early draft of this paper. 

