NATURAL FREEDOM
DANIEL C. DENNETT
Abstract: Three critics of Freedom Evolves (Dennett 2003) bring out important
differences in philosophical outlook and method. Mele’s thought experiments are
supposed to expose the importance, for autonomy, of personal history, but they
depend on the dubious invocation of mere logical or conceptual possibility.
Fischer defends the Basic Argument for incompatibilism, while Taylor and I
choose to sidestep it instead of disposing of it. Where does the burden of proof lie?
O’Connor’s candid expression of allegiance to traditional ideas that I reject
highlights a fundamental difference in assumptions about howFand whyFto do
philosophy. There are indeed deﬁnable varieties of free will that are incompatible
with determinism. Do they matter? I have argued, against philosophical tradition,
that they don’t.
Keywords: autonomy, causation, determinism, freedom, naturalism.
Dearly beloved, I want to thank Brother Tim O’Connor for his candid
reactions to my published sermons, and I welcome you all, in the spirit of
ecumenicism, to the Church of Fundamentalist Naturalism. Let me tell
you a bit more about the church. Our symbol is of course the Darwin-ﬁsh,
the four-legged evolver that echoes the ancient ﬁsh symbol of Christian-
ity. I was wearing my Darwin-ﬁsh lapel pin at an evolutionary theory
conference a few years ago, and the physicist Murray Gell-Mann came up
to me and after reminding me of what he regarded as the ﬁrst known
acronymFIXYYS, the Greek word for ﬁshFIZsouB XristoB Yeou
YioB SotZr, Jesus Christ, God the son and saviorFhe asked me what
D-A-R-W-I-N stood for. I said I’d get back to him and went off to have a
cup of coffee while dredging up what I could of my high-school Latin. I
came up with something I’m quite happy with: Delere Auctorem Rerum
Ut Universum Inﬁnitum Noscere: Destroy the Author of things in order to
understand the inﬁnite universe! That, it seems to me, is our key insight
about Darwin’s dangerous idea: in a single nonmiraculous stroke, it
unites the world of meaning and purpose and design with the world of
meaningless matter and mechanism, cause and effect.
Let the service begin with the Rite of Confession. Brother Al Mele
gently notes in his essay that I have committed an unusual sin; anti-
r Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005.
Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK, and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA
METAPHILOSOPHY
Vol. 36, No. 4, July 2005
0026-1068
r Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005

plagiarism: I misattribute to him and his book Autonomous Agents (1995)
an invention of someone else, the Principle of Default Responsibility.
Dumfounded by his claim, I returned to my ﬁle of notes on his book,
made when I read it some years ago, and sure enough, there is the
Principle of Default Responsibility, capital letters and all, but apparently
part of my musings on his book, not a quotation. So Al is the muse, not
the author, of the principle, and I apologize for my error. Mea culpa. Had
I realized that it was my own formulation when I put it into my book, I
might have tinkered with it, expanded or enlarged upon it, but there it is,
for others to make of what they will. I made it up; no wonder I approved
of it. I’m just glad I didn’t commit the much more serious sin of foisting a
principle onto him that I then subjected to withering rebuttal and scorn!
He also notes another instance of sloppy scholarship on my part. I
overlooked, as he says, the fact that in his tale of Ann and Beth he had
speciﬁcally headed off my objection about pseudomemories: How did I
overlook this? Well, this is what he says about Beth’s brainwashing: ‘‘Beth
did not consent to the process. Nor was she even aware of it’’ (Mele 1995,
145). Doesn’t her lack of awareness of the brainwashing entail some
pseudomemories in its place? Perhaps not. But Al is right that he
explicitly says Beth is surprised by the changes in her values, so
apparently Beth isn’t as radically misinformed as I imagined her to be.
Once again, mea culpa. Let’s see what difference this makes.
As Al notes, I might be expected to ﬁnd his historical condition
appealing, given some of the things I say about how we make ourselves
into responsible agents over time. Why don’t I go along with his
historicized version of compatibilism? My view about the role of history
here is the same as my view about history in other philosophical contexts:
it is indeed important, because in the actual world only certain sorts of
historical processes can create what really matters: the set of competences
implicit in the total structure of an embodied nervous system. The sorts of
philosophical thought experiments that try to tease apart the history from
the current state all depend on ‘‘logically possible’’ but preposterous
scenarios. My parody is the case of the cow-shark.
Suppose a cow gave birth to something that was atom-for-atom indiscernible
from a shark. Would it be a shark? If you posed that question to a biologist,
the charitable reaction would be that you were making a labored attempt at a
joke. . . . Is a cow-shark a shark? It swims like a shark, and mates successfully
with other sharks. Oh, but didn’t I tell you? It is atom-for-atom indiscernible
from a shark, except that it has cow DNA in all its cells. Impossible? Not
logically impossible (say the philosophers). Just so obviously impossible as to
render further discussion unnecessary. (Dennett 1994, 518; 1996, 76–77)
The philosophical problem of cow-sharks is not worth discussing.
Swampman is less obviously bogus, but still bogus, for the same reasons
For at least so I argue. But aren’t Al’s examples of brainwashing much
r Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
DANIEL C. DENNETT
450

more realistic, much closer to the realm of genuine possibility? That is the
issue. Let’s consider the new case, of Ted and Fred, that A1 mentions in
his article for this symposium:
Fred truly believes that he has not been brainwashed whereas Ted falsely
believes this about himself. Imagine that after Ted has lived with and thought
about his new values for a few hours, and before he takes out the loan, we show
him a video of his being brainwashed and persuade him of the truth about how
he acquired his new values. He is now no less informed than Fred, and I do not
see why [my italics] his now having this true belief must render him less ﬂexible,
less open-minded, or less capable of resisting temptation than he was just
before he acquired it.
Strangely enough, what Al himself cannot see, his imaginary inter-
locutor Pad surmises with ease: ‘‘You have a nonchalant attitude toward
such a drastic change in beliefs. That change would deﬁnitely be
psychologically devastating to Fred and to any possible being who had
been acting freely, and the devastation would deﬁnitely render any such
being unfreeFat least for quite some time.’’ Of course Pad is talking of a
slightly different case, in which the autonomous Fred is given the
misinformation about being brainwashed, but Al’s response to his own
interlocutor has an ominous ring to it: ‘‘Now is it conceptually impossible
[my italics] that Fred absorbs the shock well enough to take out that loan
for his daughter?’’ No, I daresay it isn’t conceptually impossible, in the
philosophers’ strained sense of the term. But so what? It also isn’t
conceptually impossible that Beth should ﬁnd herself with unshedable
values in spite of their unanticipated and inexplicable overnight arrival,
while still preserving her basic sanity. But it is, in fact, impossible.
Al and I agree that history is important; the only thing we disagree on
is whether it is important in itself aside from the effects it produces so
reliably. He even agrees with me, I think, that the reason history is
important is that the right sorts of histories yield just the sort of
informedness, open-mindedness, and ﬂexibility that I make the hallmark
of autonomy. So the only thing that divides us, so far as I can see, is how
to handle cases that could never come up: Swampman-type agents who
are only apparently autonomous according to him but fully autonomous
according to me.
He notes that ‘‘all bets are off’’ if we tweak the thought experiments
further and allow Ted to have initiated the brainwashing process himself.
I think this is right, and important. The implications of these prospects
are elegantly surveyed by Peter Suber (2001). Finally, I must say that I
myself am going to ﬁnd it difﬁcult in the future not to think of my book as
Elbow Pad.
Let me now turn to John Fischer’s essay. In the closing pages of
Freedom Evolves, I offer a passage in which I lead with my chin:
r Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
NATURAL FREEDOM
451

I have not just lavished attention on the ideas of non-philosophers; in the
process I have ignored the ideas of more than a few highly regarded
philosophers, sidestepping several vigorously debated controversies in my
own discipline without so much as a mention. To the participants in those
debates I owe an explanation. Where, some may well ask, are my refutations,
my proofs, my philosophical arguments demonstrating the unsoundness of
their carefully crafted analyses? I have provided a few: Austin’s putt, Kane’s
faculty of practical reasoning, and Mele’s autonomy, for instance, have come
in for the sort of detailed attention philosophers expect. With regard to others,
I have decided to put the burden of proof on them. It takes a certain amount of
shared background assumptions to make a philosophical controversy, and I
have convinced myselfFnot provedFthat my informal tales and observations
challenge some of their enabling assumptions, rendering their contests op-
tional, however diverting to those embroiled in them. I could have said exactly
how and why, but it would have taken a hundred pages or more of dense
textual exegesis and argument, ending up with verdicts of false alarm, an anti-
climax to be eschewed. That is a risky decision on my part, since it is open to
them to demonstrate that I have woefully underestimated the inevitability of
their shared presuppositions, but it is a risk I am prepared to take. (Dennett
2003, 307)
Quite appropriately, John rises to the occasion and claims that I have
not managed (even with lots of help from my coauthor, Christopher
Taylor) to slide by the thickets of work on what he calls the Basic
Argument for incompatibilism. In the book, I don’t even discuss the Basic
Argument, but in the essay, Taylor and I provide an appendix in which we
brieﬂy discuss a version, essentially van Inwagen’s, and say what we think
is wrong with it. This is where John has something to get his hands on that
is more meaty than my insouciant disregard for this literature. He sees
several problems with our handling of this version of the Basic Argument,
all hinging on how to understand the term cause in
3. If A has the power to cause a and a ) b obtains in every possible world,
then A has the power to cause b. (Taylor and Dennett 2001, 273)
This is the premise we deny, following our recommended policy of
treating counterfactual necessity, not sufﬁciency, as the heart of the
(appropriate) concept of causation. John agrees that if we stay with our
concept of causation, premise 3 has no warrant, but he urges that ‘‘there is
a weakly causal reading’’ that makes premise 3 defensible. He does not
claim that this weakly causal reading ‘‘captures some ordinary, common-
sense idea,’’ saying rather that it ‘‘builds on such ideas but departs slightly
from them to create a theoretical notion that can then be deployed in the
Basic Argument.’’ AndFno surpriseFwhen we substitute John’s reading
for our recommended reading, the Basic Argument is ‘‘not obviously
problematic, and certainly not problematic in the way indicated by Taylor
and Dennett.’’
r Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
DANIEL C. DENNETT
452

So, just to review the bidding, Taylor and I argue for a necessity-based
notion of causation, and we show (in passing, in an appendix) how it
enables us to sidestep the notorious Basic Argument that has troubled
philosophers for thousands of yearsFby John’s reckoning. He agrees
that given our notion of causation, the Basic Argument falls apart, but he
proposes his own ‘‘theoretical’’ notion of causation, acknowledges that it
does not have even the imprimatur of ordinary language but does have
the virtue of saving the Basic Argument for another day, or maybe
another millennium. We wouldn’t want to say farewell to something as
much fun as the Basic Argument in an appendix would we? Well, yes.
John also disapproves of our cavalier treatment of events and
sentences. ‘‘This tends to conﬂate issues about causation of events and
causation of states of affairs or propositions or the truth of sentences, that
is, causing it to be the case that a certain state of affairs obtains (or a
certain proposition or sentence is true).’’ These issues ‘‘are complex and
require delicate analysis. I do not believe that the Taylor and Dennett
account is sufﬁciently nuanced to handle such complex states of affairs,
and their conﬂation . . . leads them astray here.’’ Perhaps he is right, but
then now would seem to be the ideal time for him to sock it to me. Just
how does our simpler view lead us astray? Please show us all a serious gap
in our account, a distinction we will want to honor and can’t, a case we
can neither handle nor dismiss as ignorable. That is how one would go
about countering the suspicion that all this complexity and delicacy that
Taylor and I walk past may be an artifact of the controversy, technolo-
gical innovations spun in a philosophers’ arms race but having no
peacetime use. Perhaps John is merely being polite in refraining from
going into the details of our muddlement, but if the only virtue of all that
complexity is that it permits the continuing discussion of the Basic
Argument, I will continue to be unembarrassed by my refusal to grapple
with the ﬁne details of that literature. He says that Taylor and I ‘‘cannot
dispose of the ‘modal’ or ‘transfer’ version of the Basic Argument so
easily,’’ and he is surely right: we could not dispose of all the versions of
that argument without showing how each and every one of them is
mistaken. And that is a daunting challenge, the work of a lifetime. But
having given and defended our own reading of ‘‘cause’’ and shown that it
does not lend itself to the argument, we can quite easily excuse ourselves
from the onerous task of argument-disposal until such time as we are
shown to have left out something important.
Showing exactly that is what John next attempts to do. He does so by
setting aside the appeal to any such ‘‘transfer principle’’ as premise 3 and
appealing instead to the ‘‘extremely plausible and intuitively attractive
Principle of the Fixity of the Past and Laws: an agent has it within his
power to do A only if his doing A can be an extension of the actual past,
holding the natural laws ﬁxed.’’ He says that his argument using this
Fixity Principle is ‘‘a version’’ of the Basic Argument, but since one of the
r Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
NATURAL FREEDOM
453

points of the Taylor and Dennett essay was to disentangle the two issues
of causation and possibility, I have to view this claim as an instance of the
conﬂation we were exposing.
John says that his (extremely plausible and intuitively attractive)
Principle ‘‘captures Carl Ginet’s point that our freedom is the freedom
to add to the given past (holding the natural laws ﬁxed).’’ And he adds
that if one accepts this fundamental idea, then one can state an argument
for incompatibilism that is invulnerable to Taylor and Dennett worries.
I’m sure he is right, but I do not accept this fundamental idea. That is
precisely why I was so pleased with Christopher Taylor’s way of showing
what is wrong with it: it insists on taking the ‘‘actual past’’ as ‘‘given,’’
down to the last electron, but it simply neglects the fact that this is an
unmotivated insistence. When we are interested in whether somebody
could have done otherwiseFthe phrase John himself uses in the conclu-
sion of his alternative argumentFwe are never interested in this way of
construing the issue, unless we are doing philosophy and confronting the
Basic Argument!
I don’t deny that there is a deﬁnable concept of freedom that is
incompatible with determinism; I just deny that anybody should care
whether one is free in that sense. If you really want to ‘‘extend the given
past’’ in the way deﬁned by Ginet, then if determinism is true, you are in
for a disappointment. But why should you care? This metaphysical
condition has nothing to do with talent, let alone such highly charged
issues as personal responsibility, authorship, and moral character.
John agrees with at least most of this. He says in his review of Freedom
Evolves in the Journal of Philosophy: ‘‘Both of us hold that [libertarian
freedom] is not necessary for moral responsibility. But I take seriously the
libertarian’s wish to have such freedom’’ (Fischer 2003, 634). I don’t. That
is, I am myself utterly unmoved by the libertarian’s wish, and I wonder if
it is due to some confusion or otherFmost likely the confusion Taylor
and I point out. In the end, John agrees that ‘‘our pragmatic interests and
epistemic situation force an interest in broad possibility [the Taylor and
Dennett kind of possibility]’’ but goes on to add, ‘‘but that interest is
completely compatible with the idea that our freedom is the freedom to
add to a given past, holding ﬁxed the laws of nature. It is also completely
compatible with the idea that what is possible, in the sense that is relevant
to our planning, occurs along future paths that branch off the present,
holding the past ﬁxed.’’ I grant the mere compatibility; what I am still
looking for is a reason why the libertarian’s wish should galvanize us any
more than the idle metaphysical desire that one have a doppelga¨ nger
outside one’s light cone. I suppose it would be cool, but I’m not going to
worry over arguments for or against its truth.
This brings me, ﬁnally, to Tim O’Connor’s reactions to my naturalism,
which I ﬁnd as usefully challenging as they are amusing. ‘‘Chances are,
. . .’’ he says at the outset, ‘‘you’re not a member of Dan’s church, either.’’
r Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
DANIEL C. DENNETT
454

This is to me a most interesting point: Tim, for one, is sure that the APA
is not teeming with naturalists, and if he is right, then I submit that
philosophy, as a discipline, has a serious problem. Because my brand of
naturalism, however quaint and ‘‘fundamentalist’’ it may seem to some
philosophers, is pretty much the unargued ambient worldview of the
scientiﬁc community, and in case you haven’t noticed, the denizens of that
community outnumber us philosophers by better than a hundred to one.
Those are just numbers, of course, and majority doesn’t rule in any serious
investigation, but at least one would expect philosophers to take seriously
the metaphysical and epistemological presuppositionsFhowever unex-
aminedFof such a highly informed and successful group of researchers.
As Tim says, my self-appointed role is largely that of drawing out some of
the more unsettling implications of this shared naturalism, and one can go
one of two ways with the results: are they an unintended reductio ad
absurdum of this naturalism, or a measure of the amount of counter-
intuitive adjustment that we will all have to make in the coming years to
the further developments of this view? (Philosophers of Tim’s persuasion
might take comfort in knowing that one of the reactions I often get from
scientists to my arguments is that they thought they were good mechanist
materialists until they contemplated what I told them they would have to
give up to be consistent, and now the attractions of dualism look better
than they would ever have imagined!)
One of Tim’s best jokes in a generally funny article is this: ‘‘What
makes a naturalist a fundamentalist? Naturalists are an educated bunch
(as fundamentalists often enough are), but their intellectual diet is
narrow.’’ Right. Compared with the intellectual diet of people doing
analytic metaphysics, for example! I don’t think Tim believes this, but
since he raises the issue, I cannot forbear commenting. There seems to be
a trend among today’s graduate students in philosophy to return to the
blissful know-nothing attitude of my graduate-student days during the
heyday of ordinary-language philosophy. ‘‘I was attracted to philosophy
as a career,’’ a promising graduate student candidly told me last year,
‘‘because I saw that I wouldn’t have to learn anything much about
anything!’’ Shades of Oxford in the mid-1960s, when all you needed was a
well-thumbed copy of Philosophical Investigations and a talent for glib
ripostes and counterexamples. I must say that I view anybody in our
profession who encourages this attitude in students, when there are so
many wonderful opportunities to do serious research on important topics,
to be guilty of a serious crime of intellectual seduction. True, there have
always been a fair number of people in our ﬁeld who have had no project
beyond exhibiting and exercising their own cleverness, but I for one do
not think this is a tradition we should honor.
Back to Tim’s interpretation of my ‘‘fundamentalist’’ strictures on
philosophical method: ‘‘In thinking about human beings and our place
within the wider scheme of nature, we are not entitled to make empirically
r Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
NATURAL FREEDOM
455

‘risky’ assumptions in advance of hard evidence that has the imprimatur
of a mature scienceFhowever well certain assumptions may ﬁt our
prereﬂective view of ourselves.’’ No, of course you’re entitled to do it,
and I suppose there’s no harm in it, so long as you know what you’re
doing. In such an exercise, you work out the logical implications of the
prereﬂective intuitions of your informantFwho is yourself. Back in the
1970s, the artiﬁcal-intelligence researcher Patrick Hayes embarked on a
project to formalize a portion of folk physics or what he called naive
physicsFthe physics we all betray knowledge of in our everyday life:
towels absorb water, shadows can be projected through clear glass, things
drop when you let go of them and often bounce (depending on the surface
they land on), when things collide they make a noise, and so forth (Hayes
1978). We literally couldn’t live without naive physics; it is extremely swift
and fecund in its deliverance of reliable expectations, and virtually
involuntary. You can’t readily turn off your expectations. For instance,
you ‘‘unthinkingly’’ leap back from the table when a water glass is
overturned, expecting the water to roll off the edge onto your lap.
Somehow your brain generates that expectation from its current percep-
tual cues and takes the usually appropriate avoidance action. The back-
ground machinery of naive physics is not directly accessible to
introspection but can be studied indirectly by mapping its ‘‘theorems,’’
the generalizations it can be seen to endorse (in a manner of speaking) by
its particular deliverances. Many magic tricks exploit our intuitions of
naive physics, gulling us into overlooking ‘‘impossible’’ possibilities, or
inducing us to jump to conclusions (unconsciously) on the basis of a
perceptual cue of one sort or another. Then there are the counterintuitive
phenomena that bafﬂe us naive physicists: gyroscopes, pipettes (why on
earth doesn’t the soda fall out of the bottom of that strawFit’s wide
open!), siphons, sailing upwind, and more.
Hayes’s delicious idea was to try to formalize a portion of naive
physics, the naive physics of liquids, yielding an explicit theory that would
predict all the things we actually expect from liquids and hence predict
against the things liquids do that we view as anomalies, such as siphons.
Siphons are ‘‘physically impossible’’ according to naive physics. (This was
a classic exercise in GOFAI, John Haugeland’s Good Old-Fashioned
Artiﬁcial Intelligence [Haugeland 1985], or what I have called the
paradigm of the Walking Encyclopedia [Dennett 1991]; if a robot is to
mimic a normal person’s ‘‘knowledge of folk physics’’ it will have to have
a version of that theory written in its memory banks, with a swift-
inference engine attached, so that expectations can be generated in time
for action guidance.)
What Hayes set out to do was a kind of rigorous anthropology,
attempting to axiomaticize the false theories found among the folk. Let’s
call it aprioristic anthropology of naive physics, to mark its resolute refusal
to let the actual facts of physics get in the way of deducing the
r Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
DANIEL C. DENNETT
456

implications of its found axioms. The physics was naive, but Hayes was
not. His project was sophisticated aprioristic anthropology, since he was
fully alert to the fact that false theories are just as amenable to
formalization as true theories, and he withheld all allegiance to his
axioms. One could attempt just the same sort of project with folk
psychology: deducing the implications of whatever is deemed ‘‘axio-
matic’’ (unquestioned, impossible to deny, too obvious for words) by
the folk. Call this enterprise sophisticated aprioristic anthropology of folk
(naive) psychology, and contrast it with naive aprioristic anthropology of
folk (naive) psychology, whose practitioners would make the mistake of
committing themselves to the beliefs of the folk. And if one’s set of
informants is the singleton oneself, you get naive aprioristic autoanthro-
pology of folk psychology. (The preceding three paragraphs are drawn,
with revisions, from Dennett 2005.)
Now my question is: How if at all does ‘‘traditional’’ philosophy of
mind, of the sort now making something of a comeback in the anti-
cognitive-science backlash, differ from this enterprise? I don’t detect any
differences in either methods or sources of data.
Tim announces that he is ‘‘committed to causal realism,’’ the doctrine
he explicates thus: ‘‘Some things make other things happen, and the truth
makers of these causings are not to be gleaned from suitable regularities
in patterns between isolated bits of inert facts.’’ This is an interesting and
somewhat compelling vision of causation, but why be committed to it?
David Lewis, Jaegwon Kim, and their many ingenious students have
explored the ins and outs of our everyday notions of causation, trying to
ﬁnd a consistent folk theory thereof, and I submit that the way to
understand this enterprise, known in our discipline as analytic metaphys-
ics, is as a kind of anthropology, educing the best possible version (most
perspicuous, consistent if possible) of some current folk concepts. If it is
like good anthropology, it reserves judgment about the ultimate sound-
ness or utility of the folk theory, an assessment that requires folk theory
to be put into registration with the best scientiﬁc theories or, failing that,
put into competition with such theoriesFan inquiry few metaphysicians
are well equipped to conduct. (For an example of such a scientiﬁcally
sophisticated theory of causation, see Judea Pearl 2000.)
Tim goes on to criticize my discussion of Austin’s notorious putt, and
the lessons to be drawn from it: ‘‘Here I think Dan fails to appreciate that
the all-in sense of can is not disjoint from the ability sense but is rather
stronger than it. It is the ability sense plus. . . . No experiments that we are
able to undertake could conﬁrm the further condition of (robust) causal
indeterminismFwe simply assume that in practical life.’’ But since the
assumption has no testable consequences, we might well ask: Are we right
to assume this? Need we assume this? Is it perhaps at best merely an
enabling or life-enhancing myth that we may usefully profess but need not
take seriously, like the situation in Garrison Keillor’s imaginary town of
r Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
NATURAL FREEDOM
457

Lake Wobegon, ‘‘where all the children are above average’’? If the all-in
sense of can has no other role to play, and it alone is what is motivating
incompatibilism, we do well to see if we can get along without it.
Later Tim asks: ‘‘Why think that the very same notions of avoidance/
avoidability are at work when we assess impersonal systems, even
sophisticated, information-processing ones, and human beings to whom
we attribute freedom and responsibility? It seems rather that we have at
least two important senses.’’ Perhaps. But is the second sense really
important? Why? Again, I am not claiming that there is no such other
sense (though I haven’t seen the case yet made that there is) but am simply
demanding that before any such sense is detached from its bracketed
home in autoanthropology and put to work, it needs to be motivated by
something beyond tradition; its role needs to be defended on the further
ground that it makes a real distinction that science must honor.
Tim goes on: ‘‘For a person to be responsible for what he or she does,
his or her causal activity must not entirely consist in the activity of
impersonal constituents.’’ This is, as near as I can tell, a frank avowal of
some kind of Cartesian dualism. While I ﬁnd the anthropological claim
that at least some schools of folk (moral) psychology are committed to
dualism to be somewhat plausible and worthy of defense, and while, in my
role of anthropologist or heterophenomenologist, I can hardly vouchsafe
the autoanthropological claim from Tim that he himself is committed to
dualism, as a move in the debate over compatibilism and incompatibilism
it falls short. He advocates ‘‘ontologically emergent’’ capacities, exhorting:
‘‘Think new basic capacities resulting from irreducible properties of whole
systems!’’ Go ahead, but while you’re at it, you’d better try to give
scientists a way of taking these properties seriously. ‘‘Dan doesn’t seem to
like it when a philosopher shrugs his shoulders and says, ‘Those are all
fascinating questions for empirical researchers. It would be great if
neuroscience can attain a degree of understanding of . . . human brains.
. . . ’ ’’ He’s right. I don’t like it when philosophers pass the buck in this
way, since what philosophers sometimes seem not to realize is that it isn’t
enough to contrive a deﬁnition of a putatively logically consistent
capacity; you have to motivate it in more than mere conceptual terms.
Otherwise you are just positing what I have called ‘‘wonder tissue.’’ There
may be wonder tissue, undreamt of to date by the relevant scientists, but
we need a better reason to hunt for it than that your intuitive theory of
responsibility demands it. One way of looking at what I am doing in
Freedom Evolves is to execute a sort of squeeze play, showing that more
and more and more of what your pretheoretical intuitions insist on can in
fact be provided for without the wonder tissue that tradition imagines.
Still, you say, you want wonder tissue. Why? Just for old times’ sake?
A reader of my book, Pamela Robinson of Citrus Heights, California,
recently sent me a giftFa glorious bit of needlework on which she had
embroidered a little poem from her childhood:
r Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
DANIEL C. DENNETT
458

Due to Circumstances
Beyond my Control,
I am the
Master of my Fate
and the Captain
of my Soul.
Amen. This nicely captures one of my main themes, and I plan to adopt
it as one of the canonical texts in the Church of Fundamentalist
Naturalism.
Center for Cognitive Studies
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
USA
daniel.dennett@tufts.edu
References
Dennett, Daniel C. 1991. ‘‘Mother Nature Versus the Walking Encyclo-
pedia: A Western Drama.’’ In Philosophy and Connectionist Theory,
edited by W. Ramsey, S. Stich, and D. E. Rumelhart. Hillsdale, N.J.:
Erlbaum.
FFF. 1994. ‘‘Get Real.’’ Philosophical Topics 22:505–68.
FFF. 1996. ‘‘Cow-sharks, Magnets, and Swampman.’’ Mind and
Language 11:76–77.
FFF. 2003. Freedom Evolves. New York: Viking Penguin.
FFF. 2005. Sweet Dreams: Philosophical Obstacles to a Science of
Consciousness. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Fischer, John Martin. 2003. ‘‘Review of Freedom Evolves.’’ Journal of
Philosophy 100:632–37.
Haugeland, John. 1985. Artiﬁcial Intelligence: The Very Idea. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Hayes, Patrick. 1978. ‘‘The Naive Physics Manifesto.’’ In Expert Systems
in the Microelectronic Age, edited by D. Michie. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Mele, Alfred. 1995. Autonomous Agents. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Pearl, Judea. 2000. Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Suber, Peter. 2001. ‘‘Saving Machines From Themselves: The Ethics of
Deep
Self-Modiﬁcation.’’
Available
at
http://www.earlham.edu/
 peters/writing/selfmod.htm.
r Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005
NATURAL FREEDOM
459

