Darwin’s ‘‘strange inversion of reasoning’’
Daniel Dennett1
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155-7059
Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection uniﬁes the world
of physics with the world of meaning and purpose by proposing a
deeply counterintuitive ‘‘inversion of reasoning’’ (according to a
19th century critic): ‘‘to make a perfect and beautiful machine, it is
not requisite to know how to make it’’ [MacKenzie RB (1868)
(Nisbet & Co., London)]. Turing proposed a similar inversion: to be
a perfect and beautiful computing machine, it is not requisite to
know what arithmetic is. Together, these ideas help to explain how
we human intelligences came to be able to discern the reasons for
all of the adaptations of life, including our own.
evolution  meme
Two Strange Inversions of Reasoning
S
ome of the most important thinkers we philosophers take
seriously were not philosophers but scientists—Newton,
Einstein, Go¨del, and Turing, for instance—but by far the
scientist who has made the greatest contribution to philosophy
is Charles Darwin. If I could give a prize for the single best idea
anybody ever had, I’d give it to Darwin. In a single stroke
Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection united the
realm of physics and mechanism on the one hand with the realm
of meaning and purpose on the other. From a Darwinian
perspective the continuity between lifeless matter on the one
hand and living things and all their activities and products on the
other can be glimpsed in outline and explored in detail, not just
the strivings of animals and the efficient designs of plants, but
human meanings and purposes: art and science itself, and even
morality. When we can see all of our artifacts as fruits on the tree
of life, we have achieved a unification of perspective that permits
us to gauge both the similarities and differences between a spider
web and the World Wide Web, a beaver dam and the Hoover
Dam, a nightingale’s nest and ‘‘Ode to a Nightingale.’’ Darwin’s
unifying stroke was revolutionary not just in the breadth of its
scope, but in the way it was achieved: in an important sense, it
turned everything familiar upside down. The pre-Darwinian
world was held together not by science but by tradition: all things
in the universe, from the most exalted (‘‘man’’) to the most
humble (the ant, the pebble, the raindrop) were the creations of
a still more exalted thing, God, an omnipotent and omniscient
intelligent creator—who bore a striking resemblance to the
second-most exalted thing. Call this the trickle-down theory of
creation. Darwin replaced it with the bubble-up theory of
creation. One of Darwin’s 19th century critics put it vividly:
In the theory with which we have to deal, Absolute
Ignorance is the artificer; so that we may enunciate as
the fundamental principle of the whole system, that, IN
ORDER TO MAKE A PERFECT AND BEAUTIFUL
MACHINE, IT IS NOT REQUISITE TO KNOW
HOW TO MAKE IT. This proposition will be found, on
careful examination, to express, in condensed form, the
essential purport of the Theory, and to express in a few
words all Mr. Darwin’s meaning; who, by a strange
inversion of reasoning, seems to think Absolute Igno-
rance fully qualified to take the place of Absolute
Wisdom in all of the achievements of creative skill.
MacKenzie (1)
This was indeed a ‘‘strange inversion of reasoning,’’ and the
outrage and incredulity expressed by MacKenzie more than a
century ago is still echoing through a discouragingly large
proportion of the population in the 21st century. A page from a
20th century creationist pamphlet (Fig. 1) perfectly captures the
‘‘obviousness’’ of the intuition that Darwin’s theory overthrows.
When we turn to Darwin’s bubble-up theory of creation, we
can conceive of all of the creative design work metaphorically as
lifting in Design Space. It has to start with the simplest repli-
cators, and gradually ratchet up, by wave after wave of natural
selection, to multicellular life in all its forms. Is such a process
really capable of having produced all of the wonders we observe
in the biosphere? Skeptics ever since Darwin have tried to
demonstrate that one marvel or another is simply unapproach-
able by this laborious and unintelligent route. They have been
searching for a ‘‘skyhook,’’ something that floats high in Design
Space, unsupported by ancestors, the direct result of a special act
of intelligent creation. And time and again, these skeptics have
discovered not a miraculous skyhook but a wonderful ‘‘crane,’’
a nonmiraculous innovation in Design Space that enables ever
more efficient exploration of the possibilities of design, ever
more powerful lifting in Design Space. Endosymbiosis is a crane;
sex is a crane; language and culture are cranes. (For instance,
without their addition to the arsenal of R&D tools available to
evolution, we couldn’t have glow-in-the-dark tobacco plants with
firefly genes in them. These are not miraculous. They are just as
clearly fruits of the tree of life as spider webs and beaver dams,
but the probability of their emerging without the helping hand
of Homo sapiens and our cultural tools is nil.)
As we learn more and more about the nano-machinery of life
that makes all this possible, we can appreciate a second strange
inversion of reasoning, provided by another brilliant English-
man: Alan Turing. Here is Turing’s strange inversion, put in
language borrowed from MacKenzie:
IN ORDER TO BE A PERFECT AND BEAUTIFUL
COMPUTING MACHINE, IT IS NOT REQUISITE
TO KNOW WHAT ARITHMETIC IS.
Before Turing there were computers, by the hundreds, working
on scientific and engineering calculations. Many of them were
women, and many had degrees in mathematics. They were
human beings who knew what arithmetic was, but Turing had a
great insight: they didn’t need to know this! As he noted, ‘‘The
behavior of the computer at any moment is determined by the
symbols which he is observing, and his ‘state of mind’ at that
moment . . .’’ (2). Turing showed that it was possible to design
machines—Turing machines or their equivalents—that were
Absolutely Ignorant, but could do arithmetic perfectly. And, he
showed that, if they can do arithmetic, they can be given
instructions in the impoverished terms that they do ‘‘under-
stand’’ that permit them to do anything computational. (The
Church-Turing Thesis is that all ‘‘effective procedures’’ are
Turing-computable—although of course many of them are not
This paper results from the Arthur M. Sackler Colloquium of the National Academy of
Sciences, ‘‘In the Light of Evolution III: Two Centuries of Darwin,’’ held January 16–17, 2009,
at the Arnold and Mabel Beckman Center of the National Academies of Sciences and
Engineering in Irvine, CA. The complete program and audio ﬁles of most presentations are
available on the NAS web site at www.nasonline.org/SacklerDarwin.
Author contributions: D.D. wrote the paper.
The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1E-mail: daniel.dennett@tufts.edu.
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0904433106
PNAS 
June 16, 2009 
vol. 106 
suppl. 1 
10061–10065

feasible because they take too long to run. Because our under-
standing of effective procedures is unavoidably intuitive, this
thesis cannot be proved, but it is almost universally accepted, so
much so that Turing-computability is typically taken as an
acceptable operational definition of effectiveness.) A huge
Design Space of information-processing was made accessible by
Turing, and he foresaw that there was a traversable path from
Absolute Ignorance to Artificial Intelligence, a long series of
lifting steps in that Design Space.
Many people can’t abide Darwin’s strange inversion. We call
them creationists. They are still looking for skyhooks—
‘‘irreducibly complex’’ features of the biosphere that could not
have evolved by Darwinian processes. Many people can’t abide
Turing’s strange inversion either. I propose that we call them
‘‘mind creationists.’’ Among them are some eminent thinkers.
They argue—so far with no more success than creationists—
that there are aspects of (human) minds that are forever and
‘‘in principle’’ inaccessible by the long upward trudge of Turing
machines. John Searle (3, 4) and Roger Penrose (5, 6) are the
two best known. Interestingly, in the last few years, several
philosophers have come close to embracing both species of
creationism: Jerry Fodor (7–9) Thomas Nagel (10), and Alvin
Plantinga (11, 12, *). Fodor and Nagel deny that religion has
anything to do with their skepticism about evolution. Fodor
declares that his arguments provide no support for Intelligent
Design because he isn’t saying that adaptations are due to an
Intelligent Designer; he is saying that nobody knows how
adaptations arose. He accepts descent with modification, but
doesn’t think natural selection (‘‘adaptation’’) is the explana-
tion of any features of living things. ‘‘It is in short one thing to
wonder if evolution happens and another thing to wonder if
adaptation is the mechanism by which it happens’’ (8). The
paleontologist Simon Conway Morris (14) takes a strikingly
different tack: he wholeheartedly accepts adaptationism but
still thinks that human minds are inexplicable as a product of
natural selection unaided by the intelligence of a Christian
God.
Plantinga’s Attempted Reductio ad Absurdum of Naturalism
Plantinga also has an explicitly religious foundation for his
repugnance, and he covers both kinds of creationism in his
attempt at a reductio ad absurdum of naturalism (12, *). Where
N is naturalism, E is current evolutionary theory and R is the
proposition that our cognitive faculties are reliable:
1. P(RN&E) is low. [The probability of R, conditional
on N & E, is low.]
2. One who accepts N&E sees that (1) is true has a
defeater for R.
3. This defeater can’t be defeated.
4. One who has a defeater for R has a defeater for any
belief she takes to be produced by her cognitive
faculties, including N&E.
Therefore:
5. N & E is self-defeating and can’t rationally be accepted.
Plantinga*
We needn’t dwell here on the interpretation of the whole
argument because the crucial Premise 1 is false. We can see why
in terms of evolution by natural selection. Consider the excel-
lence and reliability of various organs. Across the entire spec-
trum of, say, vertebrates, hearts are highly reliable pumps, lungs
are highly reliable bloodoxygenators, and eyes and ears are
highly reliable distal-information-acquirers. In each species
there is admirable—but not perfect—tuning of these organs to
the specific needs of the organisms in their demanding environ-
ments. The eagle’s eyes are strikingly unlike the rabbit’s eyes or
the frog’s eyes. The effect is that the beliefs (or if you’re
abstemious about using that term, the information states) that
are provoked by those eyes and ears are highly reliable—but far
from perfect—truth-trackers. Animals that get it right in general
fare better than those whose senses deceive them.
This is adaptationist reasoning, of course, and it is not
surprising that creationists of both kinds have typically taken aim
at adaptationist thinking in biology, for they see, correctly, that
if they can discredit it, they take away the only grounds within
biology for assessing the justification or rational acceptability of
the deliverances of such organs. We need to put matters in these
‘‘reverse engineering’’ terms if we are to compare organs with
respect to their reliability—and not just their mass or density or
use of phosphorus, for instance. Such an appeal to the power of
natural selection to design highly reliable information-gathering
organs would be in danger of vicious circularity were it not for
the striking confirmations of these achievements of natural
selection using independent engineering measures. The acuity of
vision in the eagle and hearing in the owl, the discriminatory
powers of electric eels and echolocating bats, and many other
cognitive talents in humans and other species have all been
objectively measured, for instance.
It might seem that the skeptics could short-circuit this defense
of our natural reliability as truth-trackers by showing that there
can be no gradualistic path to truth-tracking. They could claim
that there are no quasi-believers, proto-thinkers, hemi-
semidemi-understanders; you either have a full-blown mind or
you don’t. This is where Turing’s strange inversion comes
usefully into play, for his insight has given us a wealth of
undeniable examples of just such partial comprehension: devices
that can do all manner of impressive discriminative, predictive,
and analytic tasks. We may insist on calling this competence
without comprehension, but, as the competence grows and
grows, the declaration that there is no comprehension at all
embodied in that competence sounds less and less persuasive.
This is made especially vivid when we reflect that, as we learn
more about the nano-technology within our cells, we discover
that they themselves contain trillions of protein robots: motor
proteins, proof-readers, snippers, and joiners and sentries of all
kinds. It is undeniable that the other necessary competences of
life are composable from unliving, uncomprehending parts; why
should comprehension itself be the lone exception?
In the gradual path to intelligence, endosymbiosis has played
a particularly potent role as a crane. The endosymbiotic origin
of the eukaryotic revolution 2.5 billion years ago gives us a
telling example of a quite sudden multiplication of competence:
each partner in the symbiosis got the potential benefit of over a
billion years of independent R&D, a tremendous acquisition
of talent not found in one’s ancestors. Instead of eating the
intruder—disassembling it for raw materials and energy—the
*Plantinga A, The American Philosophical Association Central Division 106th Annual
Meeting, February 21, 2009, Chicago, IL.
Fig. 1.
An expression of incredulity about Darwin’s inversion, from an
anonymous creationist propaganda pamphlet, ca. 1970.
10062 
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0904433106
Dennett

host coopted the intruder, preserving most or all of the valuable
information embodied in its design. The greater complexity of
the resulting eukaryotes permitted greater versatility, allowing
for the sorts of division of labor that enabled multicellularity to
evolve. (As Lukecs, this volume, shows, the evolution of multi-
cellularity also involved reducing the complexity of prokaryotic
replication methods, which were temporally and energetically
too inefficient to support the profligate cell division of viable
multicellular organisms.)
Free-Floating Rationales of Evolution
When we observe the caddis fly’s impressive food sieve (Fig. 2)
we can see that there are reasons for its features that are
strikingly similar to the reasons for the features of another
artifact for harvesting food from water, the lobster trap (Fig. 3).
The difference is that the reasons in the former case are not
represented anywhere. Not in the caddis fly’s ‘‘mind’’ or brain,
and not in the process of natural selection that ‘‘honored’’ those
reasons by blindly homing in on the best design. These are
examples of the ubiquitous ‘‘free-floating rationales’’ of evolu-
tion (16). Some of the features of the lobster trap may be
similarly the result of blind trial and error by trap-makers over
the centuries, but there is little doubt that most if not all of the
reasons for the design features instantiated by today’s lobster
traps have been represented, understood, appreciated, and
communicated by their (more or less intelligent) artificers.
Consider the murderous behavior of the cuckoo chick, pushing
the eggs of the host out of the nest to maximize its food intake.
The rationale for this behavior is unmistakable, but the chick has
no Need to Know; it can be the beneficiary of a routine that it
follows without any comprehension of its rationale. This is
Turing’s strange inversion uncovered in nature. There is a
common tendency to overinterpret animals exhibiting such
clever behaviors, imputing to them much more comprehension
than they need, or have, and an equally common tendency, in
reaction, to underestimate them. The literature on animal
intelligence reverberates with the contests between the roman-
tics and the killjoys (17), and long series of ingenious experi-
ments are gradually limning the actual boundaries of these
competences. Because we don’t have everyday terms for semi-
understood quasi-beliefs, we have no stable vocabulary for
describing the cascade of Turing-powers that climbs to the
summit of our particular human levels of comprehension. Is it
‘‘metaphorical’’ to attribute beliefs to birds or chimpanzees?
Should we reserve that term, and many others, for (adult) human
beings alone? This lexical dearth helps to sustain the illusion that
there is an unbridgeable gulf between animal minds and human
minds—despite the obvious fact that similar quandaries of
interpretation afflict us when we turn to young children. Just
when do they exhibit enough prowess in one test or another for
us to say, conclusively, that they ‘‘have a theory of mind’’ or
understand numbers? How much do we human beings need to
know to understand our own concepts? There is no good,
principled answer to this question.
Evolution of Thinking Tools
Rather than attempt to answer such an ill-motivated question
about necessary and sufficient conditions we can simply ac-
knowledge, with Szathmary and Maynard Smith (18), that along
the path from amoebas and cuckoos to us, there was a major
transition with powers to rival the endosymbiotic birth of the
eukaryotes: the evolution of language and culture, one of the
great cranes of evolution. In both cases, individual organisms
were enabled to acquire, rapidly and without tedious trial and
error, huge increases in competence designed elsewhere at
earlier times. The effects have been dramatic indeed. According
to calculations by MacCready, at the dawn of human agriculture,
the worldwide human population plus livestock and pets was
0.1% of the terrestrial vertebrate biomass. Today, he calcu-
lates, it is 98%!
Over billions of years, on a unique sphere, chance has
painted a thin covering of life—complex, improbable,
wonderful and fragile. Suddenly we humans . . . have
grown in population, technology, and intelligence to a
position of terrible power: we now wield the paintbrush.
MacCready (19)
Unlike the biologically ‘‘sudden’’ Cambrian explosion, which
occurred over several million years 530 million years ago (20),
the MacCready explosion occurred in 10,000 years, or 500
human generations. There is no doubt that it was the rapidly
accumulating products of cultural evolution that made this
possible. As Richerson and Boyd (2006) show, in addition to the
standard highway, the vertical transmission of genes, a second
information highway from parents to offspring is evolvable
under rather demanding conditions; and once this path of
vertical cultural transmission is established and optimized, it can
Fig. 2.
A caddis larva food sieve, exhibiting design features for which there
are good (unrepresented) reasons (15) that are strikingly similar to the reasons
for the features of another artifact for harvesting food from water, the lobster
trap (see Fig. 3). [Reproduced with permission from ref. 15 (Copyright 2000,
Cambridge University Press).]
Fig. 3.
Lobster trap diagram, exhibiting design features similar to those of
the caddis larva food sieve (see Fig. 2); the reasons for the design features are
described in the patent application (available at www.freepatentsonline.com/
7111427.html). [Reproduced with permission from United States Patent
7111427.]
Dennett
PNAS 
June 16, 2009 
vol. 106 
suppl. 1 
10063

be invaded by ‘‘rogue cultural variants,’’ horizontally or obliquely
transmitted cultural items that do not have the same probability
of being benign. (The comparison to spam on the internet is hard
to avoid.) These rogue cultural variants are what Richard
Dawkins (21) calls ‘‘memes,’’ and although some of them are
bound to be pernicious—parasites, not mutualists—others are
profound enhancers of the native competences of the hosts they
infect. One can acquire huge amounts of valuable information of
which one’s parents had no inkling, along with the junk and
scams.
Language is the key cultural element, because it alone pro-
vides the digitized base for reliable cumulative evolution. (It is
digitized in the sense that it is composed of a finite set of discrete,
all-or-nothing elements—phonemes—that can survive noisy
transmission, different accents and tones of voice, drawls and
lisps, by a process of largely automatic correction to norms.)
Other species, such as chimpanzees, have a handful of culturally
transmitted traditions—of termite fishing or grooming signals or
nut cracking, for instance—but nothing that ramifies the way
human culture does. Language, by providing a basic repertoire
of readily replicated elements, permits the reliable transmission
of semiunderstood formulas, recipes, admonitions, techniques.
(It is not typically noticed that one of the most valuable features
of language is its ability to convey information down a chain of
communicators who do not really understand what they are
‘‘parrotting.’’) By rendering copying and transmission relatively
impervious to variations in comprehension, language optimizes
fidelity in the pathway. Words, composed of a finite ‘alphabet’
of phonemes, share with computers and the genetic code the
self-normalizing feature of absorbing noise, or permitting many
minor variations to ‘‘count as the same’’ for the purposes of
computation or replication. This makes it possible, using lan-
guage, to create fairly ‘‘standardized’’ thinking tools. Douglas
Hofstadter (22) provides a short list of some of his favorites:
Y wild goose chases
Y tackiness
Y dirty tricks
Y sour grapes
Y elbow grease
Y feet of clay
Y loose cannons
Y crackpots
Y lip service
Y slam dunks
Y feedback
Each of these is an abstract cognitive tool, in the same way that
long division or finding-the-average is a tool; each has a role to
play in a broad spectrum of contexts, rendering hypothesis-
generation more efficient, pattern-recognition more probable.
Equipped with such tools one is able to think thoughts that would
otherwise be relatively hard to formulate. Of course, as the old
joke has it, when the only tool you have is a hammer, everything
looks like a nail, and each of these can be overused. Acquiring
tools and using them wisely are distinct skills, but you have to
start by acquiring the tools.
Bootstrapping Our Way to Intelligent Design, and Truth
In fact, the development of cultural tools for thinking, for
designing, for extracting and recording information have led to
orders of magnitude of improvement in all our belief-forming
competences. Consider, as just one simple example, the evolu-
tion of the straightedge. How do you draw a straight line? By
placing a pencil on a straightedge and running it across the
paper. Where did you get the straightedge? From a straightedge-
maker. Where did the straightedge-maker get the straightedge
used to make this product? From some earlier toolmaker, and so
on, but not to infinity. This is an instance of nonmiraculous
bootstrapping, and it has occurred many times. There is a finite
regress leading back to the earliest relatively primitive and
inaccurate straightedges, but, over time, straightedges have been
manufactured to ever more demanding tolerances. The devia-
tions from perfection manifest in a straightedge from the 1960s
are shown in Fig. 4, magnified a millionfold. Such representa-
tions make possible highly efficient, guided, foresighted trajec-
Fig. 5.
Adaptive landscape, which can be used as an explicit representation
of valuable states of affairs or goals, relative to one’s current situation.
[Reprinted with permission from ref. 13 (Copyright 1991, Springer).]
Fig. 4.
A surface trace of a precision gauge block at 1 million times vertical magniﬁcation, illustrating the representation of deviations from perfection.
[Reproduced with permission from ref. 23 (Copyright 1970, Moore Special Tool Company).]
10064 
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0904433106
Dennett

tories in design space. And our indefinitely extendable recursive
power of reflection means that not only can we evaluate our
progress, but we can evaluate our evaluation methods, and the
grounds for relying on evaluation methods, and the grounds for
thinking that this iterative process gives us grounds for believing
the best fruits of our research, and so forth. Science is a culturally
transmitted and maintained system of truth-tracking that has
identified and rectified literally hundreds of imperfections in our
animal equipment, and yet it is not itself a skyhook, a gift from
God, but a product of adaptations, a fruit on the tree of life.
That is, in outline, the response to Plantinga’s premise (1). We
have excellent internal evidence for believing that science in general
is both reliable and a product of naturalistic forces only—natural
selection of genes and natural selection of memes. An allegiance to
naturalism and to current evolutionary theory not only doesn’t
undermine the conviction that our scientific beliefs are reliable; it
explains them. Our ‘‘godlike’’ powers of comprehension and imag-
ination do indeed set us apart from even our closest kin, the
chimpanzees and bonobos, but these powers we have can all be
accounted for on Darwin’s bubble-up theory of creation, clarified
by Turing’s own strange—and wonderful—inversion of reasoning.
Our powers of representation permit us, for instance, to
represent some of our predicaments as locations on adaptive
landscapes (Fig. 5). Here, we are, we may think, isolated on this
sup-optimal peak; is there any way of getting over there, to what
seems to be the global summit? Because we can represent this
state of affairs (in diagrams or words—you don’t need to use
adaptive landscape sketches, but they often help), we can, for the
first time, ‘‘see’’ some of the peaks beyond the valleys, and
thereby are motivated to devise ways of traversing those valleys.
We, the reason representers, can evaluate our possible futures
far more powerfully, far less myopically, than any other species,
can now look back at our own prehistory and discover the
unrepresented reasons everywhere in the tree of life.
We are not perfect truth-trackers, but we can evaluate our own
shortcomings by using the methods we have so far devised, so we
can be confident that we are justified in trusting our methods in
the foreseeable future.
It took Darwin to discover that a mindless process created all
those reasons. We ‘‘intelligent designers’’ are among the effects,
not the cause, of all those purposes.
1. MacKenzie RB (1868) The Darwinian Theory of the Transmutation of Species Examined
(Nisbet & Co, London).
2. Turing A (1936) On computable numbers, with an application to the Entscheidungs-
problem. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society. 42:230–265, and erratum
(1937) 43:544–546.
3. Searle J (1980) Minds, brains and programs. Behav Brain Sci 3:417–458.
4. Searle J (1992) The Rediscovery of the Mind. (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
5. Penrose R (1989) The Emperor’s New Mind. (Oxford Univ Press, Oxford).
6. Penrose R (1990) The nonalgorithmic mind. Behav Brain Sci 13:692–705.
7. Fodor J (2007) Why pigs don’t have wings. London Rev Books 20:5–8.
8. Fodor J (2008a) Against Darwinism. Mind Language 23:42–49.
9. Fodor J (2008b) LOT 2: The Language of Thought Revisited (Oxford Univ Press, Oxford).
10. Nagel T (2008) Public education and intelligent design. Philosophy Public Affairs
36:187–205.
11. Plantinga A (1993) Warrant and Proper Function. (Oxford Univ Press, New York).
12. Plantinga A (1996) Darwin, mind and meaning. Books and Culture. Available at
www.veritas-uscb.org/library/plantiga/dennett.html.
13. Schull J (1991) The view from the adaptive landscape. Parallel Problem Solving from
Nature (Springer, Berlin), pp 415–427.
14. Conway Morris S (February 12, 2009) Darwin was right. Up to a point. Guardian.
Available at www.guardian.co.uk/global/2009/feb/12/simon-conway-morris-
darwin.
15. Hansell M (2000) Bird Nests and Construction Behaviour (Cambridge Univ Press,
Cambridge, UK).
16. Dennett D (1995) Darwin’s Dangerous Idea (Simon & Schuster, New York).
17. Dennett D (1983) Intentional systems in cognitive ethology: The ‘‘Panglossian Para-
digm’’ defended. Behav Brain Sci 6:343–390.
18. Maynard Smith J and Szathmary E (1995) The Major Transitions in Evolution. (Freeman,
Oxford).
19. MacCready P (1999) An ambivalent Luddite at a technological feast. Available at
www.designfax.net/archives/0899/899trl2.asp.
20. Gould S J (1989) Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History, (Norton,
New York).
21. Dawkins R (1976) The Selﬁsh Gene (Oxford Univ Press, Oxford).
22. Hofstadter DR (2007) I Am a Strange Loop (Basic Books, New York).
23. Moore WR (1970) Foundations of Mechanical Accuracy (Moore Special Tool Co,
Bridgeport, CN).
Dennett
PNAS 
June 16, 2009 
vol. 106 
suppl. 1 
10065

