I Could not have Done Otherwise--So What?
Daniel C. Dennett
The Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 81, No. 10, Eighty-First Annual Meeting American Philosophical
Association, Eastern Division. (Oct., 1984), pp. 553-565.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-362X%28198410%2981%3A10%3C553%3AICNHDO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-D
The Journal of Philosophy is currently published by Journal of Philosophy, Inc..
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/jphil.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to and preserving a digital archive of scholarly journals. For
more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Fri May 18 08:30:55 2007

553 
FREEDOM AND DETERMINISR.1 
I COULD NOT HAVE DONE OTHERWISE-SO 
WHAT?' 
W
HEREVER progress is stalled on a philosophical prob- 
lem, a tactic worth trying is to find some shared (and 
hence largely unexamined) assumption and deny it. The 
problem of free will is such a problem, and, as Peter van 
Inwagen notes: 
. . . almost all philosophers agree that a necessary condition for hold- 
ing an agent responsible for an act is believing that the agent could 
haue refrained from performing that act.' 
Perhaps van Inwagen is right; perhaps most philosophers agree on 
this. If so, this shared assumption, which I will call CDO (for 
"could have done otherwise"), is a good candidate for denial, espe- 
cially since there turns out to be so little to be said in support of it, 
once it is called in question. I will argue that, just like those people 
who are famous only for being famous, this assumption owes its 
traditional high regard to nothing more than its traditional high 
regard. It is almost never questioned. And the tradition itself, I will 
claim, is initially motivated by little more than inattentive extrapo- 
lation from familiar cases. 
T o  engage the issue, I assert that it simply does not matter at all 
to moral responsibility whether the agent in question could have 
done otherwise in the circumstances. Now how does a friend of 
CDO set about showing that I am obviously wrong? Not by re- 
minding me, unnecessarily, of the broad consensus in philosophy 
in support of the CDO principle, or by repeating it, firmly and 
knowingly. The inertia of a tradition is by itself scant recommen- 
dation, and if it is claimed that the assumption is not questioned 
because it is obvious or self-evident, I can at least ask for some sup- 
porting illustration of the self-evidence of the assumption in appli- 
cation to familiar cases. Can anyone give me an example of some- 
one withholding a judgment of responsibility until he has 
determined (to his own satisfaction) whether the agent could have 
done otherwise? 
It will perhaps appear that I must be extraordinarily inattentive 
to the topics of daily conversation if I can ask that question with a 
straight face. A prominent feature of many actual inquiries into the 
*To be presented in an APA symposium on Freedom and Determinism, December 
30, 1984. Peter van Inwagen will comment; see this JOI.RNAI., this issue, 565-567 
'"The Incompatibilit) of Free Will and Determinism," Phzlosophical Stud~rs, 
xxvr~,3 (March 1975): 185-99, p. 188, reprinted in Gar) Watson, ed., Free Will (New 
York: Oxford, 1982): 46-58, p. 50. 
0022-362X~84/8110/0553$01.30 
01984 The Journal of Philosophy, Inc. 

554 
THE JOL'RKAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
responsibility of particular agents is the asking of the question 
"Could he have done otherwise?" The question is raised in trials, 
both civil and criminal, and much more frequently in the retro- 
spective discussions between individuals concerning blame or ex- 
cuse for particular regretted acts of omission or commission. 
Before turning to a closer examination of those cases, it is worth 
noting that the question plays almost no role in discussions of 
praise or reward for felicitous, unregretted acts-except 
in the for- 
mulaic gracious demurrer of the one singled out for gratitude or 
praise: "What else could I do?" ("Anyone else would have done the 
same." "Shucks; 'twarn't nothin'.") And in these instances we do 
not take the agent to be disavowing responsibility at all, but just 
declaring that being responsible under those conditions was 
not difficult. 
Perhaps one reason we do not ask "Could he have done other- 
wise?" when trying to assess responsibility for good deeds and tri- 
umphs is that (thanks to our generosity of spirit) we give agents the 
benefit of the doubt when they have done well by us, rather than 
delving too scrupulously into facts of ultimate authorship. Such a 
charitable impulse may play a role, but there are better reasons, as 
we shall see. And we certainly do ask the question when an act is 
up for censure. But when we do, we never use the familiar question 
to inaugurate the sort of investigation that would actually shed 
light on the traditional philosophical issue the question has been 
presumed to raise. Instead we proceed to look around for evidence 
of what I call a pocket of local fatalism: a particular circumstance 
in the relevant portion of the past which ensured that the agent 
would not have done otherwise (during the stretch of local fatal- 
ism) n o  matter what he had tried, or wanted, to do. A standard ex- 
ample of local fatalism is being locked in a room.' 
If the agent was locked in a room (or in some other way had his 
will rendered impotent), then independently of the truth or falsity 
of determinism and no matter what sort of causation reigns within 
the agent's brain (or Cartesian soul, for that matter), we agree that 
"he could not have done otherwise." The readily determinable em- 
pirical fact that an agent was a victim of local fatalism terminates 
the inquiry into causation. (It does not always settle the issue of re- 
sponsibility, however, as Harry Frankfurt shows3; under special 
2 ~ h e
misuse of this standard example-e.g., 
in the extrapolation to the theme 
that, if determinism is true, the whole world's a prison-is 
described in my Elbow 
Room: The C'arzeties of Free W111 Worth Want~ng (Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford/ 
MIT Press, 1984), from which portions of the present argument are drawn. 
"Alternate Possibilities and Moral Responsibilit)," this JOLTRN.AL,LX\., 23 (Dec. 
4, 1969): 829-833. 

555 
FREEDOM AND DETERMINISM 
circumstances an agent may still be held responsible.) And if our 
investigation fails to uncover any evidence of such local fatalism, 
this also terminates the inquiry. We consider the matter settled: the 
agent was responsible after all; "he could have done otherwise." 
Proving a negative existential is not generally regarded as a prob- 
lem here. We can typically count on the agent himself to draw our 
attention to any evidence of local fatalism he is aware of (for if he 
can show that "his hands were tied" this will tend to exculpate 
him), so his failures to come forward with any such evidence is 
taken to be a reliable (but not foolproof) sign that the case is closed. 
The first point I wish to make is that if the friends of CDO look 
to everyday practice for evidence for the contention that ordznary 
people "agree that a necessary condition for holding an agent re- 
sponsible for an act is believing that the agent could haue refrained 
from performing that act," they in fact will find no such support. 
When the act in question is up for praise, people manifestly ignore 
the question and would seem bizarre if they didn't. And when as- 
sessing an act for blame, although people do indeed ask "Could he 
have done otherwise?", they show no interest in pursuing that 
question beyond the point where they have satisfied their curiosity 
about the existence or absence of local fatalism-a 
phenomenon 
that is entirely neutral between determinism or indeterminism. For 
instance, people never withhold judgment about responsibility 
until after they have consulted physicists (or metaphysicians or 
neuroscientists) for their opinions about the ultimate status-de- 
terministic or indeterministic-of 
the neural or mental events that 
governed the agent's behavior. And so far as I know, no defense at- 
torney has ever gone into court to mount a defense based on an ef- 
fort to establish, by expert testimony, that the accused was deter- 
mined to make the decision that led to the dreadful act, and hence 
could not have done otherwise, and hence ("obviously") is not to 
be held responsible for it. 
So the CDO principle is not something "everybody knows" even 
if most philosophers agree on it. The principle requires supporting 
argument. My second point is that any such supporting argument 
must challenge an abundance of utterly familiar evidence suggest- 
ing that often, when we seem to be interested in the question of 
whether the agent could have done otherwise, it is because we wish 
to draw the opposite conclusion about responsibility from that 
which the philosophical tradition endorses. 
"Here I stand," Luther said. "I can do no other." Luther claimed 
that he could do no other, that his conscience made it zmposszble 
for him to recant. He might, of course, have been wrong, or have 
been deliberately overstating the truth, but even if he was-perhaps 

556 
THE JOllRNAL OF PHILOSOPHk 
especially if he was-his 
declaration is testimony to the fact that we 
simply do not exempt someone from blame or praise for an act be- 
cause we think he could do no other. Whatever Luther was doing, 
he was not trying to duck responsibility. 
There are cases where the claim "I can do no other" is an avowal 
of frailty: suppose what I ought to do is get on the plane and fly to 
safety, but I stand rooted on the ground and confess I can do no 
other-because 
of my irrational and debilitating fear of flying. In 
such a case I can do no other, I claim, because my rational control 
faculty is impaired. This is indeed an excusing condition. But in 
other cases, like Luther's, when I say I cannot do otherwise I mean 
that I cannot because I see so clearly what the situation is and be- 
cause my rational control faculty is not impaired. It is too obvious 
what to do; reason dictates it; I would have to be mad to do other- 
wise, and, since I happen not to be mad, I cannot do otherwise. 
I hope it is true-and 
think it very likely is true-that 
it would 
be impossible to induce me to torture an innocent person by offer- 
ing me a thousand dollars. "Ah1'-comes the objection-"but 
what 
if some evil space pirates were holding the whole world ransom, 
and promised not to destroy the world if only you would torture an 
innocent person? Would that be something you would find impos- 
sible to do?" Probably not, but so what? That is a vastly different 
case. If what one is interested in is whether under the speczfzed czr- 
cumstances I could have done otherwise, then the other case men- 
tioned is utterly irrelevant. I claimed it would not be possible to 
induce me to torture someone for a thousand dollars. Those who 
hold the CDO principle dear are always insisting that we should 
look at whether one could have done otherwise in exactly the same 
circumstances. I claim something stronger; I claim that I could not 
do otherwise even in any roughly similar case. I would neuer agree 
to torture an innocent person for a thousand dollars. It would 
make no difference, I claim, what tone of voice the briber used, or 
whether I was tired and hungry, or whether the proposed victim 
was well illuminated or partially concealed in shadow. I am, I 
hope, immune to all such offers. 
Now why would anyone's intuitions suggest that, if I am right, 
then if and when I ever have occasion to refuse such an offer, my 
refusal would not count as a responsible act? Perhaps this is what 
some people think: they think that if I were right when I claimed I 
could not do otherwise in such cases, I would be some sort of zom- 
bie, "programmed" always to refuse thousand-dollar bribes. A gen- 
uinely free agent, they think, must be more volatile somehow. If I 
am to be able to listen to reason, if I am to be flexible in the right 
way, they think, I mustn't be too dogmatic. Even in the most pre- 

557 
FREEDOM AND DETERMINISM 
posterous cases, then, I must be able to see that "there are two sides 
to every question." I must be able to pause, and weigh up the pros 
and cons of this suggested bit of lucrative torture. But the only way 
I could be constituted so that I can always "see both sidesH-no 
matter how preposterous one side is-is 
by being constituted so 
that i n  any particular case " I  could have done otherwise." 
That would be fallacious reasoning. Seeing both sides of the 
question does not require that one not be overwhelmingly per- 
suaded, in the end, by one side. The flexibility we want a responsi- 
ble agent to have is the flexibility to recognize the one-in-a-zillion 
case in which, thanks to that thousand dollars, not otherwise ob- 
tainable, the world can be saved (or whatever). But the general ca- 
pacity to respond flexibly in such cases does not at all require that 
one could have done otherwise in the particular case, or in any par- 
ticular case, but only that under some variations in the circumstan- 
ces-the 
variations that matter-one 
would do otherwise. Philo- 
sophers have often noted, uneasily, that the difficult moral problem 
cases, the decisions that "might go either way", are not the only, or 
even the most frequent, sorts of decisions for which we hold people 
responsible. They have seldom taken the hint to heart, however, 
and asked whether the CDO principle was simply wrong. 
If our responsibility really did hinge, as this major philosophical 
tradition insists, on the question of whether we ever could do other- 
wise than we in fact do in exactly those circumstances, we would be 
faced with a most peculiar problem of ignorance: it would be un- 
likely in the extreme, given what now seems to be the case in phys- 
ics, that anyone would ever know whether anyone has ever been re- 
sponsible. For today's orthodoxy is that indeterminism reigns at 
the subatomic level of quantum mechanics; so, in the absence of 
any general and accepted argument for universal determinism, it is 
possible for all we know that our decisions and actions truly are 
the magnified, macroscopic effects of quantum-level indetermina- 
cies occurring in our brains. But it is also possible for all we know 
that, even though indeterminism reigns in our brains at the sub- 
atomic quantum-mechanical level, our macroscopic decisions and 
acts are all themselves determined; the quantum effects could just 
as well be self-canceling, not amplified (as if by organic Geiger 
counters in the neurons). And it is extremely unlikely, given the 
complexity of the brain at even the molecular level (a complexity 
for which the word 'astronomical' is a vast understatement), that 
we could ever develop good evidence that any particular act was 
such a large-scale effect of a critical subatomic indeterminacy. So if 
someone's responsibility for an act did hinge on whether, at the 
moment of decision, that decision was (already) determined by a 

558 
THE JOL'RNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
prior state of the world, then barring a triumphant return of uni- 
versal determinism in microphysics (which would rule out all re- 
sponsibility on this view), the odds are very heavy that we will 
never have any reason to believe of any particular act that it was or 
was not responsible. The critical difference would be utterly inscru- 
table from every macroscopic vantage point and practically inscru- 
table from the most sophisticated microphysical vantage point 
imaginable. 
We have already seen that ordinary people, when interested in as- 
signing responsibility, do not in fact pursue inquiries into whether 
their fellows could have done otherwise. Now we see a reason why 
they would be unwise to try: the sheer impossibility of conducting 
any meaningful investigation into the question-except 
in cases 
where macroscopic local fatalism is discovered. What then can 
people think they are doing when they ask the CDO question in 
particular cases? Are they really asking the philosophers' meta-
physical question about whether the agent was determined to do 
what he did, but just giving u p  as soon as the investigation gets 
difficult -and the prospects get dim of striking a lucky negative 
answer (with the discovery of some local fatalism)? No, for there is 
a better question they can have been asking all along, a question 
that stops for principled reasons with the conclusion that local fa- 
talism is ruled out (or in). It is better for two reasons: it is usually 
empirically answerable, and its answer matters. For not only is the 
traditional metaphysical question unanswerable; its answer, even if 
you knew it, would be useless. 
What good would it do to know, about a particular agent, that 
on some occasion (or on every occasion) he could have done other- 
wise than he did? Or that he could not have done otherwise than he 
did? Let us take the latter case first. Suppose you knew (because 
God told you, presumably) that when Jones pulled the trigger and 
murdered his wife at time t, he could not have done otherwise. 
That is, given Jones's microstate at t and the complete microstate 
of Jones's environment (including the gravitational effects of dis- 
tant stars, etc.) at t, no other Jones-trajectory was possible than the 
trajectory he took. If Jones were ever put back into exactly that 
state again, in exactly that circumstance, he would pull the trigger 
again-and 
if he were put in that state a million times, he would 
pull the trigger a million times. 
Now if you learned this, would you have learned anything im- 
portant about Jones? Would you have learned anything about his 
character, for instance, or his likely behavior on merely similar oc- 
casions? No. Although people are physical objects which, like 

559 
FREEDOM AND DETERMINISM 
atoms or ball bearings or bridges, obey the laws of physics, they are 
not only more complicated than anything else we know in the uni- 
verse; they are also designed to be so sensitive to the passing show 
that they never can be in the same microstate twice. One doesn't 
even have to descend to the atomic level to establish this. People 
learn, and remember, and get bored, and shift their attention, and 
change their interests so incessantly, that it is as good as infinitely 
unlikely that any person is ever in the same (gross) psychological 
or cognztzue state on two occasions. And this would be true even if 
we engineered the surrounding environment to be "utterly the 
same" on different occasions-if 
only because the second time 
around the agent would no doubt think something that went un- 
thought the first time, like "Oh my, this all seems so utterly famil- 
iar; now what did I do last time?" 
Learning (from God, again) that a particular agent was not thus 
determined to act would be learning something equally idle, from 
the point of view of character assessment or planning for the fu- 
ture. A genuinely undetermined agent is no more flexible, versatile, 
sensitive to nuances, or reformable than a deterministic near-dupli- 
cate would be.4 
So if anyone at all is interested in the question of whether one 
could have done otherwise in exactly the same circumstances (and 
internal state) this will have to be a particularly pure metaphysical 
curiosity-that 
is to say, a curiosity so pure as to be utterly lacking 
in any ulterior motive, since the answer could not conceivably 
make any noticeable difference to the way the world went. 
If it is unlikely that it matters whether a person could have done 
otherwise-when 
we look microscopically closely at the causation 
involved-what 
is the other question that we are (and should be) 
interested in when we ask "But could he have done otherwise?"? 
Consider a similar question that might arise about a robot, des- 
tined (by hypothesis) to live its entire life as a deterministic ma- 
chine on a deterministic planet. Even though this robot is, by 
hypothesis, completely deterministic, it can be controlled by "heu- 
ristic" programs that invoke "random" selection-of 
strategies, pol- 
icies, weights, or whatever-at 
various points. All it needs is a 
pseudo-random number generator, either a preselected list or table 
of pseudo-random numbers to consult deterministically when the 
occasion demands or an algorithm that generates a pseudo-random 
sequence of digits. Either way it can have a sort of bingo-parlor 
machine for providing it with a patternless and arbitrary series of 
digits on which to pivot some of its activities. 
4 ~ h i sis shown in "Designing the Perfect Deliberator," in Elbow Room, op. czt. 

560 
THE JOL'RKAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
Whatever this robot does, it could not have done otherwise, if we 
mean that in the strict and metaphysical sense of those words that 
philosophers have concentrated on. Suppose then that one fine 
Martian day it makes a regrettable mistake: it concocts and executes 
some scheme that destroys something valuable-another 
robot, 
perhaps. I am not supposing, for the moment, that it can regret 
anything, but just that its designers, back on Earth, regret what it 
has done and find themselves wondering a wonder that might nat- 
urally be expressed: Could it have done otherwise? Let us suppose 
that they first satisfy themselves that no obvious local fatalism 
(locked room, dead battery) has afflicted their robot. But still they 
press their question: Could it have done otherwise? They know it is 
a deterministic system, of course; so they know better than to ask 
the metaphysical question. Their question concerns the design of 
the robot; for in the wake of this regrettable event they may wish to 
redesign it slightly, to make this sort of event less likely in the fu- 
t ~ r e . ~
What they want to know, of course, is what information the 
robot was relying on, what reasoning or planning it did, and 
whether it did "enough" of the right sort of reasoning or planning. 
Of course in one sense of 'enough' they know the robot did not 
do enough of the right sort of reasoning; if it had, it would have 
done the right thing. But it may be that the robot's design in this 
case could not really be improved. For it may be that it was making 
optimal use of optimally designed heuristic procedures-but 
this 
time, unluckily, the heuristic chances it took didn't pay off. Put the 
robot in a similar situation in the future, and, thanks to no more 
than the fact that its pseudo-random number generator is in a dif- 
ferent state, it will do something different; in fact it will usually do 
the right thing. It is tempting to add: it could have done the right 
thing on this occasion-meaning 
by this that it was well enough 
designed, at the time, to have done the right thing (its "character" 
is not impugned); its failure depended on nothing but the fact that 
something undesigned (and unanticipatable) happened to inter- 
vene in the process in a way that made an unfortunate difference. 
A heuristic program is not guaranteed to yield the "right" or 
sought-after result. Some heuristic programs are better than others; 
when one fails, it may be possible to diagnose the failure as assign- 
able to some characteristic weakness in its design, but even the best 
are not foolproof, and when they fail, as they sometimes must, 
'"IVe are scarcely ever interested in the perf:rmance 
of a communication-engi- 
neering machine for a single input. T o  function adequately it must give a satisfac- 
tory performance for a whole class of inputs, and this means a statisticall) satisfac- 
tory performance for the class of inputs which it is statistically expected to receive." 
Norbert IViener, Cybernetics (Cambridge, Mass: Technology Press; New York: 
b'iley, 1948),p. 55. 

FREEDOM AND DETERMIKISM 
561 
there may be no reason at all for the failure; as Cole Porter would 
say, it was just one of those things. 
Such failures are not the only cases of failures that will "count" 
for the designers as cases where the system "could have done other- 
wise." If they discover that the robot's failure, on this occasion, was 
due to a "freak" bit of dust that somehow drifted into a place 
where it could disrupt the system, they may decide that this was 
such an unlikely event that there is no call to redesign the system to 
guard against its re~urrence.~ 
They will note that, in the micropar- 
ticular case (as always) their robot could not have done otherwise; 
moreover, if (by remotest possibility) it ever found itself in exactly 
the same circumstances again, it would fail again. But the de- 
signers will realize that they have no rational interest in doing any- 
thing to improve the design of the robot. It failed on the occasion, 
but its design is nevertheless above reproach. There is a difference 
between being optimally designed and being infallible. 
Consider yet another sort of case. The robot has a ray gun that it 
fires with 99.9%accuracy. That is to say, sometimes, over long dis- 
tances, it fails to hit the target it was aiming at. Whenever it misses, 
the engineers want to know something about the miss: was it due 
to some systematic error in the controls, some foible or flaw that 
will keep coming up, or was it just one of those things-one 
of 
those "acts of God" in which, in spite of an irreproachable execu- 
tion of an optimally designed aiming routine, the thing just nar-
rowly missed? There will always be such cases; the goal is to keep 
them to a minimum-consistent 
with cost-effectiveness, of course. 
Beyond a certain point it isn't worth caring about errors. W. V. 
Quine notes that engineers have a concept of more than passing 
philosophical interest: the concept of "don't-caresn-the 
cases one 
is rational to ignore.' When they are satisfied that a particular miss 
was a don't-care, they may shrug and say: "Well, it could have been 
a hit." 
What concerns the engineers when they encounter misperform- 
ance in their robot is whether the misperformance is a telling one: 
does it reveal something about a pattern of systematic weak- 
ness, likely to recur, or an inappropriate and inauspicious linking 
between sorts of circumstances and sorts of reactions? Is this sort of 
thing apt to happen again, or was it due to the coincidental con- 
vergence of fundamentally independent factors, highly unlikely to 
6Strictly speaking, the recurrence of an event of thzs general type; there is no need 
to guard against the recurrence of the particular event (that is logically impossible) 
or against the recurrence of an event of exactly the same type (that is nornologically 
impossible). 
Word and Object (Cambridge. Mass.: MIT Press. 1960). pp. 182. 259. 

562 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
recur? So long as their robot is not misperforming but rather mak- 
ing the "right" decisions, the point in asking whether it could have 
done otherwise is to satisfy themselves that the felicitous behavior 
was not a fluke or mere coincidence but rather the outcome of good 
design. They hope that their robot, like Luther, will be imperturb- 
able in its mission. 
T o  get evidence about this they ignore the micro-details, which 
will never be the same again in any case, and just average over 
them, analyzing the robot into a finite array of macroscopically de- 
fined states, organized in such a way that there are links between 
the various degrees of freedom of the system. The question they can 
then ask is this: Are the links the right links for the task? 
This rationale for ignoring micro-determinism (wherever it may 
"in principle" exist) and squinting just enough to blur such fine 
distinctions into probabilistically related statm and regions that 
can be treated as homogeneous is clear, secure, and unproblematic 
in science, particularly in engineering and biology. That does not 
mean, of course, that this is also just the right way to think of peo- 
ple, when we are wondering whether they have acted responsibly. 
But there is a lot to be said for it. 
Why do we ask "Could he have done otherwise?"? We ask it be- 
cause something has happened that we wish to interpret. An act 
has been performed, and we wish to understand how the act came 
about, why it came about, and what meaning we should attach to 
it. That is, we want to know what conclusions to draw from it 
about the future. Does it tell us anything about the agent's charac- 
ter, for instance? Does it suggest a criticism of the agent that might, 
if presented properly, lead the agent to improve his ways in some 
regard? Can we learn from this incident that this is or is not an 
agent who can be trusted to behave similarly on similar occasions 
in the future? If one held his character constant, but changed the 
circumstances in minor-even 
major-ways, 
would he almost al- 
ways do the same lamentable sort of thing? Was what we observed a 
fluke, or was it a manifestation of a robust trend-a 
trend that per- 
sists, or is constant, over an interestingly wide variety of condition^?^ 
When the agent in question is oneself, this rationale is even more 
plainly visible. Suppose I find I have done something dreadful. 
Who cares whether, in exactly the circumstances and state of mind 
I found myself, I could have done something else? I didn't do some- 
'M'C are interested in trends and flukes in both directions (praiseworthy and re- 
gretted); if we had evidence that Luther was just kidding himself, that his appar- 
ently staunch stand was a sort of comic-opera coincidence, our sense of his moral 
strength would be severely diminished. "He's not so stalwart," we might say. "He 
could well have done otherwise." 

563 
FREEDOM AND DETERMIKISM 
thing else, and it's too late to undo what I did. But when I go to in- 
terpret what I did, what do I learn about myself? Ought I to prac- 
tice the sort of maneuver I botched, in hopes of making it more 
reliable, less vulnerable to perturbation, or would that be wasted ef- 
fort? Would it be a good thing, so far as I can tell, for me to try to 
adjust my habits of thought in such sorts of cases in the future? 
Knowing that I will always be somewhat at the mercy of the con- 
siderations that merely happen to occur to me as time rushes on, 
knowing that I cannot entirely control this process of deliberation, 
I may take steps to bias the likelihood of certain sorts of considera- 
tions routinely "coming to mind" in certain critical situations. For 
instance, I might try to cultivate the habit of counting to 10 in my 
mind before saying anything at all about Ronald Reagan, having 
learned that the deliberation time thus gained pays off handsomely 
in cutting down regrettable outbursts of intemperate commentary. 
Or I might decide that, no matter how engrossed in conversation I 
am, I must learn to ask myself how many glasses of wine I have 
had every time I see someone hovering hospitably near my glass 
with a bottle. This time I made a fool of myself; if the situation 
had been quite different, I certainly would have done otherwise; if 
the situation had been virtually the same, I might have done other- 
wise and I might not. The main thing is to see to it that I will jolly 
well do otherwise in (merely) similar situations in the future. 
That, certainly, is the healthy attitude to take toward the regret- 
table parts of one's recent past. It is the self-applied version of the 
engineers' attitude toward the persisting weaknesses in the design 
of the robot. Of course, if I would rather find excuses than improve 
myself, I may dwell on the fact that I don't haue to "take" respon- 
sibility for my action, since I can always imagine a more fine-
grained standpoint from which my predicament looms larger than 
I do. (If you make yourself really small, you can externalize virtu- 
ally everything.) But we wisely discourage this refuge in finer- 
grained visions of our embedding in the world, for much the same 
reason it is shunned by the engineers: what we might learn from 
such an investigation is never of any consequence. It simply does 
not matter whether one could have done otherwise. 
It does not matter for the robot, someone may retort, because a 
robot could not deserue punishment or blame for its moments of 
malfeasance. For us it matters because we are candidates for blame 
and punishment, not mere redesign. You can't blame someone for 
something he did, if he could not have done otherwise. This, how- 
ever, is just a reassertion of the CDO principle, not a new consider- 
ation, and I am denying that principle from the outset. Why indeed 
shouldn't you blame someone for doing something he could not 

564 
THE JOL'RNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
have refrained from doing? After all, if he did it, what difference 
does it make that he was determined to do it? 
"The difference is that if he was determined to do it, then he had 
no chance not to do it." But this is simply a non sequitur, unless 
one espouses an extremely superstitious view of what a chance is. 
Compare the following two lotteries for fairness. In Lottery A, after 
all the tickets are sold, their stubs are placed in a suitable mixer, 
and, after suitable mixing (involving some genuinely-quantum- 
mechanically-random 
mixing if you like), the winning ticket is 
blindly drawn. In Lottery B, this mixing and drawing takes place 
before the tickets are sold, but otherwise the lotteries are conducted 
the same. Many people think the second lottery is unfair. It is un- 
fair, they think, because the winning ticket is determined before 
people even buy their tickets; one of those tickets is already the 
winner; the other tickets are so much worthless paper, and selling 
them to unsuspecting people is a sort of fraud. But in fact, of 
course, the two lotteries are equally fair: everyone has a chance of 
winning. The timing of the selection of the winner is an utterly in- 
essential feature. The reason the drawing in a lottery is typically 
postponed until after the sale of the tickets is to provide the public 
with first-hand eyewitness evidence that there have been no shenan- 
igans. No sneaky agent with inside knowledge has manipulated the 
distribution of the tickets, because the knowledge of the winning 
ticket did not (and could not) exist in any agent until after the 
tickets were sold. 
It is interesting that not all lotteries follow this practice. Pub- 
lishers' Clearinghouse and Reader's Digest mail out millions of 
envelopes each year that say in bold letters on them "YOU MAY 
ALREADY HAVE WON"-a 
million dollars or some other prize. 
Surely these expensive campaigns are based on market research that 
shows that in general people do think lotteries with pre-selected 
winners are fair so long as they are honestly conducted. But per- 
haps people go along with these lotteries uncomplainingly because 
they get their tickets for free. Would many people buy a ticket in a 
lottery in which the winning stub, sealed in a special envelope, was 
known to be deposited in a bank vault from the outset? I suspect 
that most ordinary people would be untroubled by such an arrange- 
ment, and would consider themselves to have a real opportunity to 
win. I suspect, that is, that most ordinary people are less supersti- 
tious than those philosophers (going back to Democritus and Lu- 
cretius) who have convinced themselves that, without a continual 
supply of genuinely random cruces to break u p  the fabric of causa- 
tion, there cannot be any real opportunities or chances. 
If our world is determined, then we have pseudo-random number 

565 
FREEDOM AND DETERMINISM 
generators in us, not Geiger counter randomizers. That is to say, if 
our world is determined, all our lottery tickets were drawn at once, 
eons ago, put in an envelope for us, and doled out as we needed 
them through life. "But that isn't fair!" some say, "For some peo- 
ple will have been dealt more winners than others." Indeed, on any 
particular deal, some people have more high cards than others, but 
one should remember that the luck averages out. "But if all the 
drawings take place before we are born, some people are destzned to 
get more luck than others!" But that will be true even if the draw- 
ings are held not before we are born, but periodically, on demand, 
throughout our lives. 
Once again, it makes no difference-this 
time to fairness and, 
hence, to the question of desert-whether 
an agent's decision has 
been determined for eons (via a fateful lottery ticket lodged in his 
brain's decision-box, waiting to be used), or was indeterministic- 
ally fixed by something like a quantum effect at, or just before, the 
moment of ultimate decision. 
It is open to friends of the CDO principle to attempt to provide 
other grounds for allegiance to the principle, but since at this time 
I see nothing supporting that allegiance but the habit of allegiance 
itself, I am constrained to conclude that the principle should be 
dismissed as nothing better than a long-lived philosophical illu- 
sion. I may be wrong to conclude this, of course, but under the cir- 
cumstances I cannot do otherwise. 
D INIEL C DENNETT 
Tufts University 
DENNETT ON 'COULD HAVE DONE OTHERWISE1* 
D
ANIEL DENNETT attacks what he describes as a "shared as- 
sumption" of writers on free will: 
A is responsible for having done X only if A could have refrained from 
doing X. 
If this sentence is to express a thesis that has been widely accepted, 
then 'could have' must be read as the past indicative of 'can', where 
'Abstract of a paper to be presented in an APA s)mposium on Freedom and De- 
terminism, December 30, 1984, commenting on Daniel C. Dennett, "I Could Not 
Hake Done Otherwise-So 
What?," this JOI.RNAL,
this issue, 553-565. 
0022-362X/84/8110/0565$00.50 
el984 The Journal of Philosoph), Inc. 

