5
Kinds of Things—Towards a
Bestiary of the Manifest Image
Daniel C. Dennett
Consider this chess puzzle. White to checkmate in two. It appeared
recently in the Boston Globe, and what startled me about it was that I had
thought it had been proven that you can’t checkmate with a lone knight
(and a king, of course). I was wrong; as David Misialowski (personal
correspondence) has pointed out to me, what had been proven is just that
you cannot checkmate your opponent's king when only his king and your
king and knight are on the board. The fact that the proposition you can never
checkmate with a lone knight and king is not a truth of chess is a higher-order truth
of chess. Now let’s consider chmess (I made up the term); it’s the game that
you get by allowing the king to move two spaces, not one, in any direction.
a
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
b
WHITE TO PLAY
Hint: Checkmate in 2
moves.
c
d
e
f
g
h
Figure 5.1 White to play (hint: check-
mate in two moves).

I made it up and I don’t know if anybody has ever played it. I have no idea
whether it’s worth playing. Probably it isn’t, but it doesn’t matter; it’s not
even worth our attention long enough to ﬁgure out. But a moment’s
reﬂection reveals that there are exactly as many higher-order a priori truths
of chmess as there are of chess, namely, an inﬁnity of them. And no doubt
they would be roughly as difﬁcult to discover and to prove as the higher-
order truths of chess. There are people who make a living working out the
truths of chess and certainly it’s been a big avocation for many other people.
But I doubt if anybody yet has spent more than ﬁve minutes trying to work
out the a priori truths, and the higher-order truths, of chmess.
I use this example (complete with my mistake, now corrected by
Misialowski) in a paper, ‘Higher-order truths about Chmess’ (Dennett,
2006), my own salvo against analytic metaphysics and other dubious
battles in philosophy. It is, more broadly, my advice to graduate students
in philosophy on how to avoid the trap of getting stuck in a career devoted
to an artifactual ‘problematic.’ As one of my heroes, Donald Hebb once
said, ‘If it isn’t worth doing, it isn’t worth doing well.’ I think we have to
admit that there are quite a few philosophers who do very well what they
do, executing their self-assigned tasks with cleverness, technical proﬁ-
ciency, and rigor, but engaged in an enterprise that’s just not worth doing.
So I applaud the ﬁrst chapter of Ladyman and Ross (2007), which
articulates the grounds for my conviction much better than I could ever
have done. They comment brieﬂy on my discussion (in Dennett, 2005) of
Patrick Hayes, the artiﬁcial intelligence researcher, who set out on a
project to axiomatize the naïve (or folk) physics of liquids. I’m going to
expand a bit on this point, to clarify the message we both derive from this
ingenious enterprise. The idea was that a robot who interacted with
everyday folk would need to understand folk physics—the manifest
image of liquids, solid objects, and so on—so, in classic GOFAI1 style
Hayes set out provide such a robot with the propositions it would need to
use as its core beliefs. It proved to be more challenging than he had
anticipated, and he wrote an interesting paper about the project, ‘The
Naïve Physics Manifesto’ (Hayes, 1978). In the naïve physics of liquids,
everything that strikes naïve folks as counter-intuitive is, of course, ruled
out: siphons are ‘impossible’ and so are pipettes, but you can mop up liquid
1 Good Old-Fashioned Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
KINDS OF THINGS—TOWARDS A BESTIARY
97

with a ﬂuffy towel, and pull water out of a well with a suction pump.
A robot equipped with such a store of ‘knowledge’ would be as surprised
by a siphon as most of us were when ﬁrst we saw one in action. Hayes’
project was what I would call sophisticated naïve physics, because he was
under no illusions; he knew the theory he was trying to axiomatize was
false, however useful in daily life. This was an exercise in what might be
called axiomatic anthropology: you treat what the folk say—and agree
about—as your axioms or theorems, and try to render the data set consist-
ent. And, of course, he didn’t bother rounding up any actual informants;
he ﬁgured that he knew the naïve physics of liquids as well as any normal
person did, so he used himself as his sole informant: axiomatic auto-
anthropology.2
Now compare Hayes’ project with the projects of analytic metaphysics,
which often strike me as naïve naïve auto-anthropology since the partici-
pants in this research seem to be convinced that their program actually gets
at something true, not just believed-true by a particular subclass of human
beings (Anglophone philosophers of the analytic metaphysics persuasion).
Otherwise, the programs seem identical: you gather your shared intuitions
(testing and provoking them by engaging in mutual intuition-pumping)
and then try to massage the resulting data set into a consistent ‘theory,’
based on ‘received’ principles that count, ideally, as axioms. I’ve asked a
number of analytic metaphysicians whether they can distinguish their
enterprise from naïve auto-anthropology of their clan, and have not yet
received any compelling answers.
The alternative is sophisticated naïve anthropology (both auto- and
hetero-)—the anthropology that reserves judgment about whether any
of the theorems adduced by the exercise deserves to be trusted—and this is
a feasible and frequently valuable project. In this essay I am going to
propose that this is the enterprise to which analytic metaphysicians should
turn, since it requires rather minimal adjustments to their methods and
only one major revision of their raison d’être: they must roll back their
pretensions and acknowledge that their research is best seen as a
2 Hayes’ work inspired others. See the anthology edited by Daniel Bobrow, Qualitative
Reasoning about Physical Systems (1985). Authors of one of the essays therein remark: ‘Naïve
physics is in itself an ambiguous term. Is it just bad physics? Is it psychology? Artiﬁcial
intelligence? Physics?’ (de Kleer and Brown, p. 13) The answer, I submit, is that naïve physics
is the attempt to make the physics part of our manifest image rigorous enough to support
automated deductive reasoning.
98
DANIEL C. DENNETT

preparatory reconnaissance of the terrain of the manifest image, conducted
between brackets, as it were, like the Husserlian epoché: let’s pretend for the
nonce that the natives are right, and see what falls out. Since at least a large
part of philosophy’s task, in my vision of the discipline, consists in negoti-
ating the trafﬁc back and forth between the manifest and scientiﬁc images,
it is a good idea for philosophers to analyze what they are up against in the
way of folk assumptions before launching into their theory-building and
theory-criticizing. Philosophical work on the perennially hot-button topic
of free will, for instance, certainly must be guided by an appreciation of
what non-philosophers think free will is or might be—and why it matters
so much to them.
One of the hallmarks of sophisticated naïve anthropology is its openness
to making counterintuitive discoveries. As long as you’re doing naïve
anthropology, counterintuitiveness (to the natives) counts against your
reconstruction; when you shift gears and begin asking which aspects of
the naïve ‘theory’ are true, counterintuitiveness loses its dispositive force
and even becomes, on occasion, a sign of signiﬁcant progress. In science in
general counterintuitive results are prized, after all.
One of the weaknesses of auto-anthropology is that one’s own intu-
itions are apt to be distorted by one’s theoretical predilections. Linguists
have known for a long time that they get so wrapped up in their theories
that they are no longer reliable sources of linguistic intuition. Their raw,
untutored intuitions have been sullied by too much theory, so they
recognize that they must go out and ask non-linguists for their linguistic
intuitions. Philosophers have recently begun to appreciate this point, in
the new enthusiasm for so-called experimental philosophy. It is early days
still, and some of the pioneer efforts are unimpressive, but at least philoso-
phers are getting used to the idea that they can no longer just declare
various propositions to be obviously true on the sole grounds that they
seem smashingly obvious to them. (In a similar vein Hayes might have
surprised himself about the chief tenets of folk physics if he had gone to
the trouble of interviewing a random sample of folk instead of just treating
himself as exemplary.)
So there is a project, a particular sort of sophisticated naïve anthropol-
ogy, that philosophers should seriously consider as a propadeutic inquiry
before launching into their theories of knowledge, justice, beauty, truth,
goodness, time, causation, and so on, to make sure that they actually aim
their analyses and arguments at targets that are relevant to the rest of the
KINDS OF THINGS—TOWARDS A BESTIARY
99

world, both lay concerns and scientiﬁc concerns. What they would get
from such a systematic inquiry is something like a catalogue raisonné of the
unreformed conceptual terrain that sets the problems for the theorist, the
metaphysics of the manifest image, if you like. This is where we as
philosophers have to start in our attempts to negotiate back and forth
between the latest innovations in the scientiﬁc image, and it wouldn’t hurt
to have a careful map of this folk terrain instead of just eyeballing it. (This is
the other half, one might say, of the reform that turned philosophy of
science from an armchair fantasy ﬁeld into a serious partnership with actual
science when philosophers of science decided that they really had to know
a lot of current science from the inside.) Once one thinks about our
philosophical tasks with this image in mind, one can see that a great deal
of the informal trudging around, backing and ﬁlling, counter-example-
mongering and intuition-busting that ﬁlls the pages of philosophy journals
is—at best—an attempt to organize a mutually acceptable consensus about
this territory. Maybe a Mercator of the Manifest Image will emerge from
experimental philosophy.
But that won’t be me. I am instead going to fall back on the good
old-fashioned informal methods of ordinary language philosophy—the
‘discipline’ I was ‘trained’ to do—and draw attention to some of the
unanswered questions that one might want to take seriously in sketching
the ontology of the manifest image. The only innovation in my method is
that I encourage us all to be sophisticated naïve (auto-) anthropologists,
perhaps savoring our intuitions about cases, but not endorsing them—yet.
The main goal in the rest of this paper is simply to draw attention to the
riotous assembly of candidate things that we ﬁnd in the manifest image.
Wilfrid Sellars (1963) ‘discovered’ the manifest image much the way
Columbus discovered the western hemisphere, but he, like Columbus,
was more the explorer than the systematic cartographer, and, as just noted,
our Mercator has yet to appear. But what about a Linnaeus, a systematic
taxonomist of all the things we ﬁnd in this new, if all too familiar, world?
Ontology, it seems to me, has been resolutely reductive and minimalist in
its attempts to come up with an exhaustive list of kingdoms, classes, genera
and species of things. No doubt the motivation has been the right one: to
prepare the disheveled cornucopia for scientiﬁc accounting, with every-
thing put ultimately in terms of atoms and the void, space-time points, or
(by somewhat different reductive trajectories) substances and universals,
events and properties and relations, As is well known, these procrustean
100
DANIEL C. DE NNETT

beds provide metaphysicians with no end of difﬁcult challenges, trying to
ﬁt all the candidates into one austere collection of pigeonholes or another.
Where do we put numbers, or melodies, or ideas, for instance? Do
numbers even exist, and are there different kinds of existence? Instead of
attempting any answers of my own to these oft-asked questions of system-
atic taxonomy, I am going to push, informally, in the opposite direction,
like the bestiarists of yore, recounting with as much ontological tolerance
as I can, a few of the neglected candidates for thing-hood that everyday
folks have no trouble countenancing in their casual ontologies. Metaphys-
ics as folklore studies, you might say.
Quine did some pioneering on this score in Word and Object (1960). Are
there sakes? Are there miles? He used these homely examples to loosen up
his readers for his theory-driven proposals, his quest for a ‘desert landscape’
clean-shaven by Occam’s Razor, a minimalist ontology for science (and
for everything worth talking and thinking about—he was Carnap’s stu-
dent, after all). Since his overall aim was eliminative, he no more had to
address the question of whether sakes and miles belonged to different kinds
of thing than Linnaeus had to worry about whether mermaids were
mammals and dragons were reptiles. Nor were the Oxbridge ordinary
language philosophers interested in constructing a systematic taxonomy of
the ordinary. Their informal but clever sallies did unearth some useful
examples, however, and I want to add some more for the consideration of
sophisticated naïve (auto- and hetero-) anthropologists.
Let’s consider some of Quine’s examples in a little more detail. In
addition to Paris and London are there the miles that separate them? Are
there sakes, as suggested by such familiar idioms as ‘for Pete’s sake’ and ‘for
the sake of –– ’? What are the identity conditions for sakes? How many
sakes might there be? How do they come into existence? Can one still do
something for FDR’s sake, or did it expire with him decades ago? Art for
art’s sake shows that not only living things can have sakes. Quine gave us
reasons to see the ontological candidacy of sakes as something of an
accident of ordinary language (more speciﬁcally, of English, since there
aren’t clear synonyms in all other languages), a sort of potential cognitive
illusion frozen in a few idioms, waiting to be viviﬁed by an unwary and
proﬂigate semanticist. The restriction to a few idioms (‘for the sake of ,’ ‘on
behalf of,’ and the like) which might rather gracefully be ‘fused’ into
unanalyzed prepositions does suggest, as Quine proposed, that this noun is
defective, and its putative referents need not be taken seriously from an
KI NDS OF THINGS—TOWARDS A BESTIARY
101

ontological point of view. He suggested that we dismiss all the nouns of
measure—miles, ounces, minutes, and their ilk—by the same principle, a
more demanding exercise of self-denial, since talk about gallons and
kilograms and minutes is less easily paraphrased away, and plays a much
richer role in daily life.
What about dints? Again, the noun, descended from a now extinct term
for a blow or strike, has lost its combinatorial power, almost as inert as the
board in cupboard. Not a compelling candidate—on the surface, anyway—
for thing-hood, but we shouldn’t jump to conclusions. It is noteworthy
that computer scientists in the last few decades have found the task of
knowledge representation for software agents or bots, where the demands
of automated inference put a severe strain on data structures, is often
clariﬁed and expedited by the devising of ingenious ontologies that carve
up what might be called the manifest image of their bots in novel ways.
Dints could conceivably prove to be just the things to represent when
reasoning about actions and effects of certain sorts.
Then there are cahoots and smithereens, both particularly unpromising.
These are probably just what Quine said about sakes, degenerate cases that
do not require patient elaboration. It is bad enough having graduate
students writing whole dissertations on the relationship of constitution
between the stone and the statue; we need not create a microdiscipline,
smithereen theory, to work on the sub-problem of what to say about all
the bits when the wrecking ball hits the statue.
David and Stephanie Lewis (1970) made famous the difﬁculties of either
banishing holes altogether or ﬁtting them into any of the austere schemes
favored by Quine and others. As they amusingly showed in the dialogue
between Argle and Bargle, getting through the day without holes in one’s
ontology is no easy matter. They never considered the tempting hypoth-
esis that our reliance on the concept of holes has a deep biological or
ecological source, since holes are Gibsonian affordances par excellence, put
to all manner of uses in the course of staying alive and well in a hostile
world. Ubiquitous and familiar though they are, it is surprisingly hard to
say what holes are made of, if anything, what their identity conditions are,
whether they are concrete or abstract, how to count them, and so forth. In
the end Bargle says: ‘I for one have more trust in common opinion than
I do in any philosophical reasoning whatsoever.’ To which Argle replies:
‘My theories can earn credence by their clarity and economy; and if they
disagree a little with common opinion, then common opinion may be
102
DANIEL C. DE NNETT

corrected even by a philosopher’ (Lewis and Lewis, 1970: 211–12). The
sophisticated naïve anthropologist can calmly note the impasse from a
position of neutrality and conclude (tentatively) that holes are virtually
indispensable in the ontology of the manifest image, but probably not
portable, without strikingly counterintuitive revision, to the austere scien-
tiﬁc image. But not so fast: holes may play a potent role in organizing the
patterns studied in the special sciences—consider the importance of mem-
branes and their multiple varieties of portals in cell biology, for instance—
and what about the slit that ﬁgures so prominently in quantum physics?
Not so fundamental or indispensable, no doubt, but still not easily
dismissed are the voices I discussed (Dennett, 1969) at some length at
about the same time. My project then, rather like the Lewises’ project
with holes, was to coax philosophers out of their self-imposed disjunctions
about minds—are they brains or spirits, concrete or abstract, or are they,
strictly speaking, as non-existent as witches and mermaids? I tried to do this
by showing that voices, ostensibly nowhere near as mysterious as minds
(there is no voice-throat problem to set alongside the mind-body prob-
lem, thank goodness), were just as uncategorizable, and none the worse for
that. Why are voices more robust candidates for thing-hood than sakes? In
part because synonyms or near-synonyms for ‘voice’ occur in many
languages, and the contexts in which these nouns appear are remarkably
diverse and varied. You can hear a voice, lose a voice, strain a voice, record
a voice, recognize a voice, disguise a voice, and use technology to see
through an acoustic disguise to identify the underlying voice, for instance.
What kind of thing is a voice? It can be strained, like a larynx or knee, but it
is not an organ, since it can be lost and recovered. Is it a disposition or
prowess or idiosyncratic competence or method, something like a style? In
a way, but it can also be recorded, like a sound or a melody. Maybe a voice
is the sole exemplar of an ontological kind all of its own. Maybe bass
voices, soprano voices, childish voices, raspy voices and nasal voices are all
kinds of voices but voices aren’t kinds of anything at all except the voice
kind. (There could be other such kinds, of course. In some cultures that
use bells a lot, there might be the recognizable ding of this or that bell.)
Here is an interesting question in the empirical theory of perception and
knowledge as it merges with semantics (see Jackendoff, 2002, 2007): why
is it so natural for human minds speaking many different languages to hit
upon voices as a valuable addition to their ontology? But remember: we
KI NDS OF THINGS—TOWARDS A BESTIARY
103

are bracketing for the time being the question of which elements of the
ontology of the manifest image we take ourselves to be committed to.
Haircuts (and hairdos more generally) are another variety that is
strangely resistant to pigeonholing. A haircut is not really an event or a
property or a relation or a material object (made of hair, presumably).
How long haircuts last, and just how to apply the type-token distinction to
them (think of the Beatles haircuts all around the world), are not readily
answered questions.
The wonderful world of economics provides us with further socially
constructed things, such as dollars and euros. Do dollars exist? It seems
obvious that they do, and—unlike some of our other problematic things,
they seem eminently countable, designed to be countable in fact. But we
should note, before moving on, that there has been a historical progression
in the direction of abstraction. No doubt a large source of the conﬁdence
with which we countenance the existence of dollars as things is that today’s
dollars are the descendants, in effect, of paradigmatic things, made out of
metal and having a shape and weight, like dimes and nickels and silver
dollars. These were followed by ﬁrst paper dollar bills, ﬁve-pound notes,
and their kin, and then entirely abstract dollars, by the trillions. It’s a good
thing we don’t have to make them all out of metal; they would bury the
world. We gain a tremendous efﬁciency from this transition, and all we
lose is the standard way of keeping track of individual concrete things. It
makes sense to ask whether this particular dime or silver dollar once passed
through the hands of Jacqueline Kennedy, but not whether the hundred
dollars I just sent to my PayPal account ever did.
The concept of abstract dollars is undeniably useful in our everyday
affairs, but is utility tantamount to reality? This question sits happily within
the perspective of sophisticated naïve anthropology but is out of place in
traditional metaphysics. Consider the reality of centers of gravity or mass.
Are they real or not? Some philosophers have said yes, and others no, and
both sides have used their conviction to disagree with my use of them as a
useful analogy for the soul, as the ‘center of narrative gravity’ (Dennett,
1991). Compare the concept of the center of gravity of, say, an automobile
with the concept of Dennett’s lost sock center, deﬁned as the center of the
smallest sphere that can be inscribed around all the socks I have ever lost in
my life. The former is an undeniably useful concept, and so palpably useful
that you can almost feel a center of gravity once you know what to feel for.
The toddler’s toys, called Weebles, ‘wobble but they don’t fall down’;
104
DANIEL C. DE NNETT

watching a child discover this marvelous property by exploratory manipu-
lation, it is hard to resist casting the task of ﬁnding the center of gravity
alongside the task of ﬁnding the hidden coin as different instances of the
same activity. But however perceptible or tangible a center of gravity is, it
is (one would suppose, as a metaphysician) in exactly the same basic
ontological genre as Dennett’s lost sock center, and kazillions of other
equally pointless abstractions we could invent. Must we ﬁll our world with
all that pseudo-Platonic garbage? Scientiﬁc utility, as Quine never tired of
reminding us, is as good a touchstone of reality as any, but why shouldn’t
utility within the manifest image count as well? Is there anything dangerously
relativistic in acknowledging that the two images may have their own
‘best’ ontologies, which cannot be put into graceful registration with each
other? (This suggestion is a close kin, and descendant, of Quine’s onto-
logical relativity (1969), and his claims about the indeterminacy of radical
translation, but I cannot do justice to exploring the relations in the limited
space of this essay.)
In the introduction to Brainstorms (1978), I imagined a society that
speaks a language just like English except for
one curious family of idioms. When they are tired they talk of being beset by
fatigues, of having mental fatigues, muscular fatigues, fatigues in the eyes and
fatigues of the spirit . . . When we encounter them and tell them of our science,
they want to know what fatigues are . . . what should we tell them? (pp. xix–xx)
Our task, I suggested then, and still maintain, is more a matter of diplomacy
than philosophy. It is not that there is or must be—there might be—a
univocal, all-in, metaphysical truth about what there is, and whether
fatigues can be identiﬁed as anything in that ultimate ontology, but just
better and worse ways of helping people move between different onto-
logical frameworks, appreciating at least the main complexities of the
failures of registration that are encountered. For anyone interested in
such diplomatic projects, a vigorous anthropological scouting is good
preparation.
Metaphysicians and philosophers of mathematics have devoted years of
work to the question of whether numbers exist, while taking the existence
of numerals more or less for granted, but why? Numerals, as tokens, are no
doubt unproblematic trails of ink or chalk or some other physical particu-
lar, but as types, they are more problematic. They are like words in this
regard. Words are rather like voices: they seem to be a set with no obvious
KI NDS OF THINGS—TOWARDS A BESTIARY
105

superset. Nouns and verbs are kinds of words, but what are words a kind
of? Symbols? Sounds? I have suggested that words are a kind of meme;
words are memes that can be pronounced (Dennett, 2009). They are also,
as Jackendoff (2002) puts it, ‘autonomous, semi-independent information
structures, with multiple roles in cognition.’ In other words, they are a
kind of software that runs on the brain.
And how about software? Does it exist? I have been fascinated to learn
recently that there are philosophers who are reluctant to countenance
software (and all its subspecies, from data structures and subroutines to apps
and widgets) as being among the things that truly exist. This is a descend-
ant, apparently, of a similar line of ontological skepticism or mistrust about
information in general, as something—some thing—that can be stored,
moved, processed.
Once again, the perspective I would recommend is that of the diplo-
matic anthropologist, not the metaphysician intent on limning the ultim-
ate structure of reality. The ontology of everyday life is now teeming with
items that, like fatigues, sit rather awkwardly in the world of atoms and
molecules. If we can understand how this population explosion came
about, and why it is so valuable to us as agents in the world, we can
perhaps discharge our philosophical obligations without ever answering
the ultimate ontological question. To me it looks more and more like
professional make-work, an artifact of our reasonable but ultimately op-
tional desire for systematicity rather than a deeper mystery in need of
solving.
References
Bobrow, D. (1985). Qualitative Reasoning about Physical Systems, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Dennett, D. (1969). Content and Consciousness. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
—— (1978). Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychology. Montgomery,
VT: Bradford Books.
—— (1991). Real Patterns. Journal of Philosophy, LXXXVIII: 27–51.
—— (2005). Sweet Dreams: Philosophical Obstacles to a Science of Consciousness.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (2006). Higher-order truths about chmess. Topoi, 25: 1–2.
106
DANIEL C. DE NNETT

—— (2009). The cultural evolution of words and other thinking tools. Cold
Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology, 74: 435–41 [online]
<http://ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/papers/coldspring.pdf> accessed 11 May 2012.
Hayes, P. (1978). The naïve physics manifesto. In D. Michie (ed.) Expert Systems in
the Mocroelectronic Age. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Jackendoff, R. (2002). Foundations of Language: Brain, Meaning, Grammar, Evolution.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— (2007). Language, Consciousness, Culture: Essays on Mental Structure. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ladyman, J. and Ross, D. (2007). Every Thing Must Go: Metaphysics Naturalized.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D. and Lewis, S. (1970). Holes. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 48, 2:
206–12.
Quine, W. (1960). Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (1969). Ontological Relativity and Other Essays. New York: Columbia Univer-
sity Press.
Sellars, W. (1963). Science, Perception and Reality. London: Routlege & Kegan Paul.
KI NDS OF THINGS—TOWARDS A BESTIARY
107

Scientiﬁc
Metaphysics
EDITED BY
Don Ross, James Ladyman,
and Harold Kincaid
1

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
# The several contributors 2013
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
First Edition published in 2013
Impression: 1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Data available
ISBN 978–0–19–969649–9
Printed in Great Britain by
MPG Books Group, Bodmin and King’s Lynn
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
contained in any third party website referenced in this work.

