Aching Voids and Making Voids
A review of Incomplete Nature: How Mind Emerged from Matter by Terrence W. Deacon
Review by: Daniel C. Dennett
The Quarterly Review of Biology, Vol. 88, No. 4 (December 2013), pp. 321-324
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/673760 .
Accessed: 21/06/2014 11:48
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 .
The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
Quarterly Review of Biology.
http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 185.2.32.121 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 11:48:27 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

ACHING VOIDS AND MAKING VOIDS
Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University
Medford, Massachusetts 02155-7059 USA
e-mail: daniel.dennett@tufts.edu
A review of
Incomplete Nature: How Mind Emerged
from Matter.
By Terrence W. Deacon. New York: W. W. Norton
& Company. $29.95. xvii  602 p.; ill.; index.
ISBN: 978-0-393-04991-6. 2012.
Suppose a robot exploring an apparently un-
inhabited planet sent us back photographs of
two items found on a beach: something that
looked like a clamshell and something that
looked like a clam rake—iron tines, wooden
handle. Both objects are highly improbable
from the perspective of the Second Law of
Thermodynamics. They both imply makers.
The clamshell-maker (a clam, or something
of that ilk) must have been alive, and the
clam rake-maker must have been not just
alive, but something of a thinker. We would
have found clear evidence of advanced intel-
ligence on that planet. This is all intuitively
obvious, perhaps, but can the principles be-
hind these intuitions be explicitly articulated
and marshaled into a theory that takes us all
the way from the Second Law to conscious
thought? Terrence Deacon gives it a fascinat-
ing try in this hugely ambitious book.
He is the latest—and best, in my opinion—
participant in a tug of war that has been going
on since Descartes put forward his mechanistic
theory of the body and dualistic theory of the
mind in the 17th century. The unbridgeable
gulf between Descartes’s two “substances” has
not gone away, but in many regards the gap has
been narrowed, as players on both sides of this
opponent process have discarded unsupport-
able overstatements. The simplistic mechanism
of Hobbes and La Mettrie, and Skinnerian
behaviorism, have been largely abandoned
on one side, while dualism and e´lan vital have
been largely banished from the other (except
among philosophers). But there are still potent
manifestations of unresolved conﬂict. A recent
Dilbert cartoon showed Dilbert opining: “Free
will is an illusion. Human beings are nothing
but moist robots. Just relax and let it happen.”
Are we “nothing but” moist robots? And if we
are, does that have bleak implications for our
sense of autonomy, our sense that our lives of
striving can have meaning? Alternatively, if the
computational perspective “leaves something
out,” just what is it that is missing, and is it really
important?
There are no entirely apt labels for the op-
posing sides of this gulf, since the ongoing con-
troversy turns every battle cry into a derogatory
term for the other side. Reductionism, ﬁe!
Holism, ﬁe! “Enlightenment” versus “Roman-
ticism” is pretty close, as the reader can judge
by considering what the following team players
have in common; on the Enlightenment side:
Darwin, Turing, Minsky, Dawkins, both Crick
and Edelman (in spite of their antagonisms),
Tibor Ga´nti, E. O. Wilson, Steven Weinberg,
Paul and Patricia Churchland, and both Ray-
mond Kurzweil and me (in spite of our antag-
onisms). On the Romantic side are arrayed
Romanes and Baldwin, Kropotkin, Stephen Jay
Gould, Humberto Maturana, Francisco Varela,
Stuart Kauffman, Roger Penrose, Ilya Prigo-
gine, Rupert Sheldrake, and the philosophers
The Quarterly Review of Biology, December 2013, Vol. 88, No. 4
For permission to reuse, please contact journalpermissions@press.uchicago.edu.
Volume 88, No. 4
December 2013
THE QUARTERLY REVIEW OF BIOLOGY
321
This content downloaded from 185.2.32.121 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 11:48:27 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

John Haugeland, Evan Thompson, Alicia Juar-
rero, John Searle, and—off the map, now—
Jerry Fodor and Thomas Nagel. Many have
been inoculated against the other side by the
excesses of some of the participants. Can any-
body knit up “the Cartesian wound that severed
mind from body at the birth of modern science”
(p. 544)? Deacon, defending the Romantic side,
makes some real progress largely because he
understands and appreciates both sides so well.
He is a good evolutionist and cognitive scientist
with insightful interpretations of the strengths
and triumphs of evolutionary and computa-
tional thinking, and he is trenchant in his crit-
icisms of Romantic lapses into mystery.
What is missing from the computational ap-
proach now so dominant in biology and cogni-
tive science? According to Deacon, it is, well,
missingness. Absence does not just make the
heart grow fonder; in many places at many
levels absence marks the ultimately thermody-
namic asymmetries that power evolution and
life, and reactions to absence play the founda-
tional causal role in mental phenomena. The
separation of the concept of information from
the concept of energy, which for 50 years and
more has been seen by many as a key enabling
insight, enriching Darwin’s world with Turing’s
world, was a premature divorce, Deacon argues,
and we need to return to basics, enriching the
context of our thinking by reaching back into
Schrödinger territory, looking at the funda-
mental requirements of life from the point of
view of physics. But rather than just alluding
to Schrödinger, as we all do, he digs deeper
and reconstructs the arguments about the Sec-
ond Law of Thermodynamics, drastically revis-
ing the standard (and woefully out-of-date)
ideas about causation that bedevil many—but
not all—thinkers today. Then he can address,
in outline, the phenomena in the prebiotic
world that had to churn away for eons to set the
stage for life. “Autogens” are Deacon’s hypo-
thetical nonliving but entropy-defying self-
perpetuators. They are the ancestors—or more
aptly, enabling predecessors—of the ﬁrst living
things, such as Ga´nti’s “chemotons,” the sim-
plest hypothetical living things. Living requires
work, and work requires constraining structure
(the enclosing wall of a piston is a simple ex-
ample), which in turn requires structure-
making processes, but some of these must not
be dependent on external inputs of energy,
rather must grow out of intrinsic physical prop-
erties of the chemistry of their components.
Crystal growth is a “morphodynamic” process,
independent of, and prior to, life, and so are
the processes that govern the self-assembly of
some lipid membranes and, later, microtubules
out of tubulin molecules, for instance, laying
the foundations for the “teleodynamic” pro-
cesses of life.
Deacon makes a powerful case that the prob-
lem of the origin of life is not independent of
the problems of intentionality and consciousness,
and that getting clearer about the preconditions
for the former sets the table for a similarly artic-
ulated account of the preconditions for minds,
conscious or unconscious. In both cases we need
to understand the interplay between “ortho-
grade” and “contragrade” processes; the for-
mer, such as free fall in gravity and dissolution
under the aegis of the Second Law of Thermo-
dynamics, but also the “fall” into attractor states
in a “teleodynamic” regime, do not require
work; they just happen on their own, without
further input from outside. Contragrade pro-
cesses, such as reproduction, self-repair, and
active perception and problem solving, require
work, a concept that gets a deﬁnition carefully
extended beyond its grounding in physics. Hy-
droelectric power depends on structure that
can exploit the orthograde process of water
falling downhill in order to produce or enlarge
a difference that can make a difference, an
asymmetry that permits work to be done.
Where is the absence? There has to be some
empty place for the water to go. Similarly, prob-
lem solving and theory building depends on
structures in the brain that have to be built and
maintained against dissipation. Mental fog is
an analog of heat death, and any theory of
intelligence that does not incorporate such a
dynamical perspective is going to distort the
phenomena, sweeping problems under the rug
that will later emerge to haunt theory.
For instance, Shannon’s brilliant ideal-
ization, deﬁning a communication channel
between a sender and a receiver, and put-
ting some constraints on the signals that could
be sent along the channel, nicely captured one
important aspect of information in its everyday
sense. The utility of the Shannon concept of
information, measured in bits, is borne out ev-
322
Volume 88
THE QUARTERLY REVIEW OF BIOLOGY
This content downloaded from 185.2.32.121 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 11:48:27 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

ery day in our conﬁdent calculations of band-
width and the capacity of our USB sticks. Bioin-
formatics could not exist without it. But if we
are going to have a proper account of informa-
tion that matters, which has a role to play in
getting work done at every level, we cannot just
discard the sender and receiver, two homun-
culi whose agreement on the code deﬁnes what
is to count as information for some purpose.
Something has to play the roles of these
missing signal-choosers and signal-interpreters.
Many—myself included—have insisted that
computers themselves can serve as adequate
stand-ins. Just as a vending machine can ﬁll in
for a sales clerk in many simpliﬁed environ-
ments, so a computer can ﬁll in for a general
purpose message-interpreter. But one of the
shortcomings of this computational perspec-
tive, according to Deacon, is that by divorcing
information processing from thermodynamics,
we restrict our theories to basically parasitical
systems, artifacts that depend on a user for
their energy, for their structure maintenance,
for their interpretation, and for their raison
d’eˆtre. Roboticists may reply that they have
postponed consideration of such phenomena
as energy capture, unaided reproduction, self-
repair, and open-ended self-revision, expecting
to reap the beneﬁts of this simpliﬁcation by ﬁrst
getting clear about the purely informational phe-
nomena of learning and self-guidance (a kind
of autonomy, however incomplete). Nobody
would dream of complicating the design of a
chess-playing computer by requiring it to ob-
tain its energy from sandwiches and soft drinks,
obliging it to monitor not just its time but its
depleting reserves of usable energy. Human
chess players have to control their hunger
pangs, and such emotions as humiliation, fear,
and boredom, but computers can ﬁnesse all
that with impunity, can they not? Deacon is not
alone in insisting that postponing consider-
ation of these all-too-human phenomena is a
big mistake—this is the theme song of the Ro-
mantics, you might say—but he does the best
job yet of demonstrating this in terms that do
not beg the question against the Enlighten-
ment vision. Those who think they have taken
the measure of the Romantics in their earlier
encounters should reserve judgment until they
see what Deacon does with these familiar ideas.
A residual disagreement between the En-
lightenment and the Romantics is about
whether brains compute, and one way of asking
that question is to ask if the organization that
orchestrates the activities of billions of neurons
is properly considered to be enough like a com-
puter program to underwrite computational
neuroscience (for instance). Deacon says no,
but he does acknowledge “[c]omputationlike
processes” (p. 537), and would agree, I think,
with the rejoinder that at least many of the
thinking methods we human beings have devised
and then imposed on the underlying organiza-
tion of the neurons, exploiting their labor in
effect, are enough like programs to warrant
being considered computational. Here, as else-
where, the details matter more than the gen-
eral (ideological) picture.
One of the weaknesses of Deacon’s book
ﬂows from his decision to coin a host of new
terms—absential, entention, contragrade, orthograde,
and teleodynamic—piled on top of the usual
jargon—emergence, attractor—in which to couch
his arguments. This burdens readers with the
extra task of rehearsing these not obviously
obligatory novelties. One of strengths of the
volume is that Deacon does not try to bludgeon
the skeptic with proofs of the necessity of his
position and the futility of theirs. Instead, he is
content to let the details pile up, showing how
his perspective has good things to say about
many topics the Enlightenment has not yet
been successful at addressing, such as—at one
extreme—the order in which the obligatory
features of living things must have emerged in
the prebiotic world, and—at the other ex-
treme—the way some emotions tire us out and
others ease the passage to discovery. In the
former case, starting with physics allows Dea-
con to describe “teleodynamic” systems simpler
than the simplest living systems we know today
(simpler, even, than viruses) but still primitively
self-sustaining, thanks to the synergy between
autocatalysis and self-assembly of membranes.
Most “origin-of-life” scenarios make use of parts
that are themselves products of teleodynamic
processes of living things—Frankencells, com-
posed, like Mary Shelley’s monster, of ca-
daver parts, not suitably “raw” materials.
Starting with physics also allows Deacon to
construct an imaginative scenario in which
nucleotide chains, quite robust but function-
December 2013
323
NEW BIOLOGICAL BOOKS
This content downloaded from 185.2.32.121 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 11:48:27 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

less, could gradually evolve into the repre-
senting medium for reproduction. At the
other extreme, he can offer a (very sketchy)
account of “what it feels like” in terms of the
brain’s tendency to change in the direction
of “work minimization.” He wants to arrive at
the conclusion that “[c]omputations and cy-
bernetic processes are insentient because
they are not teleodynamic in their organiza-
tion” (p. 536) and although he has given us
ways to see the differences between teleody-
namic systems and other complex systems,
this step is less persuasive—because less
worked out in detail—than the earlier steps.
Curiously, the philosopher Ned Block’s (1978)
thought experiment about the Chinese Nation
can be put to good use to locate Deacon’s
position, as I understand it. Block imagines
harnessing the entire population of China into
a gigantic hand-simulation of a massive artiﬁ-
cial intelligence program simulating a human
being’s mind, with each Chinese citizen assigned
a small computational role in implementing the
whole kaboodle. Would the resulting implemen-
tation be conscious? Block assures us it would not,
without giving any arguments for this “obvious”
verdict. Deacon would say that the reason the
Chinese efforts would not sustain conscious-
ness in the subject whose brain they were sim-
ulating is that the individuals are being turned
by the giant program into computers! If they
were given more autonomy, and the right
teleodynamic organization, there would be a
conscious super-subject composed by their ac-
tivities, and they would be just as oblivious to its
content as our neurons are to ours. “Looking
for mental information in individual neuronal
ﬁring patterns is looking at the wrong level of
scale and at the wrong kind of physical mani-
festation” (p. 516). The right organization
would involve higher-order teleodynamics, and
something like negotiation, alliance formation,
and the exploitation of “noise” in the system.
This is at least a tempting idea, worth further
exploration.
There has been a deeply regrettable contro-
versy about Deacon’s book, involving charges
of intellectual theft, not plagiarism of explicit
formulations, but plagiarism of ideas from other
recent books that deal with many of the same
issues (see http://theterrydeaconaffair.com/
and http://terrydeacon.berkeley.edu/plagiarism
-investigation-exonerates-terrence-w-deacon).
The constellation of problems Deacon addresses
has been a hotbed of theorizing and interpre-
tation for some years across several ﬁelds, in-
cluding philosophy, and with hindsight we can
judge that Deacon, a prodigious citer of earlier
work, overlooked some clearly relevant antici-
pators. I myself have been trying in recent years
to say quite a few of the things Deacon says
more clearly here. So close and yet so far! I
tried; he succeeded, a verdict I would apply to
the other contenders in equal measure. Alicia
Juarrero (1999) and Evan Thompson (2007)
have both written excellent books on neighbor-
ing and overlapping topics, but neither of them
managed to win me over to the Romantic side
(see, e.g., Dennett 2011), whereas Deacon,
with his more ambitious exercise of reconstruc-
tion, has me re-examining my fundamental
working assumptions. I encourage others who
see versions of their own pet ideas emerging
more clearly and systematically in Deacon’s ac-
count to join me in applauding.
REFERENCES
Block N. 1978. Troubles with functionalism. Pages 261–
325 in Perception and Cognition: Issues in the Founda-
tions of Psychology. Minnesota Studies in the Philoso-
phy of Science, Volume 9. Minneapolis (Minnesota):
University of Minnesota Press.
Dennett D. 2011. Shall we tango? No, but thanks for
asking. Review of Mind in Life: Biology, Phenome-
nology, and the Sciences of Mind, by E. Thompson.
Journal of Consciousness Studies 18:23–34.
Juarrero A. 1999. Dynamics in Action: Intentional Behavior
as a Complex System. Cambridge (Massachusetts):
MIT Press.
Thompson E. 2007. Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenol-
ogy, and the Sciences of Mind. Cambridge (Massachu-
setts): Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
324
Volume 88
THE QUARTERLY REVIEW OF BIOLOGY
This content downloaded from 185.2.32.121 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 11:48:27 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

