The Philosophical Review, LXXXV, 2 (April 1976). 
ARE DREAMS EXPERIENCES? 
DANIELC. DENNETT 
T H E "received view" of dreams is that they are experiences that 
occur during sleep, experiences which we can often recall upon wak- 
ing. Enlarged, the received view is that dreams consist of sensations, 
thoughts, impressions, and so forth, usually composed into coherent 
narratives or adventures, occurring somehow in awareness or con- 
sciousness, though in some other sense or way the dreamer isuncon- 
scious during the epis0de.l Received it certainly is; as Norman Mal- 
colm pointed out in his book, Dreaming, not only has it been virtually 
unchallenged, it has been explicitly endorsed by Aristotle, Des- 
cartes, Kant, Russell, Moore, and F r e ~ d . ~  
That was in 1959, and I 
think it is fair to say that in spite of Malcolm's arguments against the 
received view, it is still the received view. I want to reopen the case, 
and though my aims and presuppositions are quite antagonistic to 
Malcolm's, those familiar with his attack will see many points at 
which my discussion agrees with and gains insight and direction 
from his. I will not, though, go into a detailed extraction and defense 
of what I find valuable in Malcolm's book. My immediate purpose in 
what follows is to undermine the authority of the received view of 
dreams. My larger purpose is to introduce a view about the relation- 
ship between experience and memory that I plan to incorporate into 
a physicalistic theory of consciousness, a theory considerably differ- 
ent from the theory I have hitherto defended.3 
The most scandalous conclusion that Malcolm attempted to draw 
from his analysis of the concept of dreaming was to the effect that 
contemporary dream research by psychologists and other scientists 
was conceptually confused, misguided, ultimately simply irrelevant 
to dreaming.4 This conclusion strikes many as bizarre and imperti- 
Cf. Hilary Putnam's version of "a natural lexical definition": "a series of impres- 
sions (visual, etc.) occurring during sleep; usually appearing to the subject to be of 
people, objects, etc.; frequently remembered upon awakening" ("Dreaming and 
'Depth Grammar' " in R. J. Butler [ed.], Analytical Philosophy Oxford, 1962, p. 
224). 
Norman Malcolm, Dreaming (London, 1959), p. 4. 
In Content and Consciousness (London, 1969), and more recently in "On the 
Absence of Phenomenology" (unpublished). 
* Dreaming, p. 82. 

DANIEL C. DENNETT  
nent. If scientists can study waking experience, waking sensation, 
thought, imagination, consciousness, they can surely study the vari- 
eties of these phenomena that occur during sleep, in dreaming. This 
riposte is not, of course, a consideration that would impress Mal- 
colm, for it is simply an announcement of faith in the received view, 
the view that dreams do consist of sensations, thoughts, and so forth 
occurring during sleep, and Malcolm already knows that the view he 
is attacking inspires such faith. In any event, as everyone expected, 
Malcolm's words have had little or no discouraging effect on dream 
researchers. Their work continues apace to this day, apparently with 
a degree of fruition that makes a mockery of Malcolm's view. So let 
us suppose, contra Malcolm, that the researchers are neither the 
perpetrators nor the victims of a conceptual crime, and see where it 
leads us. Let us suppose that the dream researcher's concept of 
dreaming is not only received, but the true and unconfused concept 
of dreaming. What are the prospects, then, for the scientific elabora- 
tion of the received view? 
It is well known that periods of rapid eye movements (REMs) 
occur during sleep, and correlate well with subsequent reports of 
having dreamed. There are also characteristic EEG patterns usually 
concurrent with the REM episodes, and other physiological corre- 
lates that go to suggest that dreams do indeed occur during sleep, 
and can now be timed, confirmed to occur, and measured in all 
manner of ways. One tantalizing finding has been the apparent 
occasional content-relativity of the REMs. A person whose REMs are 
predominantly horizontal is awakened and reports a dream in which 
he watched two people throwing tomatoes at each other. A predom-
inantly vertical pattern in REMs is correlated with a dream report of 
picking basketballs off the floor and throwing them up at the bas- 
ket.5 A neurophysiological model6 of dreaming would plausibly 
construe these REMs as relatively gross and peripheral effects of a 
more determinate content-relative process deeper in the brain, 
which we might hope some day totranslate, in this sense: we might be 
able to predict from certain physiological events observed during 
sleep that the subsequent dream report would allude to, for exam- 
ple, fear, falling from a height, eating something cold, even (in the 
David Foulkes, The Psychology of Sleep (New York, 1966). 
Putnam (op. n't.) points out that a crucial lacuna in Malcolm's verificationist 
arguments against REMs as evidence confirming the received view is his failure to 
consider the confirmation relations arising from the use of developed theories and 
models (p. 226). At a number of points this paper attempts to fill that gap. 

Golden Age of neurocryptography) buying a train ticket to New 
Haven for $12.65 and then forgetting which pocket it was in. The 
prospect of ageneralired capacity to predict dream narratives in such 
detail would be vanishingly small in the absence of a highly systemat- 
ic and well-entrenched theory of representation in the brain, but let 
us suppose for the nonce that such a theory is not only in principle 
possible, but the natural culmination of the research strategies that 
are already achieving modest success in "translating" relatively gross 
and peripheral nervous-system activity.' 
Now some people claim never to dream, and many people waken 
to report that they have dreamed but cannot recall any details. The 
latter usually have a strong conviction that the dream did have 
details, though they cannot recall them, and even when we can recall 
our dreams, the memories fade very fast, and the mere act of 
expressing them seems to interfere, to speed up the memory loss. 
Here the impression of details there then but now lost is very strong 
indeed. REM researchers now confidently state that their research 
shows that everybody has dreams (and every night); some of us just 
seldom-or 
never-recall 
them. It must be unsettling to be assured 
that one has dreamed when one is positive one has not; Malcolm 
could be expected to diagnose one's reaction to such an assurance as 
the shudder of conceptual violation,* but that would be an over- 
statement. The data of common experience strongly suggest a gra- 
dation in people's capacities to recall (both dreams and other items) 
and it should be nothing worse than an odd but obvious implication 
of the received view that one could dream without recalling just as 
one can promise without recalling or be raucously drunk without 
recalling. 
Guided by common experience and the received view, then, we 
can imagine our scientists of the future isolating the memory 
mechanisms responsible for dream recall, and finding ways of chem- 
ically facilitating or inhibiting them. This is surely plausible; re- 
search into the chemistry of memory already suggests which chemi- 
cals might have these powers. We would expect that the scientists' 
claims to a theory of the dream-recall mechanism would be buttress- 
? I have in mind such work as Hubel and Wiesel's "tr'anslation" of optic nerve 
signals in the cat. I argue against optimism regarding the prospects for a generalized 
neural theory of representation in "Brain Writing and Mind Reading," in Keith 
Gunderson, ed., Language, Mind, and Knowledge, Minn. Studies in Philosophy of Science 
VII (1975), but nothing in what follows relies on the considerations I raise there. 
See Norman Malcolm, "Dreaming and skepticism," Philosophical Review, LXV 
(1956), 14-37, esp. sec. VIII. 

DANIEL C. DENNETT  
ed by systematic ties to a theory of memory mechanisms in general 
and by results, such as, perhaps, their ability to cure the dream- 
amnesiac. 
So we imagine future dream theory to posit two largely separable 
processes: first, there are neural events during sleep (more spe- 
cifically during REM periods having certain characteristic EEG cor-
relates) that systematically represent (are systematically correlatable 
with) the "events occurring in the dream," and during this process 
there is a second, memory-loading process so that these events can 
be recalled on waking (when the memory process works). Dreams 
arepresented, and simultaneously recorded in memory, and we might 
be able to interfere with or prevent the recording without disturbing 
the presentation. 
This posited process of memory-loading and playback must be 
saved from simplistic interpretation if we are to maintain any vestige 
of realism for our fantasy. It is rarely if ever the case that a dreamer 
awakens and proceeds to recite with vacant stare a fixed narrative. 
Dream recall is like recall generally. We interpret, extrapolate, re- 
vise; it sometimes seems that we "relive" the incidents and draw 
conclusions from this reliving-conclusions 
that are then expressed 
in what we actually compose then and there as our recollections. It is 
not easy to analyze what must be going on when this happens. What 
is the raw material, the evidence, the basis for these reconstructions 
we call recollections? 
Consider a fictional example. John Dean, a recently acclaimed 
virtuoso of recollection, is asked about a certain meeting in the Oval 
Office. Was Haldeman present? Consider some possible replies. 
(1) "No." 
(2) "I can't (or don't) recall his being there." 
(3) "I distinctly recall that he was not there." 
(4) "I remember noticing (remarking) at the time that he was 
not there." 
If Dean says (1) we will suspect that he is saying less than he can say, 
even if what he says is sincere and even true. At the other extreme, 
(4)seems to be a nearly complete report of the relevant part of Dean's 
memory. Answer (2), unlike all the others, reports an inability, a 
blank. Under the right circumstances, though, it carries about as 
strong a pragmatic implication of Haldeman's absence as any of the 
others (we ask: could Dean conceivably fail to recall Haldeman's 
presence if Haldeman had been there?). The stronger these prag- 
matic implications, the more disingenuous an answer like (2) will 

ARE DREAMS EXPERIENCES?  
seem. Consider: "Was Dan Rather at that meeting in the Oval 
Office?" "I can't recall his being there." The answer is seen to be 
disingenuous because we know Dean knows, and we know, the 
additional supporting premises which, in conjunction with (2), 
imply something like (I), and we expect Dean to be reasonable and 
draw this conclusion for-and 
with-us. 
Then what should Dean 
say, if asked the question about Dan Rather? Certainly not (4),unless 
the paranoia in the White House in those days knew no bounds, but 
(3)can be heard to carry a similar, if weaker, implication. We would 
not expect Dean to say this because it suggests (presumably mislead- 
ingly) that his answer is closer to beinggwen in his recollection, less a 
conclusion quickly drawn. (1) is clearly the best answer on the list 
under these circumstances. It looks like a conclusion he reaches on 
the basis of things he remembers. He remembers Nixon and 
Ehrlichman talking with him, forming a sort of triangle in the room, 
and on the basis of this he concludes that Haldeman, and Rather, 
were absent, though he took no notice of the fact at the time, or if he 
did he has forgotten it. Now suppose Dean says (1). Perhaps when he 
does this he recalls in his mind this triangle, but does not bother to 
tell us that-he 
does not close his eyes on the witness stand and do a 
little phenomenology for us; he simply offers up his conclusion as a 
dictate of memory. But he need not have gone through this con- 
scious process of reliving and reasoning at all. He may say, directly, 
"No," and if he is pressed to be more forthcoming, any reasoning he 
offers based on other things he recalls will not be expressing any 
reasoning he knows he went through before his initial negative re- 
ply. He may not even be able to explain why or how his memory 
dictates this answer to the question, and yet be sure, and deservedly 
sure, that his reply is a sincere and reliable dictate of memory. 
To summarize: sometimes we can sincerely answer a question of 
recollection with an answer like (4), but often we cannot, and some- 
times we draw a blank, but in all these cases there are conclusions we 
can draw based on what in some sense we directly remember in 
conjunction with common and proprietary knowledge, and these 
conclusions need not be drawn in a process of conscious reasoning. 
Whatever it is that is directly remembered can play its evidentiary 
role in prompting an answer of recollection without coming into 
consciousness. This suggests that when we remember some event, 
there is some limited amount of information that is there, not neces- 
sarily in consciousness but available in one way or another for 
utilization in composing our recoll~ctions and answering questions 

DANIEL C. DENNETT  
we or others raise. Perhaps what occupies this functional position is 
an immensely detailed recording of our experience to which our 
later access is normally imperfect and partial (although under hyp- 
nosis it may improve). Perhaps there is enough information in this 
position to reconstitute completely our past experience and present 
us, under special circumstances, with a vivid hallucination of reliving 
the event.9 However much is in this position in Dean, however, it is 
not possible that Dan Rather's absence is there except by implication, 
for his absence was not experienced by Dean at the time, any more 
than up to this moment you have been experiencing Rather's ab- 
sence from this room. What the posited memory-loading process 
records, then, is whatever occupies this functional position at a later 
time. The "playback" of dream recollections, like other recollec- 
tions, is presumably seldom if ever complete or uninterpreted, and 
often bits of information are utilized in making memory claims 
without being played back in consciousness at all. 
In dreaming there is also a third process that is distinguished both 
in the layman's version of the received view and in fancier theories, 
and that is the composition of what is presented and recorded. In 
various ways this process exhibits intelligence: dream stories are 
usually coherent and realistic (even surrealism has a realistic 
background), and are often gripping, complex, and of course 
loaded with symbolism. Dream composition utilizes the dreamer's 
general and particular knowledge, her recent and distant experi- 
ence, and is guided in familiar ways by her fears and desires, covert 
and overt. 
Studying these three processes will require tampering with them, 
and we can imagine that the researchers will acquire the technologi- 
cal virtuosity to be able to influence, direct, or alter the composition 
process, to stop, restart, or even transpose the presentation process 
as it occurs, to prevent or distort the recording process. We can even 
imagine that they will be able to obliterate the "veridical" dream 
memory and substitute for it an undreamed narrative. This eventual- 
ity would produce a strange result indeed. Our dreamer would wake 
up and report her dream, only to be assured by the researcher that 
she never dreamed that dream, but rather another, which they 
proceed to relate to her. Malcolm sees that the scientific elaboration 
of the received view countenances such a possibility-in-principle and 
Cf. Wilder Penfield's descriptions of electrode-induced memory hallucinations, 
in The Excitable Cortex in Conscious Man, (Springfield, Illinois, 1958). 

ARE DREAMS EXPERIENCES?  
for him this amounts to a reductio ad absurdurn of the received view,1° 
but again, this is an overreaction to an admittedly strange cir- 
cumstance. Given the state of the art of dream research today, were 
someone to contradict my clear recollection of what I had just 
dreamed, my utter skepticism would be warranted, but the science- 
fictional situation envisaged would be quite different. Not only 
would the researchers have proved their powers by correctly pre- 
dicting dream recollections on numerous occasions, but they would 
have a theory that explained their successes. And we need not 
suppose the dream they related to the dreamer would be entirely 
alien to her ears, even though she had no recollection of it (and in 
fact a competing recollection). Suppose it recounted an adventure 
with some secretly loved acquaintance of hers, a person unknown to 
the researchers. The stone wall of skepticism would begin to crum- 
ble. 
The story told so far does not, I take it, exhibit the conceptual 
chaos Malcolm imagines; strange as it is, I do not think it would 
evoke in the layman, our custodian of ordinary concepts, the nausea 
of incomprehension. As a premise for a science-fiction novel it 
would be almost pedestrian in its lack of conceptual horizon- 
bending. 
But perhaps this is not at all the way the theory of dreaming will 
develop. Malcolm notes in passing that it has been suggested by 
some researchers that dreams may occur during the moments of 
waking, not during the prior REM periods. Why would anyone 
conjecture this? Perhaps you have had a dream leading logically and 
coherently up to a climax in which you are shot, whereupon you 
wake up and are told that a truck has just backfired outside your 
open window. Or you are fleeing someone in a building, you climb 
out a window, walk along the ledge, then fall-and 
wake up on the 
floor having fallen out of bed. In a recent dream of mine I searched 
long and far for a neighbor's goat; when at last I found her she 
bleated baa-a-a-and 
I awoke to find her bleat merging perfectly 
with the buzz of an electric alarm clock I had not used or heard for 
months. Many people, I find, have anecdotes like this to relate, but 
the scientific literature disparages them, and I can find only one 
remotely well-documented case from an experiment: different 
stimuli were being used to waken dreamers, and one subject was 
wakened by dripping cold water on his back. He related a dream in 
"Dreaming and Skepticism," sec. VIII, esp. p. 30. 

DANIEL C. DENNETT  
which he was singing in an opera. Suddenly he heard and saw that the 
soprano had been struck by water falling from above; he ran to her 
and as he bent over her, felt water dripping on his back.ll 
What are we to make of these reports? The elaboration of the 
received view we have just sketched can deal with them, but at a high 
cost: precognition. If the terminal events in these dreams are 
stronglyprepared for by the narrative, if they do not consist of radi- 
cally juxtaposed turns in the narrative (for example, the goat turns 
into a telephone and starts ringing), then the composition process 
must have been directed by something having "knowledge" of the 
future. That is too high a price for most of us to pay, no doubt. 
Perhaps all these anecdotes succumb to a mixture of reasonable 
skepticism, statistics (coincidences do happen, and are to be "ex- 
pected" once in a blue moon), the discovery of subtle influences from 
the environment, and various other deflating redescriptions. But if 
all else failed we could devise any number of variant dream theories 
that accommodated these "miracles" in less than miraculous ways. 
Perhaps, to echo the earlier conjecture, dreams are composed and 
presented veryfast in the interval between bang, bump, or buzz and 
full consciousness, with some short delay system postponing the full 
"perception" of the noise in the dream until the presentation of the 
narrative is ready for it. Or perhaps in that short interval dreams are 
composed, presented, and recorded backwards and then remem- 
bered front to back. Or perhaps there is a "library" in the brain of 
undreamed dreams with various indexed endings, and the bang or 
bump or buzz has the effect of retrieving an appropriate dream and 
inserting it, cassette-like, in the memory mechanism. 
None of these theories can be viewed as a mere variation or rival 
elaboration of the received view. If one of them is true, then the 
received view is false. And since these rival theories, including the 
theory inspired by the received view, are all empirical, subject to 
confirmation and refutation, and since the rival theories even have 
some (admittedly anecdotal) evidence in their favor, we are con- 
strained to admit that the received view might simply turn out to be 
false: dreams, it might turn out, are not what we took them to 
be-or 
perhaps we would say that it turns out that there are not 
dreams after all, only dream "recollections" produced in the manner 
l1 William Dement and E. A. Wolpert. h he Relation of Eye Movements, Bodily 
Motility and External Stimuli to Dream Content," Journal of Experimental Psychology, 
55 (1958), pp. 543-553. 

-- 
ARE DREAMS EXPERIENCES?  
described in our confirmed theory, whichever it is. Malcolm sees that 
all this is implied by the received view and takes it to be yet another 
reductio ad absurdurn of it: any view that could permit the discovery 
that "we are always only under the illusion of having had a dream" is 
"~enseless."~~
But again, Malcolm's response to this implication is too 
drastic. The claim that we had been fooled for millennia into believ- 
ing in dreams would be hard to swallow, but then we would not have 
to swallow it unless it had the backing of a strongly confirmed 
scientific theory, and then this claim would put no greater strain on 
our credulity than we have already endured from the claims of 
Copernicus, Einstein, and others. It would be rather like learning 
that dream-recall was like d4b vu-it 
only seemed that you had 
experienced it before-and 
once you believed that, it would no 
longer even seem (as strongly) that you were recalling. The experi- 
ence of "dream recall" would change for us.13 
My attack on the received view is not, however, a straightforward 
empirical attack. I do not wish to aver that anecdotal evidence about 
dream anticipation disproves the received view, but I do want to 
consider in more detail what the issues would be were a rival to the 
received view to gain support. I hope to show that the received view 
is more vulnerable to empirical disconfirmation than its status as the 
received view would lead us to expect. Of the rival theories, the 
cassette-library theory runs most strongly against our pretheoretical 
convictions, for on the other two there still is some vestige of the 
presumed presentation process: it is just much faster than we had 
expected, or happens backwards. On the cassette view, our "pre- 
cognitive" dreams are never dreamed at all, but just spuriously 
"recalled" on waking. If our memory mechanisms were empty until 
the moment of waking, and then received a whole precomposed 
dream narrative in one lump, the idea that precognitive dreams are 
experienced episodes during sleep would have to go by the board. 
Suppose we generalize the cassette theory to cover all dreams: all 
dream narratives are composed directly into memory banks; which, 
if any, of these is available to waking recollection depends on various 
factors-precedence 
of composition, topicality of waking stimulus, 
l2 "Dreaming and Skepticism," p. 3 1. 
l3 Cf. Putnam,op. cit., p. 227. The nai'vesubject ofdijh nusays, "I vaguely remember 
experiencing all this before"; the sophisticated subject is not even tempted to say this, 
but says, perhaps, "Hm, I'm having ad@ vu experience right now." The experience 
has changed. 

DANIEL C. DENNETT  
degree of "repression", and so forth. On this view, the process of 
presentation has vanished, and although the dream cassettes would 
have to be filled at some time by a composition process, that process 
might well occur during our waking hours, and spread over months 
(it takes a long time to write a good story). The composition might 
even occur aeons before our birth; we might have an innate library of 
undreamed dream cassettes ready for appropriate insertion in the 
playback mechanism. Stranger things have been claimed. Even on 
the received view the composition process is an unconscious or 
subconscious process, of which we normally have no more experience 
than of the processes regulating our metabolism; otherwise dreams 
could not be suspenseful. (Isay "normally" for there does seem to be 
the phenomenon of self-conscious dreaming, where we tinker with a 
dream, run it by several times, attempt to resume it where it left off. 
Here the theatrical metaphor that enlivens the received view seems 
particularly apt. After tinkering like the playwright, we must sit 
back, get ourselves back into the audience mood, suspend disbelief, 
and re-enter the play. Some researchers call these occasions lucid 
dream. But usually we are not privy to the composition process at all, 
and so have no inkling about when it might occur.) Research might 
give us good grounds for believing that dream narratives that were 
composed onto cassettes in the morning decayed faster than cas- 
settes composed in the afternoon, or during meals. 
A more likely finding of the cassette-theorist would be that the 
composition process occurs during sleep, and more particularly, 
during periods of rapid eye movements, with characteristic EEG 
patterns. One might even be able to "translate" the composition pro- 
cess-that 
is, predict dream recollections from data about the com- 
position process. This theory looks suspiciously like the elaboration 
of the received theory, except for lacking the presentation process. 
Cassette narratives, we are told, are composed in narrative order, 
and long narratives take longer to compose, and the decay time for 
cassettes in storage is usually quite short; normally the dream one 
"recalls" on waking was composed just minutes earlier, a fact at- 
tested to by the occasional cases of content-relativity in one of the by- 
products of cassette composition: rapid eye movements. On this 
theory dream memories are produced just the way the received 
theory says they are, except for one crucial thing: the process o f .  
dream-memory production is entirely unconscious, involves no 
awareness or experiencing at all. Even "lucid dreams" can be ac- 
commodated easily on this hypothesis, as follows: although the com- 

ARE DREAMS EXPERIENCES?  
position and recording processes are entirely unconscious, on occa- 
sion the composition process inserts traces of itself into the record- 
ing via the literary conceit of a dream within a dream. 
Now we have a challenge to the received view worth reckoning 
with. It apparently accounts for all the data of the REM researchers 
as well as the received view does, so there is no reason for sober 
investigators not to adopt the cassette theory forthwith if it has any 
advantages over the received view. And it seems that it does: it has a 
simple explanation of precognitive dreams (if there are any) and it 
posits one less process by eliminating a presentation process whose 
point begins to be lost. 
But what greater point could a process have? In its presence we 
have experience; in its absence we have none. As Thomas Nagel 
would put it, the central issue between these two theories appears to 
be whether or not it is like anything to dream.14 On the cassette 
theory it is not like anything to dream, although it is like somethingto 
have dreamed. On the cassette theory, dreams are not experiences we 
have during sleep; where we had thought there were dreams, there 
is only an unconscious composition process and an equally uncon- 
scious memory-loading process. 
A few years ago there was a flurry of experimentation in 
learning-while-you-sleep. Tape recordings of textbooks were 
played in the sleeper's room, and tests were run to see if there were 
any subsequent signs of learning. As I recall, the results were nega- 
tive, but some people thought the results were positive. If you had 
asked one of them what it was like to learn in one's sleep, the reply 
would presumably have been: "It was not like anything at all-I 
was 
sound asleep at the time. I went to sleep not knowing any geography 
and woke up knowing quite a bit, but don't ask me what it was like. It 
wasn't like anything." If the cassette theory of dreams is true, 
dream-recollection production is a similarly unexperienced process. 
If asked what it is like to dream one ought to say (because it would be 
the truth): "It is not like anything. I go to sleep and when I wake up I 
find I have a tale to tell, a 'recollection' as it were." It is Malcolm's 
view that this is what we ought to say, but Malcolm is not an explicit 
champion of the cassette theory or any other empirical theory of 
dreaming. His reasons, as we shall see, are derived from "conceptual 
analysis." But whatever the reasons are, the conclusion seems out- 
l4 Thomas Nagel, "What Is It Like to Be a ' ~ a t ? , "Philosophical Review, LXXXIII 
(1974), pp. 435-450. 

DANIEL C. DENNETT  
rageous. We all know better, we think. But do we? We are faced with 
two strikingly different positions about what happens when we 
dream, and one of these, the received view, we are notjust loath to 
give up; we find it virtually unintelligible that we could be wrong 
about it. And yet the point of difference between it (as elaborated 
into a theory by scientists) and its rival, the cassette theory, is appar- 
ently a technical, theoretical matter about which the layman's biases, 
his everyday experience, and even his personal recollections of 
dreams are without authority or even weight. What should we do? 
Sit back and wait for the experts to tell us, hoping against hope that 
dreams will turn out to be, after all, experiences? That seems 
ridiculous. 
If that seems ridiculous, perhaps it is ridiculous. Can some way be 
found to protect the received view from the possibility of losing this 
contest? If we do not for a minute believe it could lose, we must 
suppose there is some principled explanation of this. One might set 
out in a verificationist manner.15 What could possibly settle the issue 
between the received view and the cassette theory if subjects' recol- 
lections were deemed neutral? The conclusion of one view is that 
dreams are experiences, and of the other that they are not, but if 
subjects' recollections were not held to be criterial,nothing else could 
count as evidence for or against the rival theories, at least with 
regard to this disputed conclusion. Therefore the claimed differ- 
ence between the two theories is illusory, or perhaps we should say 
they are both pseudo-theories. This will not do. We can easily im- 
agine the two theories to share a concept of experience, and even to 
agree on which data would go to show that dreams were, in this 
shared technical sense, experiences. Nor would this technical con- 
cept of experience have to look all that unordinary. We have many 
common ways of distinguishing which among the events that im- 
pinge on us are experienced and which are not, and we can imagine 
these theories to build from these ordinary distinctions a powerful 
shared set of well-confirmed empirically necessary and sufficient 
conditions for events to be experienced. If, for instance, some part 
of the brain is invariably active in some characteristic way when some 
event in waking life is, as we ordinarily say, experienced, and if 
moreover we have a theory that says why this should be so, the 
l5 This argument is inspired by the verificationist arguments of Malcolm and its 
rebuttal is inspired by Putnam's objections, but Malcolm does not commit himself to 
this argument. 

ARE DREAMS EXPERIENCES?  
absence of such brain activity during REM periods would look bad 
for the received view and good for the cassette view. 
But if that is what we should look for, the received view is in 
trouble, for one routinely recognized condition for having an ex- 
perience is that one be conscious, or awake, and dreamers are not. A 
well-confirmed physiological condition for this is that one's reticular 
activating system be "on," which it is not during sleep. The fact that 
one is in a sound sleep goes a long way to confirming that one is not 
having experiences, as ordinarily understood. Malcolm would make 
this criterial, but that is one more overstatement. Lack of reticular 
system activity strongly suggests that nothing is being experienced 
during REMs, but the defender of the received view can plausibly 
reply that reticular activation is only a condition of nomnal experi-
ence, and can point to the frequent occurrence during REM periods 
of the normal physiological accompaniments of fear, anxiety, de- 
light, and arousal as considerations in favor of an extended concept 
of experience. How could one exhibit an emotional reaction to 
something not even experienced? The debate would not stop there, 
but we need not follow it further now. The fact remains that the 
physiological data would be clearly relevant evidence in the dispute 
between the theories, and not all the evidence is on the side of the 
received view. 
Still, one might say, the very relevance of physiological evidence 
shows the dispute not to involve our ordinary concept of experience 
at all, but only a technical substitute. For suppose we were told 
without further elaboration that the theory inspired by the received 
view had won the debate, had proved to be the better theory. We 
would not know what, if anything, had been confirmed by this 
finding. Which of our hunches and biases would be thereby vindi- 
cated, and are any of them truly in jeopardy? 
This plausiable rhetorical questions suggests that none of our 
precious preconceptions about dreaming could be in jeopardy, a 
conclusion that "conceptual analysis" might discover for us. How 
might this be done? Let us return to the comparison between the 
cassette view of dreams and the speculation that one might learn in 
one's sleep. I suggested that subjects in either circumstance should, 
on waking, deny that it was like anything to have undergone the 
phenomenon. But there would be a crucial difference in their wak- 
ing states, presumably. For the dreamer, unlike the sleep-learner, 
would probably want to add to his disclaimer: "Of course it seem to 
me to have been like something!" The sleep learner has new knowl- 

DANIEL C .  DENNETT  
edge, or new beliefs, but not new memom'es. This is surely an impor- 
tant difference, butjust what difference does it make? Is it that the 
claim 
(5)It was not like anything, but it seems to me to have been like 
something, 
is a covert contradiction? Can one sustain the following principle? 
(6)If it seems to have been like something, it was like something. 
The present tense version of the principle is unassailable: 
(7) If it seems to me to be like something to be x, then it is like 
something to me to be x. 
That is what we mean when we talk of what it is like: how it seems to 
us.16 When we try to make the principle extend through memory to 
the past, however, we run into difficulties. There is no good reason 
to deny that memories can be spurious, and there is plenty of 
confirmation that they can. This is somewhat obscured by some 
looseness in our understanding of the verb "remember." Sometimes 
we draw a distinction between remembering and seeming to re- 
member such that remembering, like knowing, is veridical. On this 
reading it follows that if you remember something to have been x, it 
wasx. If it was notx you only seem to remember that it was. But when 
I say, about a restaurant we are dining in, "This isn't the way I 
remember it," my claim is equivocal. I may not be claiming the 
restaurant has changed-it 
may be that my memory is at fault. On 
this reading of "remember" there is still a distinction between re- 
membering and seeming to remember, but it is not a distinction with 
veridicality on one side: for example one tells a tale of one's child- 
hood that is shown to be false and one wonders whether one has 
mistaken fantasizing or confabulating for (mis)remembering. On 
either reading, however, there is no claim that can be made of the 
form: 
(8)Since I remember it to have been like something, it was like 
something. 
On the first reading of "remember" the claim, while logically im- 
peccable, does not work unless one claims a capacity to tell one's 
memories from one's seeming memories that one simply does not 
have. On the second reading, even if we could always tell fantasy 
from memory the consequent would not follow. So (5)represents a 
l6 Cf. Nagel, op, cit., p. 440 n. "[Tlhe analogical form of the English expression 
'what is it like' is misleading. It does not mean 'what (in our experience) it resembles,' 
but rather 'how it is for the subject himself.' " 

ARE DREAMS EXPERIENCES?  
possible state of affairs. We had in fact already countenanced this 
state of affairs as an abnormality in supposing that the dream 
researchers could, by tampering, insert a spurious dream recollec- 
tion. Now we are countenancing it as a possible and not even im- 
probable account of the normal case. 
Malcolm sees that nothing like (6)or (8)can be exploited in this 
context; we can seem to have had an experience when we have not, 
and for just this reason he denies that dreams are experiences! His 
argument is that since one can be under the impression that one has 
had an experience and yet not have had it, and since if one is under 
the impression that one has had a dream, one has had a dream,17 
having had a dream cannot be having had an experience, hence 
dreams are not experiences. 
This "criteriological" move has a curious consequence: it "saves" 
the authority of the wakened dream-recaller, and this looks like a 
rescue of subjectivity from the clutches of objective science, but it 
"saves" dreaming only at the expense of experience. What Malcolm 
sees is that if we permit a distinction between remembering and 
seeming to remember to apply to dream recollections, the concept of 
dreaming is cast adrift from any criteria1 anchoring to first-person 
reports, and becomes (or is revealed to be) a theoretical concept. 
Once we grant that subjective, introspective or retrospective evi- 
dence does not have the authority to settle questions about the 
nature of dreams-for 
instance, whether dreams are 
experiences-we 
have to turn to the other data, the behavior and 
physiology of dreamers, and to the relative strengths of the theories 
of these, if we are to settle the question, a question which the subject 
is not in a privileged position to answer. Malcolm avoids this by 
denying that dreams are experiences, but this only concedes that 
one does not have a privileged opinion about one's own past experi- 
ences.ls This concession is unavoidable, I think, and Malcolm's is not 
l 7  "That he really had a dream and that he is under the impression that he had a 
dream: these are the same thing" ("Dreaming and Skepticism," p. 32). This is the 
central premise of Malcolm's work on dreaming, and one he gets from Wittgenstein: 
"The question whether the dreamer's memory deceives him when he reports the 
dream after waking cannot arise unless indeed we introduce a completely new 
criterion for the report's 'agreeing' with the dream, a criterion which gives us a 
concept of 'truth' as distinguished from 'truthfullness' here" (Philosophical Investiga- 
tions, pp. 222-223). It is Malcolm's unswerving loyalty to this remark that forces his 
account into such notorious claims. 
l 8  Sometimes Malcolm seems to want to "save" all "private states" in this way, thus 
either having to deny that experiences are prikate states, or having to adopt after all 
some principle like (8). See Dreaming, p. 55. 

DANIEL C. DENNETT  
the only philosophic position caused embarrassment by it. A de-
fender of the subjective realm such as Nagel must grant that in 
general, whether or not it was like something to be x, whether or not 
the subject experienced being x-questions 
that dejine the subjective 
realm-are 
questions about which the subject's subsequent subjec- 
tive opinion is not authoritative. But if the subject's own convictions 
do not settle the matter, and if, as Nagel holds, no objective consid- 
erations are conclusive either, the subjective realm floats out of ken 
altogether, except, perhaps for the subject's convictions about the 
specious present. Dreams are particularly vulnerable in this regard 
only because, as Malcolm observes, sleepers do not and cannot 
express current convictions about the specious present (if they have 
any) while they are dreaming. Since our only expressible access to 
dreams is retrospective, dreams are particularly vulnerable, but they 
are not alone. The argument we have been considering is more 
general; the dispute between the rival theories of memory-loading 
can be extended beyond dreaming to all experience. For instance, 
just now, while you were reading my remarks about Nagel, were you 
experiencing the peripheral sights and sounds available in your 
environment? Of course you were, you say, and you can prove it to 
your own complete satisfaction by closing your eyes and recalling a 
variety of events or conditions that co-occurred with your reading 
those remarks. While not central in your consciousness at the time, 
they were certainly there, being experienced, as your recollections 
show. But the cassette theorist, emboldened by the success with 
dreams, puts forward the subliminal peripheral recollection-production 
theory, the view that the variety of peripheral details in such cases 
are not consciously experienced, but merely unconsciously recorded 
for subsequent recall. Events outside our immediate attention are 
not experienced at all, our theorist says, but they do have subliminal 
effects on short-term memory. Our capacity to recall them for a 
short period does not establish that they were experienced, any 
more than our capacity to "recall" dreams shows that they were 
experienced. But this is nonsense, you say: recording those peripheral 
items for subsequent recollection just is experiencing them. 
If only this bold claim were true! Look what it would do for us. 
The difference between the received view of dreams and the cassette 
theory would collapse; the presumably unconscious memory- 
loading process of the cassette theory would turn out to be the very 
presentation process dear to the received view. A "conceptual rela- 
tionship" could be established between experience and memory that 

ARE DREAMS EXPERIENCES?  
avoided the difficulties heretofore encountered in such claims, as 
follows. The conceptual relationship is not between experiencing 
and subsequent subjective convictions of memory (the latter are not 
criterial), but between experiencing and something perfectly objec- 
tive: the laying down thereupon of a memory trace-for 
however 
short a time and regardless of subsequent success or failure at 
recollection.1s The conceptual relationship would be identity. Expe-
rire est recordare. 
Much can be said in support of this principle, but at this time I will 
restrict myself to a few brief persuasions. First, is remembering a 
necessary condition for experiencing? Arguably, yes, if you grant that 
memories may not last long. The idea of a subject, an "I," experienc- 
ing each successive state in a stream of consciousness with no recol-
lection of its predecessors is a hopelessly impoverished model of 
experience and experiencers. The familiarity and continuity in the 
world of current experiences is a necessary background for recogni- 
tion and discrimination and only short-term memory can provide 
this. Items that come and go so fast, or so inconspicuously, as to leave 
no reverberations behind in memory at all are plausibly viewed as 
simply not experienced. So if remembering is a necessary condition, 
is it also a suficient condition for experiencing? Yost and Kalish say 
so, without supporting argument: "Dreaming is a real experience. 
And since dreams can be remembered they must be conscious ex- 
perience~."~~
Martin and Deutscher, in their article, "Remember- 
ing," concur: 
So long as we hold some sort of 'storage' or 'trace' account of memory, it 
follows that we can remember only what we have experienced, for it is 
in our experience of events that they "enter" the s t o r e h o u ~ e . ~ ~  
So remembering, in the sense of storing away in the memory for 
some time, is arguably a necessary and sufficient condition for ex- 
l QNot completely regardless of subsequent success or failure at recollection, for 
identifying sime process as the laying down of a memory trace is identifying some 
process by its function, and nothing that did not have as its normal effect enabling the 
subject to report truly about the past could be picked out functionally as the memory- 
loading process. 
2 0  R. M. Yost and Donald Kalish, "Miss MacDonald on Sleeping and Waking," 
Philosophical Quarterly (April 1955), pp. 109-124. Malcolm discusses this claim in 
Dreaming. 
21 C. B. Martin and Max Deutscher, "~emimberin~," 
Philosophical Review, LXXV 
(1966), p. 189. 

DANIEL C. DENNETT  
periencing. These are, I think, philosophically respectable argu- 
ments for the claimed identity, and to them can be added an ulterior 
consideration which will appeal to physicalists if not to others. The 
proposed identity of experiencing and recording promises a strik- 
ing simplification for physicalist theories of mind. The problematic 
(largely because utterly vague) presentation process vanishes as an 
extra phenomenon to be accounted for, and with it goes the even 
more mysterious audience or recipient of those presentations. In its 
place is just a relatively prosaic short-term memory capacity, the sort 
of thing for which rudimentary but suggestive physical models 
already abound. 
The principle as it stands, however, is too strong, on two counts. 
Consider again Martin and Deutscher's commentary on the 
''storehouse" model of memory: "It is in our experience of events 
that they 'enter' the storehouse." What, though, of forcible or illegal 
entry? We need an account of something like nomnal entry into 
memory so that we can rule out, as experiences, such abnormally 
entered items as the undreamed dream surgically inserted by the 
dream researchers. We want to rule out such cases, not by declaring 
them impossible, for they are not, but by denying that they are 
experiences for the subject. As we shall see in a moment, the best way 
of doing this may have a surprising consequence. The second failing 
of our principle is simply that it lacks the status we have claimed for 
it. It is not self-evident; its denial is not a contradiction. We must not 
make the mistake of asserting that this is a discovered conceptual 
truth about experience and memory. We must understand it as a 
proposal, a theoretically promising adjustment in our ordinary con- 
cepts for which we may have to sacrifice some popular preconcep- 
tions. For instance, whether animals can be held to dream, or to 
experience anything, is rendered an uncertainty depending on what 
we mean by recall. Can animalsrecall events? If not, they cannot have 
experiences. More radically, subjective authority about experience 
goes by the board entirely. Still, we get a lot in return, not the least of 
which is a way of diagnosing and dismissing the Pickwickian 
hypothesis of subliminal peripheral recollection-production. 
We are still not out of the woods on dreaming, though, for we 
must define normal memory-entry in such a way as to admit ordi- 
nary experience and exclude tampering and other odd cases. 
When the memory gets loaded by 'accident or interference we will 
not want this to count as experience, and yet we want to grant that 
there is such a thing as nonveridical experience. The memory- 

ARE DREAMS EXPERIENCES?  
loading that occurs during a hallucination occurs during abnormal 
circumstances, but not so abnormal as to lead us to deny that halluci- 
nations are experiences. But look at a slightly different case. (I do 
not know if this ever occurs, but it might.) Suppose at noon Jones, 
who is wide awake, suffers some event in her brain that has a delayed 
effect: at 12: 15 she will "recall" having seen a ghost at noon. Suppose 
her recollection is as vivid as you like, but suppose her actual be- 
havior at noon (and up until recollection at 12: 15) showed no trace 
of horror, surprise, or cognizance of anything untoward. Had she 
shown any signs at noon of being under the impression that some- 
thing bizarre was happening, we would be strongly inclined to say 
she had had a hallucination then, was experiencing it then, even if 
she could not recount it to us until fifteen minutes later. But since 
she did notreact in any such telling way at noon, but proceeded about 
her business, we are strongly inclined to say the hallucination occur- 
red later, at 12: 15, and was a hallucination of recollection of something 
she had never experienced, even though the cause of the hallucina- 
tion occurred at noon. Since the events responsible for her later 
capacity to recall did not contribute to her behavior-controlling state 
at the time, they did not enter her experience then, whatever their 
later repercussions. But then when we apply this distinguishing 
principle to dreams, we find that it is quite likely that most dreams 
are not experiences. Whereas nightmares accompanied by moans, 
cries, cowering, and sweaty palms would be experiences, bad dreams 
dreamed in repose (though remembered in agony) would not be, 
unless, contrary to surface appearances, their entry into memory is 
accomplished by engagements of the whole behavior-controlling 
system sufficiently normal to distinguish these cases sharply from 
our imaginary delayed hall~cination.~~ 
If it turns out that sleep, or at least that portion of sleep during 
which dreaming occurs, is a state of more or less peripheral paralysis 
or inactivity; if it turns out that most of the functional areas that are 
critical to the governance of our wide awake activity are in operation, 
then there will be good reason for drawing the lines around experi- 
ence so that dreams are included. If not, there will be good reason to 
deny that dreams are experiences. 
2 2  Malcolm too sees an important distinction between "violent nightmares" and 
normal dreams dreamed in repose, a distinction that forces him to claim we have 
several different concepts of sleep. Only thus can he save as a conceptual truth the 
claim that we have no experiences while we sleep. 

DANIEL C. DENNETT  
Some of the relevant data are already familiar.The occurrence of 
REMs suggests that more then a little of the visual processing system 
is active during dream periods, and it should be a fairly straightfor- 
ward task-perhaps 
already accomplished-to 
determine just how 
much is. Even strongly positive results would not be overwhelming 
grounds for deciding that dreams are experiences, however, for in 
various sorts of hysteric or psychosomatic blindness there is substan- 
tial apparently normal activity in the visual processing system, and in 
so-called subliminal perception the same is true, and in neither case 
are we inclined to suppose visual experience occurs. More compel- 
ling, in many ways, is the evidence that dreams serve a purpose: they 
seem to be used to redress emotional imbalances caused by frustrat- 
ing experiences in waking life, to rationalize cognitive dissonances, 
allay anxieties, and so forth. When this task is too difficult, it seems, 
the dream mechanisms often go into a looping cycle; troubled 
people often report recurring obsessive dreams that haunt them 
night after night. It is implausible that such recurrent dreams must 
be recomposed each night,23 SO if a recurrent physiological process 
can be correlated with these dreams, it will appear to be a presenta- 
tion process, and the presentation process will have a point: namely, 
to provide the emotional and cognitive-processing functional parts 
with the raw material for new syntheses, new accommodations, 
perhaps permitting a more stable or satisfying self-image for the 
dreamer. But even this function could easily be seen to be ac-
complished entirely unconsciously. The self-presentation tactics and 
perceptual interpretation ploys posited by theorists as diverse as 
Freud and Erving Goffman are no less plausible for being presumed 
to be entirely unconscious, and they serve a similar self-protective 
maintenance function. As Malcolm points out, dreamers' narratives 
can be used by Freudians and others as a valuable source of informa- 
tion about the internal processes that shape us, without our having 
to suppose that these are recollections of experience^.^^ 
It is an open, and theoretical question whether dreams fall inside or 
23 I am indebted to Robert Nozick for raising this consideration. 
24 Dreaming, p. 122. Malcolm quotes with approval this methodological suggestion 
of Freud's (from A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis, [Garden City, 19431, p. 76): 
Any disadvantage resulting from the uncertain ~ecollection of dreams may be remedied by 
deciding that exactly what the dreamer tells is to count as the dream, and by ignoring all that 
he may have forgotten or altered in the process of recollection. 

ARE DREAMS EXPERIENCES?  
outside the boundary of e ~ p e r i e n c e . ~ ~  
A plausible theory of experi- 
ence will be one that does justice to three distinguishable families of 
intuitions we have about experience and consciousness: those deal- 
ing with the role of experience in guiding current behavior, those 
dealing with our current proclivities and capacities to say what we are 
experiencing, and those dealing with the retrospective or recollective 
capacity to say. In earlier work I have sharply distinguished the first 
and second of these, but underestimated the distinctness and impor- 
tance of this third source of demands on a theory of consciousness. A 
theory that does justice to these distinct and often inharmonious 
demands must also do justice to a fourth: the functional saliencies 
that emerge from empirical investigation. In the end, the concept of 
experience may not prove to differentiate any one thing of sufficient 
theoretical interest to warrant time spent in determining its bound- 
aries. Were this to occur, the received view of dreams, like the lay 
view of experience in general, would not be so much disproved as 
rendered obsolete. It may seem inconceivable that this could hap- 
pen, but armchair conceptual analysis is powerless to establish this. 
Tufts University 
25 Foulkes (op.cit.)cites a number of telling, if inconclusive, further observations: in 
one study no association was found between "the excitement value of dream content 
and heart or respiration rate" (p. 50), a datum to be balanced by the curious fact that 
there are usually action-potentials discoverable in the motor neurons in the bicep of 
one who is asked toimagine bending one's a r p ;  similar action-potentials are found in 
the arms of deaf mute dreamers-people 
who talk with their hands. There are also 
high levels of activity in the sensory cortex during dreaming sleep. 

