12 
Some Observations on the 
Psychology of Thinking 
About Free Will
Daniel C. Dennett
Do we have free will, or don’t we? The problem of free will is hard, and 
important. Indeed, I will argue that it is one of our hardest intellectual prob-
lems, and it is hard because it is also one of the most important intellectual 
problems we face. It is our tacit or subliminal recognition of the importance of 
the problem that makes it so difficult.
In my graduate student days, it fell to me to forge a signature on a legal 
document of some significance. If you must know, a friend asked me to inter-
cept and deposit his fellowship stipend while he was away from Oxford during 
the long Christmas break. In order to prevent just such junkets, the fellow-
ship authorities included with the stipend a receipt that had to be signed and 
returned immediately, so they could check the dates and postmarks—and sig-
natures. Failure to be present and accounted for when the check arrived was 
grounds for termination of the fellowship. Before departing for the south of 
France, my friend gave me several samples of his signature, which I practiced 
diligently, writing it well over a hundred times, until I had it just about perfect. 
When the check arrived at his flat, I practiced the signature another fifty times 
or so, then put the fatal document in front of me and proceeded to scrawl the 
shakiest, least convincing version of it I had ever written. My hand was trem-
bling, my pulse was racing, and I learned at that moment that a life of crime 
was not for me. Fortunately, the abominable signature survived the scrutiny of 
the fellowship overseers so no horrible consequences ensued. In the anxious 
aftermath, a much better strategy occurred to me. I should have asked my wife 
to embed the official document somewhere in a largish sheaf of papers to be 

the psychology of thinking about free will  
249
signed; I could have signed them all with élan not knowing which was the only 
one that mattered (an old device, related to the practice of putting blanks in 
the rifles of many of the members of a firing squad. That way nobody knows 
whether they are committing homicide.)
I was reminded of this embarrassing episode in my past when I recently 
confronted the question of why so many really intelligent people write such 
ill-considered stuff when the topic is free will. The answer, as I will try to ex-
plain, is that in some inchoate way they sense—correctly—that it really matters, 
and they just don’t want to contemplate the implications straightforwardly, in 
case the truth is too horrible to live with. This makes wishful thinking and other 
distortions of reason almost irresistible. If the arguments they are tempted by 
were somehow embedded in less forbidding contexts, they would see through 
them in an instant. People don’t do their best work when they think the stakes 
are astronomically high. Some of them may even be seduced by the follow-
ing quite reasonable consideration: When we consider whether free will is an 
illusion or reality, we are looking into an abyss. What seems to confront us is a 
plunge into nihilism and despair. Our whole reason for living is jeopardized. 
What to do? If it is really as important as all that, perhaps what would be ratio-
nal to do is blow more smoke. Whatever you do, don’t try to get clear about this! 
Don’t let the cat out of the bag. And then there are those who see the smoke 
screen for what it is but then mistakenly dismiss the problem, which really is 
important. I will be concentrating on this dismissal here.
In 1984 I published a small book about free will, Elbow Room: The Varieties 
of Free Will Worth Wanting. In it I tried to show that these fears are reasonable 
but mistaken: We can have all the varieties of free will worth wanting. Philoso-
phers have managed to define some varieties of free will that are indeed incom-
patible with what we think we know about the physical world from science, but 
these varieties, it turns out, are negligible. Nobody needs to lose any sleep over 
the fact that they are beyond our reach. The considerations I advanced for this 
optimistic conclusion were, I think, well grounded, but whatever the merits of 
my case, there were two points of concern on which I could not yet deliver all 
the goods. First, I needed a more detailed naturalistic theory of consciousness, 
since many people share the intuition of philosopher P. F. Strawson that genuine 
freedom depends on an agent’s behavior being “intelligible in terms of conscious 
purposes rather than in terms only of unconscious purposes” (1962, pp. 9–91, 
quoted in Dennett, 1984, pp. 36–37). Second, I needed a more foundational 
account of evolution by natural selection, since I was relying on evolutionary 
theory to provide the design work that, I claimed, distinguished genuinely free 
agents from less sophisticated (and hence morally incompetent) agents.
I set out to fill these gaps, in Consciousness Explained (Dennett, 1991) and 
Darwin’s Dangerous Idea (Dennett, 1995), and my conviction that I was on the 
right track was bolstered by a curious pattern I observed in the critical reactions 
to my uncompromising materialism in both these books: My critics would begin 

250  are we free?
with one technical challenge or another (“But what about this: . . . ?”) and after 
I’d parried their point, they would come up with another, and perhaps a third 
or fourth, but eventually, after I had responded to their apparent satisfaction 
to their technical objections, they would say, in one way or another, “Very well. 
But what about free will?” This was the hidden agenda that was driving their 
skepticism all along: the concern that if, as I was arguing, consciousness could 
be explained as a material phenomenon, and evolution could explain how it, 
and all the competences associated with it, came to be, the resulting picture of 
mankind would somehow fall short of providing us with enough . . . magic to give 
us the free will we desperately want to believe we have. I use the term “magic” 
advisedly, inspired by a passage in Lee Siegel’s excellent book on Indian street 
magic, Net of Magic: Wonders and Deceptions in India (1991):
“I’m writing a book on magic,” I explain, and I’m asked, “Real magic?” By 
real magic people mean miracles, thaumaturgical acts, and supernatural 
powers. “No,” I answer: “Conjuring tricks, not real magic.” Real magic, in 
other words, refers to the magic that is not real, while the magic that is real, 
that can actually be done, is not real magic. (p. 425)
It can’t be real if its explicable as a phenomenon achieved by a bag of cheap 
tricks. That is just what many people claim about consciousness.
Indeed, so powerful is that presupposition that there is a standard joke 
about my attempt to do just that: Dennett should have titled his book Con-
sciousness Explained Away. It is also what many say about free will, and I’m 
sure this is no coincidence. So I decided I had to tackle the problem of free will 
again, armed with my theory of consciousness and my survey of the power of 
natural selection as a designing process. In my second book on free will, I tried 
to show that the varieties of free will worth wanting could indeed be composed 
of a bag of natural tricks, products of genetic and cultural evolution. According 
to Freedom Evolves (2003a), it is evolutionary biology, not (indeterministic?) 
physics, that accounts for free will. (A billion years ago, there was no free will 
on this planet, but now there is. The physics hasn’t changed; the improvements 
in can do over the years had to evolve.) Once again, however, a chief source of 
resistance came from those who were reluctant to let go of a traditional, abso-
lutistic variety of free will.
Consider these passages from two reviews: “One wants to be what tradi-
tion has it that Eve was when she bit the apple. Perfectly free to do otherwise. 
So perfectly free, in fact, that even God couldn’t tell which way she’d jump” 
(Fodor, 2003). In other words, “one wants” a miracle, “the kind of absolute free 
will and moral responsibility that most people want to believe in and do believe 
in,” as Galen Strawson (son of P. F. Strawson) said in his 2003 review. As he went 
on to say, that miraculous kind of free will can’t be established by a material-
ist. Both Fodor and Strawson insist that this is what people want, and I have to 

the psychology of thinking about free will  
251
agree with them that many people do want this, but what makes them so sure 
people are right to want this? Might they be lulled or gulled by a tradition of 
dualism that doesn’t so much solve the free will problem as hide the problem 
behind an impenetrable shield of mysterious stuff or postpone the problem in-
definitely? (“It’s anybody’s guess—and not the business of science—how mind-
stuff manages to generate genuinely free decisions and get them implemented 
by a material body. Don’t ask; don’t tell.”)
Is free will truly incompatible with materialism—deterministic or even just 
mechanistic materialism? This question has been nagging ever since Darwin 
put forward his revolutionary theory of natural selection. Thomas Henry Hux-
ley, known as “Darwin’s bulldog” for his forthright championing of the theory 
of evolution by natural selection in its early days, wrote a popular piece “On 
the Hypothesis That Animals Are Automata, and Its History,” in which he con-
fronted this dire question head-on and tried to mollify the gloomleaders (see 
Dennett, 1984, p. 7):
I venture to offer a few remarks for the calm consideration of thoughtful 
persons, untrammeled by foregone conclusions, unpledged to shore-up tot-
tering dogmas, and anxious only to know the true bearings of the case.
and goes on to insist that
We are conscious automata, endowed with free will in the only intelligible 
sense of that much-abused term—inasmuch as in many respects we are 
able to do as we like. . . . (Huxley, excerpted in Chalmers, 2002, p. 30)
We are able to do as we like, Huxley avers, in the sense that if we are not 
imprisoned or paralyzed we can act as we choose. But are we able to choose as we 
like—and for that matter, are we able to like as we like? Without these supple-
ments, Huxley’s assurances ring a bit hollow. Here is where evolution comes to 
our rescue with a second wave of design: cultural evolution. The combination 
of genetic and cultural evolution does provide Homo sapiens—and only Homo
sapiens, so far, on this planet—with precisely those features. Thanks to our en-
culturation, we have been endowed with perspectives that enable us (and only 
us) to reflect indefinitely on whether our choices are well grounded, whether 
we ought to like what we find ourselves liking, and so forth. Even when we dis-
cover, as we sometimes do, that it is difficult or impossible for us to revise some 
of our likes and dislikes, at least we can inform ourselves of this, and think about 
ways of working around them.
It is this open-ended ability we have to deal informedly and constructively 
with our own grounds for, and habits of, choice that gives us a variety of free will 
that underwrites moral responsibility and that is inaccessible to the cleverest 
and most spontaneous animals.

252  are we free?
One might think that this would be enough, that since this naturalistic 
variety of free will preserves and explains what really matters—our belief in 
our own moral responsibility, and thus the denial of nihilism—it deserves to be 
called real free will. But the tradition of “real magic” is still so strong in these 
discussions that many thinkers, on both sides of the issue, continue to muddy 
the waters, however inadvertently. On this occasion I am going to set aside 
the many tantrums thrown by those who insist on the existence of traditional 
(mysterious) free will because I and others have dealt with them at great length 
elsewhere. Instead, I will concentrate on the overreactions to all this desperate 
posturing by some of my favorite thinkers.
In 2002, my friend the psychologist Daniel Wegner published his provoca-
tively titled book, The Illusion of Conscious Will. I had read the book in draft, 
and loved it—but objected to the title, which played into the hands of the “real 
magic” crowd. As I said in Freedom Evolves,
Recall the myth of Cupid, who flutters about on his cherubic wings making 
people fall in love by shooting them with his little bow and arrow. This is 
such a lame cartoonists’ convention that it’s hard to believe that anybody 
ever took any version of it seriously. But we can pretend: Suppose that once 
upon a time there were people who believed that an invisible arrow from 
a flying god was a sort of inoculation that caused people to fall in love. And 
suppose some killjoy scientist then came along and showed them that this 
was simply not true: No such flying gods exist. “He’s shown that nobody 
ever falls in love, not really. The idea of falling in love is just a nice—maybe 
even a necessary—fiction. It never happens.” That is what some might say. 
Others, one hopes, would want to deny it: “No. Love is quite real, and so is 
falling in love. It just isn’t what people used to think it is. It’s just as good—
maybe even better. True love doesn’t involve any flying gods.” The issue of 
free will is like this. If you are one of those who think that free will is only 
really free will if it springs from an immaterial soul that hovers happily in 
your brain, shooting arrows of decision into your motor cortex, then, given 
what you mean by free will, my view is that there is no free will at all. If, 
on the other hand, you think free will might be morally important without 
being supernatural, then my view is that free will is indeed real, but just not 
quite what you probably thought it was. (Dennett, 2003a, p. 222)
I saw Wegner as the killjoy scientist who shows that Cupid doesn’t shoot arrows 
and then entitles his book The Illusion of Romantic Love. Wegner does go on to 
soften the blow by arguing that “conscious will may be an illusion, but respon-
sible, moral action is quite real” (p. 224). Our disagreement was really a matter 
of expository tactics, not theory. Should one insist that free, conscious will is real
without being magic, without being what people traditionally thought it was 
(my line)? Or should one concede that traditional free will is an illusion—but 
not to worry: Life still has meaning and people can and should be responsible 

the psychology of thinking about free will  
253
(Wegner’s line)? The answer to this question is still not obvious, but Wegner was 
surprised and dismayed by some of the hostile reactions he provoked. One com-
mentator was inspired to call him a “cryptobehaviorist” who provided “terrifying 
interpretations of his experiments” (Baars, 2004). Wegner has recounted to me 
a variety of other panic-ridden reactions to his work.
More recently, the World Question Center on edge.org mounted its 2006 
question, “What is your dangerous idea?” and my friend Richard Dawkins 
dashed off—and later regretted sending and tried unsuccessfully to retract—a 
piece inspired by his friend John Cleese’s hilarious scene in Fawlty Towers in 
which he beats his automobile, “punishing” it for its poor performance. The 
image is unforgettable, but the conclusion Dawkins was tempted to draw was a 
non sequitur indeed:
Why do we vent such visceral hatred on child murderers, or on thuggish 
vandals, when we should simply regard them as faulty units that need fix-
ing or replacing? Presumably because mental constructs like blame and 
responsibility, indeed evil and good, are built into our brains by millennia 
of Darwinian evolution. Assigning blame and responsibility is an aspect of 
the useful fiction of intentional agents that we construct in our brains as a 
means of short-cutting a truer analysis of what is going on in the world in 
which we have to live. My dangerous idea is that we shall eventually grow 
out of all this and even learn to laugh at it, just as we laugh at Basil Fawlty 
when he beats his car. But I fear it is unlikely that I shall ever reach that 
level of enlightenment. (Dawkins, 2006; note that this appeared on edge.
org, but was not included, with the rest of the answers elicited in John 
Brockman, ed., What Is Your Dangerous Idea? 2006)
What Dawkins was overlooking was the prospect that there might be some sta-
ble—indeed homeostatically maintained—middle ground in between the saints 
(who never need punishing) and the “faulty units” who really are so disabled that 
it would be as pointless a travesty to punish them as to punish Fawlty’s car. By his 
own admission, Dawkins can’t quite accept his own conclusion—not, I am sure, 
because he is insufficiently “enlightened” but because he has quite properly failed 
to convince himself that “blame and responsibility, indeed evil and good” are just
“useful fictions.” Why would Dawkins, of all people, think that useful fictions 
were always something to outgrow? The selfish gene is a useful fiction—that is 
to say, it encapsulates in a well-nigh irreplaceable idealization a real pattern that 
is otherwise indescribable. Much the same can be said of the simplifications that 
we rely on when we hold people responsible or call an act good or evil.
Another dear friend, Susan Blackmore, winds up her book The Meme 
Machine (1999) with a ringing disagreement with me about free will: “Dennett 
(1984) has described many versions of the idea of free will and argues that some 
of them are worth wanting. Unlike Dennett I neither think the ‘user illusion’ is 

254  are we free?
benign, nor do I want any version of free will that ascribes it to a self that does 
not exist” (p. 237). Her reasoning is clear, and worth quoting at length. I agree 
with most of it:
Benjamin chose cornflakes this morning for breakfast. Why? . . . Memes and 
genes together produced this behaviour in this environment. If asked, Ben-
jamin will say that he chose the cornflakes because he likes them, or that 
he made a conscious decision to eat them today. But this explanation adds 
nothing. It is just a story Benjamin tells after the fact.
So does Benjamin have free will or not? The critical question to ask 
is who do you mean by Benjamin? If by “Benjamin” you mean a body and 
brain, then certainly Benjamin had a choice. Human beings make decisions 
all the time. . . . Is this sufficient for what we call free will?
I think not, because at the heart of the concept of free will lies the idea 
that it must be Benjamin’s conscious self who made the decision. When we 
think of free will we imagine that “I” have it, not that this whole conglom-
eration of body and brain has it. Free will is when “I” consciously, freely, and 
deliberately decide to do something, and do it. In other words “I” must be 
the agent for it to count as free will.
But if the memetic view I have been proposing here is right, then this 
is nonsense, because the self that is supposed to have free will is just a story 
that forms part of a vast memeplex, and a false story at that. . . . There is no 
truth in the idea of an inner self inside my body that controls the body and 
is conscious. Since this is false, so is the idea of my conscious self having free 
will. (Blackmore, 1999, pp. 236–37)
With what do I disagree? I disagree with her acquiescence (along with 
Wegner and Dawkins) in the traditional concept of free will, with its “inner 
self.” The basically Cartesian idea of the self or ego or res cogitans as the inner 
(conscious) agent is indeed a huge mistake, and therefore, as she says, any view 
of free will that depends on it is bankrupt. But why accept that this is “the heart” 
of the concept of free will? That is the concession that gives the game to the 
traditionalists, by letting their antiquated and now utterly unmotivated vision 
of the “seat” of free will capture the term. Well, what else might be the heart? 
Here’s a suggestion: Free will is whatever it is that gives us moral responsibility
(if we ever have it). And that turns out to be the very body and brain (plus 
friends and acquaintances, tools and crutches, . . .) that she says actually make 
the decisions. The key to understanding real free will is recognizing that it does 
not reside in some concentrated internal lump of specialness, but in the myriad 
relations and dispositions of an enculturated, socialized, interacting, acknowl-
edging, human agent. Tradition makes the Cartesian mistake of packing all the 
power into the inner puppeteer who pulls the body’s strings. When we banish 
this inner agent, distributing its tasks throughout not just the entire brain, but 
the body and the “surrounding” cultural storehouse—the memes, plus a little 

the psychology of thinking about free will  
255
help from our (human) friends—we don’t have to banish free will! We can see 
it as a phenomenon distributed in space and time as well. That was the point of 
my ironic formula, in Elbow Room (1984, p. 143), “If you make yourself really 
small, you can externalize virtually everything.” Don’t make yourself—your 
self—small; that’s the Cartesian error; recognize that there is a nonmysterious, 
and valuable, concept of a self that can be large enough to take responsibility 
and act morally. (In this regard, see also my discussions of Wegner’s residual 
Cartesianism in Dennett 2003a, 2003b, 2004.)
Dawkins, overreacting to the foolishness of the Cartesian vision of free will 
and its absolutist concepts of good and evil, and moral responsibility, imagines 
throwing out the notions of good and evil altogether. Wegner reassures his read-
ers that “moral action is quite real” but doesn’t try to say how this can be (if 
conscious will is an illusion). Like Wegner, Blackmore shrinks from abandon-
ing the notion of moral responsibility altogether, and she ends her book with a 
brief and optimistic look at how the world might seem to a living human body 
that had abandoned the perspective of the “selfplex” altogether: “This lack of 
self-concern means that you (the physical person) are free to notice other people 
more. Compassion and empathy come naturally. . . . Perhaps the greater part of 
true morality is simply stopping all the harm that we normally do, rather than 
taking on any great and noble deeds; that is, the harm that comes from having 
a false sense of self” (1999, p. 246). Perhaps. And perhaps not. Is she going to 
jettison our systems of law and punishment? Is she going to abandon the social 
leverage by which we encourage people to take responsibility for their actions? 
Is she prepared to dismiss the distinction between honesty and cheating as just 
another myth fostered by the traditional concept of free will?
Vohs and Schooler (in press) have recently described some pioneering 
research on the actual effect of the expression of doctrines about free will on 
behavior. In their first experiment, one group of students was given a passage to 
read from Francis Crick’s The Astonishing Hypothesis that “claimed that rational, 
thinking people (such as scientists) have long denounced the idea of free will, 
noting that it is instead a byproduct of the human mind” Notice how seamlessly 
this statement welds the idea of free will to the idea of a magical, dualistic kind 
of inner chooser. No mention is made of morality or responsibility; the only idea 
that “rational, thinking people” have denounced is the “idea of free will.” Which 
idea of free will? The control group was given a passage from the same book on 
another topic. Participants in both groups were then given a task in which there 
was an opportunity to cheat—to get more money for their participation in the 
experiment than they would earn by abiding by the rules—and those who had 
read the passage denying the existence of free will cheated significantly more 
often than those in the control group. This is not a result that supports Black-
more’s optimism. Vohs and Schooler have yet to do the balancing experiment 
in which one group reads an authoritative statement that assures them that 

256  are we free?
science has shown that free will is real—just not what they might have thought 
it was. The passage I have suggested to Schooler would be
Scientists have established that every single action and thought that you have 
is caused by the current state of your brain and body, which in turn is caused 
by the interaction between your current environment as you experience it, 
your whole life history, and, of course, your initial genetic endowment.
Some are tempted to conclude from these facts that we don’t really 
have free will, but this is a mistake. Free will in the sense that matters, in 
the sense that makes you responsible for your actions and that gives mean-
ing to both your strivings and your regrets, is determined by how your brain 
deals with the reasons it finds for acting. Philosophers have established 
that you can still have free will and moral responsibility when the decisions 
your brain arrives at are your decisions, based on your very own reasoning 
and experience, not on any brainwashing or manipulation by others. If your 
brain is normal, it enables you to consider and reconsider your options and 
values indefinitely, and to reflect on what kind of a person you want to be, 
and since these reflections can lead to decisions and the decisions can lead 
to actions, you can be the author of your deeds, and hence have free will in 
a very important sense.
Some people have diminished free will and responsibility through no 
fault of their own: their brains malfunction or they have been kept ignorant 
of the facts and values that a normal person knows full well, but those who 
are fortunate enough to have had a normal upbringing arrive at adulthood 
with all the free will necessary to be held accountable for their actions.
Would this, or a more effective version of it, produce a diminution of cheating 
compared to the control group? It will be very interesting to discover. What 
Vohs and Schooler, and a few other psychologists, are now embarking on is 
a new, empirical investigation of how what you believe about free will influ-
ences your behavior, a theme that I have been hammering on for decades (e.g., 
Dennett, 1984, 2003a). It follows directly from this that scientific investigations 
of free will have an environmental impact—in particular an impact on the belief
environment (Dennett, forthcoming) that has to be taken into account. In partic-
ular, if the popularization of the results of this research leads to widespread mis-
understanding of its import—which would be my interpretation of the effect 
Vohs and Schooler have uncovered—it could have a seriously detrimental social 
effect. This does not at all vindicate the traditionalists who have distorted think-
ing on free will for decades, but it does uncover a powerful, and not ignoble, 
motivation for their sometimes deliberate misrepresentation (Dennett, 2003a, 
forthcoming).
What are people afraid of? Perhaps they are afraid of the burgeoning of 
complicating conditions. This is not unreasonable. Once absolutism is aban-
doned, all manner of paths open up down which we might not want people 
walking! Consider a few of the (apparent) possibilities:

the psychology of thinking about free will  
257
YES, we have free will, but only if we take Prozac (or some other drug) 
once a day for the rest of our lives.
YES, we have free will, but only if we can master the stunt of squinting 
whenever we feel tempted to look too closely at the machinery in-
volved.
It’s like golf: Consider the golf pro’s advice to keep your head down until you 
have completed your swing:
But how can this be good advice? The ball leaves the club head in mid-
swing, and after it has begun its trajectory, nothing that happens on the 
tee can alter what trajectory. Isn’t the attention to details of the swing that 
occur after the ball leaves the club just so much body English? Not neces-
sarily. For it maybe that the only way to get the right thing to happen up to 
the moment of impact is to look ahead and fix a more distant goal, counting 
on one’s efforts to satisfy that goal to produce bodily motions that traverse 
just the right space at just the right speed. One would be foolish indeed to 
disregard the pro’s advice on the basis of the argument given above that it 
couldn’t make any difference. It could make all the difference. Sometimes 
the only way to get what you really want is to try to do something else. 
(Dennett, 1984, p. 16)
What if the parallel, in free will, to keeping your head down (in golf), is 
believing in an afterlife? Or believing in the Old Testament God? Is that too 
steep a price to pay for free will? What if you’re simply unable to muster the 
conviction? Have we lost our virginity for free will?
Robert Frank (1988, pp. 111–12) draws our attention to the
practice whereby many affluent couples in New York City recruit govern-
esses for their children. . . . Apparently experience has persuaded many New 
Yorkers that the local labor market is not a good place to recruit people 
who perform reliably without supervision.
The solution many of these couples have adopted is to advertise for 
governesses in Salt Lake City newspapers. they have discovered that per-
sons raised in the Mormon tradition are trustworthy to a degree that the 
average New Yorker is not.
There are other unsettling prospects to explore:
YES, we have free will, but not everybody does. In fact, roughly 10% of the 
adult “healthy” population achieves the intuitively reasonable level of 
moral competence free will demands. Most people are too ill-controlled 
to be held responsible, and ought to be kept in a state of permanent 
childhood, indulged as best we can manage so that they don’t become 
too unruly.

258  are we free?
YES, we have free will—most of us—but each of us is a sort of checker-
board of moral competence and incompetence. Trust alcoholic Adam 
with the lives of your children—unless he’s fallen off the wagon, which 
might happen at any time. Trust idée fixe Irene unless the topic is abor-
tion; she just stops thinking when that issue is raised. Trust adults in gen-
eral about cooperation and integrity so long as they haven’t taken too 
many economics courses!
In fact, of course, we already know that there are grounds for such subversive 
abridgements of our brittle, absolutistic doctrines of free will. We already know, 
as Tori McGeer (personal correspondence) has put it, that free will is not some-
thing that comes for free. We know it because if we have any self-knowledge to 
speak of, we discover such weaknesses in ourselves. And we discover them in 
our loved ones, and—hardest of all to accept—we discover them in our enemies, 
whom we are loath to let off the hook. We ought to admit, up front, that one of 
our strongest unspoken motivations for upholding something close to the tradi-
tional concept of free will is our desire to see the world’s villains “get what they 
deserve.” And surely they do deserve our condemnation, our criticism, and—
when we have a sound system of laws in place—punishment. A world without 
punishment is not a world any of us would want to live in.
We need to coordinate our investigations of the role of censure and pun-
ishment (and praise and reward) in society with our investigations of the com-
plexities of human motivation, and the role of beliefs—and beliefs in beliefs 
(Dennett, 2006)—sin shaping the perspectives of ourselves and our fellow citi-
zens. This is going to be a ticklish task, in which missteps might be painfully 
amplified. No wonder our hands shake when we get to work on it.
REFERENCES
Baars, B. (2004). Comments at the Association for the Scientific Study of Conscious-
ness, 7th annual meeting, Memphis.
Blackmore, S. (1999). The Meme Machine. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. ed. (2002). Philosophy of Mind:Classical and Contemporary Readings,
New York: Oxford University Press.
Dawkins, R. (2006). response to “What Is Your Dangerous Idea?” on edge.org. Also 
in J. Brockman, ed., What Is Your Dangerous Idea?
Dennett, D. C. (1984). Elbow Room: the Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dennett, D. C. (2003a). Freedom Evolves. New York: Viking Penguin.
Dennett, D. C. (2003b). “The Self as a Responding—and Responsible—Artifact,” 
Annals New York Academy of Sciences, 1001, 39–50.
Dennett, D. C. (2003c). “Making Ourselves at Home in Our Machines: The Illu-
sion of Conscious Will,” (review of Wegner, 2002) in Journal of Mathematical 
Psychology, 47, 101–4.

the psychology of thinking about free will  
259
Dennett, D. C. (2004). “Calling in the Cartesian loans” Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences.
Dennett, D. C. (2006). Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon. New 
York: Viking Penguin.
Dennett, D. C. (forthcoming). “How to Protect Human Dignity From Science,” in 
a volume on human dignity, ed. A. Schulman, commissioned by the Presidents 
Council on Bioethics.
Fodor, J. (2003). Review of Freedom Evolves, London Review of Books. March 5.
Frank, R. (1988). Passions Within Reason: The Strategic Role of the Emotion. New York: 
Norton.
Siegel, L. (1991). Net of Magic: Wonders and Deceptions in India. Chicago: Chicago 
University Press.
Strawson, G. (2003)., Review of Freedom Evolves, New York Times. March 2.
Strawson, P. F. (1962). “Freedom and Resentment,” Proceedings of the British Acad-
emy, 48, 1–25. Reprinted in Strawson, ed., 1968, Studies in the Philosophy of 
Thought and Action, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Vohs, K. D., & Schooler, J. (in press) “The Value of Believing in Free Will:
Encouraging a Belief in Determinism Increases Cheating.” Psychological Science.
Wegner, D. (2002). The Illusion of Conscious Will, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Are We Free?
Psychology and Free Will
Edited by
John Baer
James C. Kaufman
Roy F. Baumeister
3
2008

3
Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that further
Oxford University’s objective of excellence
in research, scholarship, and education.
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With offices in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Copyright © 2008 by Oxford University Press, Inc.
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
www.oup.com
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Baer, John.
Are we free? : psychology and free will /
John Baer, James C. Kaufman, Roy F. Baumeister.
  p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978–0–19–518963–6
1. Free will and determinism.
I. Kaufman, James C.
II. Baumeister, Roy F.
III. Title.
BF621.B28 2008
123.’5—dc22  2007036151
“The Fear of Determinism” by Steven Pinker is taken from The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human 
Nature by Steven Pinker (Viking Penguin, a member of Penguin Putnam Inc., 2002) Copyright © Steven 
Pinker, 2002. Reproduced by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper

