local recurrency argues that neurons with receptive ﬁelds
large enough to encapsulate entire objects, bind together
features through recurrent interactions, subserving image
segmentation and perceptual organization [2]. In the the-
ory of coalitions of neurons [3], neurons engage in the
formation of coalitions that represent uniﬁed percepts of
otherwise distributed information. The functional property
that these theories have in common can be loosely summed
up as the ability to integrate or bind information across
spatially separated sets of neurons to infer perceptual
rather than physical attributes of visual stimuli [4,5].
Phenomenal-access theories propose that this property
explains key elements of conscious experience, as many
observations show that it is characteristic of the emergence
of phenomenology [2,6]. Importantly, perceptual organiza-
tion does not require selective attention [6,7], but rather
serves as input for it [8,9]. Thus, although access-only
theories allege that representations are only phenomenal
when reported, access itself does not seem to be involved in
generating the contents of experience, and therefore it has
little power to explain phenomenology [10].
Now if it turns out that the neural mechanisms of
perception established in our perfect experiment subside
when their contents cannot be accessed- as when the green
connections in Figure 1 are lesioned out as Cohen and
Dennett propose- the idea of phenomenology without ac-
cess would be falsiﬁed. In that case, and only then, access
would need to be incorporated into theories of phenome-
nology. If however, given the stimuli presented in Figure 1,
these neural mechanisms continue signaling the perceptual
states corresponding to condition A and condition B, even
though subjects are not able to report about them, the
parsimonious account is to infer that perceptual states
continue to exist without access. According to Cohen and
Dennett however, these mechanisms can no longer be
trusted to operate as previously established, only because
the subject has lost his or her ability to report on them. If
anything, rather than disproving the scientiﬁc validity of
phenomenal-access theories, this step places ‘access-only’
theories outside the realm of science.
References
1 Cohen, M.A. and Dennett, D.C. (2011) Consciousness cannot be
separated from function. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 358–364
2 Roelfsema, P.R. (2006) Cortical algorithms for perceptual grouping.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 29, 203–227
3 Crick, F. and Koch, C. (2003) A framework for consciousness. Nat.
Neurosci. 6, 119–126
4 Singer, W. and Gray, C.M. (1995) Visual feature integration and
the Temporal Correlation Hypothesis. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 555–
586
5 Tononi, G. and Edelman, G.M. (1998) Consciousness and complexity.
Science 282, 1846–1851
6 Super, H. et al. (2001) Two distinct modes of sensory processing
observed in monkey primary visual cortex (V1). Nat. Neurosci. 4,
304–310
7 Scholte, H.S. et al. (2006) The inﬂuence of inattention on the neural
correlates of scene segmentation. Brain. Res. 1076, 106–115
8 Qiu, F.T.T. et al. (2007) Figure-ground mechanisms provide structure
for selective attention. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1492–1499
9 Roelfsema, P.R. et al. (2007) Different processing phases for features,
ﬁgures, and selective attention in the primary visual cortex. Neuron 56,
785–792
10 Lamme, V.A.F. (2010) How neuroscience will change our view on
consciousness. Cogn. Neurosci. 1, 204–220
1364-6613/$ – see front matter  2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.tics.2012.01.004 Trends in Cognitive Sciences, March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3
Response to Fahrenfort and Lamme: deﬁning
reportability, accessibility and sufﬁciency in conscious
awareness
Michael A. Cohen1 and Daniel C. Dennett2
1 Vision Sciences Laboratory, Department of Psychology, William James Hall, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
2 Center for Cognitive Studies, Department of Philosophy, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA
In their letter to TiCS [1], Fahrenfort and Lamme (F&L)
bring up two issues in response to our position [2] that we
address here.
The ﬁrst issue concerns the relationship between access
and reportability. F&L write that we ‘propose that con-
sciousness is inextricably tied to one’s ability to report about
the contents of an experience’. Their criticism seems to rest
on the belief that we claim that consciousness is tied to the
ability to do things such as talk or press a button. This is not
our view. If it were, it would clearly be wrong: information
can be conscious yet verbally unreportable. Some patients
with locked-in syndrome or who are in a persistent vegeta-
tivestate havebeenidentiﬁedasconsciouseventhoughthey
cannot talk about their experiences. However, it must be
stressed that these patients do still report their experiences
by engaging in mental-imagery tasks during functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and it is these ‘reports’
that allow clinicians to identify these patients as conscious
[3–5]. What enables the willful modulation of mental imag-
ery? The mechanisms of access: attention, memory, deci-
sion-making, and so on. Without these mechanisms, a
patient could not hold the instructions in memory, attend
tothe words being spokenoverthesounds ofthescannerand
decide to imagine the stimuli that correspond with a pre-
designated answer. Without these mechanisms, there
would be no reason to believe that these patients are con-
scious of anything at all.
Corresponding author: Cohen, M.A. (michaelthecohen@gmail.com);
Dennett, D.C. (daniel.dennett@tufts.edu).
Letters
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3
139

Thesecondissuedealswiththetypesofneuralprocessing
that are sufﬁcient for awareness. As has been claimed before
[6,7], F&L believe that local recurrency is sufﬁcient for
consciousness, independent of access. They state that if
the mechanisms of access were surgically removed while
local recurrency was preserved, it would prove ‘that con-
sciousness without access exists’ (Figure 1 in [1]). Why do
they believe this? No reason is provided for why local
recurrency must correspond to conscious awareness and
not simply to unconscious visual processing. Proponents
of the phenomenal-access distinction seem to simply accept
it as fact: local recurrency is consciousness. However, what
reason is there to accept this?
Itiseasytoimaginewhataconversationwouldsoundlike
between F&L and a patient (P) whose access to the locally
recurrentactivityforcolorwassomehowsurgicallyremoved.
F&L: ‘You are conscious of the redness of the apple.’
P: ‘I am? I don’t see any color. It just looks grey. Why do
you think I’m consciously experiencing red?’
F&L: ‘Because we can detect recurrent processing in
color areas in your visual cortex.’
P: ‘But I really don’t see any color. I see the apple, but
nothing colored. Yet you still insist that I am conscious
of the color red?’
F&L: ‘Yes, because local recurrency correlates with
conscious awareness.’
P: ‘Doesn’t it mean something that I am telling you I’m
not experiencing red at all? Doesn’t that suggest local
recurrencyitself isn’tsufﬁcientfor conscious awareness?’
Is this criticism avoided by saying that the hallmark of
purely phenomenal states is their being accessible but not
actually accessed [8]? Under this view, removing all access
mechanisms would be removing phenomenology because
phenomenal experiences must be accessible. Again, why
consider accessible, yet not accessed, states as being con-
scious rather than simply the product of unconscious
processing? As the dialog above illustrates, such an ‘expe-
rience’ is one that you cannot attend to, base decisions on,
remember, or report about. Those are all the products of
cognitive access. It does indeed seem to people that there is
more in consciousness than they are accessing at any one
time, and we know that because they tell us, but the simple
act of saying, ‘But it seems like I see more!’ is itself the
product of accessing that information in some attenuated
form. What reason is there to think such information is
conscious before it is accessed?
References
1 Fahrenfort, J.J. and Lamme, V.A.F. (2012) A true science of consciousness
explains phenomenology: comment on Cohen and Dennett. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 16, 138–139
2 Cohen, M.A. and Dennett, D.C. (2011) Consciousness cannot be
separated from function. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 358–364
3 Owen, A.M. et al. (2006) Detecting awareness in the vegetative state.
Science 313, 1402
4 Owen, A.M. and Coleman, M. (2008) Functional neuroimaging in the
vegetative state. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 235–243
5 Monti, M.M. et al. (2008) Willful modulation of brain activity in
disorders of consciousness. New Engl. J. Med. 362, 579–589
6 Lamme, V.A. (2006) Towards a true neural stance on consciousness.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 10, 494–501
7 Block, N. (2005) Two neural correlates of consciousness. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 9, 46–52
8 Block, N. (2011) Perceptual consciousness overﬂows cognitive access.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 567–575
1364-6613/$ – see front matter  2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.tics.2012.01.002 Trends in Cognitive Sciences, March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3
Do we still need phenomenal consciousness?
Comment on Block
Sid Kouider, Je´roˆ me Sackur and Vincent de Gardelle
Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives & Psycholinguistique, Ecole Normale Supe´rieure - CNRS, 29 rue d’Ulm, 75005, Paris, France
In a recent Opinion paper in TiCS, Ned Block [1] confronts
the recent empirical and theoretical challenges to his
distinction between two forms of consciousness (i.e. rich
‘phenomenal’ vs sparse ‘access’). Although we value his
attitude of facing these issues, we still believe that the
proposed ‘unaccessed phenomenal consciousness’, which is
the cornerstone of this theoretical proposal, remains un-
falsiﬁable and can be accounted for by other, more parsi-
monious, explanations.
Block argues that the information prior to conscious
access (e.g. letters prior to the cue in Sperling experi-
ments) is phenomenally conscious. We have argued in
previous work for the impossibility of probing the nature
of these so-called ‘phenomenal’ contents without having
subjects relying on some form of access to describe their
experience [2,3]. As this would necessarily change the
status of these contents, it renders impossible addressing
whether they were of a phenomenal or unconscious nature
prior to access [4–6]. Thus, an ‘observer effect’ might
potentially render the whole issue immune to scientiﬁc
investigation [7].
In his recent article [1], Block proposes a new strategy
that consists of relying on measures of capacity as indirect
evidence for phenomenal consciousness. According to this
proposal, rich phenomenal consciousness translates to
high capacity, as opposed to the scarce capacity of con-
scious access. However, Block omits the fact that capacity
is a measure of informational availability, regardless of
consciousness. As such, capacity may well reﬂect the
amount of information that is unconsciously processed
and that can potentially inﬂuence the cognitive system.
Corresponding author: Kouider, S. (sid.kouider@ens.fr).
Letters
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3
140

