THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 6, 391-421
Printed in the United States ot America
How are grammars represented?
Edward P. Stabler, Jr.
Centre for Cognitive Science, SSC, University of Western Ontario, London,
Ont., Canada N6A 5C2
Abstract: Noam Chomsky and other linguists and psychologists have suggested that human linguistic behavior is somehow governed
by a mental representation of a transformational grammar. Challenges to this controversial claim have often been met by invoking an
explicitly computational perspective: It makes perfect sense to suppose that a grammar could be represented in the memory of a
computational device and that this grammar could govern the device's use of a language. This paper urges, however, that the claim
that humans are such a device is unsupported and that it seems unlikely that linguists and psychologists really want to claim any such
thing. Evidence for the linguists' original claim is drawn from three main sources: the explanation of language comprehension and
other linguistic abilities; evidence for formal properties of the rules of the grammar; and the explanation of language acquisition. It is
argued in this paper that none of these sources provides support for the view that the grammar governs language processing in
something like the way a program governs the operation of a programmed machine. The computational approach, on the contrary,
suggests ways in which linguistic abilities can be explained without the attribution of any explicit representation of rules governing
linguistic behavior.
Keywords: cognition; computation; grammar; language; learning; linguistics; program; representation; rule-governed behavior
This paper will consider whether there is evidence to
support claims that some human behavior is "rule-gov-
erned" in something like the way that the behavior of a
programmed computer is "rule-governed." In particular,
I will examine in detail a claim that in certain cases the
behavior of an organism is the result of a computational
process that is governed by a set of internally represented
rules or formulae of some programming language. There
have been many proposals that could be construed in this
way. Von Neumann (1958) speculated that the brain uses
a higher-level programming language (or, in his terms, a
"short code"), and this sort of claim has since become
quite popular. Young (1964) proposed that this computa-
tional account was the appropriate one for neurophysiolo-
gists, and he has been followed in this by Arbib and others
(see Szentagothai & Arbib 1975). Similar accounts have
been adopted by psychologists. Motor-learning theorists
talk about the programming of motor behavior (e.g.,
Stelmach 1978), and psycholinguists have compared nat-
ural human languages to higher-level programming lan-
guages, which are compiled and then executed (Fodor et
al. 1974; Johnson-Laird 1977). I will concentrate, howev-
er, on the claim made by Noam Chomsky (1965; 1969;
1972; 1975; 1980a) and other linguists that human linguis-
tic behavior is somehow governed by an "internalized"
generative transformational grammar. This proposal has
received a good deal of attention, and in the controversy it
has engendered the computer analogy has frequently
been appealed to. I will argue that there are no grounds
for assuming that the grammar or any other rules govern
linguistic behavior in the way that a program governs a
programmable computer, and in the course of this argu-
ment the difficulties facing any psychological theory that
makes such a claim will become clear.
The computational framework
Despite the difficulties we may have in grasping or
spelling out the details of any particular computational
description of a physical system, there should be nothing
mysterious about computational description in general. It
is just a certain way of describing the operation of physical
systems, a way that is often quite clear and particularly
useful. What we call "calculators" and "computers" are
basically just physical systems that because of their design
are conveniently described in computational terms and
useful for this reason. But actually any physical system
can be given some computational description or other.
Let me explain what I mean by this and define some
terms that will be used below.
We can provide a computational description of a physi-
cal system by specifying a "realization function," a 1-1
mapping or "encoding" (fR) from physical states of the
system into some set of symbols, so that changes of
physical state correspond to symbolic transformations.
When these changes in physical state are regular and
predictable, so are the associated symbolic transforma-
tions. So, for example, sometimes we can specify a real-
ization function such that in some specifiable circum-
stances, C, the system will always, in virture of natural
laws that apply to the system, go from one state, Sj, in-
to another, s{, where for every such pair of states, the
symbol associated with the final state, fR(sf) is a function F
of the symbol associated with the initial state fR (st). In
such a case I will say that the system computes the
function F. This is the basic idea upon which all computa-
tional descriptions rest. I will call a theory that provides
such a description of a physical system a first-level com-
putational theory.1 I will consider theories that provide
0 1983 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X1831030391-31/$06.00
391

Stabler: How are grammars represented?
much richer descriptions of physical systems, but any one
of them which describes some sort of physical system as
computing a function thereby qualifies as a first-level
theory.
Since programs are so common in computational theo-
ries, it is perhaps worthwhile to note that a program may
be used in providing even a first-level description. For
example, if the function F computed by a system (under
some interpretation fR, in some circumstances C) is quite
complicated, we may find it useful to provide an al-
gorithm for computing its values, and this algorithm may
be expressed in a programming language. Of course, a
program that yields a unique value for each different
input defines a function, so a program may be used in
even a first-level theory to specify the function computed
by the system.
Programs sometimes provide more than just a specifi-
cation of the function computed, however. A program
typically expresses an algorithm according to which a set
of input symbols are transformed into the corresponding
output symbols in a sequence of steps. The symbols that
result from the execution of every step of the procedure
may be in the range of the interpretation fR, in which case
the system may compute the function specified by the
algorithm by passing through each of the intermediate
states; it may execute each of the appropriate instructions
(II, 12, . . . , In) of the program by computing the func-
tions (Fn, FI2 • . . , FIn) specified by the instructions
(taking the final state or output of the computation of each
instruction I; as the input to the computation of If + x for
1 < i < n - I).2 In such a case I will say that the system
executes or computes the program. It computes the func-
tion specified by the program by computing the appropri-
ate sequence of functions. I will call a theory that is
committed to the view that a system can be described as
computing a program a second-level theory.
A second-level theory, then, is necessarily a first-level
theory, since it describes a system as computing certain
functions. When a second-level theory describes a system
as computing a nontrivial program (i.e., a program with
more than one step) in the manner just described, it just
has more content than a strictly first-level theory, which
simply describes the same system as computing the
function defined by the program.
Sometimes a computational theory will provide not
only a specification of a program that is computed by a
certain system, but also some account of how the system
actually carries out the computation. In the jargon of the
computer engineer, such theories describe a physical
system as computing a program "because its operation is
governed by an actual representation of that program."
We will cash this out in terms of a precise definition of a
program-using system.
A program-using system is a system that uses some
program P to govern its computation of that program,
where this is explained as follows. Such a system has an
encoding of the program itself. We can think of the
program as a set of formulae, "instructions," and then the
encoding is a (1-1) "program-realization" function fP,
which maps these instructions into states of the system.
The system also has a set of states, which we can call
"control states," which are associated with the encoded
instructions in such a way that the system always com-
putes the function associated with the encoded instruc-
tion that is associated with the control state of the system.
In other words, the system computes function F corre-
sponding to instruction Ii because it is in a control state
which determines that the encoding fP(Ii) will determine
that FIf is computed. Thus if the control mechanism had
been in a control state which made some different encod-
ing fp(Ij) causally efficacious, then the function F,j (possi-
bly different from Fri) would have been computed. In
such a case, when the system computes a program P
because it is using an encoding of P to govern its operation
in this way, the system uses the program to govern its
operation. A theory that is committed to the view that a
system operates in this way is what I will call a third-level
theory.
A theory that proposes that some system is a "stored-
program computer" (in the ordinary sense) will be a third-
level theory (in the sense just defined), since conven-
tional computers work in just this way. A third-level
theory is also necessarily a second-level theory, since it is
committed to the view that a program is computed. A
second-level theory that did not provide any account of
the mechanism by which a system computes the program
would not be a third-level theory. And a second-level
theory can fail to be a third-level theory if it provides an
account of how the computation is carried out that does
not involve the use of an encoding of the program com-
puted. Let me explain this last point carefully, since it will
be of some importance.
Any program that can be computed by a program-using
system can be computed "directly" by a system that we
would clearly not want to call a program-using system.
We can, for example, take electronic circuits that com-
pute some very basic functions and assemble them in
such a way that the assembly as a whole computes a
function that is a particular composition of the basic
functions. In this way, networks of electronic circuits can
be "hardwired" to compute even very complex programs
directly, without having control states to govern their
operation according to an encoding of a program.3 In
these systems no explicit encoding of the program is
accessed or manipulated. Of course (as follows from the
account above), the crucial difference between program-
using systems and others is not whether some part or
other of the system is "wired in" but whether there is a set
of states in the system that encode the program and that
have the appropriate causal role in controlling the opera-
tion of the system (as specified in the definition of "pro-
gram-using system" above).
In fact, any program that can be computed by any
system can be computed directly, or by a program-using
system, or by some sort of "hybrid" system that uses a
program to govern its computations of only certain steps
of the program. It is easy to show that simple circuits
wired up in the fashion just mentioned can compute any
program. It is also important to notice that there is a
significant difference between first- and second-level
computational descriptions, on the one hand, and third-
level computational descriptions, on the other. All three
kinds of theory involve giving a symbolic interpretation to
relevant states of the system; in the jargon of the comput-
er user, we might say that all three describe certain
behavior of the system as the "manipulation of represen-
tations. " But whereas the first two levels of computational
theory use a program simply to describe how the encoded
392
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3

symbols are transformed, we ascend to the third level
only when we make a claim about why the specified
computations are carried out. A direct system transforms
representations of the objects of the computation - i.e., it
transforms the encoding of the "data" or "memory set" -
but a third-level theory has the additional commitment to
the existence of both an encoding of the rules or instruc-
tions of the program itself and a mechanism that uses
these encoded instructions to control the transformation
of the memory set. A program-using system is thus
distinguished by the way its computational processes are
controlled.
Contrasts with other frameworks. It is important to see
how first-, second-, and third-level theories as they have
been defined here compare with other theoretical ap-
proaches. Suppose, for example, that a psychologist pro-
poses a third-level theory: he proposes that under a
realization mapping of a certain sort, humans have inter-
nally encoded a program P that is used in certain circum-
stances, say, to process certain sensory input. Such a
proposal obviously contrasts with any (strict) behaviorist
theory, since it has quite definite commitments to inter-
nal states of the organism. And this proposal would also
require more than just (the trivially satisfied condition)
that the program P be somehow physically encoded in the
organism, since it requires that these encodings have (in
both actual and possible situations) the appropriate causal
roles, as described above (and see note 1). A (strict)
behaviorist would presumably also object to any first- or
second-level theory that claimed that computations over
nonsensory and nonbehavioral states were carried out,
although he would probably not object to simple com-
putations from stimulus input to behavioral output.
Our framework could be cast in different and perhaps
more familiar computational terms, but then one must
take care to avoid letting the terms suggest commitments
that theories in the present framework do not (or need
not) really have. For example, in the jargon of the
computer-using community, the framework proposed
here provides an account of when a theory makes claims
"above the level of hardware." Obviously, we get above
the "hardware level" when we propose third-level theo-
ries about the "software," i.e., about the programs used
by a system. This terminology is unfortunate, though,
insofar as it suggests that the "software" is something
other than "hardware," something other than a physical
part or feature of the system, or something other than the
"wiring." These suggestions of the colloquial terms are
incorrect. The present account makes clear the commit-
ment to an actual physical and causally efficacious realiza-
tion of any program used by any physical system. This
realization might well involve wiring, or switch positions,
or neurophysiological states, or any number of other
undeniably physical features. The important thing is not
the "physicalness" of the encoding of the program but the
role of the encoding in governing the computational
processes of the system.
There are other explicitly computational theories that
are not easily translated into the terms we have defined
here. For example, some have argued that the notion of
an encoding that has some appropriate causal role in the
functioning of a system, in one of the senses defined
above, does not capture any appropriate idea of the
Stabler: How are grammars represented?
"representation" of a memory set or program. Pylyshyn
(1980; forthcoming) takes a position rather like this when
he says that we ought to distinguish "representation-
governed" processes from the "fixed capacities of mind,"
which he calls the "functional architecture." This distinc-
tion corresponds roughly to our distinction between sys-
tems that use programs and those that do not, except that
Pylyshyn does not explicate his notion of a "representa-
tion" in terms of "encodings" with appropriate roles. But,
of course, if we do not know what counts as a "representa-
tion" in his sense, the empirical content of theories
formulated in his terms is unclear.
Another class of theories that is familiar in cognitive
science and that suffers from a similar and related diffi-
culty is that of the mentalist theories in psychology, i.e.,
those theories which are formulated in (inter alia) our
pretheoretically familiar mental terms. Of particular in-
terest in cognitive science are theories that explain
human behavior in terms of beliefs and desires (both
conscious and "tacit" or "unconscious"). There is an ever-
growing philosophical literature testifying to the diffi-
culty of understanding what "mental" states are and
whether it is appropriate to mention them in scientific
explanations of human and animal behavior. Again, inso-
far as these matters are unclear, the significance of men-
talist theories is unclear, as is the relation of these
theories to theories expressed in computational terms.
[See Dennett: "Intentional Systems in Cognitive Ethol-
ogy" BBS 6 (3) (this issue).]
There is one tradition in this controversy, though, that
ties computational and mentalist theories very close to-
gether with the assumption that propositional attitudes
(like belief and desire) are "computational relations to
mental representations." Views of roughly this sort are
advocated by Fodor (1975; 1981a), Field (1978), Pylyshyn
(1980; forthcoming), and others. On this view and the
further assumption that the notion of "computational
relation to a mental representation" could be explicated
in the vocabulary defined here, any propositional-atti-
tude psychology could be explicated in our terms. But the
relations between these different sorts of accounts are
matters of current controversy, and the whole story
promises to be exceedingly complicated. In any case, the
computational terms we will use in the present investiga-
tion have the enormous advantage of being relatively
precise and unmysterious, so we can be clear where
others have not been.
The representational hypothesis
Now let's consider the theory that language users employ
an "internalized" transformational grammar when they
exercise their linguistic abilities. Do proponents of this
theory mean to suggest that the grammar is encoded and
used by a program-using system? As we will see, some of
their remarks suggest that they do, but it should be kept
in mind that we are bringing to bear distinctions that are
not usually attended to.
The theory I want to consider has been most clearly
formulated by Noam Chomsky. He proposes that each
natural language is described by a generative transforma-
tional grammar, and he proposes the following hy-
pothesis:
(M) The grammar is mentally represented and used in
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3
393

Stabler: How are grammars represented?
the exercise of linguistic abilities such as understanding
speech and making grammaticality judgments.
I will call this the "mental-representation hypothesis"
(M). It is usually stated in these mentalist terms, and it
has, unsurprisingly, generated some controversy, which
I will discuss below. Chomsky urges that in proposing this
view he is claiming that language behavior is "rule-
governed" behavior; in exercising our linguistic abilities
we are "following" the rules of the grammar rather than
merely conforming to them (1980b, pp. 13, 54-55). The
evidence for this view is that it explains certain facts about
our language better than any alternative theory does:
The evidence bearing on the hypothesis attributing
rules of grammar to the mind is that . . . facts [about
language] are explained on the assumption that the
postulated rules are part of the AS [the "attained state"
of the language learner] and are used in computations
eventuating in such behavior as judgements about form
and meaning. (1980b, p. 54)
I know of no other account that even attempts to deal
with the fact that our judgements and behavior accord
with and are in part explained by certain rule systems
(or, to be more accurate, are explained by theories that
attribute mental representations of rule systems). . . .
The critic's task is to show some fundamental flaw in
principle or defect in execution, or to provide a differ-
ent and preferable account of how it is that what
speakers do is in accordance with certain rules - an
account that does not attribute to them a system of
rules (rules which in fact appear to be beyond the level
of consciousness). (1980b, p. 12)
In short, we need to assume that the grammar is repre-
sented and used in order to explain certain facts about
human linguistic abilities. Human language processing is
distinguished in this respect from simpler processes that
presumably do not use represented rules to govern the
behavior. Chomsky points out that things like a person's
riding a bicycle (1969, pp. 154-55), the flight of a bird
(1975, pp. 222-23), or the flight of a pigeon-controlled
missile (1980b, pp. 10-11) can presumably be explained
in terms of "reflexes" or other relatively simple mech-
anisms.
As was noted above, there is some controversy over the
status of mentalist theories. The issue manifests itself in
this context particularly as a worry about what "mental
representations" are. This worry is often answered with
recourse to an explicitly computational perspective. Thus
when Harman (1967; 1969) raised issues about the men-
talist vocabulary in these hypotheses, Chomsky re-
sponded with the following remarks:
. . . we postulate unconscious knowledge of the
rules of the grammar if this postulation is empirically
justified by the role it plays in explaining the facts of use
and understanding and acquisition of language. . . . I
see no objection to saying that "knowledge of these
principles" (obviously, unconscious knowledge) is in-
nate, though I do not want to insist on this (in my view,
perfectly appropriate and understandable) terminol-
ogy. It would be easy to program a computer in this
fashion. . . .
Consider now language use. I proposed that the
mature speaker has internalized a grammar with specif-
ic properties that I and many others have discussed in
many places, and that in understanding speech he
makes use of this grammar to assign a percept a signal.
Again, it is possible to design a computer that operates
in this manner (and, in fact, there has been a fair
amount of experimentation with such programs).
There are many possible ways in which such a program
might make use of the rules of the stored grammar; it is
a central problem of psycholinguistics to explore these
possibilities. (1969, pp. 155-56)
The computational perspective endorsed in these pas-
sages has not been abandoned by Chomsky or by many of
the linguists and psychologists that have taken up this
kind of approach. As the passages quoted earlier indicate,
Chomsky still endorses the psychological claim that ma-
ture speakers have "mentally represented" grammars of
their languages, and that these represented grammars are
used "in computations eventuating in behavior such as
judgements about form and meaning." One can agree
with Chomsky's view that this sort of view makes perfect
sense and that it is a central problem of psycholinguistics
to consider how represented rules of grammar might be
used. Psycholinguists also ought to consider whether the
attribution of represented rules is needed to explain
linguistic behavior, as Chomsky claims. It is remarkable
that this sort of investigation has not yet been undertaken
with any rigor, either in this context or in any of the other
areas in which similar computational theories have been
proposed. I propose to remedy this situation, casting the
Chomskyan views in the relatively precise terms that I
defined above. Those who do not endorse this computa-
tional construal and yet want to make similar psychologi-
cal claims are faced with the difficulty of explaining what a
realistic acceptance of their claims commits them to.
There are three main points in the Chomskyan position
that suggest that a third-level theory is being proposed.
First, it is claimed that the rules of grammar are "men-
tally represented," and it is suggested that this "repre-
sentation" is rather like the "representation" of rules in a
computer. In the precise terms defined above, we would
construe this claim in such a way that it entails at least that
the rules are encoded. Second, these "represented" rules
are assumed to actually govern language processing, not
merely to describe it. They are used to "generate" the
mental representations used in language understanding,
for example. This appears to be closely analogous to the
third-level commitment to the view that encoded rules
are used, rather than simply computed. And finally, this
sort of system, a system that "follows" "represented
rules," is distinguished from simpler systems that do not
use them. These points are precisely what a third-level
theory would be committed to. It would have a commit-
ment to encoded rules or instructions that control the
computation. And whereas virtually any system can be
given a second-level computational description according
to which "representations" (i. e., an encoded memory set)
are transformed, a third-level computational description
according to which the system computes a nontrivial
program is true only of certain quite complex and struc-
tured systems. So perhaps at last these claims about the
role of the grammar, which have aroused so much contro-
versy, can be provided with a clear explication in our
precise computational terms. Let's make a third-level
construal of the claims explicit. We can then assess it and
compare it with other proposals about the role of encoded
394
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3

rules of grammar and also with proposals that do not
presume that the rules are encoded at all.
The grammar itself is not a language-processing al-
gorithm, of course. But we can assume that the grammar
is used in the course of executing such an algorithm. We
can make this claim precise in the terms defined above.
The claim that the grammar governs language processing
could be construed as entailing the following sort of
second-level hypothesis with respect to each linguistic
ability:
(H2) Language understanding involves the computa-
tion of some program P, a program that includes the
rules of the grammar, G, which are executed to gener-
ate linguistic representations.
And so, then, the claim that the grammar is mentally
represented and used in language processing would be
construed as committing us to the following third-level
claim:
(H3) In human language understanding, the computa-
tion of P is carried out by a program-using system
whose operation is governed by an encoding of P (and
hence also of G).
This last proposal clearly commits us to what I am calling a
third-level theory. I will argue that, although third-level
theories are certainly suggested by the remarks of many
linguists and psychologists, and although no other plausi-
ble construal of these remarks suggests itself, third-level
theories, and this one in particular, are not supported by
any available evidence and are probably not something
that the linguists or psychologists really want to propose.4
However, as was pointed out above, one might want to
claim that the grammar is not encoded and used as a
program but rather is encoded in the memory set "as
data" over which other computations are defined. This
proposal will also be considered, but, as we will see, it is
not so natural a construal of the linguists' suggestions, and
it is not supported by available data either.
The grammar as program
My main argument against construing the mental-repre-
sentation hypothesis as a third-level claim is that the
evidence linguists have offered in support of the mental-
representation hypothesis (M) does not support the third-
level hypothesis (H3). The evidence for the mental-
representation hypothesis (M) comes from three related
sources in linguistic theory: (1) the explanation of lan-
guage comprehension and other abilities; (2) evidence for
formal properties of rules of the grammar; and (3) the
explanation of language acquisition. I will consider each
of these sorts of evidence in turn.
Explaining linguistic abilities. Chomsky gives some ex-
amples of the sort of evidence that is used to support the
mental-representation hypothesis (M) in a recent paper
(Chomsky 1980b). Linguists discover some regular rela-
tion between declarative sentences and the correspond-
ing interrogatives, or some constraints on anaphoric rela-
tions between a reciprocal expression and its antecedent,
and so they propose hypotheses like the following:
some general principle of language applies to permit
the proper choice of antecedent - not an entirely trivial
matter. . . . Similarly, some general principle of Ian-
Stabler: How are grammars represented?
guage determines which phrases can be questioned.
(P-4)
The proposed set of rules and principles, the grammar, is
assumed to be "one basic element in what is loosely called
'knowledge of language.'" The assumption that the gram-
mar is used then explains linguistic abilities, such as the
ability to understand a natural language. That is, it ex-
plains why the speaker of the language respects the
generalizations captured by the grammar in the exercise
of his linguistic abilities. Or rather, it explains why the
speaker's performance respects the grammar insofar as it
does; presumably, other performance factors will also be
required to explain aspects of linguistic behavior. In any
case, we have an argument here for supposing that the
grammar is mentally represented and used in language
processing, as the linguists claim.
Granting that this is one of the basic forms of argument
for the mental-representation hypothesis, our question is
whether it has any plausibility as an argument for the
third-level hypothesis (H3). If the argument does provide
support for the third-level hypothesis, we should be able
to render it in a form that is a little clearer about its
computational commitments. So, to begin with, there is
perhaps a viable argument here to the effect that gram-
matical rules are computed in language understanding,
that the grammar G is somehow "embedded" in whatever
procedure is computed. The argument for this claim is
already quite clear. It could be put as follows: the only
plausible explanation of how a person understands a
sentence is that he formulates the various representations
of the sentence that are generated by the grammar, the
representations over which the nongenerative rules and
principles are defined. The most plausible account of this
process is that the grammar itself is employed in the
computation, its rules being executed (in the sense de-
fined above) to generate the requisite representations at
appropriate points in the computation, and to apply the
other appropriate rules and principles to the representa-
tions so generated. There are procedures, such as what
are called "analysis-by-synthesis algorithms," which use a
generative grammar in this way, though these are per-
haps only crude first guesses at what might be going on.
There may be other procedures that make much more
efficient use of the grammatical rules. The argument that
some such procedure is computed, though, is just that a
procedure that has the grammar G embedded in it could
presumably be one whose computation would respect the
generalizations captured by the grammar. So this sup-
position about the procedures computed could explain
why many aspects of the speaker's linguistic behavior
accord with the grammar - the procedures computed
actually involve the execution and application of the
grammatical rules.
This is an argument for the second-level hypothesis
(H2), though, and not an argument for the third-level
hypothesis (H3). That is, this argument supports the
proposed view about what program is computed in lan-
guage understanding, but it does not support any particu-
lar view about what mechanisms are responsible for this
computation. Since any computable program can be
computed by a "direct" or "hardwired" system, by a
"hybrid" system, or by a "program-using" system, the
attribution of any of these mechanisms would suffice to
explain why the system computes the program it com-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3
395

Stabler: How are grammars represented?
putes. Any of these explanations would be adequate to
account for "how it is that what the speakers do is in
accordance with certain rules, or is described by these
rules." Thus, further evidence is needed to support any
particular claim about which sort of mechanism is, in fact,
responsible for the computation. So even if we assume
that our argument for the second-level hypothesis (H2) is
a good one, the question is: What evidence supports the
further claim that the program P and hence also the
grammar G are internally encoded and controlling the
computation? I am unable to see any grounds in the sort of
argument presented here for the claim that the rules of
grammar are not only computed to generate the requisite
representations but also encoded and used in language
processing. Since this encoding and use of the rules is
what we are assuming is meant by the proposal that the
rules are "represented" and "followed," we have no
evidence for M as we are construing it.
Similar points have been made before. For example,
John Searle (1980) makes exactly the right point in the
following passage:
The claim that the agent is acting on rules involves
more than simply the claim that the rules describe his
behavior and predict future behavior. Additional evi-
dence is required to show that they are rules the agent
is actually following, and not mere hypotheses or gen-
eralizations that correctly describe his behavior; there
must be some independent reason for supposing that
the rules are functioning causally. (P. 37)
We are making an analogous point about the difference
between the second- and third-level hypotheses: the
second-level hypothesis asserts only that the language
processing conforms to the rules of the grammar, while
the third-level hypothesis asserts that the processing
conforms to the rules because the rules are encoded
("represented") and used ("followed").5 It should be
emphasized that this criticism does not show any "con-
ceptual problems" for third-level theories; it is just that
no good evidence has been presented for them. And if
one were to abandon the third-level claims on this
ground, one could still maintain a first- or second-level
hypothesis about the significance of grammars. One could
maintain for example, that in understanding we compute
the function from phonetic representation to "logical
form" that is defined by the grammar. Such a claim would
still have the "realist" commitments to actual encodings
of the structural descriptions generated by grammars but
would not have any commitment to a causally efficacious
encoding of the rules of the grammar. These matters will
be considered in detail below.
In any case, if Chomsky is proposing H3, then we have
done what he says the critic must do, which is "to show
some fundamental flaw in principle or defect in execu-
tion, or to provide a different and preferable account of
how it is that what the speakers do is in accordance with
certain rules - an account which does not attribute to
them a system of rules" (1980b, p. 12). The fundamental
flaw in principle is the failure to recognize that additional
evidence is needed to support the claim that the rules are
not only computed but also encoded and used. The basic
point is just that some devices compute a function F or a
program P without having anything which we could
regard as an encoding of a particular name of F or
representation of P which is causally responsible for the
computation. One sort of alternative account that does
not attribute represented rules is the theory that the rules
are computed "directly" or by a "hybrid" system, i.e., by
a system that is not a program-using system. There will
always be possible systems of this sort that are capable of
computing whatever program a program-using system
can compute. This alternative may in fact be preferable,
since direct, hardwired computation is typically much
faster and more efficient than computation on a program-
using system, and one of the most striking features of
human linguistic behavior is its speed and versatility. If,
on the other hand, Chomsky and other linguists do not
mean to propose the third-level hypothesis (H3), then the
failure to provide the needed evidence is not in the least
surprising. If they are not proposing H3, though, it is not
at all clear what they are proposing, and we ought to
worry about whether we can justify the current emphasis
on program-using systems in theories about how people
process language. We will return to these points.
The commitments of formal universals. The second line
of argument for the mental-representation hypothesis
(M) that ought to be considered here has been pointed out
by Fodor, Bever, and Garrett (1974) and others. They
point out that linguists often seem to be making claims
about formal properties of the rules of the grammar, i.e.,
about their actual vocabulary and syntax, and only repre-
sentations have formal properties. If hypotheses about
formal properties of the rules are needed to explain
certain data, this surely supports the view that the rules
are represented. So we ought to consider whether there
is any such evidence relevant to the formal properties of
the rules and, if there is, whether that evidence supports
the third level (H3).
Fodor et al. (1974) point'out this line of argument in a
discussion of how linguistic universals ought to be ac-
counted for. They say:
. . . there are linguistic universals which serve pre-
cisely to constrain the form in which information is
represented in grammars (i.e., the form of grammatical
rules). The question is: If the universals do not also
constrain the form in which linguistic information is
represented in a sentence-processing system, how is
their existence to be explained? Surely if universals are
true of anything, it must be of some psychologically real
representation of the language. But what could such a
representation be if it is not part of a sentence encod-
ing-decoding system? (Pp. 369-70)
I think that Fodor et al. have fallen prey to a confusion
here about the status of linguistic universals that are
stated as constraints on the form of grammatical rules. In
fact, most linguistic universals do not involve any com-
mitment to rules of a certain form; rather, they involve
formally specifiable constraints on the applicability or
generative power of the rules. Thus, we can think of them
as generalizations that are true of the computations or
operations performed on the linguistic structures posited
by the theory. We do not need to think of them as
generalizations about the syntax or vocabulary of rules as
they are encoded in the human sentence encoding-
decoding mechanism or anywhere else. This distinction is
crucial to the present point, but it is no surprise that it is
occasionally overlooked in the linguistic literature where
it is usually of no significance.
396
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3

Stabler: How are grammars represented?
Chomsky makes the relevant point in the following
passage from "Conditions on Transformations" (1973):
For heuristic purposes we may distinguish two aspects
of universal grammar: (a) conditions on form, and (b)
conditions on function - that is, (a) conditions on
systems that qualify as grammars, and (b) conditions on
the way the rules of the grammar apply to generate
structural descriptions. (P. 232)
It is the "conditions on form" that Fodor et al. apparently
have in mind, but Chomsky rightly emphasizes that the
distinction between these and "conditions on function" is
made only "for heuristic purposes":
The distinction is one of convenience, not principle, in
the sense that we might choose to deal with particular
phenomena under one or the other category of condi-
tions. (P. 232)
The point is really quite clear. Suppose that we have one
set of rules - call them "root transformations" - which
must apply after another set of rules called "cyclic trans-
formations." If it is a universal property of grammars of
possible human languages that there must be two such
sets of rules whose application must be ordered in this
way, we could capture this fact by beginning all and only
cyclic transformations with the dummy symbol 'C and
proposing:
(1) All root transformations must apply after rules
beginning with 'C.
To capture the universal in this way we do need to require
that certain rules have a certain form (namely, that cyclic
rules begin with 'C'), but there is, of course, no need to
express the universal in this way. Instead, we could just
distinguish root transformations from cyclic transforma-
tions on the basis of their operation and say:
(2) Root transformations apply after cyclic trans-
formations.
The latter claim does not commit us to encoded rules
having any particular form, but only to a constraint on the
order in which certain operations can be applied to
linguistic representations.
Let me illustrate this point with another, more likely,
example. Consider one of Chomsky's examples of a "con-
dition on form":
. . . consider the definition of a transformation as a
structure-dependent mapping of phrase markers into
phrase markers that is independent of the grammatical
relations or meanings expressed in these grammatical
relations. This definition makes certain operations
available as potential transformations, excluding oth-
ers. . . . By requiring that all transformations be struc-
ture-dependent in this specific sense, we limit the class
of possible grammars, excluding many imaginable sys-
tems. (1973, p. 233)
Ironically, this universal, which is offered as a "condition
on form," has here been expressed as a "condition on
function"; it requires that grammatical operations apply
to linguistic representations having a certain structure,
not just to those having a certain number of words or a
certain meaning, for example, In fact, Chomsky never
does express this constraint formally as a "condition on
form," but his discussion of it (in Chomsky 1973) indicates
that what he has in mind is that we will capture the
structure dependence of the rules by expressing each one
in such a way as to indicate its dependence on structure.
He mentions the passive transformation, for example; any
of the various typical ways of writing this rule will indicate
that it applies to phrase markers with a certain structure,
as in:
(3) NP1, Aux, Vx, NP2 => NP2, Aux, BE, Vx, by +
NP1.6
In this case, the form of the rule (under its standard
interpretation) indicates to the linguist what structures it
can apply to and what it does; for example, the symbols to
the left of the arrow indicate that the rule applies to
strings that can be factored into four successive sub-
strings, the first and last of which are noun phrases, the
second an auxiliary verb, and the third a verb of a
particular category. It is no doubt convenient to express
grammatical rules in some such form, but it is clear that
the structure dependence of the grammatical operations
does not require us to do so. The structure dependence
is, in fact, entirely neutral with regard to the formal
properties of the rules.
This example is typical of what are called "constraints
on form." Given some standard interpretation of their
formalism, these linguistic universals can be captured by
constraining the form of the rules in certain ways. We
could assume, as Chomsky suggests, that the rules con-
tain symbols that refer to certain kinds of structures, such
as 'NP', 'VP', and so on, but it is clear that the point of this
assumption is not that our rules must have some particu-
lar vocabulary or syntax; it is to rule out operations that
are not structure-dependent. What we really have is a
constraint on the operation of the grammatical rules, a
constraint that will of course be reflected in whatever
formalism we choose, but not a formal constraint. The
proposed linguistic universals apparently all have this
character, so, in sum, it is at least not obvious that there
are any universals that really commit us to rules of a
certain form. As Chomsky points out, the question of
whether the form of the rules or the application of the
rules should be constrained is not an issue that linguists
have worried about. For their purposes, i.e. for the
purposes of characterizing human languages, either sort
of constraint will serve. But in the present context the
issue is crucial, and no grounds have been offered in favor
of the formal treatment, so we have no argument here for
the claim that linguistic rules must be internally encoded.
Language acquisition. Let's turn now to the third basic
source of support for the mental-representation hypoth-
esis. This support derives from certain approaches to
what Chomsky has called the "central problem of linguis-
tic theory": the problem of explaining how a child can
master a language given only limited and degenerate
evidence. Chomsky (1965; 1972), Miller (Miller &
Chomsky 1963), Katz (1966), and others originally pro-
posed that the way to solve this problem is to assume that
language acquisition involves testing hypotheses about
the language being spoken; the child selects the grammar
of his language from the class of possible grammars on the
basis of linguistic evidence:
The child is presented with data, and he must inspect
hypotheses (grammars) of a fairly restricted class to
determine compatibility with this data. Having se-
lected a grammar of the predetermined class, he will
then have a command of the language generated by this
grammar. (Chomsky 1972, p. 159)
This proposal clearly assumes that the possible grammars
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3
397

Stabler: How are grammars represented?
considered in the selection process are represented. So if
this theory of language acquisition is well supported, we
certainly have support for the mental-representation hy-
pothesis, and we ought to consider whether we also have
support for the third-level theory.
The first question, then, is whether this particular
theory of language acquisition is well supported by avail-
able data. In fact, it has been modified and developed
considerably. The problem has been to suggest plausible
constraints on the hypothesis-testing procedure such that
the correct grammar could be acquired with reasonable
efficiency on the basis of the evidence that seems to be
available. The acquisition theories that have been pro-
posed more recently sound rather different from the
original hypothesis-testing theory. In recent work, for
example, Chomsky has proposed:
I will assume that universal grammar provides a highly
restricted system of "core grammar," which represents
in effect the "unmarked case." Fixing the parameters of
core grammar and adding more marked constructions
that make use of richer descriptive resources, the
language-learner develops a full grammar representing
grammatical competence. (1980c, p. 3)
This proposal is not very well developed yet, and it faces
some difficult problems (see, e.g., Pinker, in press). But
notice that it is not so obvious that this proposal requires
that either the core grammar or the acquired grammar be
mentally represented. Indeed, at this early stage the
theory appears to be particularly amenable to the view
that the grammar is not represented. We might assume,
for example, that there is a core grammar that is not
encoded and controlling processing, but that is essen-
tially "wired in," needing only certain adjustments and
additions to yield a full grammatical competence.7 How-
ever, it is premature to speculate about this sort of feature
of a theory that is still so underdeveloped.
There really are no well-worked-out computational
theories of language acquisition that have firm commit-
ments on this issue; nor do I know of any good argument
to the effect that whatever theory is right, it is bound to be
one that assumes the grammar to be represented. So
again we have no good line of support for either the
mental-representation hypothesis or our third-level
construal.
We have now completed our review of the basic sorts of
linguistic evidence that have been offered in support of
the mental-representation hypothesis. It has been argued
that this evidence does not support the third-level hy-
pothesis (H3): H3 is not needed to explain the fact that the
generalizations captured by the grammar are respected in
the exercise of our linguistic abilities; neither is it sup-
ported by the various claims that are apparently about
formal properties of grammatical rules; and finally, there
is no good reason to think that it is required for the
explanation of language acquisition. In fact, it is begin-
ning to look as though linguists must not have intended to
propose the third-level hypothesis at all; they must not
have intended the mental-representation hypothesis to
commit them to any such view. However, in discussions
of speech-recognition models, some linguists have quite
explicitly endorsed third-level theories. Halle and Ste-
vens (1962) suggested that "a set of generative rules must
be stored within the machine" to generate representa-
tions for comparison with the linguistic input in any
"automatic speech recognition scheme capable of recog-
nizing any but the most trivial classes of utterances" (p.
157). Miller and Chomsky (1963) adopted the same as-
sumption with regard to human syntax recognition, and
almost everyone has followed suit. These proposals have
rarely been contrasted with the obvious alternative views
about the computing mechanisms that might be involved.
However, it is interesting to consider what sorts of evi-
dence could be offered specifically in support of the third-
level hypothesis.
Plasticity
Let's begin with a consideration of evidence concerning
what is probably the most outstanding feature of pro-
gram-using systems. This feature is what Pylyshyn (1980)
has called "plasticity." If the operation of a computing
system is governed by an encoding of some program, then
relevant changes in that encoding will produce corre-
sponding changes in the operation of the system. En-
gineers have designed machines, namely programmable
computers, that exploit this feature of program-using
systems to great advantage. A logic circuit can also be
modified to change its operation, but current technology
is such that practical considerations overwhelmingly
favor stored-program systems for most applications. They
are so much more flexible, more "plastic." One hardly
ever thinks of anything but a stored-program computer
when one wants to execute a nontrivial program. Perhaps
the fundamental point about the equivalence of various
sorts of systems has been overlooked partly because of an
implicit faith in the assumption that the considerations
that so overwhelmingly favor stored-program systems for
our technology will also constrain natural systems like the
brain. This possibility deserves careful consideration.
First of all, let's note one possible pitfall in arguments
based on plasticity. Consider some direct, hardwired
computer, such as a simple electronic calculator. The
operation of this system might seem very plastic, in a
sense; it can be made to compute different functions of
different arguments in very short order, simply by press-
ing certain buttons. This is not because the calculator is a
program-using system but simply because it is a system
whose operation depends on what is encoded in its
memory registers and what input it gets. One could
imagine more complicated hardwired systems in which
the relations between what is encoded in memory and
what is computed are more subtle. In all these cases the
apparent plasticity does derive (in part) from the vari-
ability of encodings that obviously have an influence on
what happens, but these encodings do not govern the
computation in the way that a program governs a pro-
gram-using system. The representations are used, we
might say, strictly as data. Any system that can be
correctly described by a second-level theory is of course
influenced by representations, but in program-using sys-
tems there is a control mechanism that determines what
program is to be computed. Any argument from plasticity
to a third-level hypothesis must take account of these
subtleties.
Suppose that there were some creature who could
398
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3

learn a human language by looking at a transformational
grammar of the language for a few minutes.8 This plas-
ticity in the creature's linguistic abilities would certainly
cast doubt on the view that the creature was directly
computing hardwired procedures with the grammar em-
bedded in them. The reason is clear: it is not plausible
that a direct system that computed the grammar could
grow, or be built, in such a short time. (Of course, this is
an empirical assumption.) So we would reject this theory
in favor of the view that the grammar is somehow encoded
in the creature and that this encoding influences the
computations carried out in the exercise of the creature's
linguistic abilities. But this account is, so far at least,
entirely neutral with regard to the question of whether
the represented grammar is itself executed by a program-
using system or whether it is used strictly as data by some
other procedure. That is, the account is neutral between a
third-level theory and the other possible alternative
views about the mechanisms responsible for the com-
putation. The apparent plasticity of the organism's lin-
guistic processing does not distinguish among these alter-
natives, though of course other considerations might do
so.
Plasticity with respect to a certain input, then, does
support the view that the input is encoded and somehow
influences the system, even if it does not itself support a
third-level theory about the processing involved. For this
reason, evidence of plasticity would certainly be of in-
terest in developing a computational account of a natural
system. Unfortunately, it is not found in the sorts of
human language processing that the grammar might be
responsible for. The acquisition of linguistic competence
takes more than a few minutes. We can learn a word in a
few minutes or less, but this is not the acquisition of
information that anyone assumes to be represented in the
grammar of the language. We do not find any evidence of
plasticity with regard to linguistic competence that would
indicate that an encoding of the grammar influences the
operation of any sort of human computing system.
In fact, Jerry Fodor (1983) has pointed out that lan-
guage acquisition is rather like the development of low-
level sensory processes in its lack of plasticity: the lan-
guage development of normal humans exhibits a remark-
ably reliable characteristic course of development across
a wide range of linguistically different environments.
Chomsky suggests that, for this reason, what we call
"learning" a language might be better understood as the
"growth of cognitive structures along on internally di-
rected course under the triggering and partially shaping
effect of the environment," analogous to the genetically
determined growth of physical organs. Language-recog-
nition processes and low-level sensory processes share a
number of other features also. There is some reason to
believe that they are all what Fodor calls "modular"
processes; i.e., they are fast, "bottom-to-top" computa-
tional processes that are relatively autonomous in that
they make use of only a very restricted and specific
domain of information. These processes are also dis-
tinguished by the fact that they seem to be subserved by
particular neural structures. Such modular processes are
perhaps the ones in which computation is most plausibly
carried out directly, without the inefficiency of a mediat-
ing control mechanism that must access a representation
Stabler: How are grammars represented?
of the procedure to be executed. It is interesting to note
that computational theories of low-level sensory pro-
cesses (such as those of Julesz, 1971, and Marr, 1979, on
vision) have explicitly not been committed to third-level
accounts. Julesz and Marr, for example, have speculated
that the processes they have been investigating are im-
plemented by neural networks with a considerable de-
gree of parallelism that compute "cooperative" al-
gorithms.
Parallelism, neurophysiology, and multiple
access
Of course, the mere existence of parallel processing does
not in itself show that a system does not use a program. In
fact, many of the familiar programming languages allow
the programmer to specify steps that can be executed in
parallel. This parallelism is usually "simulated" on a
machine that is essentially like a standard sequential
machine, but this need not be the case. Programmable
parallel machines are being developed and will probably
become more common in the future. Again, the crucial
requirement for a machine's being a program-using sys-
tem is that its computational processes, whether parallel
or not, be controlled by an encoded program.
It is perhaps possible, at least in principle, that neu-
rophysiological evidence could support a third-level the-
ory. No such evidence has been found, however, either
for linguistic processing or any other cognitive process.
The neurophysiologist David Hubel remarked recently:
The brain does not depend on anything like a linear
sequential program; this is at least so for all the parts
about which something is known. It is more like the
circuit of a radio or television set, or perhaps hundreds
or thousands of such circuits in series or parallel, richly
cross-linked. The brain seems to rely on a strategy of
relatively hard-wired circuit complexity with elements
working at low speeds. (1979, p. 46)
The lack of theories in neurophysiology that are commit-
ted to program-using architectures is really not surpris-
ing, and it is probably a mistake to start assuming, on
these grounds, that there are no such architectures. The
distinction between a program-using system and other
sorts of system is really one of detail at the level of the
wiring. The computational account of cognitive processes
would need to be very well developed before neu-
rophysiological data could be brought to bear on any such
issue. The theories of low-level visual processing devel-
oped by Marr and his associates are quite sophisticated;
yet the underlying neurophysiological mechanisms are
only beginning to be understood. And low-level visual
processing hardly exhausts the field of visual perception,
let alone the field of cognitive processes. In the area of
language processing the underlying neurophysiology is
not well understood and cannot as yet tell us anything
about the issues we have been considering here.
Let's consider some of the other sorts of evidence that
might be considered relevant. Any chronometric or other
complexity-related result that can be accounted for by a
third-level theory can be accounted for by a correspond-
ing second-level account and an assumption of "direct"
computation. It has been suggested that we should as-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3
399

Stabler: How are grammars represented?
sume that the grammar is mentally represented since it
embodies information that is used in many different sorts
of activity. It might seem that rather than having, say,
language-comprehension algorithms that simply com-
pute the functions defined by the grammar and linguistic-
judgment algorithms that also happen to compute related
functions, it would be more reasonable to make the
assumption of modularity with respect to the grammar, to
assume that it is represented in one place and accessed by
other cognitive systems. Then one could also make sense
of the possibility that a person could have knowledge of
his language and yet be unable to use it; as Chomsky
(1980a, pp. 51-52) points out, this is a possibility we want
to allow. But this kind of argument (which Pylyshyn,
1980, aptly calls the "multiple-access" argument) does
not support any third-level claim. We could have a
"modular" linguistic processor that is a very fast, direct
computing system that computes the functions from one
level of linguistic representation to another, and this
"module" could be used in the exercise of any linguistic
ability. It could be used in the course of understanding
language and in deciding whether a string is grammatical.
To make such decisions we might, for example, simply
use this module to check (unconsciously) to see whether
the string can be assigned a well-formed linguistic struc-
ture. It is clear that we could perfectly well have such
"multiple access" to systems that do not use an encoding
of the rules they compute. There is no reason to think that
any activity involving linguistic abilities would need any
more than this.
Summary. Returning to our attempt to construe the
mental-representation hypothesis (M) as the third-level
theory (H3), it is remarkable that linguists typically do not
mention plasticity. Plasticity is what program-using sys-
tems are famous for. If a third-level construal were
intended by the advocates of the mental-representation
hypothesis, one would expect a discussion of the absence
of this feature. Again, it appears that a third-level theory
must not be an appropriate construal: not only does the
evidence offered in support of M fail to support H3, but
evidence that clearly would be relevant is not considered.
We can add to this the observation that many of the
linguists' remarks indicate that they do not have anything
like H3 in mind. For example, Chomsky compares M to
the hypothesis that a missile is controlled by a computer
with a representation of a physical theory, without sug-
gesting that the physical theory is embedded in the
program computed by the computer (1980b, p. 11). So
the natural question to ask at this point is: If proponents of
M do not have H3 in mind, then what are they proposing?
This question is not easy to answer. As was noted at the
beginning of this paper, a number of points indicated that
a third-level account was intended; any other construal
will need to be reconciled with these points.
The grammar as data
Before considering some alternative construals of M, let's
quickly review what has been done so far. We have
surveyed the arguments offered by linguists in support of
M, the hypothesis that the grammar is mentally repre-
sented and used in language understanding. It was ar-
gued that this evidence does not support the third-level
hypothesis:
(H3) In human language understanding, a program P
that includes G as a proper part is encoded and com-
puted by a program-using system.
The problem is that evidence offered in support of M does
not serve to distinguish H3 from:
(Hh) In human language understanding, a program P
that includes G as a proper part is computed but not
represented; it is computed by a hardwired or hybrid
system.
In the light of the linguistic evidence, Hh seems at least as
plausible as H3, if not more so. We discovered no
evidence for M that supported H3 any more than it
supported Hh. So, we concluded, no grounds have been
provided for assuming any such program P is computed
by a program-using system rather than a system of some
other kind.
So suppose that proponents of M do not mean to
propose H3. What else might they mean? Well, they
might be construed as intending:
(Hd) In human language understanding, a program P'
is computed (either by a program-using system or by
some other kind of system) that uses G as data.
This hypothesis claims that, under some interpretation,
the language-processing system has a representation of G
in memory to which certain computational processes are
sensitive; parts of G are taken as arguments to functions
that are computed. But proponents of M are never so
explicit about the role of the grammar, so it is really more
plausible to assume that they are proposing that either H3
or Hd is correct. That is, the more likely idea is that they
mean to suggest that whatever model of speech process-
ing is correct, it will be one in which the grammar is
represented and used somehow. We can formulate this
view as follows:
(Hb) In human language understanding, the program
computed either includes G and is computed by a
program-using system or uses G as data or both.
This proposal seems rather unnatural, but, as was ob-
served above, a proposal of just this sort is what evidence
of plasticity would support.
So now the question is whether the evidence adduced
in support of M supports Hb. In particular, does the
evidence for M serve to support Hb as opposed to the
nonrepresentational hypothesis Hh? We did not consider
the looser hypothesis Hb, but a quick review of our
discussion suffices, I think, to show that it will fare no
better than H3 did. The strategy used against the third-
level hypothesis (H3) was to argue that in the light of the
evidence, Hh is just as plausible, so there is no reason to
favor the third-level theory. If we succeeded in this
argument, then it is easy to see that the looser hypothesis
Hb is also undermined; the point is that the evidence
supports the nonrepresentational models just as well as it
supports the representational models. So there is no
reason to favor the loose representational hypothesis over
the nonrepresentational Hh.
Even if Hb were empirically supportable, it would still
have trouble as a construal of the linguists' position. We
noted above that three basic points suggest a third-level
construal of the mental-representation hypothesis: first,
400
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3

rules of grammar are assumed to be "represented"; sec-
ond, these represented rules are computed in the exer-
cise of linguistic abilities; and finally, linguistic behavior
is "rule-governed" rather than simply "in accordance
with the rules." Hb is "looser" than the original third-
level construal H3 in that it allows that the represented
grammar may be used only as data in the computation of
some program. But if this were the case, it is not clear that
there would be any grounds for saying that the rules of the
grammar were computed or executed to generate repre-
sentations. Yet it is possible that the procedure that took
the rules as arguments might do something to that effect.
There would still be a problem, however, with saying that
on this account linguistic behavior is rule-governed. It is
true that the rules of the grammar would influence
linguistic processing, but this sort of influence cannot be a
sufficient condition for a system's being rule-governed. If
it were, we could show, say, the behavior of the
Sun-Mars orbital system to be rule-governed by showing
that under some interpretation of fR the system encodes
rules that are taken as arguments in the computation of
some function F - a nearly trivial exercise. So the hypoth-
esis Hb does not seem to be as good a construal of the
linguists' claim as H3 is; and, as we have seen, even if this
were what they meant, the hypothesis is as unsupported
by available evidence as 113. So we are left without any
plausible construal of the mental-representation hypoth-
esis. All the reasonable construals have failed us.
Conclusions
As noted above, given the lack of evidence for a third-
level theory of grammar one might want to retreat to a
weaker and more defensible first- or second-level hypoth-
esis to the effect that the grammar serves only to define
certain functions that are computed in language com-
prehension, where these are simply the functions that
map one level of linguistic representation into another.
Berwick and Weinberg (1983a) explicitly adopt this weak
first-level hypothesis, for example. However, as we have
seen, such a hypothesis does not warrant the view that the
grammar is represented, even in the already very weak
sense of there being an encoding or realization function fR
or fP that associates the rules of grammar with causally
efficacious states of the system. Certainly more than a
first-level hypothesis has been intended by the claims
that the grammar is "embedded" as a distinct component
in the recognition system, that it is "mentally repre-
sented" and used, that its rules are computed in language
comprehension, and that it represents our knowledge of
language. It is the latter claims that have aroused such
controversy. Few would have been so concerned about
the first-level hypothesis by itself. But perhaps, after all,
that is the only one that should be taken seriously. As
Berwick and Weinberg point out, even if the role of the
grammar were only to define the functions that an ade-
quate recognition device must compute, having some-
thing to play this role alone is enormously valuable.
So we have reached our rather pessimistic conclusion.
Given any program, there are indefinitely many different
kinds of computing systems that can compute it. Some of
these systems are governed by a representation of the
Stabler: How are grammars represented?
program; some of them are not; and in others it may be
unclear which account is correct. In the case of language
understanding, it is still a matter of speculation what sort
of procedure is computed (if a computational account is
going to be successful here at all). So we have here a
positive result of some importance: theories of human
language processing that are really concerned with how
the language processor is implemented ought to consider
the whole range of possibilities. There is apparently no
good reason to focus on program-using systems, or on
systems that have the processing algorithm encoded in
them. The issues invovled in deciding among the various
computational accounts that do or do not suppose that a
grammar is represented are really quite complex. It
appears that we will need a much firmer grasp on what is
going on before this sort of issue can be decided.
Marr and Poggio (1976) have suggested that we must
have a first-level hypothesis about what function is being
computed before we can propose any reasonable hypoth-
esis about what algorithm is computed, and we must have
a reasonable hypothesis about what algorithm is com-
puted before we can begin to investigate the mechanisms
responsible for the computation. I think that this agenda
is overly rigid, but we can conclude, at least, that the
firmly entrenched idea that grammars (or any language-
processing procedures, for that matter) are "mentally
represented" and "used" is in need of defense. On a more
positive note, the burden of our argument has been to
suggest that even if the representational hypotheses were
removed from current theories, very little of the substan-
tial and interesting work that has been done in linguistics
and psychology is going to topple as a result. A true (or
approximately true) linguistic theory, a characterization
of human languages, will not specify the human language-
processing algorithm, nor will it provide any indication of
whether that processing algorithm is encoded and used in
the exercise of linguistic abilities.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper is a revised version of part of my doctoral thesis
(Stabler 1981). I have really had a lot of help. I would like to
thank my thesis readers, Jerry Fodor and James Higginbotham,
and also Robert Berwick, Noam Chomsky, William Demop-
oulos, Howard Lasnik, Justin Leiber, Jay Keyser, Robert Mat-
thews, Zenon Pylyshyn, Amy Weinberg, and Kenneth Wexler
for helpful discussions of this material. A version of this paper
was read at Brown University on April 7,1981, at the University
of Chicago on February 25, 1982, and at the University of
Western Ontario at the eighth annual meeting of the Society for
Philosophy and Psychology on May 14,1982. The discussions of
the paper on these occasions were also very helpful. The sug-
gestions of Stevan Harnad and anonymous referees inspired
some final and important improvements.
NOTES
1. Setting up the framework this way makes computational
descriptions relatively unmysterious, but of course it says noth-
ing substantial about the interesting question of which systems,
exactly, are the ones that are "conveniently" described in
computational terms; it does not explain what a "computer," in
the usual sense of that term, is. A related problem is that of
explaining how to block what Lycan (1981) has called the
"fortuitous" satisfaction of the conditions on a computational
account. The problem is that if we allow the realization mapping
fR to be sufficiently baroque, any system can realize any com-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3
401

Commentary/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
putation. Thus, for example, the claim that humans compute
internal representations of their linguistic input in a certain way
would be trivially true of any physical system under some
realization mapping or other. This would certainly not be a
happy construal of the computational claims. The way to avoid
this is not to read computational psychologists as advancing
claims of the form "Under some fR, such-and-such is computed"
but rather to recognize that they impose quite definite con-
straints on the realization mapping. In the case of the processing
of acoustic linguistic input, for example, we have fairly clear
ideas about what the inputs (which will be in the domain of fR)
must be: they must be states that are regularly caused by the
appropriate acoustic events; the consequent computational pro-
cess must also be a natural causal chain that follows such
stimulation in the appropriate cases; and this process must be
implicated in the etiology of behaviors that depend upon an
understanding of the acoustic input. It is possible that these
"causal conditions" will not sufficiently constrain the mapping
fR, but they certainly are a substantial start.
2. Obviously, this is a simplified account. In programming
languages that are actually used by computers, the correspon-
dence between the well-formed formulae of a program and the
functions to be computed is quite complex, even for the simplest
languages. This sort of account of programming languages is
provided by "denotational semantics" - semantic theories that
interpret symbols of the language as denoting (inter alia) func-
tions over sets that include the memory set of the machine. (See,
e.g., Tennant 1976; Stoy 1977.)
3. In fact, there are results comparing the relative complexity
of the computations of functions by combinational networks of
logic circuits (which do not contain anything that could be
regarded as an encoding of the algorithm computed which
controls the computation) and Turing machines (whose opera-
tion may be controlled by an encoding of the algorithm to be
computed on a one-dimensional tape or other storage struc-
ture). (See, e.g., Schnorr 1976; Pippenger & Fischer 1979).
4. This undertaking should be distinguished from other,
more ambitious projects. For example, one might challenge
both (M) and (H3) on the ground that there is another theory
that does not presume that a generative transformational gram-
mar is used in linguistic processes at all. One might argue, for
example, that speakers use some sort of "heuristics" in language
understanding or that they compute a recognition algorithm
derivable from a lexical-interpretive grammar. (See, e.g.,
Fodor et al. 1974, ch. 6; Kaplan & Bresnan, in press a.) All of
these theories can be construed as making different second-
level claims about what procedures are computed in language
understanding, and with respect to each of them we could ask
whether there is evidence to support the third-level claim that
mental representations of the postulated procedures are actu-
ally in control of the processing. However, in this paper I will
only consider whether what we have called the "mental-repre-
sentation hypothesis" ought to be construed as committing us to
the third-level hypothesis (H3).
5. I suspect that Searle would want to criticize not only the
third-level theory that the rules are represented and used but
also the strongly realist second-level theory that they are com-
puted. However, in this paper we are considering only the
former claim. A critical examination of the methodology for
confirming second-level theories like H2 is beyond the scope of
this paper.
6. Chomsky and many other linguists have since come to
doubt that passive forms are transformationally derived, but the
rule still serves perfectly well here as an example of how
structure dependence is reflected in the form of the transforma-
tional rules.
7. The view that the core grammar might be built into a
language-processing system that computes linguistic pro-
cedures directly conforms well, I think, with Jerry Fodor's
(1983) proposal that language-recognition processes and low-
level sensory processes are "modular." This proposal is further
discussed below.
8. This example was suggested to me by Noam Chomsky
(personal communication).
Open Peer Commentary
Commentaries submitted by the qualified professional readership of
this journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as
Continuing Commentary on this article, Integrative overviews and
syntheses are especially encouraged.
Using what you know: A computer-science
perspective
Robert C. Berwick
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Mass. 02139
Stabler claims that one cannot take linguistic theory as a true
description of the actual (presumably neural) mechanisms that
underlie linguistic behavior (language acquisition and use). The
reason: lingusitic theory is committed to a program-using
model, and the available empirical evidence is equally compati-
ble with a nonrepresentational "hardwired" model. Both prongs
of the argument seem flawed, however, for there is evidence
that the rules and representations posited by grammars are
causally engaged in the machinery of language, and there isn't as
big a difference between program-using systems and hardwired
systems as Stabler would like to think.
Stabler dismisses three possible domains of evidence that
could reveal grammars to be mentally represented and used:
linguistic behavior, linguistic universals, and language acquisi-
tion; interestingly, contra Stabler's analysis, there is reason to
believe that each of these domains does support the hypothesis
of mental representation and use.
1. The use of rules. Once we abandon the mid-1960s struc-
tural-description/structural-change view of transformational
rules, there is evidence that the single "rule" of modern trans-
formational grammar - a rule that takes a syntactic constituent
like a noun phrase and moves it - could be causally engaged in
language processing. Let me mention just one piece of evidence
for this. Recent research carried out by myself and Amy Wein-
berg (Berwick & Weinberg 1983b) shows that one can explain
certain facts about linguistic behavior - in particular, the con-
straint of subjacency and the observable fact of efficient sen-
tence processing - when these rules are quite literally embed-
ded and causally engaged in a model of language processing.
Crucially, the explanation does not hold when one adopts
alternative rule systems that attempt to describe the same
surface facts by something other than a movement rule. That is,
alternative conceptions that obey the same generalizations
(hence conform to the same rules and principles as the transfor-
mational grammar, in Stabler's terminology) but don't use the
same mechanisms fail to explain why a constraint like subjacen-
cy should exist. This, then, is a genuine case where a particular
grammatical rule supports a particular claim about what sort of
mechanism is responsible for a (mental) computation - just what
Stabler has said would be required to show that grammatical
rules are "used."
2. Half a loaf Is better than none. There's good evidence that
the data structures - the units of representation - posited by
402
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3

Commentary/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
theories of transformational grammar are actually engaged -
causally implicated - in on-line language processing. This, after
all, was the burden of Fodor, Bever, and Garrett's (1974)
argument. Algorithms being data structures plus program con-
trol, it would be truly bizarre for the data structures associated
with a certain program to be causally engaged in actual computa-
tion, but not the associated program. Admittedly, it isn't neces-
sary that this be so, but it certainly constitutes a prima facie case.
Of course, Stabler will insist that this doesn't force us to adopt a
causally engaged grammar, but it seems to me that the burden of
proof goes the other way. See also the discussion on compilation
below.
3. Compilation and acquisition. Suppose there was a device
whereby you could write a program that carries out the com-
putation of some function - like, say, a fast fourier transform -
and presto! out pops a piece of silicon that actually carries out
that computation. Now here's the $64K question: If you now use
this new circuit, is the original program you specified causally
engaged in the on-line computation of the function? Answer:
well, no, since the thing isn't plastic. There is no sense in which
individual instructions are looked up and their corresponding
actions carried out, because there is no control mechanism at all;
it's just a single circuit. So the chip seems to meet all the tests for
a ncm-program-using system, at least by Stabler's own account.
But was your original program used by the chip-making ma-
chine? I think that anyone would say yes - yes, the program was
used to direct the production of the chip, and it was used, not as
some simple kind of "data," but in a basic and fundamental way
as the controlling program for the creation of a new artifact. The
analogy to language acquisition should be plain: modern trans-
formational grammar is expressly designed as a causal explana-
tion of the "construction" of language competence. (For a
worked-out account of the parameter-setting model that Stabler
insists will have "problems" - incidentally illustrating a rather
richer sense of a grammar being indirectly encoded in a process-
ing model - see Berwick 1982.) Stabler tries to dodge this
possibility by talking about this kind of indirect causal connec-
tion as merely "influencing" linguistic processing, but the kind
of "influence" we are talking about here is precisely one in
which the rules and principles of the grammar are actually used
(in the ordinary sense of the word).
Finally, let me point out that the possibility of compilation
muddies the program-using and hardwired waters to such an
extent that the distinction becomes worthless. Stabler allows
that a rule is "used" if it is causally efficacious (under some
encoding) in actual linguistic behavior, pointing out that one
could have a "hardwired " circuit that simply computes a func-
tion without "anything which we could regard as . . . a . . .
representation of [a program] P." But the three little words
"under some encoding" make all the difference in the world.
The technical results on the interchangeability of circuits and
programs that Stabler cites in his note 3 actually assume that
there is a (uniform, space- or time-bounded) encoding of such
"hardware" circuits in terms of some program's operation. That
is, given any such circuit, there is an equivalent program that
simulates, step by step, the algorithm instantiated by the cir-
cuit. But this means that the hardwired circuit is a program-
using system under Stabler's formal definition, since it is using
an encoding of a program P, namely, the one provided by the
(uniform) mapping between circuits and programs (actually,
families of circuits). To be sure, the encoding is complex and
implicit in the network, but so much the worse for the formal
definition. (There is an attempt to find an escape hatch to this
difficulty later on, when Stabler strengthens his definition to be
an "explicit encoding," but since no explanation of "explicit" is
provided, we're left in the same fix.)
We can make the same point another way by seeing whether
such a circuit meets another of Stabler's tests for true program-
using behavior, namely, "whether there is a set of states in the
system that encode the program and that have the appropriate
causal role in controlling the operation of the system. " The
answer is yes, since to answer why computations are carried out,
we appeal to the associated instructions of the (encoded) pro-
gram. But surely, one might counter, the program statements
aren't really there, and so one needn't appeal to a program.
Doesn't the circuit just "do it" in virture of its (physical) con-
struction, without the causal intervention of program state-
ments (however complicated)? Well, yes, in a sense - but then,
if we allow that as the basis for why a computation is carried out,
the same holds true for a machine executing the compiled
instructions of a higher-level programming language. After all,
circuits are what direct the operation of the machine at the
bottom, not the program at all. (Remember that after it is
compiled, the explicit instructions of a higher-level program-
ming language aren't there at all, only "some encoding" of
them.) But we would still say that the program is used by the
machine, even the compiled program. One can't have things
both ways - either both circuit and higher-level languages are
program-using systems, or neither are. And talking about "con-
trol states" won't help us either. Control states, after all, don't
really exist, except under our attribution of them - the attribu-
tion used to explain (and direct) the behavior of the machine. In
fact, there aren't any states at all, except insofar as we (as
intelligent observers) attribute them, and this is true even of
program-using systems.
In the end people behave as if they use rules of grammar, even
if they don't. And linguistic theories seem to give us true
descriptions of the world. What more could one ask for? Now,
perhaps this is just an artifact of human theory-making abilities:
because we can design and think about program-using systems,
and because there is a way to map from hardwired systems to
program-using systems, we build program-using-type theories.
From another point of view, though, this is exactly why I don't
share Stabler's fear that "we ought to worry about whether we
can justify the current emphasis on program-using systems in
theories about how people process language." It's the only game
in town.
On a computational perspective without
substance
Rudolf P. Botha
Department of General Linguistics, University of Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch
7600, South Africa
Stabler's conclusion that the basic sorts of linguistic evidence
that have been offered in support of the mental-representation
hypothesis (M) do not support the third-level hypothesis (H3) is,
as he suspects, "not in the least surprising." For, at least within a
strict Chomskyan approach, H3 cannot be a good construal of
(M). Thus, a finding to the effect that H3 is supported by the
evidence for M would have been quite remarkable.
For H3 to be an accurate reconstruction of M, it must be
possible to interpret Chomsky's use of the computer analogy as a
deliberate attempt at clarifying the ontological interpretation of
grammars with the aid of computational notions (for a recent use
of this analogy see Chomsky 1980a, p. 188). And such a construal
of the computer analogy is quite problematic.
Had Chomsky seriously "endorsed the computational per-
spective," to use Stabler's terminology, it would be reasonable
to expect this "perspective" to affect the linguistic analyses
typically performed by Chomsky and his close followers. As
argued by Botha (1980; 1982), however, Chomsky's use of the
computer analogy and of expressions such as "(mental) computa-
tion" has no substantive consequences for these analyses. Thus,
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3
403

Commentary/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
Chomsky's "endorsing of the computational perspective" does
not contribute in any way to the empirical content of linguistic
claims such as those found, for example, in his Lectures on
Government and Binding: neither language-independent
claims (e.g., those embodied in subjacency or the binding
theory) nor language-specific claims (e.g., those embodied in
the categorial rules of English) reflect this "perspective" in their
empirical content. Moreover, in justifying such linguistic
claims, Chomsky and others do not find it necessary to appeal to
special evidence of a computational sort. Finally, Stabler's
"computational perspective" does not affect Chomskyan lin-
guistic analysis heuristically by generating new grammatical or
general-linguistic questions.
Scholars who believe that Chomsky has seriously "endorsed
the computational perspective," then, have to face the following
question: How is it possible for Chomsky and his associates to
perform nuts-and-bolts linguistic analyses without paying atten-
tion to the sort of computational considerations pertinent to
Stabler's discussion? This question does not receive sufficient
attention in Stabler's paper. Botha (1980; 1982) has argued that
Chomskyans can make the above-mentioned analyses because
Stabler's "computational perspective" does not constitute a
substantive element of their approach to linguistic inquiry.
To conclude: the importance of Stabler's paper is not located in
the conclusion that the evidence furnished in support of M fails
to justify H3. The importance of this paper lies in the more
general points that it contributes to the discussion of how
Chomskyan linguistic theories may (not) be interpreted on-
tologically. I briefly mention two of these. First, the paper
furnishes yet another clear illustration of the nonilluminating
nature of the computer analogy. Second, Stabler's discussion
has considerably raised the standards of precision for future
attempts to interpret Chomskyan linguistic theories in terms of
computational notions.
Church's thesis and representation of
grammars
Martin Davis
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New
York, W.V. 10012
Stabler criticizes Chomsky's hypothesis that grammars function
in certain aspects of language use in a manner like that of stored
programs in a computer by placing this hypothesis in the context
of a proposed model of computation. He suggests that such a
model has not been hitherto available and claims that therefore
he "can be clear where others have not been." I will argue that
in developing his ideas Chomsky had at hand a profound and
highly successful theory of computation, that in the framework
of this theory, Chomsky's ideas are entirely natural, and finally
that Stabler's model betrays serious confusion about the way in
which programs are actually used by computers.
The possibility of giving a precise characterization of the class
of mathematical processes that can be carried out by purely
mechanical means first came to light during the 1930s in the
work of the logicians Church, Godel, Post, and Turing. (The
basic papers will be found in Davis 1965.) Each of these logicians
introduced one or more notions as proposed characterizations of
this class, and all of these proposals subsequently turned out to
be equivalent, in the sense that although the notions themselves
were different (in some of the cases very different), the classes
demarcated were identical to one another. It was Church who
first asserted that all mechanical processes are encompassed by
these notions, and the assertion is therefore known as Church's
thesis. However, the most compelling evidence for its correct-
ness was supplied by Turing, who was led to his machine model
by considering a description of a human being carrying out a
calculation and successively peeling away irrelevant details. The
work of these pioneers has not only had important consequences
in mathematics but has also presaged many important aspects of
computational practice which are now commonplace and whose
intellectual antecedents are typically unknown to users. Thus
Turing proved the existence in principle of all-purpose (or
universal) digital computers and showed that hardware can
always be translated into software and that programs can be
constructed whose function is to "interpret" other programs.
Post introduced the concept of a program as a list of instructions
and provided the basic concepts needed to represent grammars
by formal structures based on productions. (For further discus-
sion of some of these matters, see, for example, Davis 1978. A
thoroughgoing analysis of the implications of Church's thesis for
mechanism and mentalism can be found in Webb 1980.)
For our present purpose, it is important to emphasize that the
infinite size of the domains of definition of the functions contem-
plated under Church's thesis is no obstacle to a mechanistic
interpretation. The grade school algorithm for adding two natu-
ral numbers, given as strings of decimal digits, is most naturally
stated with no bound on the arguments, although as a practical
matter, there is of course a limit on their size. In the same way,
the most natural description of the class of grammatically correct
sentences of a natural language involves no a priori upper
bounds and is readily placed in the context of computability
theory as simply being a particular recursively enumerable set
of character strings. For Chomsky, Post's production rules
provided the perfect bridge: they could be used, on the one
hand, to generate arbitrary recursively enumerable sets, and on
the other, to model rules of grammar.
Now we are ready to consider Stabler's argument that "there
are no grounds for assuming that the grammar . . . govern[s]
linguistic behavior in the way that a program governs a program-
mable computer." This argument is based on his three-layered
account of program-driven computation. There are a number of
difficulties with this formulation. Thus Stabler himself points
out that "if we allow the realization mapping fR to be sufficiently
baroque, any system can realize any computation. ' Even more
serious is the fact that Stabler's "third-level" account of the way
a computer's behavior is governed by a program bears little
resemblance to the way actual computers work. The separate
instructions are stored in a computer in encoded form like so
much data, but they do not in any relevant sense correspond to
individual "states" of the computer. Just how a program will be
carried out will depend on the language in which it is written
and the implementation of that language (via interpreter or
compiler or some hybrid) for the computer in question. The
distinction between a program being present as "data" and a
program "controlling" the operation of a computer is just not
clear-cut, and it is not particularly helpful in understanding the
behavior of program-driven computers. A programmer who
"runs" a LISP program can quite appropriately say that his
program is driving the computer. And this situation will obtain
regardless of whether the program is being run on a LISP
machine or via an interpreter on a conventional computer. In
the latter case the interpreter uses the program as "data" which
it "consults" in order to "know" what task to undertake next.
This is not the place to repeat Chomsky's arguments for the
existence of innate biological mechanisms for learning and
computationally applying grammars. Such mechanisms would
presumably use an internal representation of a particular gram-
mar and might well operate on such a representation very much
in the manner that an interpreter or a compiler operates on a
computer program. In such a case it would be just as appropriate
to speak of a person's linguistic behavior as being grammar-
driven as to speak of a computer as being program-driven.
404
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3

On the hypothesis that grammars are
mentally represented
William Demopoulos and Robert J. Matthews
Department of Philosophy and Centre for Cognitive Science, University of
Western Ontario, London, Ont, Canada N6A 5C2
"Well now, would you like to hear of a race-course, that most people
fancy they can get to the end of in two or three steps, while it really
consists of an infinite number of distances, each one longer than the
previous one?"
Lewis Carroll, What the Tortoise Said to Achilles
1. Introduction. It is a truism, and so presumably true, that
speakers use their knowledge of language in the exercise of their
linguistic abilities. Drawing on the characterization of linguistic
knowledge made available by modern linguistic theory, propo-
nents of the so-called representational theory of mind propose
the following construal of this truism: learning a language is a
process that eventuates in the mental representation of a
grammar, which is then used by the speaker in the exercise of
his linguistic abilities. The assumption that a mental representa-
tion of the grammar is so used is said to be warranted by the fact
that this assumption, when taken together with independently
motivated theories of the character of other interacting variables
(such as memory limitations and the like), yields the best
explanation of the data about the speaker's mental states and
processes or the behaviors in which such processes result
(Chomsky 1980a; Fodor 1981a; 1981b). This form of argument is
one that any good realist should accept, but it leaves unspecified
the intended interpretation of what Stabler calls the mental-
representation hypothesis (M). Taking his cue from repeated
assertions that the mentally represented grammar is used in
computations that eventuate in the behavior to be explained,
Stabler considers the possibility that the intended interpreta-
tion of M is given by H3, which entails but is not entailed by H2.
Examining evidence alleged to support this construal of M, he
concludes that at best it supports H2 alone. His argument takes
the following form: for any program-using device that computes
a function F or a program P, there exists another device that
computes that same function or program without having any-
thing that could be regarded as an encoding of a particular name
of F or representation of P that is causally responsible for the
computation of F or P. Thus, evidence for H3 must support not
simply the claim that language understanding involves the
computation of some function or program but also the further
claim that a particular name of F or representation of P is
causally responsible for the computation. The evidence ad-
duced in support of M, Stabler argues, fails to support this
further claim; indeed, modularity considerations would seem to
favor H2. From this Stabler concludes that H3 is presumably
not the intended interpretation of M. But, he asks, "if propo-
nents of M do not have H3 in mind, then what are they
proposing?"
Stabler's charitable conclusion notwithstanding, various lin-
guists, philosophers, and psychologists seem to have intended
just the computational construal of M that he considers and then
shows to be evidentially unsupported. Bresnan and Kaplan
(1982b), for example, go so far as to propose H3 as an adequacy
condition on linguistic theory. Stabler's critical examination is
salutary, for it calls attention to the persistent tendency of
representationalists to identify mentalistic psychology with
computational psychology. This tendency seems both em-
pirically and methodologically unmotivated. We suspect that
the attractiveness of a level-three construal of M stems from the
sort of concern expressed by Stabler at the conclusion of his
paper, namely, that there seem to be no other reasonable
interpretations of M. In the remarks that follow, we sketch what
we believe to be a plausible alternative interpretation, one that
Commentaryy'Stabler: How are grammars represented?
is supported by the evidence typically adduced in support of M
but that differs from H3 in its commitments to particular com-
putational realizations of mentally represented grammars. We
conclude with some brief remarks regarding Stabler's character-
ization of representation-using systems.
2. The Interpretation of the mental-representation hypothesis.
First let us recall why an alternative to a level-three interpreta-
tion is desirable. On a level-three construal of the mental-
representation hypothesis, there is a clear sense in which the
grammar is encoded in a program that controls linguistic behav-
ior. On this construal a grammatical rule acts causally via its
encoding by a sentence in the language of thought. We may
therefore conceptualize knowledge of the rule as an extension of
the computational model of ordinary prepositional knowledge:
in both cases we stand in a yet-to-be-specified computational
relation to an encoding of the proposition that we would be said
to know. As already indicated, the difficulty with the extension
of this model to the case of grammatical rules is that there is little
reason to believe that this correctly characterizes our knowledge
of such rules: the most prominent feature of such a model,
namely, its plasticity, seems to be lacking, and many current
theoretical and empirical indicators point in the opposite direc-
tion (cf. Fodor 1983).
Can we be satisfied with a level-two construal? It seems that
we can, but only if we are willing to grant that there is no
interesting sense in which the grammar is known. Recall that on
a level-two construal, all that we are committed to is that the
mind computes the functions which correspond to rules of the
grammar. On this view, the sense of the claim that the rules are
represented and used is exhausted by the (much weaker) asser-
tion that our linguistic behavior accords with the grammar; on a
level-two construal, our knowledge of grammar is not unlike the
"knowledge" that the earth-moon system has of its Hamil-
tonian, and this seems clearly unacceptable.
So, what we require is an interpretation of the mental-
representation hypothesis under which the thesis that gram-
matical rules are represented justifies the inference that they
are used and not merely conformed to. First of all, it is necessary
to be clear concerning the domain over which we wish to
preserve this distinction. It seems clear that we wish to preserve
it over the domain of overt linguistic behavior, that is, we want
to say that the computation of semantic representations from
phonetic representations (and vice versa) is mediated by knowl-
edge of the grammar, and that the phonetic-representa-
tion/semantic-representation pairing does not merely conform
to the grammar. A representationalist theory achieves this by
postulating syntactic representations (i.e., structural descrip-
tions) that are generated and transformed according to the rules
of the grammar and that mediate between phonetic and seman-
tic representations. That is, grammatical rules specify functions
defined over a domain of internal states; these states are spec-
ified in a theoretically autonomous vocabulary, and the internal
processes thus defined mediate the production of linguistic
behavior.
Does the mental-representation hypothesis have to assert
more than this? Notice that this construal preserves the idea that
our linguistic behavior arises because of the grammar we have
internalized, and it does so in the straightforward sense of being
mediated by internal processes, described in the vocabulary of
the grammatical theory, and constrained by the rules of the
grammar. But on this construal the internal processes are only
asserted to occur in accordance with (or to conform to) the
grammar. This differs from a level-three hypothesis as follows:
on a level-three construal our linguistic practice is rule-follow-
ing and not merely rule-conforming only if rules are followed
"all the way in." Thus on a level-three construal the internal
manipulation of structural descriptions must also be rule-follow-
ing. This is the import of the requirement that there be an
explicit encoding of the grammar. But our account makes no
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3
405

Commentary/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
such demand. Rather, we require two things. First, we require
an appeal to the manipulation of internal representations that
accords with (or conforms to) the rules of the grammar. Second,
we require that within the context of the relevant linguistic
theory, and under the normal methodological constraints on
scientific explanation, this appeal should be theoretically indis-
pensable for the explanation of linguistic behavior.
One final comment before turning to the evidence for M
under this interpretation. It might be urged that on this account
we are still left with the problem of distinguishing between
hypotheses that appeal to internal processes which are rule-
conforming and hypotheses which appeal to Zaw-conforming
internal processes. On the present proposal a process like the
internal molecular motion of a gas is a Zaw-conforming (rather
than rule-conforming) process because the regularity it in-
stances is defined over states characterized in the vocabulary of
physics, and presumably there is some interesting sense in
which this is not true of structural descriptions. So our account
leaves this issue resting squarely on our ability to make out the
distinction between special-science properties and laws that are
reducible to properties and laws of physics and those that are not
so reducible. And this seems exactly where the issues should
rest. (On this point, compare Pylyshyn's cognitive-pro-
cess/functional-architecture distinction in Pylyshyn 1980.)
3. Evidence for the hypothesis. Our construal of M finds
support in the sort of evidence that is typically adduced in
support of M: such evidence, if taken at face value, would
provide support for the claim that a broad domain of linguistic
behavior can be explained by appeal to such grammatically
characterized internal processes. To the extent that we lack
alternative explanations of these same behavioral phenomena,
this evidence provides support for the theoretical indispen-
sability of such appeals. On our interpretation of M, evidence of
the sort typically adduced provides precisely what Searle (1980,
p. 37) requires, namely, "some independent reason for suppos-
ing that the rules are functioning causally": the apparent the-
oretical indispensability of appeals to grammatically charac-
terized internal states in the explanation of linguistic behavior is
surely the best sort of reason for attributing to these states a
causal role in the production of behavior. Certainly a speaker's
ability to state the rule that he took himself to be following would
provide no better evidence. Even if we suppose that such an
ability evidences an introspective awareness of one's mental
states and processes, the methodological justification of explana-
tions of such cases in terms of knowledge of a rule would rest on
the prior assumption that appeal to rule-characterized internal
states is theoretically indispensable. It is not the fact that we
have explicit knowledge of rules that sanctions explanations in
terms of rules; it is rather that we as postbehaviorists know that
explanations of behavior must advert to internal processes and
we know of no other way of characterizing these processes
except in terms of mentally represented rules.
A. Computational reduction. Our construal of M leaves open
the question of the computational realization of a speaker's
knowledge of grammar. In particular, it leaves open the pos-
sibility that the mediation of linguistic behavior effected by such
knowledge may be realized by something other than a represen-
tation-using system of the sort characterized in H3. Indeed, the
realization might be extremely abstract, in the sense that there
may be no computationally definable answer to the question
"What specific computational structures or processes realize the
speaker's grammatical knowledge?" In such an eventuality
there would fail to be the sort of homomorphism envisioned by
H2 between the mental processes imputed to the speaker by a
grammatical characterization of his linguistic knowledge and the
computational structures or processes attributed to the speaker
on partially independent grounds. Such an eventuality would
reflect the fact that the particular generalizations to be captured
at a computational level of description must be stated in a
vocabulary that cross-classifies grammatically characterized
processes. Which of the possible realizations is the one in-
stanced by human speakers is, of course, an empirical issue.
•Stabler correctly points out what sort of evidence would bear on
the claim that human speakers realize a program-using system of
the sort described in H3. What remains unclear is the distinc-
tion he proposes to draw between H3 and Hd: What is the
distinction between a system whose computation of some pro-
gram is governed by an encoding which includes the rules of
some grammar and a system whose computation of the program
uses the grammar as data? What sort of evidentiary considera-
tions would distinguish these two sorts of system?
When do representations explain?
Daniel C. Dennett
Philosophy Department, Tufts University, Medford, Mass. 02155
Stabler's patient and insightful clarification of this issue is most
welcome, for he has provided some quite visible and stationary
landmarks against which to detect the ideological slippage that
has so far marked this debate. He is reticent, however, in
answering one dialectically important question: if, as he con-
vincingly argues, none of the evidence to date supports H3,
what sort of evidence conceivably could support it?
For a representation to figure as a representation in a causal
explanation, it must occur in a context where it is "read" by
some agent, organ, or device. What could establish that such a
process occurs? Consider an obvious case: old Mother Hubbard
lies dead on the floor, a victim of poisoning, an open and half-full
bottle of paint remover in the cupboard. Acquaintances say she
had not been depressed, but had complained recently of "faint-
ing spells." "Aha!" says the detective, noting her thick eye-
glasses. "The bottle label says 'FOR PEELING PAINT' and she must
have misread it to say 'FOR FEELING FAINT.' See how like Fs
those Ps are."
What could conceivably convince us that actual rule consulta-
tion occurs in language processing would be evidence that on
occasion rules are misread. But evidence for this would require
some extraordinarily hard-to-acquire sorts of supporting evi-
dence: evidence about not just the function or operation of the
rules (as Stabler shows), and not even about just the "abstract"
form of the rules (for, as Stabler shows, this evidence is always
reinterpretable as evidence about function), but about the
actual physical features of the encoding and the reading mecha-
nisms - not just the semantics and syntax of the language of
thought, but its orthography and typography as well. Could
anything less give us clear evidence in support of H3 over its
more modest rivals? So far as I can see, nothing else would be
direct evidence.
The trouble is that it is not clear, given Stabler's treatment of
the program/data distinction, that even this sort of evidence
would satisfy him. For how could we distinguish, given this
incredibly strong (imagined) evidence, the alternative hypothesis
that we had not simply uncovered the typography of the data-
representing system, rather than the program-reading system?
I am inclined to conclude that there is something fishy about
Stabler's attempt to make that distinction, at least as it would
have to be adjusted to be transported from computerland to
psycholinguistics. Consider another simple case: we teach
somebody a simple algorithm for performing some congitive
task, such as deciding whether to open the bidding in bridge, or
winning at Nim. This, then, will be a paradigm case of someone
- in this case consciously, even self-consciously - consulting a
remembered rule and guiding calculation by its lights. Is it a
case in which the rule counts as data - "the rules as argument" -
or as program? Perhaps the answer is obvious, but it was not
obvious to me what Stabler's answer would be.
Supposing this point clarified somehow, we might return to
the question of whether there might be indirect evidence
strongly supporting the existence of represented rules. One
406
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3

Commentary/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
possible line of argument, hinted at but skirted by Stabler, is
one form or another of the "you can't get there from here"
argument. One might argue, that is, that while "hybrid" and
"hardwired" systems are always possible in principle and even,
once created, faster and more efficient, they can only be created
"naturally" by a design process that first implements a system in
which the rules essential to the "rationale" of the system's
function are explicit, and explicitly consulted. I think this is a
risky and dubious sort of speculation, but its rationale is proba-
bly worth exploring. Consider the advanced bridge player who
no longer consciously "counts points" (and who might not be
counting them unconsciously either); there is surely some plau-
sibility to the idea that the sophisticated but ex hypothesi merely
HI rule-described behavior of this player could only have been
entrained by a process that includes an interim stage of H3 rule
following. In a similar vein, one could argue that it is no accident
that sophisticated hardwired microchips - such as those to be
found in arcade video games - are designed by a process that
begins with a program-guided system in which the operations
are debugged. Tempting as these analogies are, however, they
serve in the present context to highlight one of the most
compelling sorts of indirect evidence against any H3-type theo-
ry of human linguistic competence. Surely the evolutionary
design process that yields our innate linguistic competence as its
product is strongly disanalogous to the design process that yields
video games, precisely in being undirected, unforesighted, and
completely lacking the sort of explicit "top-down" goal that is
the hallmark of design (or training) processes that are aided by
explicit "rules for beginners." [See also Dennett: "Intentional
Systems in Cognitive Ethology" BBS 6(3) 1983.]
A few analogies with computing
Maurice Gross
Laboratoire d'Automatique Documentaire et Linguistique, University of
Paris 7, 75221 Paris Cedex 05, France
The point of Stabler's whole discussion is not clear to me. Other
linguists will presumably also wonder about the interest of
arguing that just in case some informal remarks made by
Chomsky are interpreted in a specific way, then they are wrong.
Stabler perceives that, if these remarks are indeed correct, then
linguists and psychologists are left in a vacuum about the place of
a grammar in the brain; it is not clear, however, what type of
research is affected by this possible vacuum.
There is no question about the correctness of Stabler's argu-
ment, but in the course of the discussion, certain undiscussed
questions come to mind that overshadow and submerge the
special argument he has made.
First, I do not see why linguists should currently be con-
cerned about the way rules are represented, encoded, or gener-
ated in the brain. Linguists are still debating about the existence
of particular rules and about their formal nature. These debates
are concerned more with the empirical level of testing accept-
abilities of sequences than with Stabler's speculations.
Specialists in computational linguistics are closer to the pres-
ent debate. For example, the position that a grammar is a set of
data used by a program is not as marginal as Stabler appears to
think. It was one of the central ideas among specialists in
automatic syntactic analysis in the 1960s, when the main ap-
plication was mechanical translation. There have always been
roughly two main schools of thought about the construction of
the required algorithms: build fast algorithms, which implies
directly using specific grammatical features of the particular
language under analysis; build algorithms that are as language-
independent as possible - such algorithms would not have to be
modified when the grammar is extended or corrected and might
apply to several languages, perhaps even to all.
These two positions clearly raise an important issue not often
recognized by linguists: Where should the dividing line be-
tween the grammar and the recognition algorithm be drawn?
The placement of the dividing line may change the form of the
grammar substantially. Consider, for example, the case of con-
text-free grammars, as discussed by Joshi, Levy & Takahashi
(1975). These authors have shown that part of what seemed to
belong to the essence of context-free rules and of some transfor-
mational ones could be moved to a recognition algorithm, the
context-free rules themselves then becoming general conditions
on sequences.
Another alternative that computer sicentists face daily also
seems to be relevant to a discussion about the representation of
grammars. Given a certain function, either its computation can
be implemented through an algorithm, which is usually a
compact program that is applied a large number of times, once
for each computed value; or else the computations can be done
beforehand, that is, the function can be put in the form of a
(possibly) large table, and the algorithm that computes a given
value is then reduced to a simple table-lookup procedure. In
the first case, the memory occupied in the computer is small,
whereas the processing time is high (equivalently, the speed of
the computer has to be high). In the second case, the memory
needed is large, but the processing time is shorter.
Such concrete questions are ultimately empirical, but they
could also be discussed in abstracto. If one is eager to pursue an
analogy between the brain and the computer, a number of
similar proposals appear to be relevant.
The recent technology of very-large-scale integration of cir-
cuits might suggest new processes for storing and/or acquiring a
grammar. Consider the way specialized chips are now being
built. A program is written in a high-level language such as
PASCAL. This program is then compiled and automatically
transcribed into charts that will be photographically engraved
on a chip. At this point, the differences between programmed
and wired instructions become vanishingly small, perhaps to the
point that Stabler's three levels may no longer be relevant
concepts. The way such chips are made indicates that a grammar
could be acquired just by reading it once, as in the thought
experiment Stabler mentions.
One could also enter into the distinction between compiler
and interpreter for high-level languages. A grammar may corre-
spond to either type of device. There may be interesting analo-
gies between the way compilers (and whole systems) are built
and the acquisition of grammar. A compiler, for example, is built
in several stages. First, a core containing a few essential func-
tions of the language is defined and is written (represented) in
machine language, then, the rest of the compiler is written
(represented) in the high-level language itself. There is no
longer any need to write this part of the compiler in machine
language, since the core compiler can carry out the translation.
A discussion of the acquisition of a grammar might be modelled
after such a device. At an early stage of learning, a core gram-
mar, which may be partially innate or acquired, would be
actuated. Then, the bulk of the language would be acquired at a
different level, as the result of processing by the core grammar.
Other computational devices can be used to evoke linguistic
processing, but I still cannot see how linguists can derive any
useful insight from discussions a la Stabler.
In fact, the analogy between brain and computer on which the
target article is based has been considered extremely dubious by
many investigators - at least those outside the field of artificial
intelligence. The speeds and rates of transmission of signals in
the two systems are not comparable, and it is by no means clear
that the large amount of parallel computing that appears to go on
in the brain can compensate for the differences of transmission
time (e.g., Crick 1979). Moreover, it has often been noted (e.g.,
by Chomsky & Miller 1964) that computers are too versatile to
constitute valuable models of linguistic behavior, hence of the
brain. Computers are known to be rather ineffective, for exam-
ple, in recognizing syntactic patterns, whereas they are ex-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3
407

Commentary/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
tremely efficient in computing solutions of differential equa-
tions, a task the brain is not adapted for. In Stabler's terms, the
brain does not have the plasticity computers have.
Internally represented grammars
Gilbert Harman
Department of Philosophy, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J. 08544
Stabler compares a "second-level" hypothesis about grammar
with a corresponding "third-level" hypothesis. According to the
second-level hypothesis, users of a language "compute" or
(better) execute the rules of a generative grammar in generating
sentences; first they decide on the category, sentence (S), then
they decide the sentence will be a noun phrase (NP) followed by
a verb phrase (VP), etc., finally ending up with a derivation of
the relevant sentence. According to the third-level hypothesis,
speakers have an internal representation of the rules of genera-
tive grammar which they use when they talk or listen to what
others are saying. Stabler claims that a third-level hypothesis is
stronger than the corresponding second-level hypothesis and
that linguists like Chomsky write as if they hold the stronger
third-level hypothesis while arguing only for the weaker second-
level hypothesis.
These claims are mistaken in several respects. First, the
relative strengths of the second- and third-level hypotheses are
reversed. A second-level hypothesis is stronger, since it implies
the corresponding third-level hypothesis. That this implication
holds is perfectly obvious from Stabler's definitions, given the
further trivial observation that any mechanism that computes a
function is naturally treated as a representation of that function.
In particular, if speakers actually did first decide on a sentence,
then on NP followed by VP, and so on in accordance with the
rules of a given generative grammar, that would be the strongest
possible way in which the grammar might be internally repre-
sented. Since Stabler thinks there are reasons to think that such
a second-order theory is correct, he is logically committed to
thinking that grammar is internally represented, since that
conclusion is entailed by what he concedes.
The problem - and this is the second thing wrong with
Stabler's argument - is that Chomsky and his associates pre-
cisely do not argue that speakers generate sentences in this way
by executing the rules of generative grammars. Chomsky has
observed in many places that the term "generative" in the
phrase "generative grammar" has no such implication. The
relevant sort of generation is mathematical, not psychological.
Chomsky's claim, then, is that grammar is internally repre-
sented whether or not speakers generate sentences in accor-
dance with its rules. He is arguing for a third-level theory that is
weaker than the corresponding second-level theory. Therefore,
Stabler's entire framework is misguided and completely
irrelevant.
Stabler's remarks about plasticity are similarly irrelevant.
Throughout his article, with an occasional disclaimer, he sug-
gests that plasticity is a sign of representation, in contrast with
circuits that are "wired in." But consider a personal computer
with its ROM (read-only memory - unmodifiable), RAM(ran-
dom-access memory - modifiable), and on-off switch (modifia-
ble). Data and programs, internal representations, reside both
in ROM and in RAM; whether they are plastic or modifiable
makes no difference to whether they are internal representa-
tions. Nor does the fact that one can turn the computer on or off
mean that the setting of the switch represents anything!
In order to see what Chomsky is getting at one needs to look at
the details of linguistic theory, something Stabler does not do,
and something I cannot do in the space allotted me. But let me at
least point to where to look. The key is that the hypothesis:
(H) Grammars are mentally represented
has played an important role in linguistic research by Chomsky
and his associates over the last thirty years, research that has led
to many important discoveries about language. It is difficult to
see how these discoveries could have been made if H had not
been accepted. So these discoveries provide at least some con-
firmation of the hypothesis H and perhaps give meaning to it.
More precisely, the relevant hypothesis is:
(HH) The mental representation of a language user's grammar is
similar to the sort of representation a generative grammarian would
devise for the language.
HH is an important presupposition of the most salient feature of
Chomsky's work, namely, that from the study of a single lan-
guage, English, Chomsky has been led to surprising hypotheses
about universal grammar whose approximate truth has been
confirmed through the later study of other languages. Chomsky
has observed that, if HH is true and speakers of English
internally represent principles of grammar that resemble those
principles he and his associates have formulated, the speakers
do not learn the principles in any sort of ordinary inductive way,
since most speakers are never exposed to relevant evidence. But
if the principles are not learned in this way, they are presumably
there from the beginning. This means that would be part of
whatever grammar was internally represented, whether of En-
glish or of any other language. The principles should therefore
be true of all languages. So, given HH, the study of one language
leads to surprising predictions about other languages, predic-
tions that, as I say, have been found to be for the most part
approximately correct. Since it is difficult to see how these
predictions are forthcoming unless HH is assumed, this is strong
evidence for HH.
I am oversimplifying, of course, since there are various ways
in which a principle might be internally represented even
though users of the language had no evidence for it. A principle
might represent the "unmarked case" - it might be a "default"
principle, one that language users start with and keep in their
internal grammars unless they get positive evidence against it.
And there are other possibilities that are being actively investi-
gated in current work in linguistics (Chomsky 1981; 1982). But
the basic idea is still the same. And the principle HH has a
crucial role in this ongoing research.
Computational commitment and physical
realization
Robert M. Harnish
Departments of Philosophy and Linguistics, University of Arizona, Tucson,
Ariz. 85721
When one claims that mental states, events, or processes are
"computational," what is one claiming? And when one claims
that some human behavior is "rule-governed," what is one
claiming? If being rule-governed entails having rules (or repre-
sentations of rules) that are causally efficacious in the production
of (some) behavior, then it is natural to treat these questions as
related, because one of the better-understood systems that can
be said to be both computational and rule-governed is an
ordianry "Von Neumann," "stored-program," "register-archi-
tecture" computer. Whether or not such machines have (or can
have) the appropriate functional architecture to strongly simu-
late interesting human cognitive capacities (see Pylyshyn 1980),
we desperately need to understand better how any cognitive
capacity can be realized in a physical system - how the same
system can receive both a physical description and a "func-
tional" description in such a way as to explain in physical terms
what it is doing in functional (cognitive) terms.
Viewed this way, the present fundamental contribution of
computer science to cognitive science is not via artificial intel-
ligence and (basically "weak") simulation, but rather via systems
design and electrical engineering. Although clever programs
have been getting most of the play, computer science via its
408
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3

Commentary/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
"hardware" and "firmware" side, not its "software" side, has
given us clear and well-understood instances of functionally
describable capacities being realized without remainder in
physical systems.
Most programs now run directly only on "virtual" hardware,
but the relation between a program and the next level down (the
virtual hardware) is not like the relation between the lowest
level of software and firmware (read-only memories or "ROMs,"
for instance) to hardware. The former is like translation; the
latter is more like simultaneous description, in that no indepen-
dently motivated feature need be preserved by the mapping
between descriptions. In other words, it makes fairly precise
sense to speak of "translation" between programming levels,
but no sense when referring to machine code and electrical en-
gineering. '
What, then, is the relation between "hardware" and "soft-
ware," if not translation or interpretation? Stabler finds three
grades of computational involvement for physical systems: (1)
computing a function, (2) computing an algorithm for computing
a function, and (3) using a program to compute an algorithm for
computing a function. If cognitive capacities are like running
programs, then what evidence is there for this third level of
description? Stabler finds evidence only for the second level of
description. Though he may have missed some crucial sequence
of experiments, it would probably be impossible at the present
time to state enough independently motivated constraints on
permissible psychological mechanisms to guarantee that any set
of experimental data would decide between a second-level and a
third-level theory (see Pylyshyn 1980).
The central value of Stabler's excellent article is to formulate
computational commitment precisely. This illuminates a wide
range of psycholinguistic and linguistic theses. For instance, the
idea that grammars are psychologically real has received an
immense amount of exposure (see Chomsky 1980b), yet what
reason have we ever been given for supposing that theoretical
structures, principles, and rules formulated in accordance with
accepted linguistic methodology (mainly intuitive simplicity
over a data base of intuitive judgments) should be similar to
structures, principles, and operations formulated in accordance
with the accepted methodology of cognitive psychology? Of
course, it would be nice if linguists and psychologists could take
in each other's laundry, but Stabler's framework makes it quite
clear how difficult it would be to show such a thing, and so why it
should be such a tenuous article of faith.
Finally, it would be useful to have a fourth level of descrip-
tion: a "programmable system." Given that this is one capable of
being a program-using system, if we had an account of this
capacity we would have a way of characterizing the difference
between a system that was capable of being programmed to do
such and such, but was not so programmed, and one which
directly computed an appropriate algorithm. Such a character-
ization might help in assessing recent nativist accounts of con-
cept development (see Fodor 1981c).
NOTE
1. For instance, consider the case of "field-programmable" ROMs,
where the customer buying the system uses current pulses to blow out
selected portions of an otherwise equipotential circuit, thereby yielding
a physical system with the desired functional description. See F. Hill
and G. Peterson (1981), ch. 8.5.
Levels of grammatic representation: A
tempest in a teapot
Michael R. Upton
Department of Philosophy and Religion, Northeastern University, Boston,
Mass. 02115
It is a mark of some progress in the discussion of the role of
grammar in the expression of linguistic abilities that certain
questions are not asked. In particular, Stabler finds it meaning-
ful to attribute representations of this or that piece of informa-
tion to people and computers; he thinks we encode information
and execute algorithms on these representations. Also, he
recognizes that the question of the form these representations
take and what algorithms run on them is an empirical question.
This means that there is no a priori proof of the answer,
whatever it happens to be. A particular answer is a good one if it
is justified by what is politely called inference to the best
explanation. I detect a bit of backsliding on this issue when he
argues that any system explained at level three can be explained
by a level-two theory. But this claim is irrelevant if the issue is
empirical.
The chief difficulty I have with the paper is that Stabler, I
think, seriously misrepresents the evidential situation. He ar-
gues that there is evidence for H2, and that the evidence now
available does not distinguish H2 from H3, and therefore we
have no evidence for H3, a conclusion he draws often. But this is
a mistake. Positive evidence for one of two hypotheses which
does not distinguish it from a second is surely evidence for that
second. He is right that little is available to distinguish H3 from
H2, and that is because so far little is thought to depend upon
the difference.
The argument for the second-level hypothesis (H2) is that,
given it, we can explain why the language satisfies the rules of
grammar G, and how a person understands his language of
which G is the grammar. Likewise, we might motivate a third-
level hypothesis, in which G is actually encoded or represented
in a person, a hypothesis that seeks to explain the acquisition of
the cognitive capacities explained in the previous level-two
theory. Thus, this hypothesis will not be H3, which only con-
cerns comprehension. If to understand a language one must
come to compute G, then to learn the language one must
compute some other function the output of which is the state of
being able to compute G. Regularities in the course of learning,
or the state attained, or the dependence of the state attained on
experience, all may best be explained by attributing to the
learner various algorithms working on grammars. Essentially,
this is the argument Stabler likes for a level-two theory of
understanding made for a level-two or level-three (I can't tell
which - see below) theory of acquisition, which has grammars
represented.
The plausibility of this argument for a level-three hypothesis
strongly depends upon the form that learning theory takes, but
there surely are learning theories that approach matters in this
way.
The plasticity of learning, such as it is, suggests a third-level
hypothesis, although, as Stabler points out, it will not dis-
tinguish a case of G as part of the program from G as part of the
data. In thinking about the case for actual computers, it seems
that plasticity argues in favor of an encoded program because we
know how the environment affects the programs that can be
computed. This is exactly what we do not know in the case of
language learning. If a system can acquire many different
capacities, it might satisfy a level-three theory for each of those
capacities, but it needn't. It is only under many assumptions
about the nature of learning that a level-three theory is sup-
ported, assumptions about the fixedness of the hardware and the
degree of innateness of the capacities. It seems that any argu-
ment from plasticity really depends upon the available learning
theory, and not on considerations of how varied the acquired
capacities are.
Someone interested in defending the mental-representation
hypothesis might well have in mind a thesis like Hd, which
specifies that the grammar of a language is used as data. This
hypothesis appears to be different from H3; yet this difference is
difficult to characterize and is not characterized by the distinc-
tion between level two and level three. Consider a standard
machine running a program in a higher-level language through
an interpreter. The higher-level program is a program repre-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3
409

Commentary/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
sented in the machine and controlling the computation; yet
since it is being run in interpreted form it counts as data for the
interpreter. The point of the example is to show how unclear the
intended contrast is, even in cases we think we understand, and
that it is doubtful that at our current level of understanding the
difference makes a difference.
Whether a grammar G is part of a level-two theory or a level-
three theory has not been substantially addressed, to my knowl-
edge. What theorists actually believe can best be gleaned by
looking at concrete proposals for parsers, compilers, and learn-
ing devices. Even then it isn't clear that the level-two/level-
three distinction is of much importance. It is hard to see that
anything hinges on it, especially since we do not have very good
ideas about the algorithms adequate to instantiate various lin-
guistic capacities, irrespective of how they are implemented. It
is doubtful that any long-range harm will come from assuming or
theorizing as if a level-three theory were correct. If we ever got a
level-three theory of a linguistic capacity that was materially
adequate, we would know how to replace it by a level-two
theory.
On speculating across opaque barriers
Abe Lockman
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, N.J.
08903
Stabler's arguments raise a general question: what sorts of hard
conclusions can ever (i.e., in principle) be drawn concerning the
internal workings of mechanisms (whether animal-, vegetable-,
or mineral-based) from mere observation of their external in-
put/output behavior? Assume that we are observing some
mechanism M (e. g., a natural language parser) whose insides are
invisible to us: that is, we can only see pairs <l,0> of its input
and corresponding output. In such a situation the only certain
statement that we may make concerning M is an observation
that its output O is some function F of its input I. If we observe
that mechanism M computes, in this sense, some function F,
then there is in principle no way to tell whether it does so via a
nondecomposable input-to-output mapping (e.g., table-look-
up), via a decomposable but immutable (for a given input) series
of computational steps, or via the execution of a potentially
changeable program; thus there is no hard basis for supporting a
preference for any of what Stabler terms first-level, second-
level, and third-level theories. Certain additional assumptions,
however, lead to the following exception to this. If we believe
the mechanism to possess limited storage capacity, and if the
function that it computes is over an unbounded domain (as most
competence theories of grammars maintain), then we may
eliminate the possibility of a first-level theory, since decomposi-
tion into recursively applicable steps is a minimal requirement
for computation over unbounded domains using only limited
storage. Also, of course, the existing theory of formal languages
and their corresponding (in computational power) automata
allows us to distinguish between different sorts of second-level
and third-level theories for different functions computed. (All of
this is not, of course, intended to imply that particular theories
of internal composition and states may not be extremely useful
as a way of characterizing function F; although we cannot prove
that atoms exist, for example, it is convenient to describe the
world as behaving as if they did.)
The above observation subsumes Stabler's arugments against
two possible supports for a third-level theory of language use:
the explanation of basic linguistic abilities and the commitments
of formal linguistic universals. The crux of the matter is, then,
what may be inferred from the nature of language acquisition,
where we are observing how an input-to-output function
changes over time, rather than a static function. Here I must
disagree with Stabler and claim that the phenomenon of lan-
guage learning (or "plasticity") does, in fact, support a third-
level (i.e., program-executing) theory of language use.
Now the entire point of constructing (or possessing) a pro-
grammable mechanism is that it can "learn" in the following
sense: rather than computing a fixed function F, we can feed it
any of a variety of programs P, enabling it to compute (having
"learned") any of a variety of functions Fp of its inputs. Given
that humans can, in fact, learn any human language, one can
always view a human language user as a programmed system:
language acquisition amounts to absorbing knowledge of a
particular language, which is then used as a variable program by
a general-purpose language-using mechanism. While Stabler
agrees that support for a third-level theory should be sought in
this aspect of language usage, he puts forth several objections to
the above sort of argument, which I shall deal with in turn.
First, Stabler proposes that what appears to be learning by a
mechanism may merely be the effect of very complex hardwired
internals rather than of a programmed system. If this were the
case, it would imply that complete linguistic capability for all
languages exists in humans from birth, i.e., that nothing need be
learned. This contradicts all observed behavior. Second, he
suggests that language learning may consist of the "growth" of
special submechanisms in the brain, or "only certain adjust-
ments and additions' to an existing hardwired mechanism.
Whether such growth or adjustment is viewed as actual neural
growth/change or simply the encoding of information in existing
neurons, it still does not change the fact that some initial portion
of the brain will subsequently execute whatever is built or
otherwise encoded. A program may be stored in many different
physical ways, which can differ in the difficulty (or even pos-
sibility) of initial storage and/or alteration.
Finally, Stabler suggests that, while plasticity would seem to
require some encoding E of knowledge of a language, one
cannot distinguish whether E is itself a program or "whether it is
used strictly as data by some other procedure. " Now one of the
basic notions of computation is that of program/data equiv-
alence. That is, for any program P, written in some language L
and computing some function F, one can also implement F by
another program P', written in some other language L', which
uses P as its data and as its sole knowledge of F. A distinction
between program and data requires that one know the language
which the mechanism under consideration implements; then
the program is that portion of the mechanism's storage which
consists of statements in this language which are to be executed,
while the remainder is data. (Stabler himself makes no distinc-
tion between program and data in his initial definition of a third-
level theory.) Thus, if one has no knowledge of the internals of
the brain, one cannot usefully argue as to whether encoding E
is, in fact, program or data. Any such claim would require
knowledge of what the "machine language" of the brain is, i.e.,
what set of basic "instructions" it will recognize and execute.
Such knowledge is, I believe, still a good distance in the future.
Execute criminals, not rules of grammar
James D. McCawley
Department of Unguistics, University of Chicago, Chicago, III. 60637
Linguists in the 1930s and 1940s talked about stimuli and
responses and then proceeded to examine linguistic examples,
identify linguistic units, and formulate rules describing how
those units could be combined. Linguists in the 1960s and 1970s
talked about computability and algorithms and then proceeded
to examine linguistic examples, identify linguistic units, and
formulate rules describing how those units could be combined.
The professed behaviorism of the former linguists and the
professed commitment of the latter linguists to computational
410
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3

Commentary/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
models are not totally irrelevant to the kinds of linguistics that
they did, but it has a much more tangential relation to their work
than most of them would have liked to think. My impression is
that the principal influence of these ideologies on the scholarly
work done by their adherents was on those scholars'judgements
as to what ideas posed "conceptual problems" (in the sense of
Laudan 1977) and were thus to be rejected unless they could be
rendered ideologically palatable.
I have argued (McCawley 1982) that linguists' statements as to
the nature of their enterprise should be regarded with suspicion
(1 leave the drawing of similar conclusions about other disci-
plines to those familiar enough with the disciplines to have
grounds for drawing them). For example, while most transfor-
mational grammarians assent to the proposition that a language
can be identified with a set of sentences, the practice of most of
them strongly suggests that they do not believe that proposition.
Stabler takes his conception of "a grammar" exclusively from
linguists' (indeed, very orthodox transformational gram-
marians) statements as to what a grammar is supposed to be,
and he fails to take up what linguists actually accept as (partial)
grammars of languages. In view of the predilection of transfor-
mational grammarians for computational terminology and for
notational systems reminiscent of programming languages, it is
not surprising that Stabler treats a grammar as something that
can be included in a program and its rules as things that can be
"executed. " However, such a conception of a grammar conflicts
with the practice of most linguists, even of the few that Stabler
mentions, who admit grammars in which some or even all the
rules fail to be the sort of thing that one can speak of as being
executed.
For example, unless one is very loose either about what it is to
execute something or about what one identifies with a given
linguistic rule, one cannot speak of executing a "filter" such as
Chomsky and Lasnik's (1977, p. 456) rule excluding sentences in
which certain complementizers are followed by empty subjects.
Conceivably Stabler intends a loose use of his terminology, so
that computational steps that indirectly reflect the content of a
rule (say, a subroutine that serves to avoid the assembly of
structures that violate a given filter) are identified with that rule,
but he has given the reader no clue as to whether he has any such
thing in mind. As they stand, Stabler's H2, with its reference to
execution of grammatical rules, and his H3, with its reference to
computations governed by an encoding of a program that con-
tains a grammar, are irrelevant to the status of the sorts of
grammars seriously advanced by linguists, in the same way that
talk of executing rules of poker or of chess would be irrelevant to
the status as part of poker-playing or chess-playing competence
of the rule that three of a kind beats two pair or the rule that
bishops move diagonally. I use the rule that bishops move
diagonally when I decide not to move my rook to a square that is
diagonally opposite my opponent's bishop, but I doubt that
Stabler would want to say that I "execute" the rule.
Nine-tenths of the way through his paper, Stabler finally gets
to the topic of "the grammar as data" but shortly dismisses it as of
little apparent interest. By all rights it is that topic to which nine-
tenths of a paper entitled "How are grammars represented?"
should have been devoted, and the idea of a grammar as part of a
program that should have been taken up only to be dismissed.
Users of a language have knowledge (of which the linguist's
grammar is intended as an account) of the phonological, mor-
phological, syntactic, and semantic structures that the language
allows and of the permissible correspondences among those
structures. One of the few things that most linguists agree on
(Chomsky 1965, p. 9; Lakoff & Thompson 1975, p. 307) is that
the same knowledge of a language is used in speaking it as in
understanding it. The computations that one performs in speak-
ing, in comprehending speech, and in reading, however, are
presumably quite different from one another, at the very least
because of major differences in what information one has access
to (for instance, in speaking, but not in comprehending speech,
one has direct access to the speaker's intentions), though in each
case one is assembling linguistic structures on each of the
structural levels, guided by the same knowledge of what struc-
tures are possible and how the different structures may be
related to one another. The fact that older-style transformational
grammars (as in, say, Chomsky 1965) are presented in a format
reminiscent of computer programs should not delude one into
ascribing to rules of grammar the status of computational steps
to be executed in the course of linguistic behavior. The informa-
tion that transformations provide about the correspondence
between underlying and superficial linguistic structures can be
utilized by the language user (speaker or hearer) before he
finishes assembling the structure that the transformation "oper-
ates on," in which case the rule is used, though the "instruction"
by which it is expressed is not executed. The notational practices
of transformational grammarians can be compared to the imag-
inable practice of giving information (such as that there is a
bridge connecting 59th Street with Long Island City) in the form
of instructions ("Go east on 59th Street and over the bridge and
get offin Long Island City") even when there is no intention that
the instructions be complied with. (If a grammar is, as I am
suggesting, more like a map than like a program, the arrows that
appear in rules are like the arrow on a map: they tell you which
way is north, with the convention that surface structure is north
of deep structure.)
Stabler's dismissal of "the grammar as data" is merely a
baroque elaboration of an argument from ignorance. Stabler
states that "proponents of M are never so explicit about the role
of grammar, so it is really more plausible to assume that they are
proposing that either H3 or Hd is correct" (M = that grammars
are mentally represented; H3 = that language understanding is
done by a program-using system with a program that includes a
grammar; Hd = that language understanding is done by a
computational system that uses a grammar as data); this "more
plausible" assumption, however, "seems rather unnatural" and,
since it is "looser" than H3, it is also undermined by the
arguments that undermine H3. Stabler's reliance on a "plausi-
ble assumption" about what "proponents of M" have in mind
seems to be an admission that he has not asked any "proponents
of M" what they have in mind. A scholar who has spent most of
his academic life at institutions where proponents of M are not
hard to find ought to be able to rely on more than a mere
conjecture as to what such persons accept. In any event, the
inexplicitness of proponents of M about the role of a grammar is
no more grounds for dismissing Hd than it is for dismissing H3:
Stabler has not cited any proposal for the role of a grammar in
language use that is both explicit and plausible, so any of the
"competing" proposals (its's a bit ludicrous to say "competing,"
since the competitors seem more committed to withdrawing
from the race than to running in it) could be given the privileged
position that Stabler accords to H3, and its competitors replaced
by "looser" substitutes. The dereliction of duty of which Stabler
rightly accuses linguists does not justify him in putting inanities
into their mouths, much as I might regard that as a punishment
which fits the crime.
How could you tell how grammars are
represented?
John C. Marshall
Neuropsychology Unit, Neuroscience Group, The Radcliffe Infirmary,
Oxford 0X2 6HE, England
I think I agree with most of the arguments that Stabler advances,
but I'd like to be reassured - or disabused.
To begin with, it is clearly true that the research program of
generative linguistics (and trie "realist" interpretation of specific
linguistic hypotheses) implies no necessary commitment to an
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3
411

Commentary/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
encoded grammar in Stabler's sense. As Chomsky (1978) points
out, grammars specify "abstract conditions that unknown mech-
anisms must meet," an interpretation of linguistic inquiry that,
as I have previously argued (Marshall 1980), corresponds with
Marr's "top level [that] contains the theory of the computation"
(Marr 1980). This construal of the status of grammars certainly
leaves pretty much open such questions as: What are the
algorithms and heuristics employed in parsing and production?
How are these algorithms committed to particular mechanisms?
and, How are the mechanisms instantiated in neurophysiologi-
cal circuitry? There are, of course, good reasons for expressing
parsing algorithms, for example, as computer programs. It is, as
Stabler notes, somewhat easier to write the theory in a high-
level programming language than to build it directly in the form
of "networks of electronic circuits." But there is no reason why
this undoubted fact should lead to reification of programs per se.
Bratley, Dewar, and Thome (1967) have described a computer
program "to simulate the process by which humans recognize
the syntactic structure of sentences." Nonetheless, they con-
clude that it is important "to distinguish those features of the
model which are significant from those which are merely a
consequence of the fact that the model is a computer program"
(p. 973). There is no implication in Bratley et al.'s paper (or
indeed in any other paper on syntax recognition I am familiar
with) that the neuronal instantiation of parsing theories must
run on a program-using architecture. Similarly, the fact that
low-level visual processes may be implemented directly is no
bar to Grimson's (1981) expressing the Marr and Poggio (1979)
algorithm for human stereopsis as a computer program.
How, then, could we decide whether particular linguistic
computations "involve the use of an encoding of the program
computed"? Stabler's own thoughts on this question seem
somewhat gloomy. He stresses the fact that "any program that
can be computed by any system can be computed directly, or by
a program-using system, or by some sort of 'hybrid' system,"
and he suggests that the distinctions are really differences "of
detail at the level of the wiring." But is there really a principled
distinction between "direct" computation and programmed
computation, as opposed to the technological distinction be-
tween taking a soldering iron to the innards and reprogramming
from the outside? If a theoretically significant issue is involved
("at the level of the wiring"), it is surprising that Stabler refuses
even to speculate on how "neurophysiological data could be
brought to bear on any such issue." I would have expected that if
the conceptual difference between program-using architectures
and "direct" computation is as clear as Stabler maintains, it
should be possible to state in principle what kinds of anatomical
or electrophysiological evidence would distinguish between
them. (I lay aside the question of whether our current neu-
rophysiological techniques are sufficiently powerful actually to
obtain the requisite evidence.)
Elsewhere, Stabler stresses the importance of "control
states" or "a mediating control mechanism" for diagnosing that a
program-using system is operative, but I am not sure that I
would recognize the relevant control mechanism if I saw one.
Consider traditional examples of stimulus ambiguity: O is repre-
sented as "zero" in the sequence—2, — 1,0, +1, +2, but as [ou]
in the sequence M, N, O, P, Q. Can one regard digit and letter
as control states that determine the encoding of the stimulus
(Jonides & Gleitman 1972)? If I came across the word mare in a
French newspaper I would assign it the semantic interpretation
of "pond"; if I came across mare in an English newspaper the
semantic interpretation of "jument" would be rather more
appropriate. Does the (putative) existence of an "input switch"
in bilinguals (Macnamara & Kushnir 1971) count as a "mediating
control mechanism?" If "context" determines the parsing of
"They are flying planes" as either (They) (are flying) (planes) or
(They) (are) (flying planes), does this imply that the maintenance
of semantic coherence in a discourse is achieved via a control
mechanism that "decides" which encoding is to be computed?
With respect to lexical ambiguities in sentences current evi-
dence seems to indicate that initially all readings are accessed; in
a second processing state inappropriate readings are then sup-
pressed (Tanenhaus, Leiman & Seidenberg 1979; Swinney
1981). In Stabler's terms, does this mean that the first stage is
"hardwired' but the second stage is "executed by a program-
using system" with control states? Subjects in lexical-decision
experiments seem to be able to exercise options on which code
(visual, orthographic, phonetic, or semantic) they rely on to
perform the task; within limits, the construction of these codes is
under strategic control that is determined by the subjects'
perception of the character of the stimulus ensemble presented
in the experiment (Hawkins, Reicher, Rogers & Peterson 1976;
Shulman & Davison 1977; Carr, Davidson & Hawkins 1978). Do
such results point in the direction of a program-using system?
If none of these cases counts as an example of "a control
mechanism that determines what program is to be computed,"
what would?
Word processor or video game?
Robert May
Department of Linguistics, Barnard College, Columbia University, New
York, N.Y. 10027
Is the manner in which a person embodies and ultimately
employs a grammar more like the DEC-20 computer running
the word-processing program with which I'm writing this, or
more like the Pac-Man game down at the local video arcade?
The DEC-20, on the one hand, is a "system which uses [a]
program," in this case EMACS, "to govern its application." It is
what Stabler calls a third-level computational system. The Pac-
Man game, on the other hand, is a machine of a somewhat
different sort. The game is "wired in" to its circuits; it contains
"no explicit encoding of a program" and functions "without
having control states to govern [its] application." It is what
Stabler calls a "direct" system. Now, to restate the initial
question in the terminology Stabler introduces, is a grammar, as
a psychological theory, a third-level or a direct system; is it like a
description of the control states of the word-processing program
or of the game's logic circuits? Stabler does not provde us with
an answer, but then it is not his intention to resolve the issue.
Rather, his goal is to point out that the evidence purporting to
support a third-level interpretation is, for the most part, also
compatible with a direct interpretation. While grammars cer-
tainly describe a certain function (and hence qualify as second-
level computational systems), linguistic theory itself is indeter-
minate between whether grammars are physically realized in
the sense of software or hardware; whether we are dealing with
the word processor or the latest wizardry from Atari.
I am inclined to agree with Stabler's point, such as it is. As
Stabler points out, which view is correct is an empirical matter;
indeed, he is at pains to clarify the types of arguments that have
been tendered. I, for one, am willing to let the chips fall where
they may on this one. After all, Stabler is not claiming that
linguistic theories lack psychological interpretations; rather, he
is examining what such interpretations consist of. He leaves the
basic goals of empirical adequacy for linguistic theory un-
disturbed. This is not to say, of course, that this issue is an
uninteresting one; it is by no means uninteresting, especially
when considered from the perspective of a biology of language.
What we might expect to find upon investigating it, none too
surprisingly, is that the software/hardware distinction can't be
taken too literally. The DEC-20 is an all-purpose computer; I
can just as well play computer games on it as do my word
processing. Indeed, it can run programs of exceptional sophis-
tication and complexity, provided that someone programs it.
But how does a person get programmed for a grammar? If
412
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3

Commentary/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
anything is pretty certain about the acquisition of grammar at
this point, it is that its central principles are not "learned" in any
sense, because the experience necessary to induce them is
simply not available to the child in any systematic fashion. On
the other hand, however, I can play only Pac-Man on that
machine down at the arcade; there is no way I'll get to play
Asteroids or Space Invaders for my quarter, short of altering its
circuitry. People, though, speak literally thousands of tongues
but presumably do not substantially differ in those aspects of
brain structure and function relevant to language. Reality, then,
seems to fall somewhere between these extremes; grammars are
more like what Stabler calls "hybrid" systems. Insofar as a
linguistic theory attributes grammatical universals ultimately to
the genetic endowment of the organism, it is committed to at
least certain aspects of the grammar being hardwired, not
programmed, for how could a child come to know these princi-
ples, given the "poverty of the stimulus," unless they were
intrinsic properties of the system? All that would remain open,
on this view, would be how those properties which individuate
grammars, the "software applications" permitted by the nature
of the hardware, are instantiated. So it seems that the relation of
higher-order cognitive theories such as grammars to their physi-
cal realizations is most like an Atari home video system; I can't
word-process on it, but I can play Pac-Man, Asteroids, Space
Invaders, and a host of other games just by putting in the proper
cartridges.
But perhaps this is enough of this computer mishmash.
Today's computers may prove no more helpful as metaphors for
mind than did yesterday's hydraulics.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Thanks to Virginia Mann for helpful discussion.
On levels
John Morton
MRC Cognitive Development Unit, London WC1H OAH, England
Stabler has drawn attention, in some detail, to the advantages of
keeping separate the different levels at which it is possible to
give an account of a set of phenomena. In particular, he has
pointed out that a true linguistic theory will not specify the
human language-processing algorithm. In general, the message
is that higher-level specifications never entail particular lower-
level specifications. As Stabler points out, Marr and Poggio
(1976) have already made this claim and suggested that the first-
level hypothesis should be stated fully before second-level
hypotheses can be developed. Stabler thinks "this itinerary is
overly rigid," but he does not pursue this demur. Of course, in
practice, the majority of psychologists operate at the second
level. This can be because their understanding of the phe-
nomenon they are trying to account for is incomplete or does not
exist in a suitable form. Thus, psychologists who attempted to
rely on the current "true" grammar, viewing it as their function
for suggesting the processing algorithm for that grammar, would
spend more time trying to follow the linguistic debates than
getting on with their own thing. The escape clause, in practice,
is based on the modularity hypothesis. If we believe that the
human language-processing algorithm can be split into compo-
nent modules, then the properties of some of these modules can
be explored in the absence of a complete description at the first
level.
This description of current practice seems to violate one of
Stabler's other claims, that "a second-level theory . . . is neces-
sarily a first-level theory." In fact, there is no violation, since it
seems clear that, in the quotation, Stabler is referring to a
complete second-level theory. A second-level theory that refers
to only a subset of the domain covered by a putative first-level
theory, such as grammar, would say nothing about the gram-
mar, of course. If a second-level theory were complete with
respect to grammar then the mode of operation of the former
would be described in terms of the latter. There would, howev-
er, seem to be no requirement that the terms in the grammar
bear any direct relation to the nature of the modules in the
second-level theory.
The same arguments apply to the relationship between sec-
ond- and third-level theories and to that between third-level
theories and physiology. Stabler takes an intermediate position
on the latter, claiming that "the computational account of
cognitive processes would need to be very well developed
before neurophysiological data could be brought to bear" on
third-level issues. Mehler, Morton, and Jusczyk (submitted for
publication) have argued a little more strongly along the same
lines - in effect, on the assumption that the neurophysiological
level can be regarded as a fourth level. The extent to which the
assumption is valid remains to be discovered.
The relevance of the machine metaphor
Thomas Roeper
Department of Linguistics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass.
01003
Stabler's work seems to me to be not a criticism of, but rather a
fairly lucid exposition of the cautious assumptions that linguists
make (Chomsky, in particular) about the mind/body relation.
Linguists are sure that some relation - but who knows what -
must exist between grammars and processing, acquisition, or
neurological systems. Stabler points out that if one follows a
strictly constructed computer model, then it may not be correct
to say that the grammar is "represented" or "encoded" or that
"rule-governed" behavior is involved. Nor, one might add, does
he show that grammars cannot be neurologically represented.
What Stabler is doing has been done before. It belongs to a
school of criticism with a formula. Take a science that uses a
mathematical notation, observe that it has a few open defini-
tions, and then show that its realization in another domain
(usually physical) has infinitely many logical instantiations, due
to a few vague definitions.
The problem with this approach flows from an excessive
affection for the computer metaphor. The crucial initial assump-
tion is that linguistic theory is a deductive, axiomatic theory that
works like a machine. In reality, the deductive model is a goal
and not a current reality. Therefore current concepts simply fail
to have the rigor needed to be subjected to computerlike logical
extrapolations.
This is as it should be, because linguistics is evolving in just
the manner in which every other science evolves. Generative
grammar is comprised of partially systematic and partially intui-
tive notions, many of which are deliberately left open (like
subject) and others which are genuinely mysterious (like refer-
ential, or thematic). I think the true goal of linguistic theory is to
achieve a natural fit between mathematically conceived gram-
mars and neurological models. Although every linguist remains
in principle open to the possibility of radical differences be-
tween an atemporal, aphysical representation and a temporal,
physical representation, the underlying belief is that there will
be a natural and perspicuous alliance. No one knows what
"natural" means, but no one is upset by baroque logical pos-
sibilities, since they are merely reflections of (we hope) small
conceptual defects.
The spirit of the enterprise in reality is quite alien to the
computer metaphor. Chomsky has occasionally remarked that
eventually linguistic theory will simply be regarded as neu-
rological theory, just as mathematical versions of physics came
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3
413

Commentary/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
to be regarded as physics. If this approach is viable, then what
the linguist should do is head along a group of promising
concepts in the direction of physical representations. The con-
cepts represent insights, left underdefined, which can connect
to biological concepts as they evolve.
This is just what has happened. The "modular" view of
linguistics has emerged. It is coupled explicitly with the least
well-defined version of generative grammar (namely, govern-
ment binding theory), which, however, seems "natural" in light
of what we know about biology and is beautifully detailed and
nuanced with respect to linguistic data. If this is the true goal,
then it is quite satisfactory at present to say that some relation
between grammar and a physical representation will emerge.
Stabler's critique really belongs to an earlier era when the
machine model did dominate linguistics. He alludes to this
implicitly by his own discussion of "plasticity" and the "modu-
lar" views of language acquisition which have emerged more
recently. What does a current assessment look like? Syntax has
in many respects been cast in a theory of filters or output
constraints that would map naturally onto a static model. In this
respect a dynamic "rule-governed" conception perhaps be-
comes unnecessary. However, other aspects of modular linguis-
tics could, in my estimation, easily resurrect dynamic charac-
teristics with a straightforward mapping onto the processing or
acquisition models. In local domains, then, the mechanistic
model may work. This leaves open the most interesting ques-
tion: What is the right imagery for overall mental ability? It is
simply too early to tell.
What I would like to see as a contribution of philosophers to
linguistics is a sympathetic clarification of central concepts, not
criticisms of speculative remarks about undeveloped parts of the
theory. What kind of concept is empty category, pronominal
anaphor, or thematic relation? What is the status of the "exten-
sional" theory of language learning? Are there interesting sym-
pathies between these notions and modular concepts emerging
in biology? (See Lewontin 1983, for an interesting critique of the
computer metaphor in biology.)
Stabler's discussion of an alternative "parallel-processing"
model moves in the direction of bringing intuitions about
neurology together with intuitions from linguistics. A richly
detailed discussion of these matters would be a real con-
tribution.
Grammars-as-programs versus grammars-
as-data
Jerry Samet
Philosophy Department, Wellesley College, Wellesley, Mass. 02181
I agree with almost everything Stabler has to say in his target
article. His distinctions between grammars as encoded, com-
puted, or embedded in hybrid systems provides a sharper focus
for questions about the psychological reality of linguistic and
cognitivist theoretical constructs. There are a couple of points,
however, where Stabler and I diverge.
Grammars-as-programs versus grammars-as-data. Although
it's clear that grammars are psychologically important in both
program and data systems, Stabler downplays the second as an
interpretation of linguists' claims for the psychological reality of
grammars. At one point he says that the data version of the role
of grammars "is not so natural a construal of the linguists'
suggestions, and it is not supported by available data, either." I
agree that the empirical support is not there. Still, I'm not sure
why grammars-as-programs is a more plausible reading. What
sort of program would realize a grammar? Suggestions in the
literature don't strike me as all that convincing. Certainly the
rewrite rules of any natural language-processing program will
look quite different from the rewrite rules of any familiar
transformational grammar. There seems to be no important
connection between the production of sentences by a grammar
and the production of sentences by a speaker, and the analysis-
by-synthesis models Stabler mentions have very little plau-
sibility as components of comprehension systems, either.
One possible version of grammars-as-data that Stabler does
not mention would be a system in which the grammar is
acquired on the basis of universal grammar, and then serves as a
data base for the development of a set of parsing and generating
heuristics (which may themselves be realized in any of the
alternative manners Stabler discusses). Once such a parser and
generator are in place the grammar may be "expunged" or kept
as a data source for a fail-safe mechanism of some sort. In such a
system, the grammar would be represented as data but would
not be used in ordinary linguistic functioning. Of course, if we
speculatively accept grammars as playing this sort of role, it
doesn't/oWou; that they must be represented in any strong sense
(not even as data); perhaps a temporary hardwired or hybrid
system is what gets converted into a heuristic parser. Neverthe-
less, the possibility remains that we can work on discovering a
program/function that maps a representation of a grammar into
a (skeletal) parser. In the course of such research we may
confirm that we are dealing with a function that maps a repre-
sented data base into something. Although I remain skeptical
about the correctness of all these models that incorporate
grammars into processing systems, they are empirical pos-
sibilities nonetheless.
A similar issue about grammars-as-data comes up in Stabler's
discussion of rule-governed behavior. If I understand him, he is
suggesting that if a system incorporates a grammar simply as
data, then the system's behavior is not really rule-governed. He
implies that if we are willing to call such a system "rule-
governed," then "we could show, e.g., the behavior of the
Sun-Mars orbital system to be rule-governed." I don't quite
understand the argument he gives for this. Consider someone
who learns to play Monopoly by studying the rules. Suppose
he's involved in a game and he has to rehearse (to himself or
aloud) the rules for mortgaging property while he carries out the
transaction. It seems plausible to say that his behavior here is
"rule-governed." In fact, those who worry about the correct
application of this term of art usually take this sort of case to be a
paradigm of rule-governed behavior. But here it also seems
most plausible to say that the rules are stored as data and that
there is a more general program of some sort that mediates their
application in particular cases. There seems to me to be no
reason why a cognitive system that uses rules that it stores only
as data should not be considered rule-governed in the appropri-
ate sense.
The burden of proof versus the burden of research. There is
one more point that I think needs to be clarified. Stabler often
argues like this: a proposed hypothesis H' fits the data, but H"
and H'" are at least as good; why then should we accept H'? In
response to this line of attack Chomsky has suggested that an
alternative to H' be articulated and compared to H'. Stabler is
right in noting that you haven't established H' conclusively
unless you've ruled out the equally plausible contenders H"
and H'", but this is not really to the point. Chomsky's response
might be best read as a suggestion about empirical methodol-
ogy. The idea is that it doesn't really get us very far to challenge a
proposed theory with the logical point that an alternative is
constructible. It would be more constructive to actually begin to
articulate the alternative theory and then see whether it gets any
independent empirical confirmation or disconfirmation. The
fact that for every encoded theory there exists a set of "merely
computed" counterparts is unchallengeable, but it doesn't go
very far.
414
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3

Computation misrepresented: The
procedural/declarative controversy exhumed
Henry Thompson
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Programme in Cognitive Science,
School of Epistemics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9NW
Scotland
Although I am in basic agreement with Stabler's subtext - that
the role played in human linguistic behaviour by rules of a
grammar is unclear from a philosophical perspective, and at best
underdetermined by the available empirical evidence - I can-
not agree with the main thrust of his supporting argument. It is
based on a faulty model of computation and depends on a
distinction without a difference - between execution and use.
The question he claims to address is whether or not mentally
represented grammars play a causal role in linguistic behaviour.
The question he actually addresses is whether that role is
transparent or opaque. There are three points I wish to consid-
er: the computational framework: the hypotheses H3 and Hb;
plasticity and Occam.
1. The computational framework. Stabler's characterisation of
a third-level or "program-using" system is at best confusing and
at worst incorrect. He uses the phrases state of the system and
control state without making clear their relationship, and in
ways which violate their ordinary usages. As nearly as I can
make out, Stabler uses the phrase control state to denote a
function from some unspecified subset of the state of the ma-
chine to functions from (encodings of) program statements to
states of the machine. A more traditional and much simpler use
of these words would say that a program-using system imple-
ments a single interpretation function which maps from ma-
chine states to machine states, and that within machine states it
is sometimes useful to distinguish control state from memory
state. In the first instance this story is usually told at the
machine-language level - it is easy to see, for instance, how it
applies to Turing machines or simple microprocessors - but it is
straightforward to extend it to the level of virtual machines
interpreting higher-level languages. At the machine level, one
can identify instructions, which are the principal determinant of
overall system behaviour, while at a higher level of abstraction
one might speak of program statements, as Stabler does.
The problem with Stabler's approach is that it encourages him
to make a distinction between grammars as programs and
grammars as data which just isn't there. One would have hoped
that the advent of PROLOG would have dispelled this aspect of
the procedural/declarative confusion forever, but apparently it
hasn't. As Pereira and Warren (1980) make clear, a minor
augmentation of the PROLOG virtual machine allows it to use
both ordinary and decorated context-free phrase structure rules
as program statements, thereby effecting a parsing program.
2. The hypotheses H3 and Hb. This leads us to the next point,
which is whether Stabler's hypotheses represent resonable
straw men or not. Although he presents H3 as a fair expression of
the computational implications of M, it seems to me that with
respect to the distinction he is trying to draw between execution
and use it is not fair. The crucial question is whether a represen-
tation of the grammar functions causally in language processing
- the nature of the virtual machine with respect to which that
causation has effect is not in the first instance at issue. To the
extent that linguists have thought about this, I believe that their
bias has always been in the other direction from H3, rather
towards Hd. Starting with Chomsky's involvement with the
Harvard Syntactic Analyser (Kuno & Oettinger 1963), through
cognitive grammar (Lakoff & Thompson 1975), lexical function
grammar (Bresnan & Kaplan, 1982a), and generalized phrase
structure grammar (Gazdar 1982), the computational linguistic
models on which linguists have drawn have all been of the
"parsing program plus grammatical data base" (read "grammar-
Commentary/Stabler. How are grammars represented?
interpreting virtual machines") sort, and to my knowledge no
linguist has ever suggested that the grammar rules are them-
selves the program, as Stabler would have them do. Certainly
no linguist has ever entertained Hb; to do so he would have to
have adopted the sophisticated confusion of Stabler's analysis of
computation.
3. Placticity and Occam. Stabler's attempts to counter the
plasticity argument are particularly undermined by his confu-
sion about computation. He attempts to equate the possible role
of "grammar as data" in the linguistic system with the role of,
e.g., "numbers as data" in a calculator. But the crucial point he
has missed here is that in a calculator it is behaviour with respect
to numbers which makes us recognise it as such, whereas in a
linguistic system it is behaviour with respect not to grammars,
but rather, e.g., utterances which makes us recognise it as such.
Numbers play a causal role in the behaviour of calculators, and
(ex hypothesi) grammars play a causal role in the behaviour of
linguistic systems, but of an obviously different sort. M claims
that grammars are a constitutive part of any system whose
behaviour with respect to language leads us to judge it a
speaker/hearer. No such claim could possibly be made about
numbers and calculators. The plasticity argument and the argu-
ment from the multiplicity of linguistic functions are indeed
only arguments based on Occam (parsimony) - such facts as we
believe bear on these issues are most economically charac-
terised in terms of a decomposition into system(s) and grammar.
Without doubt this gives grammar a causal role in linguistic
behaviour, which is all that M has ever been taken to mean, until
Stabler tried to interpret it in the inadequate and inappropriate
terms of his so-called computational framework.
4. Conclusion. The real problem with Stabler's position is that
it has no force. Even if his computational analysis is valid, all it
leads one to conclude is that there is no solid evidence for a
causal role for grammar in human linguistic behaviour. But
neither is there any evidence against its playing a causal role. As
between these two positions - that some cognitive structure
homomorphic to some formal grammar does or does not play a
causal role in human linguistic behaviour - Stabler has contrib-
uted nothing except his scepticism, which I share. His computa-
tional framework has nothing to say about this issue - even if it
were formally adequate it could not. All his efforts in that
direction amount to the beginnings of an attack on a much
harder, perhaps necessarily unanswerable question, namely,
"What is the nature of the above mentioned homomorphism,"
or, "What is the virtual machine which interprets the cognitive
structures which are its 'output'"?
Rules are not processes
Robert Wilensky
Division of Computer Science, Department of Electrical Engineering 'and
Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, Calif. 94720
Stabler raises an important methodological point. Given that
the behavior of a system conforms to a rule, when are we
justified in saying that the behavior is caused by a representation
of that rule? As Stabler indicates, this is not a new question.
Critics of transformational grammar's psychological relevance
have been raising essentially this objection for years, namely,
that there is a long way to travel between characterizing a
behavior and understanding the process that gives rise to that
behavior.
However, Stabler's argument is both wrong and unfortunate.
It is wrong because of a misconception that one would have
thought long banished by now. Stabler confuses grammars with
processes, despite his protestations to the contrary. For exam-
ple, Stabler's formulation of his second-level hypothesis states
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3
415

Response/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
that "language understanding involves the computation of some
program P, a program that includes the rules of the grammar, G,
which are executed to generate linguistic representations" (em-
phasis added).
This statement suffers from a bad case of category error: one
may conform to a rule or violate a rule, but it is meaningless to
talk about executing rules. This is especially true of transforma-
tional-grammar rules, which are explicitly acknowledged as
nonprocedural; as Chomsky has explained ad nauseam, his rules
characterize rather than perform. My objection is not a semantic
quibble. Rather, I am raising the issue of how it is possible for a
rule to play a role in the operation of a program, if rules
themselves are not objects that can be executed.
One interpretation (which is what I suppose Stabler intends)
is that a rule may be reflected rather transparently in the
structure of a program. For example, one way to construct a
parser based on transformational grammar is to construct a
program segment corresponding precisely to the application of
each particular rule. (Some parsers for programming languages,
notably those termed recursive descent parsers, work this way,
e.g. Aho & Ullman 1972.) While it is tempting to do so, one
should not confuse this segment of the program with a represen-
tation of a rule - the mistake that I believe Stabler makes. For
example, the rule itself applies equally well to understanding
and to production, whereas this piece of program is useful only
in understanding; the program segment of necessity contains
flow of control information, whereas the notion of flow of control
is alien to true generative rules, and so on.
Rather than being a representation of a rule, this segment of
program is merely designed in accordance with the rule. Of
course, a hardwired device might also be designed in accor-
dance with this rule, and might behave in precisely the same
way as the program segment with respect to the task at hand. As
Stabler asserts, such a hardwired device need neither access nor
manipulate an encoding of a program. But in neither the hard-
wired device nor the program segment would a rule be accessed
or manipulated. Thus a rule of transformational grammar would
not be represented and causally efficacious in one case more
than in the other.
One might object that, if the code that denotes this program
appears to be isomorphic to a transformational-grammar rule,
then surely the rule must be represented and must be playing a
causal role. The problem with this objection is that, for it to be
valid, the rule must stop being a piece of program and start
being a piece of data. That is, all control information, etc., which
would distinguish this and other rule-motivated program seg-
ments from data objects must be drained from them, and
distilled into the underlying machinery that executes the pro-
gram. But now the program is no longer being executed; it is
being interpreted.
So we can have actual rules in a program only if the rules
appear as data to an underlying interpreter. The problem here,
insofar as Stabler is concerned, is that he explicitly rejects
"rules-as-data" as a sufficient condition for a system's being rule-
governed.
This point is perhaps the most startling of Stabler's conten-
tions. The "rules-as-data" view is a straightforward interpreta-
tion of how transformational grammar rules might be repre-
sented and causally efficacious. In fact, it would seem to violate
common sense to say that such a system was not rule-governed.
Rejecting this would also cause one to reject the idea that my
behavior was rule-governed if I participated in a game by
actually consulting a written list of the rules of the game while
playing it.
Fortunately, Stabler's argument here is faulty as well. His
objection to this position is that interpreting such systems as
rule-governed would enable one to interpret the behavior of a
planet in orbit as being rule-governed by showing some in-
terpretation under which this system encodes rules which are
taken as arguments in the computation of some function. Sta-
bler's own remarks in the beginning of his paper show the way
out: computational description in general "is just a certain way
of describing the operation of physical systems, a way that is
often quite clear and particularly useful. What we call 'calcula-
tors' and 'computers' are basically just physical systems that
because of their design are conveniently described in computa-
tional terms and useful for this reason." Thus one cannot reject
"rules-as-data" as being causally efficacious because under some
bizarre interpretation any system can be a rule. The question is,
Under what circumstances is it "clear and particularly useful" to
regard them as such?
Implicit in the preceding discussion is the notion that pro-
grams and data differ more in degree than in kind. That is, every
nonhardwired program is some interpreter's data. So rejecting
"rules-as-data" systems as being rule-governed while accepting
"rules-as-programs" systems as rule-governed is logically
inconsistent.
But Stabler's remarks are even more annoying than they are
wrong. He purports to be raising an objection to the general
claim that "human behavior is 'rule-governed' in something like
the way that the behavior of a programmed computer is 'rule-
governed.'" One should not need to point out that the lack of
evidence for Chomsky's claim that transformational-grammar
rules are mentally represented can hardly be considered a
refutation of the idea that human behavior is rule-governed.
The real issue, at least to me, is the relationship between the
components of one's theory and the components of the mind.
For example, the mind might directly reflect one's theory (as in
the "rules-as-data" condition); it may contain components de-
signed in accordance with it; or the theory may simply describe
the behavior of a system (such as the mind) without otherwise
having any direct bearing on the system's design. These distinc-
tions, which bear on what I have elsewhere termed the pro-
cedural adequacy of a theory (Schank 1977), seem more cog-
nitively relevant to me than the distinctions Stabler makes.
After all, one might object to transformational grammar on the
grounds that its rules may end up bearing no more relation to
how people understand language than do Peano's axioms to how
people balance their checkbooks. But one suspects that few
transformationalists would be upset if their rules ended up
"only" being explicitly represented as data to various mental
programs, or "only" directly manifest in the actual hardware of
the brain.
Author's Response
Computational theories and mental
representation
Edward P. Stabler, Jr.
Cenfre for Cognitive Science, SSC, University of Western Ontario, London,
Ont, Canada N6A 5C2
What Chomsky really means. A number of commentators
claim that I have misinterpreted Chomsky. Harman
argues that my entire discussion is misguided because
Chomsky has pointed out that we do not need to think of
the rules of a generative grammar as generating anything
in the speaker; they simply characterize the language.
Actually this is perfectly compatible with both my con-
strual of Chomsky and the arguments I develop. I quote
and agree with Chomsky's remark that "there are many
416
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3

possible ways in which . . . a program might make use of
a stored grammar; it is a central problem of psycholinguis-
tics to explore these possibilities" (1969, p. 156). The idea
of H2 and H3 (see Table 1 of Response) is, perhaps,
suggested by passages quoted in the text and remarks like
the following: "To know a language, I am assum-
ing, . . . is to have a certain mental structure consisting
of a system of rules and principles which generate and
relate 
mental 
representations 
of 
various 
types"
(Chomsky, 1980b, p. 5), but it is, as I say in the paper,
only a "crude first guess" about how the rules might be
used. This view is something Chomsky agrees to. (Mc-
Cawley, who wonders why I did not just ask the linguists
what they mean, will be interested to know that I did in
fact confirm this view in discussions with Chomsky.)
The hypotheses H2 and H3, although admittedly
crude, serve for the purposes of my paper because noth-
ing in my argument depends on any of the details of how a
program uses the rules and principles of the grammar. I
point this out after quoting Chomsky's remark, and I
emphasize the point again in note 4. Adding detail to H2
and H3 to make them more plausible is unnecessary for
my argument. The reader may add any detail he wants to
H2 or H3 or Hb to allow for "filters" (as McCawley
suggests) or for some nongenerative use of generative
rules, and my argument will go through in the same way.
Wilensky urges that it does not make sense to think of a
rule as part of a program. One would have thought that
executing a simple rewrite rule like "S —» NP VP" might
involve transforming a representation of "S" into a repre-
sentation of the sequence "NP VP." Wilensky's objection
is that a line of a program contains information about flow
of control that is not specified by the rule, but he does not
give us any reason to reject the plausible position that this
information could simply be added. One rule could sim-
Tablc 1 (Response). Hypotheses referred to in target article
(M) The grammar is mentally represented and used in the
exercise of linguistic abilities such as understanding speech
and making grammatically judgments.
(H2) Language understanding involves the computation of
some program P, a program that includes the rules of the
grammar, G, which are executed to generate linguistic
representations.
(H3) In human language understanding, the computation of
P is carried out by a program-using system whose operation
is governed by an encoding of P (and hence also of G).
(Hh) In human language understanding, a program P that
includes G as a proper part is computed but not repre-
sented; it is computed by a hardwired or hybrid system.
(Hd) In human language understanding, a program P is
computed (either by a program-using system or by some
other kind of system) that uses G as data.
(Hb) In human language understanding, the program com-
puted either includes G and is computed by a program-using
system or uses G as data or both.
Response/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
ply be a line in a program in which one line is executed
after the next; or it could be a line in a program which
would, after executing this rule, execute some rule which
rewrites "NP" or "VP"; or it could involve some more
complicated use.
The computational model. A number of commentators
also worried about the computational framework de-
scribed in my paper. The predicates "computes a func-
tion," "computes a program," and "uses a program" are
given fairly precise definitions. These definitions are not
offered as an analysis of the meaning of these predicates as
they are used in ordinary language, though I do think that
there is significant correspondence between my defined
terms and the ordinary ones. However, in my terms,
every physical system computes a function. This is a
literal truth, not just a metaphor or analogy. Conse-
quently, to say that some particular physical system
computes a function (under some fR and in some circum-
stances C) is not to make a substantial empirical claim.
However, the claim that the terms of my computational
account are appropriate for certain psychological or neu-
rophysiological theories is certainly substantial. And as I
point out in note 1, computational theories make substan-
tial empirical claims about physical systems by putting
constraints on the realization functions, fH and fP, and by
providing some indication of the relevant circumstances
C.
Roeper says that the machine model does not dominate
linguistics any more; now linguists look for connections
with biology. References to computation are still promi-
nent, though, in the work of some linguists (e.g.,
Chomsky 1980b; Gazdar 1982; Kaplan & Bresnan, in
press b), so the issue is not dead by any means. And in
spite of the rather striking but still very crude results on
localization of linguistic function in the brain, there are
good reasons for doubting that any close connections
between linguistic theory and biology will be forthcom-
ing. Indeed, it is a crucial advantage of the computational
approach that it has a functionalist vocabulary that does
not require a type reduction to physicalistic concepts (cf.
Putnam 1967; Fodor 1981a, ch. 5), since this seems to be
required in linguistics and in psychological accounts of
language processing and visual perception (cf. Liberman
et al. 1967; Ullman 1980; Keyser & Pinker 1980).
Gross suggests that the fact that the brain seems to
work at speeds much slower than are found in digital
computers indicates that the computer analogy is inap-
propriate. The computational approach sketched here,
however, has no bias towards fast processing. Slow,
parallel processes are handled as easily as the processing
that happens to be very fast in our electronic computers.
Computing a program versus using a program. This dis-
tinction plays an important role in my argument, and a
number of commentators were unable to make sense of it.
Harman, for example, argues that I am mistaken in
thinking that a third-level theory (according to which a
physical system uses a program under some fR and fP) is
stronger than the corresponding second-level hypothesis
(according to which that physical system computes P
under that fR). He says that given my definitions and the
"trivial observation" that any mechanism which com-
putes a function is naturally treated as a representation of
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3
417

Response/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
that function, a second-level hypothesis will always entail
the corresponding third-level hypothesis. In this crit-
icism, Harman not only is mistaken about the logic but
shows that he has missed the main point of my arguments.
I am not worried about claims that certain functions are
represented (whatever that might amount to) but rather
about claims that certain rules, certain syntactic objects,
are represented.
As for the logical point, suppose that under fR and in
circumstances C, physical system S computes a program
P with two instructions Ii and Ij. Can we deduce that
under that fR and some fP, S uses P? We cannot, because
according to my definitions fP must associate the two
instructions of P with two states of S such that S computes
F,j because it is in fP (Ii), and then it goes into a control
state which makes fP (Ij) govern the computation, and as a
result of being in this state it computes F^ (which might
be different from FIf). The existence of states that play
this causal role in the computation is obviously not en-
tailed by the second-level account. It could be that if we
allow ourselves to define any program-realization func-
tion at all, we will (as a matter of fact, not as a necessary
consequence of the second-level account) always be able
to find states that will serve in the required role, but again
the point I make in note 1 is important: the scientist will
be interested only in certain realization functions. With-
out implicit or explicit contraints on these functions, a
computational theory has no empirical content.
With regard to the use I make of the distinction be-
tween program computation and program use, and of the
corresponding distinction between encodings used as
data and encodings used as programs, there is an impor-
tant point that I did not emphasize in my paper, but that
should have been clear given the form of my argument.
Remember that I argue against both H3, which says that
grammars are used as programs, and Hd, which says that
grammars are used as data. Thus it is no objection to my
argument to point out that, in some cases, a particular
encoding can be treated either as data or as a program. If
the rules of grammar are not represented as data or as a
program, then, as I point out, it is hard to imagine any
computational construal of M. If there are any cases in
which rules are not used as a program but are neverthe-
less used as data, then we can propose Hd. As Samet and
Wilensky point out, in such cases we could still say that
the system was rule-governed. Wilensky is right that such
a claim is significant only given constraints on the realiza-
tion functions. The only problem with this as a construal
of M, then, is the relatively minor point that this would be
a case in which the rules were not computed. The serious
problem is that neither H3 nor Hb is supported by
available evidence.
Thompson suggests that the program/data distinction
cannot be maintained in a programming language like
PROLOG (similar worries have been raised about more
conventional programming languages; see, for example,
Burks 1963, p. 105, on branch commands). The point in
these cases is not that there is no way to distinguish
program from data but that it is sometimes hard to decide
how to classify a particular encoding; it can sometimes be
classified either way. As I have noted, this point does not
undermine my argument. In a "procedural interpreta-
tion" of PROLOG, it is natural to think of a set of clauses
as a program, and the queries (unless they are 0-place
predicates) provide the input to these programs in their
argument places (see Van Emden & Kowalski 1976; Clark
& McCabe 1979). Thus, if the clauses are rewrite rules (as
in Pereira & Warren 1980), then the rewrite rules are part
of the program being computed. The input to such
programs is typically the string to be parsed. The virtue of
PROLOG is that its procedural interpretation corre-
sponds to a standard logical interpretation under which
the clauses of the program are interpreted as premises
(and can, accordingly, be thought of not as a program but
as the "data base") and program computation can be seen
as theorem proving (see, e.g., Stabler 1982; Stabler &
Elcock 1983).
Harnish notes quite correctly that a program-using
system need not be programmable. The existence of an
encoding of a program and a control mechanism that uses
that encoding to govern the operation of a system cer-
tainly does not imply that the encoding is easily changed.
Harnish may also be right that programmable systems
should be singled out for particular attention. They may
play an important role in the sorts of adjustments in
cognitive functioning that representation-using systems
allow.
Computing compiled and interpreted programs. The fact
that we sometimes compile a program and then run the
compiled program does not raise any problems for the
framework proposed, as Berwick suggests. If we use the
original program to produce the compiled program and
then load and run the compiled program, the present
framework allows us to say precisely what has gone on.
The original program was taken as data by the compiler to
generate another program as output, and the program so
produced was then used as a program. In such cases we
usually want the compiled program to be such that any
machine that computes the compiled program (under fR)
thereby computes the original program (under some
specified fR'). This is a standard account (see, e.g., Clark
& Cowell 1976). If a grammar were part of a program that
was compiled, it would clearly be represented as data for
the compiler. In fact, Samet and Berwick propose a view
much like this - a view originally proposed in Fodor,
Bever & Garrett 1974 - in which the grammar is used as
data by a program that generates a corresponding recog-
nition algorithm. This view is committed to a representa-
tion of the grammar that is used as data and to a represen-
tation of the recognition algorithm, and so it is a theory
committed to the hypothesis Hb which I criticize.
The present framework can similarly provide the stan-
dard account of interpreters, and so I cannot see why
Lipton and Davis worry about them. An interpreter can
be seen, as Lipton suggests, as allowing a program in a
high-level language like LISP to be used by a machine
that uses a lower-level machine language, and the inter-
preter can also be seen as a program that takes the high-
level language as data. Again, it is no problem for the
present account that in such cases an encoding can be
treated both as data and as a program.
Hardwired computation. A hardwired circuit can, as Ber-
wick points out, simulate the computation of any pro-
gram; and Berwick suggests that the mapping between
parts of the circuits and parts of the programs which is
exploited to get the results I mention in note 2 can be
418
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3

taken as defining a realization function. He is right that if
this were the case, my distinction between program
computation and program use would collapse. The fact is,
though, that a piece of circuit that computes some func-
tion cannot ipso facto be taken as a representation of some
syntactic object that denotes that function. Which syntac-
tic object would it be? Furthermore, these states do not
govern the system in the way that an encoding of a
program governs a program-using system, as I pointed
out above in answer to Harman's similar idea.
Underdetermination. My arguments are seen by Samet
and Lipton as showing only that H3 is underdetermined
by the data, and since even the best-supported scientific
theories are underdetermined, my conclusion that H3 is
not supported by available evidence does not follow. That
is, they see me as pointing out that for any hypothesis like
H3 we can find another hypothesis which cannot be ruled
out on the basis of available data. To argue from this
premise to my conclusion would obviously be fallacious.
What I do instead is point out that not only is all the
evidence adduced in support of H3 accounted for by Hh,
but Hh is really the better hypothesis. In the first place, it
is simpler. H3 just posits a more complicated language-
processing mechanism than Hh does. In the second
place, the lack of plasticity of grammatical knowledge is
predicted by Hh but not by H3. And in the third place,
mechanisms of the sort posited by Hh tend to be more
efficient than mechanisms of the sort posited by H3, in
which the computation is mediated by accessing a repre-
sentation of the program computed. This point favors Hh,
since human language processing shows signs of impres-
sive efficiency: it is very fast and can be carried out at the
same time other sophisticated information-processing
tasks are underway. Since I not only argue that there is no
reason to prefer H3 or Hb in the light of any evidence but
also point out these advantages in Hh, my argument is
much stronger than these commentators allow.
The evidence for H3. Other commentators suggest that I
may have overlooked some evidence which actually does
favor a representational hypothesis like H3 or Hb. Ber-
wick argues that the assumption that the "move a" rule is
literally embedded and causally engaged in linguistic
processing is supported by its ability to explain such
things as parsing efficiency, but he does not provide any
reason for thinking that this proposal does not surfer from
the same problems that I point out for the (now widely
rejected) passive transformation. Move a specifies a map-
ping between trees, and this mapping can be computed
without accessing any representation of that rule. Lock-
man suggests that I underestimate the force of the evi-
dence from language acquisition. He seems to think that
any system which computes one function at one time and
another function at another time must be a program-using
system. This does not seem right. As I point out, "plas-
ticity" provides an argument for a representational hy-
pothesis not because "hardwired" systems are utterly
unable to change but because it is a plausible empirical
assumption that their operation cannot change radically
in a manner appropriate to the stimulus in very short
times. See Pylyshyn's (1980) discussion of plasticity for a
more detailed discussion of a similar view. As Marshall
suggests, and as Pylyshyn (1980, forthcoming) has ar-
Response/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
gued, there are many examples of real "plasticity," and I
do take these as supporting representational claims. I do
not take them as providing good support for a third-level
claim that some program is governing the computation.
Dennett and Marshall wonder what would support such a
claim, and here I think Lockman is right in suggesting
that support for such a view will probably not be available
until we have a much better idea of the basic processing
abilities, the "functional architecture" that is flexibly
employed in the execution of cognitive tasks. The moral
of Pylyshyn's work, as I read it, is that it is at present
dreadfully hard to put your finger on even a single piece of
that architecture (even granting Morton's point that we
do not need a complete first-level theory before we can
begin developing second- and even third-level theories of
isolable parts of the computational system).
The significance of the conclusion. Aside from consider-
ing my argument flawed, Lipton suggests that nothing
hinges on the truth of my conclusions: all of this is a
tempest in a teapot. Gross cannot see how any linguists
could derive any insight from my conclusions. May says
that my arguments leave linguistic methodology un-
touched. Thompson says that I have contributed nothing
except my scepticism. And Berwick notes that since we
can actually design circuits to compute any program
directly, and vice versa, we should not be particularly
concerned with whether the representational views are
correct or not. I disagree. If it is true that linguistic theory
does not tell us whether the grammar is encoded or not,
and if it is true that it does not specify the language-
processing algorithm, then theories of language process-
ing must stand on their own strengths since they will not
follow from linguistic theory, and, on the other hand,
linguists do not need to worry about the details of lan-
guage-processing theories since their own work is not
implicated. As Demopoulos & Matthews point out, the
issues here are important because some linguists reject
this view and consequently reject some linguistic theories
on the grounds that they do not provide a realistic view of
language processing (Bresnan 1978; Kaplan & Bresnan, in
press b). I think that it is the simplistic idea that grammars
are actually represented and used in computations
eventuating in linguistic behavior that has engendered
this view. If my arguments are correct, they show that
evidence adduced in support of most linguistic theories
does not have a direct bearing on theories like H3. I did
not explore the relation between the evidence that moti-
vates linguistic theories and H2, but it is clearly going to
be similarly remote; it is far from clear what, exactly, the
relation is (see Berwick & Weinberg, 1983a, for a good
discussion of this topic). Thus the simplistic idea is not
supported by the evidence, and linguists should recog-
nize that the proposal that they should require their
theories to have a direct bearing on computational ac-
counts of human language processing marks a significant
departure from the tradition.
Another construal of the mental-representation hypoth-
esis. If H3 and Hb are not supported by any of the
evidence offered by linguists in support of M, and if
evidence relevant to H3 and Hb has been ignored, as I
suggest, it is hard to believe that linguists intended any
computational construal of M. The problem then is: what
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3
419

References/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
do they mean by M? Demopoulos & Matthews, Harman,
and Botha suggest that linguistic theory is not committed
to anything like Hb and that it is a mistake to slip into any
computational construal of the mentalistic claims of lin-
guistic theory.
As Demopoulos & Matthews point out, to assume that
M can be restated in computational terms is to suppose
that hypotheses expressed in a mentalist vocabulary are
reducible in a very simple manner to hypotheses ex-
pressed in a computational vocabulary. In short, it is to
accept a strong reductionist assumption. What my paper
presents, then, is an argument that a "reduced" version of
M not only is unsupported by the evidence but also
appears to be rather different from anything that linguists
seem to have intended. Harman, Botha and Demopoulos
& Matthews argue that we should reject the reductionist
assumption and keep to the mentalist idiom; then we can
see that M is both well supported by the adduced evi-
dence and compatible with the linguists' intentions. The
point is that although my argument bears on various
computational theories of language processing, it raises
no problem for the mental-representation hypothesis M if
we reject the reductionist assumption and grant the
following points: first, the grammar of a language charac-
terizes the knowledge of a speaker-hearer; second, all
knowledge is mentally represented; and finally, mentally
represented knowledge is used to govern behavior. I
agree with these commentators about the logic of the
situation. The point to note is that this move obviously
will be unappealing if the reductionist assumption is
independently supported as Fodor (1975; 1980; 1981a)
and others have argued. Rejecting the reductionist as-
sumption divides mentalistic psychology from computa-
tional accounts in a way that will have serious implications
for psychological theories in which the two sorts of ac-
count are merged. As Fodor points out (see, e.g., 1980, p.
63), this merging is so pervasive as to make it the dis-
tinguishing characteristic of contemporary cognitive psy-
chology. Furthermore, the fact that a pure mentalist
theory is true of humans is something that will call for
explanation, and it is plausible that this explanation will
be cast in computational terms. The computational theo-
ry will still face the problem of assessing the computa-
tional significance of M.
References
Aho, A. V. & Ullman, J. D. (1972) The theory of parsing, translation, and
compiling. Prentice-Hall. 
[RW]
Berwick, R. (1982) Locality principles and the acquisition of syntactic
knowledge. Ph.D. thesis, MIT Department of Computer Science and
Electrical Engineering. 
[RCB]
Berwick, R. C. & Weinberg, A. S. (1983a) The role of grammars in theories
of language use. Cognition 13:1-61. 
[tarEPS]
(1983b) The grammatical basis of linguistic performance. MIT Press.
Forthcoming. 
[RCB]
Botha, R. B. (1980) Methodological bases of a progressive mentalism.
Synthese 44:1-112. 
[RPB]
(1982) On Chomskyan mentalism: A reply to Peter Slezak. Synthese
53:123-41. 
[RPB]
Bratley, P., Dewar, H. & Thome, J. P. (1967) Recognition of syntactic
structure by computer. Nature 216:969-73. 
[JCM]
Bresnan, J. (1978) A realistic transformational grammar. In: Linguistic theory
and psychological reality, ed. J. Bresnan, M. Halle, & G. Miller. MIT
Press. 
[rEPS]
Bresnan, J. W. & Kaplan, R. M. (1982a) Lexical-functional grammar: A formal
system for grammatical representation. In: The mental representation of
grammatical relations, ed. J. W. Bresnan, MIT Press. 
[HT]
(1982b) Grammars as mental representations of language. In: The mental
representation of grammatical relations, ed. J. W. Bresnan. MIT
Press. 
[WD]
Burks, A. W. (1963) Programming and theory of automata. In: Computer
programming and formal systems, ed. P. Braffort & D. Hirschberg.
North-Holland. 
[rEPS]
Carr, T. H., Davidson, B. J. & Hawkins, H. L. (1978) Perceptual flexibility in
word recognition: Strategies affect orthographic computation but not
lexical access. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance 4:674-90. 
[JCM]
Chomsky, N. (1965) Aspects of the theory of syntax. MIT Press. 
[JDM,
taEPS]
(1969) Comments on Harman's reply. In: Language and philosophy, ed. S.
Hook. New York University Press. 
[tarEPS]
(1972) Language and mind. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich. 
[taEPS]
(1973) Conditions on transformations. In: A festschrift for Morris Halle, ed.
S. R. Anderson & P. Kiparsky. Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
[taEPS]
(1975) Reflections on language. Pantheon Books. 
[taEPS]
(1977) On Wh-movement. In: Formal syntax, ed. P. W. Culieover, T.
Wasow & A. Akmajian. Academic Press. 
[taEPS]
(1978) On the biological basis of language capacities. In: Psychology and
biology of language and thought: Essays in honor of Eric Lennebcrg, ed.
G. A. Miller and E. Lenneberg, pp. 199-220. Academic Press. 
[JCM]
(1980a) Rules and representations. Columbia University Press. 
[RPB,
WD, taEPS]
(1980b) Rules and representations. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
3:1-61. 
[RMH, tarEPS]
(1980c) On binding. Linguistic Inquiry 11:1-46. 
[taEPS]
(1981) Lectures on government and binding. Foris Publications. 
[RPB,
GH]
(1982) Some concepts and consequences of the theory of government and
binding. MIT Press. 
[GH]
Chomsky, N. & Lasnik, H. (1977) Filters and control. Linguistic Inquiry
8:425-504. 
[JDM]
Chomsky, N. & Miller, G. A. (1964) Formal properties of grammars. In:
Handbook of mathematical psychology, vol. 1, ed. R. D. Luce, R. R.
Bush, & E. Galanter, pp. 323-418. John Wiley & Sons Inc. 
[MG]
Clark, K. & Cowell, D. (1976) Programs, machines, and computation: An
introduction to the theory of computing. McGraw-Hill. 
[rEPS]
Clark, K. L. & MeCabe, F. G. (1979) The control facilities of IC-PROLOG.
In: Expert systems in the micro electronic age, ed. D. Mitchie.
Edinburgh University Press. 
[rEPS]
Crick, F. H. C. (1979) Thinking about the brain. Scientific American
241:181-88. 
[MG]
Davis, M. (1978) What is a computation? In: Mathematics today: Twelve
informal essays, ed. L. A. Steen, pp. 241-67. Springer-Verlag. 
[MD]
Davis, M., ed. (1965) The undecidable. Raven Press. 
[MD]
Field, H. H. (1978) Mental representations. Erkenntnis 13:9-61. 
[taEPS)
Fodor, J. A. (1975) The language of thought. Crowell. 
[tarEPS]
(1980) Methodological solipsism considered as a research strategy in
cognitive psychology. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3:63-109. 
[rEPS]
(1981a) Representations. Bradford Books. 
[WD, tarEPS]
(1981b) Some notes on what Linguistics is about. In: Readings in the
philosophy of psychology, volume 2, ed. N. Block, pp. 197-207. Harvard
University Press. 
[WD]
(1981c) The present status of the innateness controversy. In:
Representations. Bradford Books. 
[RMH]
(1983) The modular theory of mind: An essay on faculty psychology.
Bradford Books. 
[WD, taEPS]
Fodor, J. A., Bever, T. G. & Garrett, M. F. (1974) The psychology of
language. McGraw-Hill. 
[RCB, tarEPS]
Fodor, J. A. & Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1981) How direct is visual perception?
Cognition 9:136-96. 
[taEPS]
Gazdar, G. (1982) Phrase structure grammar. In: The nature of syntactic
representation, ed. P. Jacobson & G. K. Pullum. Reidel. 
[rEPS, HT]
Grimson, W. E. L. (1981) A computer implementation of a theory of human
stereo vision. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London
B292:217-53. 
[JCM]
Halle, M. & Stevens, K. (1962) Speech recognition: A model and a program
for research. /fl£ Transactions on Information Theory, ITS, pp.
155-59. 
[taEPS]
Harman, G. (1967) Psychological aspects of the theory of syntax. Journal of
Philosophy 64:75-87. 
[taEPS]
(1969) Linguistic competence and empiricism. In: Language and
philosophy, ed. S. Hook. New York University Press. 
[taEPS]
420
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3

References/Stabler: How are grammars represented?
Hawkins, H. L., Reiclier, G. M., Rogers, M. & Peterson, L. (1976) Flexible
coding in word recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance 2:380-85. 
[JCM]
Hill, F. & Peterson, G. (1981) Introduction to switching theory and logical
design. Wiley. 
[RMH]
Hubel, D. H. (1979) The brain. Scientific American 241(3):44-53. 
[taEPS]
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1977) Procedural semantics. Cognition
5:189-214. 
[taEPS]
Jonides, J. &c Gleitman, H. (1972) A conceptual category effect in visual
search: O as letter or as digit. Perception and Psychophysics
12:457-60. 
[JCM]
Joshi, A. K., Levy, L. S., & Takahashi, M. (1975) Tree adjunct grammars.
Journal of Computer and System Sciences, pp. 136-63. 
[MG]
Julesz, B. (1971) Foundations of Cyclopean perception. University of Chicago
Press. 
[taEPS]
Kaplan, R. & Bresnan, J. (in press a) A formal system for grammatical
representation. In: The mental representation of grammatical relations,
ed. J. Bresnan. MIT Press. 
[taEPS]
(in press b) Grammars as mental representations of language. In: The
mental representation of grammatical relations, ed. J. Bresnan. MIT
Press. 
[rEPS]
Katz, J. J. (1966) The philosophy of language. Harper and Row. 
[taEPS]
Keyser, S. J. & Pinker, S. (1980) Direct vs. representational views of
cognition. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3:389-90. 
[rEPS]
Kuno, S. & Oettingcr, A. G. (1963) Multiple-path syntactic analyzer.
Information Processing 1962, North-Holland. 
[HT]
Lakoff, G. & Thompson, H. (1975) Introducing cognitive grammar.
Proceedings of the first annual meeting, ed. C. Cosen et al., pp.
295-313. Berkeley Linguistics Society. 
[JDM, HT]
Laudan, L. (1977) Progress and its problems. University of California
Press. 
[JDM]
Lewontin, R. C. (1983) The liberation of biology. New York Review of Books,
Jan. 20. 
[TR]
Liberman, A. M., Cooper, F. S., Shankweiler, D. P. & Studdert-Kennedy,
M. (1967) Perception of the speech code. Psychological Review
74:431-61. 
[rEPS]
Lycan, W. G. (1981) Form, function and feel. The Journal of Philosophy
78:24-50. 
[taEPS]
McCawley, J. D. (1982) How far can you trust a linguist? In: Language, mind,
and brain, ed. Thomas Simon and Robert Scholes, pp. 75-87.
Albex. 
[JDM]
Macnamara, J. & Kushnir, S. (1971) Linguistic independence of bilinguals:
The input switch. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior
10:480-87. 
[JCM]
Marr, D. (1979) Representing and computing visual information. In: Artificial
intelligence: An MIT perspective, volume 2, ed. P. H. Winston & R. H.
Brown. MIT Press. 
[taEPS]
(1980) Visual information processing: The structure and creation of visual
representations. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London B290:199-218. 
[JCM]
Marr, D. & Poggio, T. (1976) From understanding computation to
understanding neural circuitry. MIT Artificial Intelligence Memo 357,
Cambridge, Mass. 
[JM, taEPS]
Marr, D. & Poggio, T. (1979) A computational theory of human stereo vision.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, B204:301-28. 
[JCM]
Marshall, J. C. (1980) On the biology of language acquisition. In: Biological
studies of mental processes, ed. D. Caplan, pp. 106—48. MIT
Press. 
[JCM]
Matthews, R. J. (1982) Knowledge of language in a theory of language
processing. Presented at the conference "Constraints on modelling real-
time processes," sponsored by the Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, and the Center for Psychosocial Research,
Chicago, and held in Saint-Maximin, France, June, 1982. 
[taEPS]
Mehler, J., Morton, J. & Jusczyk, P. (submitted for publication) On reducing
language to biology. 
[JM]
Miller, G. A. & Chomsky, N. (1963) Finitary models of language users. In:
Handbook of mathematical psychology, volume 2, ed. R. D. Luce, R.
Bush & E. Galanter. Wiley. 
[taEPS]
Pereira, F. & Warren, D. H. D. (1980) Definite clause grammars for language
analysis: A survey of the formalism and a comparison with augmented
transition networks. Artificial Intelligence 13:231-78. 
[rEPS, HT]
Pinker, S. (in press) A theory of the acquisition of lexical—interpretive
grammars. In: The mental representation of grammatical relations, cd. J.
Bresnan. MIT Press. 
[taEPS]
Pippenger, N. & Fischer, M. J. (1979) Relations among complexity measures.
Journal of the ACM 26:361-81. 
[taEPS]
Putnam, H. (1967) Psychological predicates. In: Art, mind and religion, ed.
W. H. Capitan & D. D. Merrill. University of Pittsburgh Press. 
[rEPS]
Pylyshyn, Z. (1980) Computation and cognition: Issues in the foundation of
cognitive science. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3:11-169. 
[WD,
RMH, tarEPS]
(forthcoming) Computation and cognition. Bradford. 
[tarEPS]
Schank, R. (1977) Response to Dresher and Hornstein. Cognition
5:133-45. 
[RW]
Sehnorr, C. P. (1976) The network complexity and Turing machine complexity
of finite functions. Ada Informatica 7:95-107. 
[taEPS]
Searle, J. R. (1980) Rules and causation. (Commentary on Chomsky, 1980b.)
The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3:37-38. 
[WD, taEPS]
Shulman, H. G. & Davison, T. C. B. (1977) Control properties of semantic
coding in a lexical decision task. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior 16:91-98. 
[JCM]
Stabler, E. P. (1981) Issues in the foundations of cognitive psychology.
Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
[taEPS]
(1982) Database and theorem prover designs for question answering
systems. Cogmem No. 12, Centre for Cognitive Science Technical
Memorandum Series, The University of Western Ontario. 
[rEPS]
Stabler, E. P. & Elcock, E. W. (1983) Knowledge representation in an
efficient deductive inference system. Submitted for presentation at the
Logic Programming Workshop '83, Aldeia des Acoteias,
Portugal. 
[rEPS]
Stelmach, G. E., ed. (1978) Information processing in motor control and
learning. Academic Press. 
[taEPS]
Stoy, J. E. (1977) Denotational semantics: The Scott-Strachey approach to
programming language theory. MIT Press. 
[taEPS]
Swinney, D. A. (1981) Lexical processing during sentence comprehension:
Effects of higher order constraints and implications for representation. In:
The cognitive representation of speech, ed. T. Myers, J. Laver, and J.
Anderson, pp. 201-09. North-Holland. 
[JCM]
Szentagothai, J. & Arbib, M. A. (1975) Conceptual models of neural
organization. MIT Press. 
[taEPS]
Tanenhaus, M. K., Leiman, J. M. & Seidenberg, M. S. (1979) Evidence for
multiple stages in the processing of ambiguous words in syntactic
contexts. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior
18:427-40. 
[JCM]
Tennant, R. D. (1976) The denotational semantics of programming languages.
Communications of the ACM 19:437-53. 
[taEPS]
Ullman, S. (1980) Against direct pereception. The Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 3:373-81. 
[rEPS]
Van Emden, M. H. & Kowalski, R. A. (1976) The semantics of predicate logic
as a programming language. Journal of the Association for Computing
Machinery 23:733-42. 
[rEPS]
Von Neumann, J. (1958) The computer and the brain. Yale University
Press. 
[taEPS]
Webb, Judson C. (1980) Mechanism, mentalism, and metamathematics. D.
Reidel. 
[MD]
Young, J. Z. (1964) A model of the brain. Clarendon Press. 
[taEPS]
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1983) 3
421

Call for Papers
Investigators in
Psychology,
Neuroscience,
Behavioral Biology, and
Cognitive Science
Do you want to:
• draw wide attention to a particularly
important or controversial piece of work?
• solicit reactions, criticism, and feedback
from a large sample of your peers?
• place your ideas in an interdisciplinary,
international context?
The Behavioral
()
an extraordinary journal now in its sixth year, provides a
special service called Open Peer Commentary to re-
searchers in any area of psychology, neuroscience,
behavioral biology or cognitive science.
Papers judged appropriate for Commentary are circulated
to a large number of specialists who provide substantive
criticism, interpretation, elaboration, and pertinent com-
plementary and supplementary material from a full cross-
disciplinary perspective.
Article and commentaries then appear simultaneously with
the author's formal response. This BBS "treatment"
provides in print the exciting give and take of an interna-
tional seminar.
The editor of BBS is calling for papers that offer a clear
rationale for Commentary, and also meet high standards of
conceptual rigor, empirical grounding, and clarity of style.
Contributions may be (1) reports and discussions of empiri-
cal research of broader scope and implications than might
be reported in a specialty journal; (2) unusually significant
theoretical articles that formally model or systematize a
body of research; and (3) novel interpretations, syntheses or
critiques of existing theoretical work.
Although the BBS Commentary service is primarily devoted
to original unpublished manuscripts, at times it will be ex-
tended to precis of recent books or previously published
articles.
Published quarterly by Cambridge University Press. Edi-
torial correspondence to: Stevan Hamad, Editor, BBS,
Suite 240, 20 Nassau Street, Princeton, NJ 08540.
" . . . superbly presented . . . the result is
practically a vade mecum or Who's Who in
each subject. [Articles are] followed by pithy
and often (believe it or not) witty comments
questioning, illuminating, endorsing or just
plain arguing . . . I urge anyone with an inter-
est in psychology, neuroscience, and behav-
ioural biology to get access to this jour-
nal."—New Scientist
"Care is taken to ensure that the commentaries
represent a sampling of opinion from scientists
throughout the world. Through open peer com-
mentary, the knowledge imparted by the target
article becomes more fully integrated into the
entire field of the behavioral and brain sciences.
This contrasts with the provincialism of special-
ized journals . . ."—Eugene Garfield Current
Contents
"The field covered by BBS has often suf-
fered in the past from the drawing of battle
lines between prematurely hardened posi-
tions: nature v. nurture, cognitive v. behav-
iourist, biological v. cultural causation....
[BBS] has often produced important articles
and, of course, fascinating interchanges....
the points of dispute are highlighted if not
always resolved, the styles and positions of
the participants are exposed, hobbyhorses
are sometimes ridden with great vigour, and
mutual incomprehension is occasionally
made very conspicuous . . . . commentaries
are often incisive, integrative or bring highly
relevant new information to bear on the sub-
ject."—Nature
" . . . a high standard of contributions and dis-
cussion. It should serve as one of the major
stimulants of growth in the cognitive sciences
over the next decade."—Howard Gardner
(Education) 
Harvard
" . . . keep on like this and you will be not
merely good, but essential..."—D.O. Hebb
(Psychology) 
Oalhousie
" . . . a unique format from which to gain some
appreciation for current topics in the brain sci-
ences : . . [and] by which original hypotheses
may be argued openly and constructively."—
Allen R. Wyler (Neurological Surgery)
Washington
" . . . one of the most distinguished and use-
ful of scientific journals. It is, indeed, that
rarity among scientific periodicals: a crea-
tive forum .. ."—Ashley Montagu (Anthro-
pology) 
Princeton
"I think the idea is excellent."—Noam Chomsky
(Linguistics) 
M.I.T.
" . . . open peer commentary . . . allows the
reader to assess the 'state of the art' quickly
In a particular field. The commentaries pro-
vide a 'who's who' as well as the content of
recent research."—Journal of Social and Bi-
ological Structures
" . . . presents an imaginative approach to learn-
ing which might be adopted by other jour-
nals."— Library Journal
"Neurobiologists are acutely aware that
their subject is In an explosive phase of de-
velopment . . . we frequently wish for a fo-
rum for the exchange of Ideas and interpre-
tations . . . plenty of journals gladly carry the
facts, very few are willing to even consider
promoting ideas. Perhaps even more Impor-
tant Is the need for opportunities publicly to
criticize traditional and developing concepts
and Interpretations. [BBS] Is helping to fill
these needs."—Graham Hoyle (Biology)
Oregon

