 
On Failures of Freedom & the Fear of Science
Authors(s): Daniel C. Dennett
Source: Daedalus, Vol. 132, No. 1, On International Justice (Winter, 2003), pp. 126-130
Published by: The MIT Press on behalf of American Academy of Arts & Sciences
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/20027830
Accessed: 24-03-2016 12:07 UTC
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted
digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about
JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
The MIT Press, American Academy of Arts & Sciences are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Daedalus
http://www.jstor.org
This content downloaded from 130.113.111.210 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 12:07:21 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 several independent observations and
 experiments are consistent with this the
 ory. Perhaps most exciting is the pros
 pect of learning more about an entirely
 new form of mysterious energy, a prop
 erty of the universe that to date has
 evaded all explanation.
 The dark energy observed is smaller by
 at least 10 billion, billion, billion, billion,
 billion, billion times than the best theo
 ries of elementary particle physics would
 predict from first principles. Hence, by
 studying the behavior of the universe,
 astronomers are posing new challenges
 to fundamental physics. It is often the
 case in science that as old questions are
 resolved, novel, perhaps even more
 exciting, questions are uncovered. The
 next decade promises to be a fruitful one
 in addressing profound questions about
 the nature of the universe we live in.
 Daniel C. Dennett
 on failures of
 freedom & the
 fear of science
 Allen Funt was one of the great psychol
 ogists of the twentieth century. His in
 formal demonstrations on Candid Cam
 era showed us as much about human
 psychology and its surprising limitations
 as the work of any academic psycholo
 gist. Here is one of the best (as I recall it
 many years later) : he placed an umbrella
 stand in a prominent place in a depart
 ment store and filled it with shiny new
 golf-cart handles. These were pieces of
 strong, gleaming stainless-steel tubing,
 about two-feet long, with a gentle bend
 in the middle, threaded at one end (to
 screw into a threaded socket on your golf
 cart) and with a handsome spherical
 plastic knob on the opposite end. In oth
 Daniel C. Dennett, a Fellow of the American
 Academy since 1987, is University Professor,
 Austin B. Fletcher Professor of Philosophy, and
 director of the Center for Cognitive Studies at
 Tufts University. The ideas in this note are further
 elaborated in "Freedom Evolves," which Viking
 Penguin will publish this spring. His other books
 include "Brainstorms" (1978), "ElbowRoom"
 (1984), and "Darwin's Dangerous Idea" (1995).
 126 D dalus Winter 2003
This content downloaded from 130.113.111.210 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 12:07:21 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 er words, about as useless a piece of
 stainless-steel tubing as you could imag
 ine - unless you happened to own a golf
 cart missing its handle. He put up a sign.
 It didn't identify the contents but simply
 said: "50% off. Today only! $5.95." Some
 people purchased them, and, when
 asked why, were quite ready to volunteer
 one confabulated answer or another.
 They had no idea what the thing was,
 but it was a handsome thing, and such a
 bargain ! These people were not brain
 damaged or drunk; they were normal
 adults, our neighbors, ourselves.
 We laugh nervously as we peer into the
 abyss that such a demonstration opens
 up. We may be smart, but none of us is
 perfect, and whereas you and I might not
 fall for the old golf-cart-handle trick, we
 know for certain that there are varia
 tions on this trick that we have fallen for,
 and no doubt will fall for in the future.
 When a psychologist demonstrates our
 imperfect rationality, our susceptibility
 to being moved in the space of reasons
 by something other than consciously ap
 preciated reasons, we fear that we aren't
 free after all. Perhaps we're kidding our
 selves. Perhaps our approximation of a
 perfect Kantian faculty of practical rea
 son falls so far short that our proud self
 identification as moral agents is a delu
 sion of grandeur.
 Our failures in such cases are indeed
 failures of freedom - failures to respond
 as we would want to respond to the op
 portunities and crises life throws at us.
 They are ominous, because the ability to
 be moved by consciously appreciated
 reasons is indeed one of the varieties of
 free will worth wanting. Notice that
 Funt's demonstration would not impress
 us if his subjects were not people but an
 imals - dogs or wolves or dolphins or
 apes. That a mere beast can be tricked
 into opting for something shiny and al
 luring but not what the beast truly wants
 - should truly want - is hardly news to
 us ; we expect 'lesser' animals to live in
 the world of appearances. We aspire to a
 'higher' ideal.
 As we learn more and more about our
 own animal weaknesses and the way the
 technologies of persuasion can exploit
 them, it can seem as if our vaunted au
 tonomy is an unsupportable myth. "Pick
 a card, any card," says the magician, and
 deftly gets you to pick the card he has
 chosen for you. Salespeople know a hun
 dred ways to get you off the fence so that
 you buy that car, that dress. Lowering
 one's voice, it turns out, works very
 well: "I see you in the green number" (You
 might want to remember that the next
 time a salesperson whispers at you.)
 Notice that there is an arms race here,
 with ploy and counter-ploy balancing
 each other out. I've just somewhat di
 minished the effectiveness of the whis
 pering trick against those of you who re
 member my exposure of it.
 It is easy enough to discern the ideal of
 rationality that serves as the background
 for this battle : Caveat emptor, we declare,
 let the buyer beware. This policy presup
 poses that the buyer is rational enough
 to see through the blandishments of the
 seller, but since we know better than to
 believe this myth taken neat, we go on to
 endorse a policy of informed consent, pre
 scribing the explicit representation in
 clear language of all the relevant condi
 tions for one agreement or another.
 Then we also recognize that such poli
 cies are subject to extensive evasion -
 the fine-print ploy, the impressive
 sounding gobbledygook - so we may go
 on to prescribe still further exercises in
 spoon-feeding information to the hap
 less consumer.
 At what point do we abandon the
 myth of 'consenting adults' in our 'in
 fantalizing' of the citizenry? When we
 learn certain messages have been tai
 Failures of
 freedom &
 the fear of
 science
 D dalus Winter 2003
 127
This content downloaded from 130.113.111.210 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 12:07:21 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Note by lored to particular groups or particular
 Dennett individuals - each group targeted with
 specific images, stories, aids, and warn
 ings - we may be tempted to condemn
 these tactics as paternalistic, and as sub
 versive to the ideal of free will in which
 we are Kantian rational agents, responsi
 ble for our own destiny. But at the same
 time we should acknowledge that the
 environment we live in has been being
 updated ever since the dawn of civiliza
 tion, elaborately prepared, made easy for
 us, with multiple signposts and alerts
 along the way, to ease the burdens on us
 imperfect decisionmakers. We lean on
 the prostheses that we find valuable -
 that's the beauty of civilized life - even if
 we tend to begrudge those that others
 need.
 We are actually wonderfully rational.
 We are rational enough, for instance, to
 be really good at designing ploys for
 playing mindgames on each other, seek
 ing out ever more subtle chinks in our
 rational defenses, a game of hide-and
 seek with no time-out or time limit.
 Once we recognize that this is an arms
 race, an evolving culture of manipulative
 ploys and enlightened counter-ploys, we
 can fend off the absolutism that sees
 only two possibilities : either we are per
 fectly rational - or we are not rational at
 all. That absolutism fosters the paranoid
 fear that science might be on the verge of
 showing us that our rationality is only an
 illusion, however benign the illusion
 from some perspectives. That fear in
 turn lends spurious attractiveness to any
 doctrine that promises to keep science at
 bay, our minds sacrosanct and mysteri
 ous.
 For example, how do we manage to get
 here (rational, moral agency) from there
 (the amoral unfreedom of an infant) ? A
 sane answer will not postulate a miracu
 lous leap of self-creation ; instead, it will
 invoke the Darwinian themes of luck,
 environmental scaffolding, and gradual
 ism : with a little bit of luck, and a little
 help from your friends, you put your
 considerable native talent to work, and
 bootstrapped your way to moral agency,
 inch by inch. A proper human self is the
 largely unwitting creation of an interper
 sonal design process in which we en
 courage small children to become com
 municators and in particular to join our
 practice of asking for and giving reasons,
 and then reasoning about what to do and
 why.
 For this to work, you have to start with
 the right raw materials. You won't suc
 ceed if you try it with your dog, for in
 stance, or even a chimpanzee, as we
 know from a series of protracted and en
 thusiastic attempts over the years. Some
 human infants are also unable to rise to
 the occasion. The first threshold on the
 path to personhood, then, is simply
 whether or not one's caregivers succeed
 in kindling a communicator. Those
 whose fires of reason just won't light for
 one reason or another are consigned to a
 lower status, uncontroversially. It's not
 their fault, it's just their bad luck.
 While we're on the topic of luck, let's
 first try to calibrate our scales. Every liv
 ing thing is, from the cosmic perspec
 tive, incredibly lucky simply to be alive.
 Most - 90 percent and more - of all the
 organisms that have ever lived have died
 without producing viable offspring, but
 not a single one of your ancestors, going
 back to the dawn of life on Earth, suf
 fered that normal misfortune. You
 spring from an unbroken line of winners
 going back billions of generations, and
 those winners were, in every generation,
 the luckiest of the lucky, one of a hun
 dred or a thousand or even a million. So
 however unlucky you may be on some
 occasion today, your presence on the
 planet testifies to the role luck has played
 in your past.
 128 D dalus Winter 2003
This content downloaded from 130.113.111.210 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 12:07:21 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Above the first threshold, people ex
 hibit a wide diversity of further talents,
 for thinking and talking, and for self
 control. Some of this difference is 'ge
 netic' - due mainly to differences in the
 particular set of genes that compose
 their genomes - and some of it is con
 genital but not directly genetic (due to
 their mother's malnutrition or to fetal
 alcohol syndrome, or drug addiction, for
 instance). And some of it has no cause at
 all, the result of chance. None of these
 differences in your legacy are factors
 within your control, of course, since
 they were in place before you were born.
 And it is true that the foreseeable effects
 of some of them are inevitable, but not
 all - and less and less each year.
 It is also not in any way your own do
 ing that you were born into a specific mi
 lieu - rich or poor, pampered or abused,
 given a head start or held back at the
 starting line. And these differences,
 which are striking, are also diverse in
 their effects : some inevitable and some
 evitable, some leaving lifelong scars and
 others evanescent in effect. Many of the
 differences that survive are, in any event,
 of negligible importance to what con
 cerns us here : a second threshold, the
 threshold of moral responsibility - as
 contrasted, say, with artistic genius. Not
 everybody can be a Shakespeare or a
 Bach, but almost everybody can learn to
 read and write well enough to become
 an informed citizen.
 Consider, for instance, the affliction
 known as not knowing a word of Chinese. I
 suffer from it, thanks entirely to envi
 ronmental influences early in my child
 hood (my genes had nothing - nothing
 directly - to do with it). If I were to move
 to China, however, I could soon enough
 be 'cured,' with some effort on my part,
 though I would no doubt bear deep and
 unalterable signs of my deprivation,
 readily detectable by any native Chinese
 speaker, for the rest of my life. But I Failures of
 could certainly get good enough in Chi- the6fea
 nese to be held responsible for actions I science
 might take under the influence of Chi
 nese speakers I encountered.
 When W. T. Greenough and F. R. Volk
 mar in their classic 1972 article for Science
 first demonstrated that rats given a rich
 environment of toys and exercise gear
 and opportunities for vigorous explora
 tion had measurably more neural con
 nections, and larger brains, than rats
 raised in a bare, restrictive environment,
 some parents and educators went over
 board in their eagerness to herald this
 important discovery, and then began to
 worry themselves sick over whether jun
 ior was getting enough of the right kinds
 of crib toys. In fact we've known forever
 that a child raised alone in a bare room
 with no toys at all will be seriously stunt
 ed, but nobody has yet shown that the
 difference between having two toys and
 having twenty toys or two hundred toys
 makes any noticeable long-term differ
 ence in how the infant's brain develops.
 It would be extremely hard to show be
 cause so many confounding intervening
 influences, some planned and some for
 tuitous, would do and undo the crucial
 effect a hundred times a year as each
 child matured.
 Still, we should do the difficult re
 search as best we can, since it is possible
 that one condition or another is playing
 a larger role than suspected - and hence
 is a more appropriate target at which to
 aim our efforts of avoidance. But we can
 already be quite sure that most if not all
 of these differences in starting condi
 tions vanish into the statistical fog as
 time passes. Like coin tosses, there may
 be no salient causation to be discerned
 in the outcomes. Once we have disen
 tangled these factors to the extent that
 this is possible with careful scientific
 study, we will be able to say with some
 D dalus Winter 2003
 129
This content downloaded from 130.113.111.210 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 12:07:21 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Note by deserved confidence which interven
 Dennett tions are apt to counteract which short
 comings, and only then will we be in a
 good position to make the value judg
 ments that everybody is aching to make.
 In his recent book Hooking Up, Tom
 Wolfe deplores the use of Ritalin (meth
 ylphenidate) and other methampheta
 mines to counteract attention deficit hy
 peractivity disorder in children. He does
 this without pausing to consider the
 mass of evidence that indicates that some
 children have a readily correctable - evi
 table - dopamine imbalance in their
 brains that gives them a handicap in the
 self-control department just as surely as
 myopia does :
 ... an entire generation of American boys,
 from the best private schools of the
 Northeast to the worst sludge-trap public
 schools of Los Angeles and San Diego, was
 now strung out on methylphenidate, dili
 gently doled out to them every day by
 their connection, the school nurse.
 America is a wonderful country ! I mean
 it ! No honest writer would challenge that
 statement ! The human comedy never
 runs out of material ! It never lets you
 down!
 Meantime, the notion of a self- a self
 who exercises self-discipline, postpones
 gratification, curbs the sexual appetite,
 stops short of aggression and criminal be
 havior - a self who can become more in
 telligent and lift itself to the very peaks of
 life by its own bootstraps through study,
 practice, perseverance, and refusal to give
 up in the face of great odds - this old-fash
 ioned notion (what's a bootstrap, for
 God's sake?) of success through enter
 prise and true grit is already slipping away,
 slipping away... slipping away....
 I wonder if Wolfe would commend a
 bracing regimen of eye exercises and
 courses in Learning to Live with Short
 sightedness in lieu of eyeglasses for the
 myopic. He ends up declaiming the
 twenty-first-century version of that old
 chestnut : if God had meant us to fly, he
 would have given us wings. So rattled is
 he by the imaginary bogey of genetic de
 terminism that he cannot see that the
 bootstrapping he yearns to protect, the
 very fount of our freedoms, is enhanced,
 not threatened, by demythologizing the
 self.
 Scientific knowledge is the royal road
 - the only road - to evitability. Perhaps
 here we see the outlines of a secret fear
 that lies behind some of the calls to keep
 science at bay: not that science will take
 away our freedom, but that it will give us
 too much freedom. If your child doesn't
 have as much 'true grit' as your neigh
 bor's child, perhaps you can buy him
 some artificial grit. Why not? It's a free
 country, and self-improvement is one of
 our highest ideals. Why should it be im
 portant that you do all your self
 improvement the old-fashioned way?
 These are very important questions,
 and their answers are not obvious. They
 should be addressed directly, not distort
 ed by ill-advised attempts to smother
 them.
 130 D dalus Winter 2003
This content downloaded from 130.113.111.210 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 12:07:21 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

