tadter’s Quest 
A tale of cognitive pursuit 
hat Douglas Hofstadter is, quite simply, is a phenomenologist, a practicing 
phenomenologist, and he does it better than anyone else. Ever. For years he 
W has been studying the processes of his own consciousness, relentlessly, un- 
flinchingly, imaginatively, but undeludely. He is not a Phenomenologist with a capital 
“P”-with few exceptions, Phenomenologists don’t actually do phenomenology, they 
just write about doing it. 
In stark contrast to the Husserlian school(s) of Phenomenology, which advocates 
the epoche’or “bracketing” that excuses the investigator from all inquiry, speculative or 
otherwise, into the underlying mechanisms, the Hofstadterian school of phenomenol- 
ogy stresses the need to ask-and 
answer-the question about how it works. Hofstadter’s 
initial phenomenological observations are laced with questions and suggestions about 
dynamics and mechanisms; he watches his own mind work the way a stage magician 
watches another stage magician’s show, not in slack-jawed awe at the “magic” of it all, 
but full of intense and informed curiosity about how on earth the effects might be 
achieved. 
In 1979, Douglas Hofstadter published Godel Escher Bach:An Eternal Golden Braid, 
a brilliant exploration of fascinating ideas at the heart of cognitive science: recursion, 
computation, reduction, holism, meaning, “jootsing” (Jumping Out Of The System), 
“strange loops,” and much, much more. What made the book‘s expositions so effective 
were a family of elaborate (and lovingly elaborated) analogies: the mind is like an 
anthill, a formal system is like a game, theorem and nontheorem are like figure and 
ground, and Bach‘s Inventions are like dialogues, to mention a few. The whole analogy- 
package was wrapped in layers of self-conscious reflection. “Anything you can do I can 
do meta-” was one of Doug’s mottoes, and of course he applied it, recursively, to every- 
thing he did. 
Then in 1985 came Metamagical Themas: Questing for the Essence of Mind and 
Pattern, its title drawn from the title of his monthly column in Scientific American, 
which was of course an anagram of its predecessor, Martin Gardner’s “Mathematical 
Games.” More word-play, more games, more analogies, more recursion, more self- 
conscious reflection-all 
brilliant, but many began to wonder: what, actually, was 
Hofstadter doing? Was there a serious research project here, or just fun and games and 
self-absorption? His fans were fascinated, but even some of his colleagues and gradu- 
ate students-even his friend and co-author (of TheMind‘s I: myself)-began to worry 
a bit about his lengthy odysseys into toy worlds (ambigrams, bizarre fonts, curious 
doodles on long rolls of paper). 
This man wanted to be taken seriously, but where was the focused, rigorous investi- 
gation of some phenomena, where was the discipline? It was right in front of our noses- 
BY DANIEL E. DENNETT 
Daniel C. Dennett is Director of the 
Center for Cognitive Studies at Tufts 
University Among his books are 
Consciousness Explained (1 991), 
Darwin’s Dangerous Idea (19951, 
and Kinds of Minds (1996). hi 1981, 
he co-authored The Mind‘s I with 
Doug Hofstadtei: 
0 
1996 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
CGC 1076-27871961060009-04 

and his. We should have trusted him. He 
knew what he was doing, and in his new 
book, Fluid Concepts and CreativeAnalo- 
gies: Computer Models of the Fundamem 
tal Mechanisms of Thought, he explains 
and justifies all those curious practices; 
and shows that 
while many of the 
rest of us were rush- 
ing off half-cocked 
on various quests 
for one cognitive 
science grail or an- 
other, he was pa- 
tiently, systemati- 
cally, 
brilliantly 
building up an un- 
derstanding of a 
foundational area of cognitive science, 
doing a job that only he could do. And in 
the end, he and his team tested their 
hunches by buildingworking models that 
can simulate the particular conscious 
processes they have been studying (and 
their semiconscious, subconscious, un- 
conscious penumbra). Can they get real- 
istic performances? If not, back to the 
drawing- board. 
~ 
Robert French, The Subtlety ofSameness, 
MIT Press, 1995). 
Scattered through the book are stun- 
ning autobiographical revelations that 
shed light on his imperviousness to the 
impatience and doubt that was 
easier and prettier to present to 
others. On the other hand, doing so 
also tends to make one forget, es- 
pecially as the years pass, how 
many awkward notations one ac- 
tually used, and how many futile 
pathways one tried out. 
He is not a Phenomenologist 
with a capita! “P”-with 
few 
exceptions, Phenomenologists 
don’t actually do phenomenology, 
they just write about doing it. 
l i d  Concepts and Creative Analo- 
gies is an anthology of the work of 
Hofstadter and his graduate stu- 
dents at FARG, the Fluid Analogies Re- 
search Group, which he formed first in 
Ann Arbor in 1984, and then moved to its 
current home at Indiana University. His 
fellow “Fargonauts” are given the role of 
co-authors, both on the title page, and in 
the individual chapters, but these are his 
versions, by and large, of their joint 
projects. It is entirely appropriate for him 
to produce a volume of his ownversions, 
since it is his idiosyncratic vision of how 
to do cognitive science that is in need of 
a full-scale overview and demonstration, 
which is what this bookprovides. (His co- 
authors are very good at grinding their 
own axes-see 
their articles listed in 
H o fs t ad t e r ’s bib I i o gr a p h y, and their 
books: Melanie Mitchell, Analogy-Mak- 
ing as Perception, MIT Press, 1993, and 
inconcealable-indeed 
often vigorously 
expressed-by his friends and associates. 
At the outset of one “reenactment of a dis- 
covery,” he tells us: 
I am going to be very faithful to my 
actual discovery process, not to 
some idealization thereof. This 
means that what I will show may 
seem quite awkward and stupid in 
spots; but that is the way discover- 
ies are often made. After a discov- 
ery has been completed and its 
ideas well-digested, one quite un- 
“Luckily,” he goes on to inform us, 
“having always been fascinated by how 
the mind works, I have tended to keep 
careful records of my discovery pro- 
cesses-even back at age sixteen, which 
is when this particular exploration and 
discovery took place.” Later in the book, 
he tells of his alphabetic font obsession: 
What ensued was a lengthy per- 
iod of time during which I de- 
signed hundreds of new alpha- 
betic styles, relentlessly exploring 
all sorts of combinations of grace- 
fulness, funkiness, sassiness, 
sauciness, silliness, softness, 
pointiness, hollowness, curviness, 
jaggedness, roundness, smooth- 
ness, complexity, austerity, irregu- 
larity, angularity, symmetry, asym- 
metry, minimality, redundancy, 
ornamentation, and countless 
other indefinable parameters ... .I 
am sure that to somebody who 
.... he watches his own mind mark 
the way a stage magician watches 
another stage magician’s show, not Sla 
slack-jawed aw8 at the ”magls” of it 
all, but tell 0% intense and informed 
curiosity aaboot how on earth the 
eflects might be achieved. 
hadn’t 
thought 
much about alpha- 
bets and visual 
styles and the idea 
of pushing con- 
cepts to their very 
limits or just be- 
yond, many of my 
experiments would 
have looked myste- 
rious and point- 
less, perhaps even 
gawky and stupid. 
But that wouldn’t 
derstandably wishes to go back 
and clean it up, so that it appears 
elegant and pristine. This is a 
healthy desire, and doing so cer- 
tainly makes the new ideas much 
have deterred me, because I had a 
stable inner compass that was car- 
rying me somewhere, though I 
couldn’t have said exactly where or 
why. As the years [!I went by.. . 
1 0  
C O M P L E X I T Y  
0 
1996 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

So far so good: by keeping a lifetime 
of notes, and daring to share them with 
us, he provides himself, and us, with a 
wealth of data. But data are only as good 
as the observer and the phenomena ob- 
served warrant. Other phenomenologists 
and, indeed, cognitive scientists have 
scrupulously gathered data on various 
trains ofthought. K. A. Ericsson and H. A. 
Simon’s Protocol Analysis: Verbal Reports 
as Data (MIT Press, 1984) comes to mind 
as a particularly systematic and reflective 
effort along these lines. But the phenom- 
ena they study, like those studied by al- 
most all cognitive scientists and psy- 
chologists, are a cramped subset of 
human thought processes: solving well- 
defined problems 
with clear (ifhard to 
find) paths to the 
correct solution. 
Hofstadter has al- 
ways been inter- 
ested in the more 
free-wheeling, cre- 
ative, artistic, un- 
predictable sort of 
thinking, but as a 
good scientist he 
has appreciated 
that one must sim- 
tion: the anagrams and words of Jumbo, 
the alphabet-world of Copycat, the con- 
crete and mundane but conventional and 
limited furnishings of Tabletop, to name 
a few of the best. This success has been a 
hard-won evolution, not the result of a 
saltation of perfect inspiration. The Seek- 
Whence domain begat the Jumbo do- 
main and the Copycat domain which 
begat theTabletop domain, and so forth. 
ne of the simplest demonstrations 
of the power of Hofstadter’s ap- 
0 
proach to analogy-finding is to 
compare his toy problems to the limited 
domains others have devised to demon- 
strate their models. Every practical model 
plify one’s domain, limiting and control- 
ling it in as many dimensions as possible, 
so that only a few sources ofvariation are 
salient, and hence investigatable, at a 
time. 
very science needs its toy problems; 
population genetics has its fruit- 
flies, neuroanatomy has its giant 
squid axons, developmental biology has 
its nematode worm, C. elegans, GOFAI 
had its blocks world, Tower of Hanoi 
puzzle, chess, cryptarithmetic problems, 
connectionism has its NETTalk domain 
of uncomprehending pronunciation, and 
so forth. Hofstadter and his students have 
been remarkably successful at creating 
well-behaved toy domains for exploring 
the shifty, subtle, quirky processes of 
analogy-making and metaphor apprecia- 
must oversimplify ruthlessly, but it is 
quite possible to leave out all the impor- 
tant phenomena and be left with a nearly 
trivial model. Which simplifications offer 
the most insight? In his latest work, 
Hofstadter contrasts the bounty of varie- 
gated and even surprising behavior his 
models can generate with the single- 
stunt-in-different-costumes behavior of 
rival models, which from other perspec- 
tives may appear more powerful. 
Hofstadter has numerous important re- 
flections to offer on “the knotty problem 
of evaluating research,” and one of the 
book’s virtues is to draw clearly for us “the 
vastness of the gulf that can separate dif- 
ferent research projects that on the sur- 
face seem to belong to the same field. 
Those people who are interested in re- 
sults will begin with a standard technol- 
ogy, not even questioning it at all, and 
then build a big system that solves many 
complex problems and impresses alot of 
people.” He has taken a different path, 
and has often had difficulties convincing 
the grown-ups that it is a good one: 
“When there’s a little kid trying somer- 
saults out for the first time next to a flashy 
gymnast doing flawless flips on a balance 
beam, whoS going to pay any attention 
to the lid?” A fair complaint, but part of 
the problem, now redressed by this book, 
was that the little kid didn’t try to explain 
(in an efficient format accessible to im- 
patient grown-ups) why his somersaults 
were so special. 
So just what have Hofstadter and the 
Fargonauts discovered? Hofstadter lists 
eight themes that have been explored and 
reexplored in the succession of models, 
and I cannot improve on his list: 
1) perception and high-level cognition 
are inseparable; 
2) high-level perception consists of eas- 
ily reconfigurable multilevel cogni- 
tive representations; 
3) there are “subcognitive pressures” 
that probabilistically influence the 
building and reforming of these rep- 
resentations; 
4) many such pressures commingle, 
“leading to a nondeterministic par- 
allel architecture in which bottom-up 
and top-down processing coexist 
gracefully.” 
5) there is a “simultaneous feeling-out 
of many potential pathways” 
6) making analogies is a central compo- 
nent in high-level cognition. 
7) cognitive representations have 
“deeper and shallower aspects, with 
the former remaining relatively im- 
mune to contextual pressures, and 
the latter being more likely to yield 
under pressure (to ‘slip’);’’ 
8) a crucial role is played by “the inner 
structure of concepts and conceptual 
neighborhoods” 
0 
1996 John Wiley & Sons, Inc 
C B N I P L E X I l - Y  
1’1 


