THE SELFISH GENE AS A
PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAY
Daniel C. Dennett
One critic complained that my argument was ‘philo-
sophical’, as though that was sufﬁcient condemnation.
Philosophical or not, the fact is that neither he nor any-
body else has found any ﬂaw in what I said. And ‘in prin-
ciple’ arguments such as mine, far from being irrelevant to
the real world, can be more powerful than arguments based
on particular factual research. My reasoning, if it is cor-
rect, tells us something important about life everywhere in
the universe. Laboratory and ﬁeld research can tell us only
about life as we have sampled it here1.
P
robably most scientists would shudder at the prospect of
having a work of theirs described as a philosophical treatise.
‘You really know how to hurt a guy! Why don’t you just say
you disagree with my theory instead of insulting me?’ But Richard
Dawkins knows better. He is just as leery of idle armchair specula-
tion and hypersnickety logic-chopping as any hardbitten chemist
or microbiologist, but he also appreciates, as the passage above
makes admirably clear, that the conceptual resources of science
need to be rigorously examined and vividly articulated before
genuine understanding, sharable by scientists and laypeople alike,
can be achieved. Dawkins’ contribution on this conceptual front is
philosophy at its best, informed by a wealth of empirical work
and alert to the way subtle differences in expression can either
trap a thinker in an artifactual cul-de-sac or open up new vistas of
implications heretofore only dimly imagined. My high opinion of
his philosophical method is hard for me to separate, of course,
from my deep agreement with the conclusions and proposals he

arrives at. But this is not inevitable; there are few experiences more
unsettling to a philosopher than watching a non-philosopher
stumble into agreement with one’s most carefully executed con-
clusions by a sort of lucky drunkard’s walk. Dawkins, in contrast,
is impressively surefooted.
I didn’t read The Selﬁsh Gene when it came out in 1976
because of some negative comment I ran into—I can’t recall from
whom—to the effect that the book was too clever by half, a bit of
popularizing that could well be ignored. So I am deeply grateful
to Douglas Hofstadter for undoing the damage of that bum steer
fairly soon, in 1980, when he and I were working on our anthol-
ogy, The Mind’s I,2 in which we included two excerpts, under the
title ‘Selﬁsh Genes and Selﬁsh Memes’. (Several times in my life
I’ve taken the word of somebody I regarded well and moved a
new book onto my ‘don’t bother’ list only to discover later that
this was a book that properly belonged on my ‘read immediately’
pile. We are all overwhelmed with competitors for our limited
attention, so we really have no choice but to trust some ﬁlters and
hope for the best, but it is distressing to ﬁnd in retrospect that we
have almost missed a close encounter of the ﬁnest kind. Ever since
then I have tried—with marginal results, I’m sure—not to be dis-
missive of books unless I am really sure that they are time-
wasters.)
I was a committed Darwinian before I got around to reading
The Selﬁsh Gene. My 1969 book Content and Consciousness,3
and my essays, ‘Intentional Systems’,4 and ‘Why the Law of Effect
Will not Go Away’,5 have Darwinian moves at their heart, for
instance. But I actually knew very little about the ﬁne points of the
theory, and some of what I thought I knew was just wrong. The
Selﬁsh Gene delighted me from beginning to end, instructing and
correcting me on dozens or hundreds of important points and
conﬁrming my inchoate sense that evolution by natural selection
was the key to solving most of the philosophical problems I was
interested in. This was mind candy of the highest quality. I have
never looked back, as one says, so when I was invited to write an
essay for this volume, it struck me that looking back would indeed
Daniel C. Dennett
102

be a good idea. Although I had often assigned large parts of the
book in my classes, I hadn’t reread it in one go, and now that I had
spent a solid quarter-century delving into the controversies of
evolutionary theory (and reading just about everything else that
Dawkins has written, along with untold numbers of books and
essays by other evolutionists and their critics), I wondered if it
would still strike me as brilliant, or would I now see ﬂaws, over-
simpliﬁcations, solecisms that escaped my naive reading? Having
climbed the ladder, would I now want to discard it?
So I took a copy along on a two-week trip, in June 2005, to the
Galápagos, for a cruise arranged by the historian of science, Frank
Sulloway (whose work had upset the traditional myth of Darwin’s
eureka moment while on the Beagle), followed by the World
Summit on Evolution organized by the Universidad San Francisco
de Quito, held on San Cristóbal Island. I would be spending my
days in conversation with some of the world’s best evolutionary
biologists, and I’d be rereading The Selﬁsh Gene while sailing
from island to island, in Darwin’s footsteps. I didn’t take my
heavily underlined and annotated 1976 edition, but my almost
equally heavily underlined and annotated 1989 edition, with all
the endnotes and the two additional chapters. What follows are
my reﬂections on this rereading, most of them composed on my
laptop in the salon of Sagitta, a gracious three-masted schooner,
while riding at anchor in one or another of the Beagle’s stopping
places in the Galápagos. With all the intellectual and perceptual
competition, this would be a stern test for any book.
What struck me most was that my deep appreciation of
Dawkins has been strengthened, not diminished, by the interven-
ing years of evolutionary adventures. I found myself in rousing
agreement with Dawkins’ opening passage: ‘We are survival
machines—robot vehicles blindly programmed to preserve the
selﬁsh molecules known as genes. This is a truth which still ﬁlls
me with astonishment.’6 As he went on to say in the preface to
the 1989 edition,7 the theorists whose work he celebrates in the
book had clearly articulated this truth, ‘But I found their expres-
sions of it too laconic, not full throated enough’. What Dawkins
The Selﬁsh Gene as a Philosophical Essay
103

saw was that Darwin’s scientiﬁc revolution was also a philo-
sophical revolution: ‘Zoology is still a minority subject in uni-
versities, and even those who choose to study it often make their
decision without appreciating its profound philosophical signiﬁ-
cance.’8 Indeed. Darwin’s dangerous idea amounts to nothing
less than a reframing of our fundamental vision of ourselves and
our place in the universe. Stephen Jay Gould once branded us
both as ‘Darwinian fundamentalists’,9 and in spite of the nega-
tive connotations Gould intended to convey by that epithet, there
is a sense in which he was right. This is the fundamental truth of
Darwinism, and, as I have tried to show in my own work, there
are no stable intermediate positions; either you shun Darwinian
evolution altogether and cling to an Aristotelian or Abrahamic
vision of God as Prime Mover and Creator, or you turn that
traditional universe upside-down and accept that mind, meaning,
and purpose are the fairly recent effects of the churning mech-
anistic mill of mindless Darwinian algorithms, not their cause.
Design is generated originally by bottom-up processes, and all
the top-down processes of research and development that we
know so well (human authorship and exploration, invention,
problem-solving, and creation) are themselves the evolved fruits
of these bottom-up processes at many levels and scales, including
Darwinian algorithmic processes within individual brains. All the
attempts at compromise, at making exemptions for one cherished
treasure or another by hanging it on a skyhook, are doomed to
incoherence.
I was invited by Dawkins to write an Afterword for the new
edition (1999) of The Extended Phenotype, and I opened that
brief essay much as I have opened this one, by applauding both the
philosophical methods and the very considerable philosophical
substance of that work.
Why is a philosopher writing an Afterword for this book? Is The
Extended Phenotype science or philosophy? It is both; it is science,
certainly, but it is also what philosophy should be, and only intermit-
tently is: a scrupulously reasoned argument that opens our eyes to a
new perspective, clarifying what had been murky and ill-understood,
Daniel C. Dennett
104

and giving us a new way of thinking about topics we thought we
already understood.10
This and other published instances of commendation earned me
the epithet ‘Dawkins’ lapdog’ from Gould. Huxley was happy
to call himself Darwin’s bulldog, and Dawkins has shown that
he can be his own bulldog, so I’d be happy to be known as a
hard-working sled dog on the same team as Dawkins; but enough
about dogﬁghts. Our agreement is deep and detailed, and I give
him credit for some of the issues we chime together on, but on
some others I got there on my own. What matters is not who got
what ﬁrst, but that our convergent versions support each other,
gaining strength from the different paths by which we arrived
at them.
Most centrally, consider our mentalistic behaviorism. If you
think that’s a contradiction in terms, you’ve missed the boat. To
see why, you have to appreciate an earlier scientist/philosopher
friendship, between B. F. Skinner and W. V. O. Quine. Fred
Skinner’s brand of behaviorism was a philosophically driven
methodology: according to him, mind-talk in all its varieties was
dualistic and mysterian (to speak anachronistically, using Owen
Flanagan’s useful term). Science was to be materialistic, and
mechanistic, and hence should abjure all use of mentalistic
idioms.11 Never speak of an animal as knowing or wanting or
believing or expecting. Speak instead of an animal’s dispositions
to behave (where the behavior was to be described in scrupulously
mechanistic terms—no seeking behavior or investigating behavior,
for instance. His Harvard colleague and friend Van Quine appre-
ciated Skinner’s impatience with unsupported mind-talk, and
sharpened that puritan ethic by analyzing mind-talk as logically
pathological: the intentional idioms of mentalistic discourse
exhibited the awkward feature of ‘referential opacity’. (In a sen-
tence such as ‘Tom believes that Tully denounced Catiline’, you
can’t ‘substitute equals for equals’ by putting in ‘Cicero’ for
‘Tully’—two expressions referring to the same individual—and be
sure that you will preserve the truth, as you can always do in a
The Selﬁsh Gene as a Philosophical Essay
105

normal, referentially transparent sentence.) In a famous phrase,
Quine joined forces with Skinner and threw down the gauntlet:
One may accept the Brentano thesis [of the irreducibility of intentional
idioms] either as showing the indispensability of intentional idioms
and the importance of an autonomous science of intention, or as
showing the baselessness of intentional idioms and the emptiness of a
science of intention. My attitude, unlike Brentano’s, is the second.12
This abstemious brand of behaviorism, apparently the straight-
forward extension of what we might call standard scientiﬁc
positivism, had widespread inﬂuence in the second half of the
twentieth century, but meanwhile another sort of behaviorism was
developing, which helped itself blithely to a few well-chosen
intentional idioms—mainly expect and prefer (or, equivalently in
philosopher-speak, believe and desire)—and built up impressive
ediﬁces of theory and practice, in decision theory and game the-
ory, in economics and computer science and cognitive science, and
farther aﬁeld. This was close kin to the ‘logical behaviorism’
informally explored by Gilbert Ryle in The Concept of Mind.13
Although it is unclear whether Ryle had much inﬂuence outside
philosophy, his coupling of staunch anti-Cartesianism (the notori-
ous ‘ghost in the machine’) with an insouciant disregard of the
Skinnerian strictures opened the conceptual ﬂoodgates. The key
idea, as he saw, was that mentalistic terms were a convenient way
of speaking of dispositions to behave, and more particularly
behavioral competences or abilities. When one spoke of some-
body’s knowledge or expectation, goals or preferences, one was
alluding not to some spooky, metaphysically private inner goings-
on, but to a pattern of (mainly intelligent) action that could be
expected from this agent. Although Ryle concentrated on human
minds, the extension of this perspective to other natural phenom-
ena, both ‘higher’ and ‘lower’, was more or less guaranteed by the
substrate-neutrality or abstractness of any such dispositional
analysis: handsome is as handsome does, and anything that can
behave as if striving for this and that while guided by what it
‘knows’ is an appropriate subject for such an analysis.
Daniel C. Dennett
106

So, just as a person could be conﬁrmed to be vain by observing
how she tended to act when in the presence of mirrors or potential
admirers (without our having to look into her soul for some
imagined vanity-nugget), a gene could be selﬁsh without our
having to impute any consciousness or ‘qualia’ or other dubious
mental furniture to it: ‘It is important to realize that the above
deﬁnitions of altruism and selﬁshness are behavioural, not sub-
jective. I am not concerned here with the psychology of motives.’14
Dawkins’ brilliant application of mentalistic behaviorism—what I
call the intentional stance—to evolutionary biology was, like my
own coinage, an articulation of ideas that were already proving
themselves in the work of many other theorists. We are both clari-
ﬁers and uniﬁers of practices and attitudes pioneered by others,
and we share a pantheon: Alan Turing and John von Neumann on
the one hand, and Bill Hamilton, John Maynard Smith, George
Williams, and Bob Trivers on the other. We see computer science
and evolutionary theory ﬁtting together in excellent harmony; it’s
algorithms all the way down.
Dawkins and I have both had to defend our perspective against
those who cannot fathom—or abide—this strategic approach to
such deep matters. Mary Midgley15 was incredulous—how on
earth could a gene be selﬁsh?—while John Searle16, 17 was equally
scornful—anybody who says a thermostat has a belief about the
temperature must be crazy! Mere as if intentionality or derived
intentionality could never explain our real, original intentionality.
But the appropriate response to this incredulity is the same
response that any biologist should make to a similar challenge
about where to ‘draw the line’ between the living and the non-
living: ‘Should we call the original replicator molecules “living”?
Who cares?’.18 One of the central lessons of Darwinian thinking is
that essentialism must be abandoned: the imagined ‘essence of
life’ has to be approached by one imaginable chain or another of
simple agents or agencies stretching from the clearly non-living to
the clearly living, and only a lexicographical decision is going to
‘draw the line’. There are better and worse joints at which to carve
nature, but they are better only in that they make life easier for the
The Selﬁsh Gene as a Philosophical Essay
107

theorist. As we climb the scale from utterly mindless (but selﬁsh)
genes through almost equally mindless (but still striving) macro-
molecular mousetraps to ingeniously designed (but still clueless)
ﬂedgling cuckoos to clever apes (and robots) to wonderful, mind-
ful us, if anyone asks us the question ‘But which of these inten-
tional systems have real minds?’ the answer is: ‘Who cares?’ There
couldn’t be ‘real’ minds and ‘real’ selﬁshness without billions of
years of hemi-semi-demi-pseudo-proto-quasi-minds and mere ‘as
if’ selﬁshness to drive the research and development process that
has eventually yielded our minds. Now we can look back: our
paradigmatic minds and purposes can be used as our model—
sometimes literal, sometimes metaphorical, sometimes semi-
literal/semi-metaphorical—for the processes that populated the
ancestral phenomena. The same virtual regress can be played out
synchronically by treating a human mind (for instance) as a ‘soci-
ety of minds’19, 20—lesser intentional agencies competing and
cooperating in the ongoing task of maintaining a soul to govern a
body, and those clever striving agencies are made up of simpler
agencies in turn, and so on until we get to functionaries so simple
and mindless that they can be replaced by a machine.
‘Yes, we have a soul; but it’s made of lots of tiny robots!’21—and
it was designed by a Blind Watchmaker. Championing such vivid
oxymorons is not just a rhetorical habit that Dawkins and I share;
it is a deliberately designed assault on the default presumption of
the pre-Darwinian world: the trickle-down vision in which all
Design must come from a greater, higher Mind, instead of bubbling
up from mindless, motiveless mechanisms.
One of the insights I gained from rereading The Selﬁsh Gene
in the context of the World Summit on Evolution was that it is
not just the Midgleys and Searles who are uncomfortable with
Dawkins’ anthropomorphizing of genes; there are eminent evo-
lutionary scientists who still yearn for a biological version of
stripped-down Skinnerian/Quinian behaviorism. They may not
know just why they are unwilling to speak, with Dawkins, about
what the Blind Watchmaker has discovered over and over again (in
convergent evolution), and they fully appreciate the aptness of
Daniel C. Dennett
108

Orgel’s Second Rule (evolution is cleverer than you are), but they
feel a little guilty indulging in such talk, even in the squeaky-clean
contexts of evolutionary game theory. (On several occasions in
discussion with such self-styled hardheads I have been put in mind
of the philosopher Sydney Morgenbesser’s reaction to such purit-
anical overkill: ‘Let me see if I’ve got this straight, Prof. Skinner:
you’re saying it’s a mistake to anthropomorphize humans?’ The
Skinnerians did seem to think that in order to be properly scien-
tiﬁc they had to pretend that people were stupid, since after all, at
bottom, people are made of nothing but atoms and atoms are
stupid. And some evolutionists still seem to think that they have to
refrain from using the oft-proven fact that natural selection can be
relied upon to ﬁnd the best move in the design problems set for it.22
Yes, at bottom, evolution is a mindless, purposeless, mechanistic
process, but at higher levels of analysis, it can be seen to be teem-
ing with agent-like entities engaged in competitions, exploring
possibilities, solving problems, discovering designs.)
Dawkins, unlike many scientists—and most philosophers—is
comfortable with deﬁnitions that lack the hard edges of necessary
and sufﬁcient conditions. Even the central concept of a gene, he
claims, can get by on ‘a kind of fading-out deﬁnition, like the
deﬁnition of ‘big’ or ‘old’.23 Is this really acceptable? Philosophers
have a way of starting off down a promising path and then stop-
ping after the ﬁrst few steps and spending the rest of their time
and energy worrying about some problem of deﬁnition or an
assumption that they might better just grit their teeth and make!
Dawkins goes on: ‘A gene is not indivisible, but it is seldom div-
ided.’24 That is what makes it a gene, in fact: its salience over
longish periods of time. (That is, it is the salience over time of a
particular undivided but still varying sequence that makes it the
case that there is something there worth reidentifying and nam-
ing.) ‘The gene is deﬁned as a piece of chromosome which is
sufﬁciently short for it to last, potentially, for long enough for it to
function as a signiﬁcant unit of natural selection.’25 But notice
that it is not a particular hunk of DNA Dawkins is talking about:
philosophers would say he’s talking about a type not a token.
The Selﬁsh Gene as a Philosophical Essay
109

(Two tokens of the word type ‘talking’ occur in the previous
sentence. When I say that ‘talking’ is a two-syllable word, I’m
talking about the type, not any particular token.) Dawkins puts
the point this way: ‘What I am doing is emphasizing the potential
near-immortality of a gene, in the form of copies, as its deﬁning
property.’26 So genes are like words, or like novels or plays, or
melodies. A particular play, such as Romeo and Juliet, exists in
many tokens, on stages and in books, on videotapes and DVDs. A
particular gene also exists in many tokens, in trillions of cells.
This is Dawkins’ way of making George Williams’ point that the
gene is the information carried in the base pairs, not the base pairs
themselves, which are like the trails of ink (or acoustic waves or
laser-readable DVD pits). What counts as the gene is not just any
canonical reading of the text but also all the mutant misreadings
that are clearly misreadings of this text.
Dawkins is equally pragmatic in his treatment of animal signals.
Some theorists have wondered if we can ever say exactly what any
animal signal really means, or what any animal is really thinking,
but Dawkins wisely avoids committing himself to this hysterical
realism: ‘If we wish to (it is not really necessary), we can regard
signals such as the cheep call as having a meaning, or as carrying
information . . .’.27 Alarm calls ‘could be said to carry informa-
tion’.28 While I approve of this reluctance to be drawn into def-
initional battles, such reluctance can be carried too far, leading one
to overlook or underestimate important differences. For instance,
in his brief discussion of a lecture he attended by Beatrice and
Allen Gardner, trainers and keepers of the famous signing chim-
panzee Washoe,29 he mentions, disparagingly, the philosophers
at the lecture who ‘were very much exercised by the question of
whether Washoe could tell a lie’. He suspects that the Gardners
thought there were more interesting things to talk about, and
says he agreed with them. It was not important, he suggests, to
inquire into whether Washoe could tell a deliberate lie, knowingly
and consciously intending to deceive. What was interesting, he
suggests, is just creating an ‘effect functionally equivalent to
deception’.
Daniel C. Dennett
110

Angler ﬁsh wait patiently on the bottom of the sea, blending in with the
background. The only conspicuous part is a wriggling worm-like piece
of ﬂesh on the end of a long ‘ﬁshing rod’, projecting from the top of the
head. When a small prey ﬁsh comes near, the angler will dance its
worm-like bait in front of the little ﬁsh, and lure it down to the region
of the angler’s own concealed mouth. Suddenly it opens its jaws, and
the little ﬁsh is sucked in and eaten. The angler is telling a lie, exploiting
the little ﬁsh’s tendency to approach wriggling worm-like things. He
is saying ‘Here is a worm’, and any little ﬁsh who ‘believes’ the lie is
quickly eaten.30
This is true, and a ﬁne use of the intentional stance, but it is
also true that deliberate lies are on a different plane from the
functional deception of angler ﬁsh. There are many intermediate
cases of quasi-knowing deception in animals—the distraction
displays of such low-nesting birds as piping plovers are a well-
studied instance31—as well as a bounty of tempting anecdotes
about the ‘Machiavellian’ intelligence of primates.32 In fact the
question of whether Washoe could tell a deliberate lie is a deeply
interesting theoretical question, investigated at length with another
chimpanzee, Sarah, by David Premack and his colleagues, and
leading to some intermittently fruitful and important research on
both animals and children, the ill-named ‘theory of mind’ contro-
versy.33 The transition from mindless deceit to mindful deceit is
a good manifestation of a major transition in evolution—not a
metaphysical or cosmic distinction, an unbridgeable chasm, but a
passage, with intermediate transitional cases of deceit that may
not be so mindless. Once that transition has been clearly accom-
plished, it opens up a whole new world of deceit (and other
sophisticated behavior). Dawkins recognized this himself in his
commentary in Behavioral and Brain Sciences on ‘Intentional Sys-
tems in Cognitive Ethology’,34 so this is not a point of ongoing
disagreement.
In fact, of course, Dawkins’ insight into the role of cultural
evolution in designing the minds of one species of primates,
Homo sapiens, has been a major inﬂuence on my own work. The
concept of a meme, a replicating unit of cultural evolution that
The Selﬁsh Gene as a Philosophical Essay
111

can move from brain to brain, redesigning the brain a little to
make it a better outpost for itself and other memes, opens up ways
of thinking about psychological phenomena—both cognitive and
emotional—that were inaccessible to earlier theorists puzzling
about the problems of consciousness. Now that we have the idea,
it even seems obvious, in retrospect, that most of the huge differ-
ence between our minds and the minds of chimpanzees is not due
directly to the genetically controlled differences in neuroanatomy
but to the vast differences in virtual architecture made possible by
those minor differences in the underlying neural hardware. By
becoming adapted to the transmission and rehearsal (internal rep-
lication) of a cornucopia of pre-designed cultural thinking tools,
our brains became open-minded in a way that is apparently
unavailable to chimpanzee brains no matter how intensively their
cultural environment is enriched.
At this time, the contributions of the concept of a meme are
still largely conceptual—or philosophical. The search for testable
hypotheses of memetics is still in its infancy, but there are more
than a few applications of the underlying insights to theoretical
problems in philosophy, cognitive science, and more recently, the
nature of ethics and religion.35 For instance, I recommend Balkin’s
Cultural Software,36 and my own book on religion as a natural
phenomenon, Breaking the Spell.37 The creation of a new scien-
tiﬁc concept is like speciation: you can’t identify a successful
instance at the moment of birth. Time will tell whether, in
another century, Dawkins’ chapter on memes will be retro-
spectively crowned as the birth of an important scientiﬁc lineage
of work. I am betting on it, but what about my claim that the
book is excellent philosophy in any case? A psychologist col-
league, on reading a draft of this essay, asked if The Selﬁsh Gene is
considered required reading in any philosophy graduate program.
Certainly specialists in the philosophy of science or philosophy of
biology would be expected to have read it, but what about stu-
dents of epistemology or philosophy of mind or language? We
philosophers are a somewhat conservative lot, loath to grant that
anybody but a professional philosopher could write something
Daniel C. Dennett
112

worthy of entry into the canon. If you put The Selﬁsh Gene on the
required reading list, just which ‘classic’ would you bump from the
list to make room for it? I have seen enough philosophy students
enthusiastically tell me how they were transformed by reading the
book to judge that it pulls its weight and then some, so yes, I put
Dawkins’ book alongside classics by such non-philosophers as
Turing38 and Kuhn39 as essential thinking tools for any student of
philosophy. In addition to everything else they will learn from it,
they will discover that it is actually possible to write arguments
that are both rigorous and a joy to read. That discovery, if enough
philosophers took it to heart, could transform our discipline.
ENDNOTES
1 Richard Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2nd edn., 1989), 322.
2 Douglas R. Hofstadter and D. Dennett, The Mind’s I: Fantasies and
Reﬂections on Self and Soul (New York: Basic Books, 1981).
3 Daniel Dennett, Content and Consciousness (London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul, 1969).
4 Daniel Dennett, ‘Intentional Systems’, Journal of Philosophy, 68
(1971): 87–106.
5 Daniel Dennett, ‘Why the Law of Effect Will not Go Away’, Journal
for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 5 (1975): 169–187.
6 Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene (1st edn., 1976), v.
7 Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene (2nd edn., 1989), ix.
8 Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene (2nd edn., 1989), 1.
9 Stephen Jay Gould, ‘Darwinian Fundamentalism’, New York Review
of Books (12 June 1997), 34–37 and ‘Evolution: The Pleasures of
Pluralism’, New York Review of Books (26 June 1997), 47–52.
10 Daniel C. Dennett, ‘Afterword’, in Richard Dawkins, The Extended
Phenotype (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999).
11 For a detailed analysis of Skinner’s position, see Daniel C. Dennett,
‘Skinner Skinned’, in Brainstorms (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1978).
12 Willard Van Orman Quine, Word and Object (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1960), 227. Quine acknowledged the ‘practical indispensability’
The Selﬁsh Gene as a Philosophical Essay
113

in daily life of the intentional idioms of belief and desire but disparaged
such talk as an ‘essentially dramatic idiom’ rather than something
from which real science could be made in any straightforward way
(Word and Object, page 217), but later in his career he came to
appreciate that this dramatic idiom might be harnessed into a predict-
ive science. My own very Quinian analysis of the philosophical prob-
lems of referential opacity and their dissolution can be found in two
essays: Daniel C. Dennett, ‘Beyond Belief’ and ‘Mid-term Examin-
ation: Compare and Contrast’, in The Intentional Stance (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press/Bradford, 1978).
13 Gilbert Ryle, The Concept of Mind (London: Hutchinson, 1949).
14 Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene (2nd edn., 1989), 4.
15 Mary Midgley, ‘Gene-juggling’, Philosophy, 54 (1979): 439–458.
16 John Searle, Minds, Brains and Science (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press 1985).
17 John Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1992).
18 Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene (2nd edn., 1989), 18.
19 Marvin Minsky, Society of Mind (New York: Simon & Schuster,
1985).
20 George Ainslie, Breakdown of Will (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2001).
21 ‘Si abbiamo un anima. Ma è fatta di tanti piccolo robot.’ Giulio
Giorelli, quoted in Daniel C. Dennett, Freedom Evolves (London:
Penguin, 2003), 1.
22 Richard Lewontin has often insisted that it is a mistake to assume
that lineages are posed problems by the environments they encounter,
and since a wealth of adaptationist success stories belies this claim,
it is tempting to conclude that Lewontin views all these results as
ill-gotten gains. For a discussion, see Richard Lewontin, ‘Elementary
Errors about Evolution’, Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 6 (1983):
367–368 and Daniel C. Dennett, (1983), my response to his response.
23 Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene (2nd edn., 1989), 32.
24 Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene (1989), 33–34.
25 Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene (1989), 35–36.
26 Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene (1989), 35.
27 Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene (1989), 63.
28 Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene (1989), 64.
29 Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene (1989), 64.
30 Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene (1989), 64–65.
Daniel C. Dennett
114

31 C. Ristau, ‘Aspects of the cognitive ethology of an injury-feigning
bird, the piping plover’, in C. Ristau (ed.), Cognitive Ethology: The
minds of other animals (Hillsdale: LEA, 1991).
32 Andrew Whiten and R. Byrne (eds.), Machiavellian Intelligence
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988) and Machiavellian Intelli-
gence, II: Extensions and Evaluations (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1997).
33 Daniel C. Dennett, ‘Beliefs about Beliefs’ (commentary on Premack,
Woodruff, et al.), Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1 (1978): 568–570.
34 Richard Dawkins, ‘Adaptationism was always predictive and needed
no defense’, Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 6 (1983): 360–361. Com-
mentary on Daniel C. Dennett, ‘Intentional Systems in Cognitive
Ethology: The “Panglossian Paradigm” Defended’, Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 6 (1983): 343–390.
35 For a survey of the status and progress of memetics, see Daniel C.
Dennett, ‘The New Replicators’, in Mark Page (ed.), The Encyclo-
pedia of Evolution (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), vol. 1,
E83–E92.
36 J. M. Balkin, Cultural Software: A Theory of Ideology (New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1998).
37 Daniel C. Dennett, Breaking the Spell (London: Penguin, 2006).
38 A. Turing, ‘Computing Machinery and Intelligence’, Mind, 59 (1950):
433–460.
39 Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1962).
The Selﬁsh Gene as a Philosophical Essay
115

RICHARD
DAWKINS
HOW A SCIENTIST CHANGED
THE WAY WE THINK
Reﬂections by scientists, writers, and philosophers
Edited by
ALAN GRAFEN
AND
MARK RIDLEY
1

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With ofﬁces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
© Oxford University Press 2006
with the exception of To Rise Above
© Marek Kohn 2006
and Every Indication of Inadvertent Solicitude
© Philip Pullman 2006
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 2006
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Data available
Typeset by ReﬁneCatch Ltd., Bungay, Suffolk
Printed in Great Britain by
Clays Ltd., St Ives plc
ISBN 0–19–929116–0
978–0–19–284055–8
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

