CHAPTER 11
What to Do While Religions Evolve 
before Our Very Eyes
DANIEL DENNETT
T
he term New Atheists has recently emerged as a way to refer to the 
explosion into public visibility of a group of atheist critics of religion, 
distinguished not just by their outspokenness but by their success in com­
manding attention in the media. The books by Richard Dawkins (2006), 
Sam Harris (2004, 2006), Christopher Hitchens (2007), and me (2006) 
were among the first of a still-​growing list, and someone christened us the 
Four Horsemen, a sobriquet that seems to have gone to fixation. (We are 
not, as Kitcher [2011c] puts it in “Militant Modern Atheism,” “self-​styled 
horsemen,” but we have acquiesced in the term.) In spite of our differences 
in topics, tactics, and manners, we have often been lumped together as a 
convenient target for condemnation by the legions of defenders of religion. 
In addition to the religious spokespeople and churchgoers who have risen 
up to deplore our rude assault on religions are the critics we Horsemen 
refer to as the “I’m an atheist but” crowd. Religion is not for them, but in 
deference to those who love it and need it, they abstain from criticizing 
it and accuse us militants of the secular sin of intolerance. While Kitcher 
expresses sympathy for many of the claims of the New Atheists, he (Kitcher 
2011c, 2) also “agrees with the critics that valuable options are being fore­
closed.” “Militant Modern Atheism” stands out from the rest of the “I’m 
an atheist but” literature by attempting to articulate some of the positive 
details of ways religions might evolve harmlessly under the protective 
mantle of tolerance.
 
 

[ 274 ] 
The Philosophy of Philip Kitcher
This is important, because it helps to expose a systemic weakness in the 
sacrosanct ideal of Freedom of Religion, which we might call, with a bow to 
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, “benign neglect.” A policy of maximizing 
tolerance for religious diversity can work smoothly only if we are careful 
not to scrutinize the boundaries too closely, and Kitcher’s tightrope act 
wobbles tellingly between the philosophical ideal of explicitness and the 
theological necessity of smoke and mirrors. Consider the pressing ques­
tions we are wise to postpone, if possible: Exactly which religious practices 
are beyond the pale? Human sacrifice for sure, animal sacrifice less cer­
tainly. Is clitoridectomy genital mutilation and hence intolerable, and if so, 
is the circumcision of males, at least in infancy or childhood, to be banned 
as well? Is it tolerable for a religious sect to deny reading and writing to its 
(female) children, or to replace the treatments of modern medicine with 
prayer?
These are profound questions about how to live a human life, and the 
principle of religious freedom declares that answering such questions is 
so important that it should be left to individuals to the greatest extent 
possible, not dictated by the state, not even by majority rule of the citi­
zens. Following that policy to the maximum, however, could in principle 
undo the state’s primary function of protecting its citizenry from harm, 
licensing all the crimes it otherwise forbids, under the exemption of reli­
gious freedom. Where does tolerance slide over the cliff edge into anarchic 
hypertolerance? Any attempt to legislate an answer would itself be a viola­
tion of religious freedom, it seems. Can’t we just depend on the goodwill 
of all parties, counting on religious groups to moderate their ways in def­
erence to the sensibilities of others? No, obviously, we cannot. There are 
today, and have been for millennia, religious sects and even major religions 
that endorse or even enjoin practices that are widely held by others to be 
criminal offenses. We may all individually think we know which are the 
punishable crimes and which are the permissible practices, but we have 
to recognize that there are many thoughtful, serious people who disagree 
with us. We would like to use gentle, reasonable persuasion to create a con­
sensus on these fraught issues, but we must also recognize that there is 
such a thing as being too diplomatic.
The ethical questions merge with strategic questions: How much pres­
sure is apt to be effective in bringing about the sought-​for changes? If 
reform at gunpoint worked, there might be occasions to revert to it, and 
in fact it has worked in the past. It is worth reminding ourselves that racial 
integration was enforced in the United States with the help of thousands 
of armed troops, and few today would argue that it would have been wiser 
to forgo the troops and rely on diplomacy alone.

What to Do While Religions Evolve before Our Very Eyes  [ 275 ]
This uneasy balance between principle and strategy is the background 
that frames the disagreement between Kitcher and me. We are both athe­
ists who disagree about which truths it is wise to broadcast, a difference 
of opinion about strategy but not so stark as whether or not to use force. 
Neither I nor any other of the New Atheists has called for armed suppres­
sion of any religious doctrines, so far as I know. We are content to try to 
achieve our ends using political means: swaying public opinion with forth­
right verbal criticism, and even condemnation on occasion. That is the 
extent of our “aggression.” But Kitcher still thinks it is counterproductive, 
and instead of just blasting us for our rudeness the way most of the “I’m an 
atheist but” crowd do, he attempts to demonstrate an alternative path that 
he expects will have more humane results.
Let’s consider his proposal: replacing the “belief model” of religion with 
the “orientation model.” The belief model is the more or less standard sup­
position “that individual religions are distinguished by their different doc­
trines, and that to be committed to a particular religion is to believe the 
doctrines constitutive of that religion” (Kitcher 2011c, 3). According to 
this view, coreligionists share values, aspirations, attitudes, and loyalties 
because they share belief in a set of propositions, the defining creed of their 
religion. The proposed orientation model inverts this dependence:  the 
shared values and loyalties are an “orientation” definitive of a religion, with 
the characteristic beliefs tagging along as a typical effect, not the core or 
essence of the religion.
The idea is that religious creeds are no longer the protective shields 
they once were, uniting the brethren in a shared litany of proprietary 
and unquestioned truth; they have become part of the problem, and not 
a small part. If religions could just find a way of quietly jettisoning their 
creeds while preserving their traditions, rituals, art, and music and honor­
ing the symbolic and historic value of their holy texts, they would actually 
shed the source of their greatest vulnerability: the all-​but-​demonstrable 
falsehood of most of the cosmology and history they have heretofore felt 
obliged to profess in defiance of evidence and rationality. Some religions—​
some denominations or at least some congregations—​already occupy this 
enlightened niche, so we know it is a possible stable outcome, but are there 
steps we can take to get others to transform themselves? If the relentless 
harsh light shone by the New Atheists on traditional believers just hardens 
their resistance and enmity, is there a kinder, gentler way of fostering the 
change of perspective?
There is a tactic that all of us recognize, some of us deplore, and some 
of us employ. You would think it would be a matter of considerable con­
troversy, but it is seldom discussed, since even raising the issue tends to 

[ 276 ] 
The Philosophy of Philip Kitcher
preempt the controversy by taking one side. This is the tactic that dare not 
speak its name; it belongs to a family of tactics that spread in a continuum 
from indefensible (lying for Christ is an example) to indispensable (respect­
ing the privacy and feelings of others to the greatest extent possible). Some 
relatively benign points on this continuum can be justly called diplomacy or 
tact, and other points, over near the other extreme, should be called what 
they are: intellectual dishonesty at its most culpable. One of the clearest 
results of my ongoing research with Linda LaScola on the plight of nonbe­
lieving clergy (Dennett and LaScola 2010, 2013, 2015) is the recognition 
that the slippery slope between these extremes has no boundaries to which 
one may cling in a principled way. What begins as tact can sour into dissem­
bling that shatters the integrity and blights the lives of many clergy. I have 
coined a deliberately mild—​comically mild—​term for the middle ground, 
faith fibbing, which is not so harsh that people find it impossible to confess 
to, but not so benign that we can all publicly advocate it as a policy without 
undermining it in the process. No one would occupy a pulpit adorned with 
the declaration Faith Fibbing Practiced Here.
I went to some lengths in Breaking the Spell (Dennett 2006) to distin­
guish two spells one might consider breaking: the taboo against looking 
“too closely” at religion, holding it up to the same harsh light of rational 
probing to which we subject all other important phenomena, and the spell 
of religion itself. In my book I declared my intention to break the first spell 
and my agnosticism about the wisdom of breaking the second—​citing the 
very considerations that Kitcher advances more positively. Kitcher ignores 
my distinction but in fact is in nearly perfect harmony with my positions 
on them. His essay is an example of breaking the first spell: he writes with 
unflinching candor about the shaky status of any religion adopted on what 
he calls the belief model and uses that spell-​broken perspective to look hard 
at the prospects for keeping the second spell unbroken by relying on what 
he calls the orientation model, supposing that this is perhaps the only sur­
viving mode of religion that can provide the benefits he wants to preserve, 
which may just be a necessity of meaningful life for many people. As I noted 
in my book, there is a reasonable fear that breaking the first spell will inevi­
tably break the second as well, which fear is the obligatorily tacit standard 
justification for not breaking the first. Kitcher vividly illustrates that prob­
lem in his essay, trying to split the difference between being patronizing 
on the one hand and uneasy complicity with unacceptable nonsense on the 
other.
The point of Kitcher’s introduction of the orientation model is to give 
him a way of reversing—​most of the time—​the otherwise standard depen­
dence of serious commitments and aspirations on grounded beliefs. The 

What to Do While Religions Evolve before Our Very Eyes  [ 277 ]
orientation-​type religionists put commitments first, as the fundamental 
landmarks of their lives, and let the expression of (what take the place 
of) grounds for these commitments wander somewhat opportunistically 
between “mythically self-​conscious” metaphor at one pole and “doctrinal 
entanglement” (flirting with the belief model) at the other, with convenient 
vagueness in the middle. (The “doctrinally indefinite” folks “take refuge in 
language that is resonant and opaque, metaphorical and poetic, and deny 
that they can do any better at explaining the beliefs they profess” [Kitcher 
2011c, 6].) Whatever floats your boat, as one says. And indeed, if maintain­
ing a religious orientation is the only way for you to have a meaningful 
life, you should rely on whatever floats your boat. But then it will just make 
matters harder for you if you have to confront Kitcher’s trio. Tell me, sir or 
madam, have you decided to go with mythic self-​consciousness, doctrinal 
entanglement, or doctrinal indefiniteness? Don’t ask! Don’t tell! That’s why 
many think the first spell should not be broken, but Kitcher and I have both 
ignored that admonition.
Kitcher (2011c, 6) is at pains to express his defense of these delicate 
options sympathetically: “I’ll suggest that doctrinal indefiniteness can be 
a reasonable expression of epistemic modesty, and that even doctrinal 
entanglement can be justified when it is the only way of preserving, in the 
socio-​cultural environment available, a reflectively stable orientation.” But 
a somewhat less diplomatic version hovers in the background: Kid yourself 
if you have to.
“Epistemic modesty” sounds like an exemplary character trait, but we 
should note that it has its dark side. In many religious settings it serves 
handily to unnerve and disarm those who otherwise might be brave 
enough to observe that the emperor has no clothes: think twice before you 
challenge what the elders say; what do you know? A nice feature of this 
ambient attitude is that it can be iterated in a pinch. Pastors can hold off 
skeptical challenges by subtly impugning the comprehension, the experi­
ence, the sophistication of a lay challenger, and then, if that doesn’t do the 
trick, confess their own abject incomprehension in the face of mystery. Not 
“Who are you to question these sacred and difficult truths?” but “Who are 
we to question these sacred and difficult truths?”
One of the troublesome aspects of the books by the Four Horsemen is 
that we don’t bother wrestling with the intricate arguments and analyses 
of theologians, and we don’t back off; we don’t accept the modest role that 
self-​styled religious sophisticates try to impose on us. This “arrogance” of 
the New Atheists is often criticized, but, as I never tire of responding: we, 
like scientists and philosophers generally, are forever asking ourselves 
“But what if I’m wrong?”—​a reflection that is not just rare but positively 

[ 278 ] 
The Philosophy of Philip Kitcher
discouraged among religious spokespeople. There are some famously arro­
gant Nobel Laureates in the scientific community, but I have never encoun­
tered one who can hold a candle to the overweening overconfidence, the 
smug certainty of the typical self-​righteous defender of religion. Their dis­
dain for evidence-​seeking and careful argumentation is often breathtak­
ing, amounting to self-​disqualification for the role of rational discussant. 
Those who view it as positively immoral to entertain alternatives to, or 
even objections to, their faith place themselves outside the marketplace 
of ideas, incompetent to participate in the serious political conversations 
that we ought to be engaging in today. And one of the effects of fostering 
epistemic modesty in all matters religious, as Kitcher recommends, is pro­
tecting the social niche in which these influential subverters of reason can 
operate largely unchallenged.
I have been asking defenders of sophisticated theology for a recom­
mended reading list, for works they are prepared to defend as intellectually 
bracing and honest, and have yet to have my challenge met. I am tempted 
to draw the conclusion that, on closer examination, they recognize that 
they have indeed been adopting a double standard and letting pass as deep 
thought work that is actually just obscure, and apparently often deliber­
ately obscure. These works do serve a useful purpose for the adopters of 
epistemological modesty who can reason as follows: These professors are pro­
fessional thinkers about religion; they are still in the church, so they must have 
gone way beyond me in thinking these issues through. I don’t get it, but they 
do, so I should accept their authority. In other words, these works provide 
examples of high-​flown rumination that one can confess to finding some­
what incomprehensible but nevertheless deem inspiring and authoritative. 
Go read the meticulous arguments of this thinker; they should sweep away your 
doubts. (And if they don’t, it must be your fault.)
Kitcher (2011c, 9) is well aware of the risks entailed by adoption of the 
orientation model, and I’m happy to say that his defense of the three con­
veniently smudged alternatives firmly draws the line at letting any of these 
options abrogate a commitment to reason when deciding ethical mat­
ters: “Someone who makes decisions affecting the lives of others is ethically 
required to rely on those propositions best supported by the evidence.”
This requirement runs into awkward interference from the orientation 
model, however, as Kitcher reveals in discussing one of the central problems 
with the Abrahamic religions (Judaism, Christianity, and Islam): Abraham! 
Abraham is called upon by God to perform an unthinkable act (to commit an 
unspeakable crime, bluntly put). Is this any kind of inspiring example? In a 
felicitous phrase Kitcher (2011c, 8) notes that “there ought to be no ‘teleo­
logical suspension of the ethical,’ ” but then just what is the positive role of 

What to Do While Religions Evolve before Our Very Eyes  [ 279 ]
Abraham as a “knight of faith” supposed to be, when he so clearly violates 
this principle? Kitcher (2011c, 8) says that Abraham’s “sort of trust is not 
legitimate”—​you can’t put it much plainer than that—​but how, then, does 
he find a way of endorsing Abraham’s (mythical) story as any sort of talisman 
for a meaningful life? He doesn’t say, and I suspect that his reticence covers 
a conviction that any answer would be intellectual sleight of hand at best.
Kitcher (2011c, 9)  sketches a speculative account of the evolution of 
religious phenomena that is, as he says, an alternative to my own specula­
tive conjecture—​it sees the predominance of religion as explained by its 
being (socially) adaptive, not a byproduct of other evolutionary selection 
pressures—​but he then draws a misleading contrast:
If you start with the thought that the predominance of religion in human societ­
ies is to be explained by a cognitive deficiency, you will tend [my italics] to see 
your campaign for the eradication of myths in terms of a return to intellectual 
health. . . . By contrast, if you suppose that the social factors towards which 
I have gestured have played a non-​trivial role in the spread of the world’s reli­
gions, you will wonder [my italics] if there are psychological and social needs that 
the simple abandonment of religion will leave unfulfilled.
There may be such a tendency, pulling in opposite directions, but Darwin 
(1862, 461) long ago showed us that it should be resisted: “It is in perfect 
accordance with the scheme of nature, as worked out by natural selection, 
that matter excreted to free the system from superfluous or injurious sub­
stances should be utilized for [other] highly useful purposes.”
So Kitcher’s wonder is just as available to me, and, similarly, however 
socially adaptive religious phenomena may have been in the past, their util­
ity may have expired. It is simply a mistake—​but a very common one—​to 
seek a theory of the evolution of religious phenomena that would provide 
some imagined warrant for your view of the value of religion today. I worked 
hard to keep these issues distinct in my book, and Kitcher should acknowl­
edge that his preferred speculation is logically independent of the main point 
for which he is arguing: that religion is valuable today, all things considered.
It may well be. I find his most compelling point to be his observation 
that Dawkins and I should not extrapolate glibly from our own immense 
good fortune: we find ourselves in a position not only to understand and 
appreciate the glories of the scientific worldview but to have the thrill—​
no other word will suffice—​of playing significant roles in the spreading of 
this vision: “The vast majority will never be able to recognize themselves as 
important participants in any impressive joint enterprise that contributes 
to knowledge and enlightenment” (Kitcher 2011c, 11).

[ 280 ] 
The Philosophy of Philip Kitcher
I discuss this in Breaking the Spell (Dennett 2006, 286–​92), where I note 
that religion has the unparalleled capacity to give people a chance to be, in 
Kitcher’s good phrase, important participants in the world they were born 
into. But as I go on to discuss there, nobody has yet estimated what price 
we should be prepared to pay—​in xenophobia, violence, the glorification of 
unreason, the spreading of patent falsehood—​for that wonderful sense of 
importance religion gives to many people who would otherwise lead lives 
without drama, without a point. Kitcher wants to preserve religions (at 
least for the foreseeable future, I gather), but I think it would be better 
to work constructively on secular institutions that can provide alternative 
structures of meaning for everyone, hastening the day of religion’s demise. 
Still we might accomplish this most practically by encouraging existing reli­
gious institutions to evolve into … former religions. Some have already 
done so, but they are not yet competing very well in the marketplace of 
allegiances. That may soon change.
The transparency of information engendered by electronic media has 
dramatically changed the epistemological environment—​the environment 
of knowledge, belief, error, illusion, confidence—​that we all inhabit. It 
threatens the security and stability of all institutions that depend on con­
fidence and trust, which includes such disparate entities as newspapers, 
banks, hospitals, religions, and universities. If a reliable source of news 
loses its reputation for telling the truth, it may be out of business, no mat­
ter how scrupulously it checks the facts it publishes. So a new arms race is 
now ensuing, dealing in the manipulation of reputations for truth-​telling, 
and its campaigns can be detected on all sides. Al Jazeera has an excellent 
and deserved reputation for truthful reporting in most of the world out­
side the United States. Will its recent acquisition of Al Gore’s news website 
finally secure its respectability in this country or damage Gore’s reputa­
tion? Time magazine continues its print edition in the United States, while 
Newsweek abandoned its US edition in 2012, choosing to link its fate to 
the Daily Beast website. In recent decades both magazines have experi­
mented with the ploy of bolstering sales by running favorable cover stories 
on religious topics: the Shroud of Turin, the Dead Sea Scrolls, the Gnostic 
Gospels, new interpretations of putative relics and archaeological discover­
ies. They clearly have seen the security of religious institutions as a possible 
lifeboat to cling to, but it is not obvious that their design choice was wise, 
in retrospect.
Oxford zoologist Andrew Parker (2003) has proposed in his book, In 
the Blink of an Eye that the famous Cambrian Explosion of novel life forms 
that occurred about 530 million years ago was triggered by a change in 
the chemistry of the atmosphere or the seas or both, which increased the 

What to Do While Religions Evolve before Our Very Eyes  [ 281 ]
transparency of these media, letting much more sunlight in, making vision 
possible for the first time. Suddenly it paid to have eyesight with which to see 
your prey or your predators in the offing, and as eyes evolved, so did all the 
devices and tactics that eyes enable. The result was an arms race of new ways 
of hiding and seeking, locomoting and defending oneself that drove evolution 
into one of its most innovative and revolutionary periods. My suggestion is 
that we are entering just such an arms race today thanks to the cultural evo­
lution of all the new ways of obtaining and distributing information—​and 
misinformation (Dennett and Roy, 2015). Old tactics and defenses no longer 
suffice, and whoever doesn’t redesign in a hurry is doomed to extinction.
I suspect that the critical element in the information revolution that 
jeopardizes traditional religions is the explosive increase in mutual knowl­
edge. It is not just that hundreds of millions of people know about the sex­
ual abuse scandal in the Catholic Church; hundreds of millions of people 
know that hundreds of millions of people know about the sexual abuse. 
The Church used to be able to hush up scandals locally, moving the offend­
ers to other parishes; there were millions of people who each knew about 
one local case or another, or maybe a few, but nobody (one may charita­
bly assume) knew that there were these millions of people who knew this; 
nobody knew that there were thousands of cases around the world. Now, 
thanks to the media, when “everybody knows” about the thousands of 
priests around the world who have been uncovered as sexual abusers, the 
Church is very hard-​pressed to recruit new priests. Knowing that all the 
parents in one’s parish will be warning their children about the dangers 
of being alone with a priest must dampen the enthusiasm of any young 
Catholic man who is considering entering the priesthood. A generation ago 
Ireland had three priests for every parish; today it is three parishes for each 
priest. The number of Roman Catholic priests in North America is down a 
third from a generation ago, and the seminaries don’t have enough appli­
cants to replenish the pipeline.
That is a particularly vivid example of how swiftly a reputation prob­
lem can threaten the very survival of an institution that has seemed for 
centuries to be as impervious as any mountain. More indirect effects are 
worrying the leaders of other denominations. When children learn of the 
many alternatives to the creeds they are taught by their elders, otherwise 
unthinkable options become real possibilities. Baptists in America today 
are baptizing about as many each year as they did back in the middle of 
the twentieth century, when the population was less than half what it is 
today, a huge erosion of market share. The Evangelical movement antici­
pates shrinking dramatically in the twenty-​first century, according to some 
studies. According to one, “If current trends continue, only four percent 

[ 282 ] 
The Philosophy of Philip Kitcher
of teenagers will be Bible-​believing Christians as adults” (Goodstein 2006; 
see also Spencer 2009). Not without good reason do defenders of religion 
inflate the numbers of their adherents and conceal—​as best they can—​any 
negative trends in attendance. For the same reasons, of course, colleges 
and universities neglect to report declining enrollments and applications 
while trumpeting any gains but among religions there are few gains to her­
ald. Muslims and Mormons have increasing populations, due mainly to dif­
ferential birth rates, not conversions, but “no religion at all” is the fastest 
growing category, worldwide.
As these and a host of other such facts become more widely known—​and 
known to be known—​it will be hard for religious spokespeople to maintain 
their traditional tone of authority. Religions that flourished in the murky 
epistemic waters of earlier millennia are going to find themselves increas­
ingly vulnerable to “impertinent” questions about their practices, their fund­
ing, their creeds. Recent history has shown us that cover-​ups that used to 
succeed in the past now have a way of imploding spectacularly. Will the com­
mitment model that Kitcher recommends be able to deflect the scrutiny that 
would undermine it? Who knows what the near future will bring? Religions 
have changed more in the past century than in the past millennium, and 
perhaps they will change more in the next decade than in that past century.
Kitcher and I agree on so much. We agree that “public reason must be 
thoroughly secular” (Kitcher 2011c, 12). We agree that the belief model of 
religion is indefensible. We agree that the first spell must be broken—​we 
have both broken it. We differ, apparently, only in our assessment of how 
to ease the people of the twenty-​first century into a more reasonable and 
socially benign form of organization. It’s like the problem of how to remove 
an adhesive bandage: slowly, gently lifting, pulling, pausing—​or a swift, 
well-​timed yank. I favor the quick shock and it’s over—​not so bad, and now 
let’s get on with our lives. Kitcher favors the glacial approach, and whatever 
there is to be said for it when calculating the costs and benefits, it is impor­
tant not to overlook the suffering of those who get caught in the pulpit, 
slowly accumulating a deplorable history of dissembling and obfuscation 
in the name of tact. We all indulge in those little white lies, and it would be 
heartless to forswear them, but how much is too much? I think we should 
both admit that we haven’t yet figured that out.1
1.  Portions of this essay are revised from “Kitcher versus Dennett: Is New Atheism 
Counterproductive?,” Why Evolution Is True, October 7, 2010, https://​whyevolu­
tionistrue.wordpress.com/​2010/​10/​07/​kitcher-​versus-​dennett-​is-​new-​atheism-​
counterproductive-​2/​, and from Dennett and LaScola 2013 and 2015.

What to Do While Religions Evolve before Our Very Eyes  [ 283 ]
Reply to Dennett
PHILIP KITCHER
For four decades now I’ve been a great admirer of Dan Dennett’s philosoph­
ical work. His concerns that philosophy should be broadly accessible and 
that it should focus on questions that interest more than a small coterie of 
professionals are sources of inspiration. Dan’s ability to combine stylistic 
elan with clarity and precision sets a model for us all. I have often been 
encouraged by the fact that he and I have stood shoulder to shoulder on 
many issues. As Dan points out, we agree on so much.
With respect to religion our disagreements resemble those of the 
Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks—​all the more intense, perhaps, because 
the differences might appear, to an external observer, to be so small. In the 
end, however, I think they are more important than simple divergences on 
strategy. We are divided not only about the value of religion but also on 
some basic questions about belief.
Dennett’s characteristically lucid and forceful essay engages with the 
argument of my “Militant Modern Atheism” (Kitcher 2010; also Kitcher 
2012c, ch. 12). Dennett responds to my contrast between the belief and 
orientation models by arguing that, once the orientation model is made 
explicit, those whose religious commitments conform to it are placed in 
an uncomfortable position. They have to decide exactly where they stand 
on matters of doctrine: are they “mythically self-​conscious,” “doctrinally 
indefinite,” or “doctrinal[ly] entangle[d]‌”? Unless they fall into the last cat­
egory, in which case they are lapsing into the belief model, they are forced 
to realize that they are “kid[ding]” themselves. When religion backs away 
from full-​blooded commitment to doctrines, the devout have to fess up to 
“faith fibbing.”
To my mind this response is revealing, for it shows how Dennett thinks 
about belief. His writings about religion tacitly adopt a pair of theses, 
shared by the less sophisticated members of the “Four Horsemen” (I owe 
the whole quartet an apology for having mistakenly suggested that they 
proposed this name):
1.	 When a person properly affirms a statement, there is a precise and defi­
nite content, formulable in language as transparent as the languages of 
the sciences.
 

[ 284 ] 
The Philosophy of Philip Kitcher
2.	 Believing truly is an ultimate value, one that can override other values. 
Replacing false belief by true belief brings gains that outweigh whatever 
losses are involved in the replacement.
In my later work on religion (Kitcher 2014), I’ve called both theses into 
question, insisting on the need to recognize that some valuable linguistic 
practices stand in need of interpretation and that arriving at a state of clear 
and definite true belief may not be worth the sacrifices required to achieve 
it. My aim in what follows is to elaborate these points.
Dennett imagines religious believers who are dumbfounded by the 
request to situate themselves with respect to the orientation model. 
Perhaps he and I move in different circles, but I know many thoughtful 
people who would have no trouble with the question. Some, like the late 
Robert Bellah, would identify themselves as mythically self-​conscious. 
They recognize that their creedal professions aren’t intended to record 
matters of historical fact, and they are happy to talk of their doctrines as 
“myths” (Bellah 2011)—​and even to claim that clashing myths can count 
as true. Chapter 3 of Kitcher (2014) offers a philosophical reconstruction 
of this usage, distinguishing alternative approaches to truth in different 
domains (see my replies to Gideon Rosen and to Michael Smith). To put 
the point very simply, religious statements are viewed as metaphorical, as 
gestures toward a different aspect of reality—​the transcendent—​and valu­
able because of their “fruits for life.”
Others, probably the majority of those who profess “liberal” (or, as 
I would characterize it, “refined”) religion, would answer Dennett’s question 
differently. They would point out, from the beginning, that the statements 
in question are complex, in need of interpretation. Some of them might 
invoke particular interpretations they favor, interpretations that separate 
the content of belief from any literal commitment to supernatural goings-​
on. All would deny that the interpretations they can give, or even the inter­
pretations that have been provided in the history of their religion, exhaust 
the significance of the doctrinal statements. Many would likely concur with 
the attitude recommended by Bellah, seeing all the world’s major religions 
(and perhaps the less prevalent ones as well) as gesturing toward an aspect 
of reality that literal language cannot capture, an aspect that deserves the 
emotional responses William James ([1902] 1982, lecture 2) saw as central 
to religion (solemnity and awe, combined with a joyous acceptance). Faced 
with the suggestion that they are “kidding themselves” or “faith fibbing,” 
they would reject the description (possibly indignantly); resorting to meta­
phor or allegory, they would explain, is not the same as lying, particularly 
when there is no other way to express important insights.

What to Do While Religions Evolve before Our Very Eyes  [ 285 ]
Dennett, working with Linda LaScola, has been much concerned to help 
a group of lapsed religious people who cannot take the stance I find so 
common among the thoughtful devout. The effort to help clergy who have 
lost faith deserves sustained applause—​even though, as I’ll suggest below, 
there’s a vastly larger group of vulnerable people to whose predicaments 
Dennett often appears blind. Interactions with those who cannot find 
any convincing interpretation of the doctrines they are paid to recite and 
teach has probably encouraged Dennett’s sense that people who grope for 
words to explain their religious commitments are hopeless muddleheads. 
He issues a challenge: Give me a list of theologians who are worth reading. 
I’ll bite. James (although not officially a theologian), Martin Buber, Paul 
Tillich, George Lindbeck, Nicholas Lash, and Bellah (again, a believer, not 
a theologian). I anticipate Dennett’s reply: All these writers descend into 
deep-​sounding vagueness at crucial moments; their works lack clarity and 
precision. Apparently nothing short of an explication meeting Carnap’s 
high standards will do, either for the believer who is asked to clarify his 
version of the orientation model or for the theologians to whose works the 
believer might turn. Thesis 1 tacitly underlies Dennett’s complaint against 
liberal (refined) religion.
Let me be clear. In the end, as Kitcher (2014) argues, even refined reli­
gion should be seen as a way station on the road to secular humanism. My 
book (2014) is concerned to show how refined religion evades the most 
powerful arguments against (literalist) religions (those committed to the 
belief model) and how a philosophical reconstruction of it can be given. 
Refined religion fails because it introduces an unnecessary and potentially 
diversionary “transcendent realm” that compromises the human values at 
the core of the orientation model and because it narrows the class of narra­
tives that are fruitful for human life.
Yet refined religion should not be dismissed out of hand in the way 
Dennett and his fellow Horsemen favor. Thesis 1 embodies a narrow sci­
entism. To see this, consider literature generally, and poetry in particular. 
Neither King Lear nor The Brothers Karamazov nor Finnegans Wake would 
pass the “Carnapian explication” test. The failure is even more evident with 
respect to the poetry of Rimbaud or Rilke or Blake or T. S. Eliot. The closing 
section of “Little Gidding” is plainly religiously inflected, but even a reso­
lute atheist like me can find significant content in Eliot’s resonant lines. 
You don’t have to be a believer to sense profound truths, truths you can 
partially express but never render fully in the language Dennett demands. 
Why should a different—​higher—​standard be set for the doctrinally indef­
inite believer or for the writers on my list?

[ 286 ] 
The Philosophy of Philip Kitcher
I turn now to Thesis 2 and its unfortunate consequences. I agree with 
Dennett and Dawkins that it is often good for people to be enlightened, for 
their false beliefs to be replaced by true ones. From my Science, Truth, and 
Democracy (Kitcher 2001b) on, however, I’ve been arguing that not every 
truth is worth having. The aim of our epistemic ventures is significant truth. 
Moreover the significant truths are those that contribute to human well-​
being. Practical significance is the most obvious species: we value some 
truths because they help doctors ameliorate diseases or protect vulnerable 
people from threats to their security. Yet we shouldn’t overlook the value 
of truths that simply advance our understanding of the world. Dawkins is 
often eloquent on the joy that comes from viewing nature clearly and accu­
rately. He rightly laments the blindness that prevents many people from 
experiencing the uplift enlightenment brings.
Nevertheless once you make the shift from the value of truth (period) 
to the value of significant truth, Thesis 2 becomes problematic. Because 
significance depends on the conditions of human lives, the predicaments 
different individuals and communities face, significant truth is thrown into 
a broader mix of values, so that its benefits may be swamped by the losses 
entailed in achieving it. No doubt if we lived in some rather different world, 
it would be good to learn about the degrees to which genetic differences 
affect the talents on which our current societies place most emphasis. But 
if our only method for acquiring the knowledge would be to breed identical 
twins, rearing them apart in controlled environments, we rightly forgo the 
benefits of understanding the precise genetic contribution. And even if we 
have alternative routes to knowledge, we might be obligated not to take 
them if we were convinced that the likely damage from future uses of the 
information would be too great.
My resistance to sweeping away all religion as noxious rubbish stems 
from combining the pragmatist sense of truth as one value among others 
(the point of the previous paragraph) with reflections on the lives I have 
known. For anyone like me, for whom a youth in the lower reaches of the 
British class system brought acquaintance with many people whose lives 
were made bearable by their local church (liberal, by today’s standards) and 
the sense of community it provided, the losses of religious involvement can 
easily outweigh the gains of enlightenment: I have known too many people 
who have said, sincerely and accurately, “Without my faith I just couldn’t go 
on.” Their declaration stems, of course, from failures of the ambient societ­
ies. They are probably at least as common among those who live just north 
of me in Harlem and who turn to one of the local churches or synagogues 
or mosques for comfort, for support, for community, and sometimes for 
a joint campaign for social justice. Ideally we could attend to the causes 

What to Do While Religions Evolve before Our Very Eyes  [ 287 ]
of injustice and provide meaningful communities for those who are strug­
gling. In practice we are at a far remove from being able to do so.
Dennett and I  focus on different groups. Salient for him (and for 
LaScola) are the lapsed clergy, whose chosen professions require them 
publicly to proclaim things they privately reject. Prominent for me are the 
world’s poor and vulnerable, whose religious practices give shape and value 
to their lives. The task of building a fully secular world in which their needs 
will be properly accommodated strikes me as vast—​that world won’t be 
built in a day or even in a generation. Much as I admire the humanist orga­
nizations that have tried to assume the functions of religious communities, 
their efforts strike me as early experiments to find surrogates for the ritu­
als, devotions, and forms of joint life that the major religions have honed 
over centuries.
For Dennett the main difference between us is one of strategy. He prefers 
to pull off the bandage quickly and sees me as favoring “the glacial approach.” 
His image captures some features of our quarrel, but it’s important to pose 
a question: Who, or what exactly, feels the pain? The most obvious subject 
is a society, a particular nation, perhaps, or the entire human population. 
Society, after all undergoes a transformation, from a state in which religion 
is prevalent, even dominant, to another state from which religion has van­
ished. The envisaged benefits are clear: no more obfuscation to cloud policy 
discussions, no more people with false religious conceptions, no more clergy 
crossing their fingers as they preach. Society, however, doesn’t feel the pain. 
Individual people do—​and especially those whose otherwise drab or miser­
able lives are transformed by their religious practices.
The potential anguish caused by the quick removal of the bandage 
seems to me vast enough to outweigh the benefits. But even if the utilitar­
ian calculation goes differently, computing a net gain in aggregate levels 
of well-​being, there’s no shirking the obvious standard objection. A large 
number of lives would be blighted in order to secure the well-​being of oth­
ers. Better, I believe, to develop secular humanism as a positive position, 
showing clearly how a meaningful life after faith is possible, and, probably 
more important, to combat social injustice and fashion functional substi­
tutes for religious institutions. My recent work on religion is intended to 
point the way.
The rate of secular transformation does not have to be “glacial.” I hope it 
goes smoothly and quickly. But I don’t think the task of building a secular 
world will be forwarded by cheery assurances about quick tugs of the ban­
dage or by neglect of the positive comforts the world’s religions bring. So 
for all my admiration for Dan, all my agreement with his endorsement of 
the secular life, I remain a “soft” atheist, an unrepentant Menshevik.

1
The Philosophy 
of Philip Kitcher
Edited by Mark Couch
and
Jessica Pfeifer
 

1
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers
the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education
by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University
Press in the UK and certain other countries.
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America.
© Oxford University Press 2016
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction
rights organization. Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above.
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.
Cataloging-in-Publication data is on file at the Library of Congress
ISBN 978–​0–​19–​938135–​7
1  3  5  7  9  8  6  4  2
Printed by Sheridan, USA
 

