Lovely and Suspect Qualities
Daniel C. Dennett
Philosophical Issues, Vol. 1, Consciousness. (1991), pp. 37-43.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=1533-6077%281991%291%3C37%3ALASQ%3E2.0.CO%3B2-U
Philosophical Issues is currently published by Ridgeview Publishing Company.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/rpc.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to and preserving a digital archive of scholarly journals. For
more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Fri May 18 08:30:35 2007

PHILOSOPHICAL
ISSUES,1 
Consciousness, 199 1 
Lovely and Suspect 
Qualities 
Daniel C. Dennett 
A family of compelling intuitions work to keep "the problem 
of consciousness" systematically insoluble, and David Rosen- 
thal, in a series of papers including the one under discussion, 
has been resolutely driving these intuitions apart, exposing 
them individually to the light, and proposing alternatives. 
In this instance the intuition that has seemed sacrosanct, 
but falls to his analysis, is the intuition that "sensory qual- 
ity" and consciousness are necessarily united: that, for in- 
stance, there could not be unconscious pains, or unconscious 
subjective shades of blue, or unconscious aromas of fresh- 
ly roasted coffee beans. The particular airborne polymers 
that are the vehicles of freshly roasted coffee beans could 
exist, of course, in the absence of any observer, and hence 
of any consciousness, but the sensory quality of that aroma 
requires -according 
to well-entrenched intuition- 
not only 
an observer but a conscious observer. Such properties have 
no esse except as percipi. 
Rosenthal argues that this utterly familiar idea is just 
wrong; the connection between what he calls sensory quality 
and consciousness is only contingent. Moreover -and 
this 

is the most important contribution of his paper- 
it is only 
by denying this traditional link that progress can be made. 
I have no substantive quarrels with Rosenthal's arguments, 
so instead of raising obstacles, I will try to push his claims a 
little further, and support them with further considerations. 
Hume pointed to what he thought was an important differ- 
ence between our "internal impressions" and our sensations. 
The latter require (or at least invite) us to posit continu- 
ously existing bodies and properties in order to preserve the 
coherence and constancy of our discontinuous impressions of 
sensation. His example was the fire in his study fireplace, 
which gradually burns down, during the intervals between 
his different sensations of it (Treatise, I.iv.2). He thought it 
was otherwise with "internal impressions": "on no occasion 
is it necessary to suppose that they have existed and oper- 
ated, when they were not perceived, in order to preserve the 
same dependence and connexion, of which we have had expe- 
rience." But Hume's claim is by no means obvious, however 
well supported by tradition. Unfelt pains make a convenient 
entering wedge. As Rosenthal points out, it is natural, con- 
trary to Hume's supposition, to speak of having had a single, 
persistent pain or ache during the longish stretch of time 
when one is intermittently distracted by -conscious of-
a 
headache. If all the other psychological effects of pain are 
present -the 
lowered effectiveness, the inability to concen- 
trate, the irritability- 
as well as the physiological effects that 
are responsible for them, such as the characteristic changes in 
neuromodulator balances, there is good reason to treat one's 
pain as persisting unobserved, just like the fire in the hearth. 
And if there can be unfelt pains, there can be unconscious 
sensations of red. 
Suppose, to make the idea vivid, that we train human sub- 
jects to respond to color-coded signals in a video game, and 
suppose they have accustomed themselves to expect some 
sort of disagreeable event in the aftermath of a flashing red 
spot; we then arrange to present them with a flashing red 
spot under conditions in which their attention is concen-
trated on other matters; we observe that they do not, and 
cannot, report the occurrence of the flashing red spot, but 
their galvanic skin response (as a measure of their anxiety, 

their expectation of a disagreeable sequel) indicates that they 
have distinguished the redness of the spot. Experiments ex- 
hibiting similar effects are legion, and while I cannot think 
of any offhand that have exactly the effect described, I have 
no doubt that such effects could be produced. Suppose, in 
any case, that we did have evidence that the effects of "see- 
ing red" (and seeing it as red, of course) could occur in the 
absence of consciousness of red (as revealed in the normal 
experimental way -by 
the subjects' reports). Would this 
not give us good reason to admit that sensory qualities can 
exist independently of consciousness? 
Why not? What arguments have been offered, by Hume or 
others, to oppose this idea? If it seems repugnant to reason, 
just why is this? Perhaps the most persuasive ground is the 
idea -so 
persuasive, apparently, that it need not be made 
into an explicit argument!- 
that once science has established 
that secondary properties are just powers in objects to pro- 
duce certain ideas in observers, these ideas-in-observers must 
"intrinsically" involve consciousness. Rosenthal says: "It is 
often pointed out that we cannot repeat [the Lockean] move; 
there is no place to relocate the qualitative character that 
the distinctive properties of sensory states seem to exhibit." 
(p. 27) Rosenthal questions this claim, but I will go further. 
We can repeat the Lockean move, and in fact we must. 
The common wisdom is that modern science has removed 
the color from the physical world, replacing it with colorless 
electromagnetic radiation of various wavelengths, bouncing 
off surfaces that variably reflect and absorb that radiation. 
It may look as if the color is out there, but it isn't. It's in here. 
It seems to follow that what is "in here" is both necessarily 
conscious (otherwise it isn't all the way "in") and necessar- 
ily "qualitative" (otherwise color would be utterly missing in 
the world). This reasoning is confused. What science has 
actually shown us is just that the light-reflecting properties 
of objects cause creatures to go into various discriminative 
states, underlying a host of innate dispositions and learned 
habits of varying complexity. And what are their properties? 
Here we can indeed play Locke's card a second time: these 
discriminative states of observers' brains have various "pri- 
mary" properties (their mechanistic properties due to their 

connections, the excitation states of their elements, etc.), and 
in virtue of these primary properties, they have various sec- 
ondary, merely dispositional properties. In human creatures 
with language, for instance, these discriminative states often 
eventually dispose the creatures to express verbal judgments 
alluding to the "color" of various things. The semantics of 
these statements makes it clear what colors supposedly are: 
reflective properties of the surfaces of objects, or of trans- 
parent volumes (the pink ice cube, the shaft of limelight). 
And that is just what colors are in fact -though 
saying just 
which reflective properties they are is tricky. 
Don't our internal discriminative states also have some spe- 
cial "intrinsic" properties, the subjective, private, ineffable, 
properties that constitute the way things look to us (sound 
to us, smell to us, etc.)? No. The dispositional properties 
of those discriminative states already suffice to explain all 
the effects: the effects on both peripheral behavior (saying 
"Red!", stepping the brake, etc.) and "internal" behavior 
(judging "Red!", seeing something as red, reacting with un- 
easiness or displeasure if, say, red things upset one). Any 
additional "qualitative" properties or qualia would thus have 
no positive role to play in any explanations, nor are they 
somehow vouchsafed to us "directly" in intuition. Qualita-
tive properties that are intrinsically conscious are a myth, an 
artifact of misguided theorizing, not anything given prethe- 
oretically. 
We do have a need, as Rosenthal shows, for properties 
of discriminative states that are in one sense independent 
of consciousness, and that can be for that very reason in- 
formatively cited in explanations of particular contents of 
our consciousness. These properties are partially, but not 
entirely, independent of consciousness. We may call such 
properties lovely properties as contrasted with suspect prop-
erties. Someone could be lovely who had never yet, as it 
happened, been observed by any observer of the sort who 
would find her lovely, but she could not -as 
a matter of 
logic-
be a suspect until someone actually suspected her of 
something. Particular instances of lovely qualities (such as 
the quality of loveliness) can be said to exist as Lockean dis- 
positions prior to the moment (if any) where they exercise 

their power over an observer, producing the defining effect 
therein. Thus some unseen woman (self-raised on a desert 
island, I guess) could be genuinely lovely, having the dispo- 
sitional power to affect normal observers of a certain class in 
a certain way, in spite of never having the opportunity to do 
so. But lovely qualities cannot be defined independently of 
the proclivities, susceptibilities, or dispositions of a class of 
observers. Actually, that is a bit too strong. Lovely qualities 
would not be defined -there 
would be no point in defining 
them, in contrast to all the other logically possible gerryman- 
dered properties- 
independently of such a class of observers. 
So while it might be logically possible ("in retrospect" one 
might say) to gather color property instances together by 
something like brute force enumeration, the reasons for sin- 
gling out such properties (for instance, in order to explain 
certain causal regularities in a set of curiously complicated 
objects) depend on the existence of the class of observers. 
Are sea elephants lovely? Not to us. It is hard to imagine 
an uglier creature. What makes a sea elephant lovely to 
another sea elephant is not what makes a woman lovely to 
another human being, and to call some as-yet-unobserved 
woman lovely who, as it happens, would mightily appeal to 
sea elephants would be to abuse both her and the term. It is 
only by reference to human tastes, which are contingent and 
indeed idiosyncratic features of the world, that the property 
of loveliness (to-a-human-being) can be identified. 
On the other hand, suspect qualities (such as the prop- 
erty of being a suspect) are understood in such a way as 
to presuppose that any instance of the property has already 
had its defining effect on at least one observer. You may be 
eminently worthy of suspicion -you 
may even be obviously 
guilty-
but you can't be a suspect until someone actually 
suspects you. The tradition that Rosenthal is denying would 
have it that "sensory qualities" are suspect properties -their 
esse is in every instance percipi. Just as an unsuspected sus- 
pect is no suspect at all, so an unfelt pain is supposedly no 
pain at all. But, for the reasons Rosenthal adduces, this 
is exactly as unreasonable as the claim that an unseen ob-
ject cannot be colored. He claims, in effect, that sensory 
qualities should rather be considered lovely properties -like 

Lockean secondary qualities generally. Our intuition that the 
as-yet-unobserved emerald in the middle of the clump of ore 
is already green does not have to be denied, even though its 
being green is not a property it can be said to have "intrin- 
sically." This is easier to accept for some secondary qualities 
than for others. That the sulphurous fumes spewed forth by 
primordial volcanos were yellow seems somehow more objec- 
tive than that they stank, but so long as what we mean by 
"yellow" is what we mean by "yellow," the claims are paral- 
lel. For suppose some primordial earthquake cast up a cliff 
face exposing the stripes of hundreds of chemically different 
layers to the atmosphere. Were those stripes visible? We 
must ask to whom. Perhaps some of them would be visible 
to us and others not. Perhaps some of the invisible stripes 
would be visible to pigeons (with their tetrachromat color vi- 
sion), or to creatures who saw in the infra-red or ultraviolet 
part of the electromagnetic spectrum. For the same reason 
one cannot meaningfully ask whether the difference between 
emeralds and rubies is a visible difference without specifying 
the vision system in question. 
The same moral should be drawn about the sensory quali- 
ties Rosenthal attributes to mental (or cerebral) states. Like 
Lockean secondary qualities in general, they are equivalence 
classes of complexes of primary qualities of those states, and 
thus can exist independently of any observer, but since the 
equivalence classes of different complexes that compose the 
property are gathered by their characteristic effect on normal 
observers, it makes no sense to single them out as properties 
in the absence of the class of observers. There wouldn't be 
colors at all if there weren't observers with color vision, and 
there wouldn't be pains at all if there weren't subjects capa- 
ble of conscious experience of pains, but that does not make 
either colors or pains into suspect properties. 
Rosenthal (in a personal communication) asks whether this 
is not too strong. Why should the existence of pains require 
subjects capable of conscious experience of pains, as opposed 
simply to subjects capable of having nonconscious pains? 
Fair question, and his implied point is a good one -except 
for what amounts, in the end, to a lexical quandary, which 
can be brought out by considering the parallel with color. 

There is nothing except the specific effects on normal human 
beings that demarcates the boundaries of the "visible spec- 
trum". Infra-red and ultra-violet radiation does not count as 
subserving color vision (at least according to a sort of purist 
definitional taste) even in creatures who respond to it in the 
ways we respond to the (humanly) visible spectrum. "Yes, 
it's like color vision, but it isn't color vision," someone might 
insist. "Color vision is vision whose proper objects are (only) 
red through violet." Now imagine that we confront a set of 
primary property complexes as candidates for the secondary 
property of pain, and suppose it is a somewhat enlarged set 
(it includes infra-pain and ultra- pain, in effect), including 
out-lying cases of which we human beings would never be 
conscious (but which have the sorts of effects on variant hu- 
man beings that paradigmatic pains have on us, etc). Would 
those be pains? There would certainly be a property which 
was the property picked out by that set, but would it be pain? 
(Not a terribly interesting question.) 
I claim, then, that sensory qualities are nothing other than 
the dispositional properties of cerebral states to produce cer- 
tain further effects in the very observers whose states they 
are.' It is no objection to declare that it just seems obvi- 
ous that our mental states really do have intrinsic proper- 
ties over and above their dispositional properties. (If this 
were a good argument, it would be a good argument against 
the original distinction, by Locke, Boyle and others, between 
primary and secondary qualities, for it certainly "seems ob- 
vious" that physical objects have their color properties "in- 
trinsically" -just 
look at 'em!) It does indeed appear to us 
as if we somehow enjoy, in our minds, some sort of direct 
and intimate access to "intrinsic" properties of our conscious 
states, but as Rosenthal observes, "We need not preserve the 
'element of truth' in erroneous commonsense intuitions when 
we become convinced that these intuitions reflect how things 
appear, rather than how they really are." (p. 27.) 
'The claims advanced briefly here are drawn from a longer discussion 
and defense of them in my forthcoming book, Consciousness Explained, 
which has been much influenced by Rosenthal's articles, and from many 
discussions with him. 

