- 9 -
No One Is Boss 
i .) 
Interview with Daniel Dennett 
Cells do not know who you are, nor do they care. 
-DANIEL DENNETT 
Chimpanzees and humans are the only animals able to recognize themselves 
in a mirror. They may be the only ones to possess consciousness of their own. 
Dolphins, not fish but mammals, may also. But where and when in the history 
of evolution does personal consciousness appear? When we try to describe 
consciousness, do we illustrate the soul? We seem closer than ever to dis­
cerning at least self-consciousness, thanks to the impressive team of scientists 
that includes Richard Dawkins, Francis Crick, James Watson, Edward 0. 
Wilson, and Steven Pinker, directed by Daniel Dennett from the Center for 
Cognitive Studies at Tufts University near Boston. 
Daniel Dennett is director for the Center of Cognitive Studies at Tufts University. 

So 
P E O P L E  P R I M A T E S  
We had better understand the fierce debate of those who question the dual 
nature of humans. Both factions seem to have irrefutable views, formulated 
with an elegance and clarity rarely found in scientific prose. It is a profoundly 
ambiguous debate. The most reductionist scientists, like Dennett, reserve 
space for consciousness, while the staunchest defenders of the power of the 
mind, such as Deepak Chopra, see science, not religion, as the preferred mode 
to understand nature. 
The commotion stirred by the denial of the existence of the soul by the sci­
entific community is not surprising. The outcry raised by antireductionists 
was generated by their profound fear of existence without free wil. French 
physicist and mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace summarized with clarity 
the essence of determinism. As flies are dazzled by light, humans debate, 
unaware of determinism at times. So often discomfort leads to loud rejection 
of the concept of a universe undefined. 
Eduardo P unset: So this machine, which is our body, has no spirit? 
Daniel Dennett: Exactly, it does not have any spirit. 
E.P. Nor soul. 
Da.D. There may be a soul. As far as a spirit is concerned, let us take stock of 
the human body, and what do we find? Several billions of different cells, 
living cells, neurons-cells of every type, in other words. But none of the 
cells know who you are, nor do they care. But in some way, you join the 
team of trilions of cells, rather fascist cells, which, like slaves, expel 
intruders as bees do in a hive, and they do not care for democracy, 
Barcelona, or Boston. Our cells are unfamiliar with al of this, and yet, here 
are two great teams of cells, your team and mine, that know a lot of things 
of which they are not aware. Therefore, it is natural to think that the only 
explanation is that, in addition to all this tissue, there is a spirit in the body, 
and that a soul does exist. 
E.P. It is what people believe. 
Da.D. It is a very powerful idea, but it is wrong. A spirit cannot exist in a 
machine. 
E.P. Dan, if there is no soul in the machine body, then what governs it? 
Da.D. Let me illustrate it using a fable. In a country there reigned a king, and 
without the king the nation did not exist. But then democracy was 
invented. Something similar happened in biology, even though biology 
invented democracy first. No part of you is the king, there are only fac­
tions, political parties, and groups that compete for control of your brain. 

D a n i e l  D en n e t t  
81 
But what sort of groups are they? They are groups of activities, they are not 
cells but rather information models that compete for control of your body; 
and because competition is dynamic and fluid, there is always someone at 
the controls, someone in the office. 
E.P. Even though they have not been officially elected, right? 
Da.D. Exactly; there are no official elections, but the brain has an opposition 
process that allows one issue after another to surface, to go forward and 
take over the situation. While we talk, we are a collection of ideas, projects, 
hopes, and plans that we might put aside at the end of the day; and a dif. 
ferent me wil take over the controls. Al the projects are linked by memory. 
There is no one spirit, but rather a succession of temporary controllers. 
E.P. What does consciousness mean? What I mean is, how did it all start? How 
can we explain it? How can we know what exists in this machine? 
Da.D. To my knowledge, the key to understanding consciousness is to ask the 
evolutionist's question: why? Consciousness exists so that we may antici­
pate the future and have foresight in order to plan and project a better 
course in life. In a human that has a background of language, science, and 
culture, there is a great deal of information being exchanged. We can pre­
dict eclipses that are not expected for another few centuries, imagine dis­
tant galaxies, and think of a past we never lived. Consciousness is the power 
of the brain to represent things that do not occur in the present, strictly 
speaking, but rather in the past and future. Our consciousness is that 
power, it is the physical world's capacity to represent itself. 
E.P. And what genes wil carry the information from one brain to another? 
Da.D. We call them memes. 
E.P. Memes? 
Da.D. Yes, I use Richard Dawkins's term, who says that memes are like genes; 
they are the units that transmit and replicate culture. 
E.P. Like traditional genes, right? Are you suggesting that for memes, or cul­
tural genes, to exist, there has to be a capacity for communication among 
diferent brains that did not exist before? 
Da*D. True, language is very important, but it is not the only way. There is 
also a type of cultural transmission in other species. For example, con­
sider the methods used to build nests or dig burrows. It has been discov­
ered that chimpanzees have a way of catching termites with a stick, which 
involves using a sponge to take out water from the trunk to drink. It is a 
minor form of cultural transmission compared with that of humans, but 
it is stil there. 

82 
P B O P L B  P R I M A T E S  
E.P. Do you mean that it is not simply a different grade, but that it is com­
pletely different? 
Da.D. In biology, you always start with a diferent grade of complexity, which 
increases from there. Therefore, for us culture is not a question of thou­
sands but of millions, and not only grades. It is a milion times greater than 
that of the chimpanzees. For example, were we to grow up in a desert 
island without the influence of human culture, we would not be that dif­
ferent from a chimpanzee. Who would invent arithmetic, language, 
cooking, or agriculture? These skils, abilities that are so distinctly human, 
have been acquired through cultural transmission, and that is what com­
poses our mind. If you think about human beings, you realize that their 
minds are not just in their brain, but also in the library, in computers, in 
friends, and in al the tools used to think, acquired throughout their lives. If 
you take away these tools from a person, you make them quite vulnerable. 
E.P. Going back to my own obsessions, Dan. Who looks after the brain, 
assuming that someone looks after it? 
Da.D. It is an idea that is a little scary. The brain has ten billion or perhaps one 
hundred bilion neurons, and that is not al. Not one neuron is aware of 
who you are, nor does it care. They are too stupid for that. Therefore, it 
requires a democracy; neurons work in teams and they compete among 
themselves without being overseen by anyone, because nobody can oversee 
them. The theory that the consciousness or conscience (as you know con­
sciousness is the same word as conscience in Spanish) has a supreme master 
is simply wrong. 
E.P. It would be like walking into a factory devoid of people. 
Da.D. Exactly, like an automated factory; full of machinery, but empty of per­
sonnel. There are parts of the brain that do act as agents responsible for fol­
lowing up other parts, and therefore are like civil servants, but without 
consciousness. 
E.P. They cannot think-
Da.D. No, it is you that generate thought, not the parts from which you are 
made. 
E.P. Therefore, if someone wanted to investigate powers of the brain which 
are unknown, invisible, and intangible, we should have to tell them they are 
wasting their time. 
Da.D. We do not even understand the most elemental abilities of the brain, in 
fact, such as its ability for multiplication, walking, or telling the diference 
between a cat and a cup. These questions may be dificult to answer, but I 

D a n i e l  D e n n e t t  
do not believe the idea that the mind has mysterious powers helps. I believe, 
however, that with time we will be able to explain the functions of the brain 
in normal biological terms. 
E.P. If we observe the universe and we try to gain knowledge, where do our 
senses come from? Does anything exist beyond our own physical percep­
tions? How do we attribute meaning to anything? No matter how much we 
progress, we stil have not attained what Newton said: "I would like to 
know the mechanisms by which a visual perception of the universe is trans­
formed into the glory of colors." Remember? Dan, we do not understand 
something as basic as that yet; it reminds me of the vain search for the pre­
cursor molecule of the first cell. 
Da.D. In the first place, bear in mind that we are the only species that poses 
those sorts of questions. Cats and dogs do not sit around meditating on the 
meaning of life, nor do they ponder their position in the world. Their states 
have meaning because they have been given a sense for the history of evo­
lution from where they emerged, and their own experience. A dog knows 
that a certain visual situation means danger, such as if a man once hit it 
with a stick and the dog then recognizes the man. This is where its sense 
comes from. The dog's brain is designed to be able to extract this sense 
from memory and apply it to certain situations. Our brains function in the 
same way, but because we have the ability of language, we can reflect over 
events and construct layers of meaning upon the sense derived from our 
biological makeup. 
E.P. Are you then saying that there is no such thing as extraordinary percep­
tion, no extrasensory perception, nothing beyond the neurons and atoms? 
Da.D. Yes, it does exist, but it does a marvelous job of hiding, because there is 
no actual evidence. 
E.P. Therefore the brain has no prodigious capacity. 
Da.D. The capacities of the brain are prodigious. A child that learns a foreign 
language, or goes to school, is showing the prodigious capacity of the 
brain, which has not yet been fuly understood. 
E.». Then what do you think of people who believe they have identified sup­
posedly occult powers such as thought transmission or time travel? I know 
it must seem preposterous to you-
Da.D. People who claim such things probably believe them, but it is not true. 
Pablo Picasso once said, "I do not search, I find.'' This "I find" is a great 
explanation of what is an alert genius, even though I do not think it is true. 
Picasso was indeed a genius. His discoveries, however, were not miracles, 

P E O P L E  P R I M A T E S  
but the fruit of much research previously carried out by him, and going 
back to our sphere, natural selection. 
E.P. What role does intuition play then? Einstein said that, as a last resort, dis­
coveries were born from a great intuition. 
Da.D. That is true, but what is intuition? When we get a brilliant idea and we 
say we came to it through intuition, in reality we acknowledge we do not 
know how we came to get that idea. In other words, we say it occurred in 
the brain, through the workings of our neurons, competing among each 
other, suggesting ideas. Some people's brains are better than others' in gen­
erating new ideas, probably as a result of their acquired thinking habits. In 
fact, they teach themselves to think differently, but there is nothing extraor­
dinary in that. 
E.P. Therefore, are you saying it is an exercise of the will? 
Da.D. It is like a magic trick. If we see a magician perform a magic trick on 
stage, at first we think it is extraordinary, impossible, and magic. Later, 
when we understand how it was done, we say it was nothing more than 
trickery. Science is proving that something similar occurs in the brain, 
which can perform dramatic tricks. 
E.P. Including intuition-
Da.D. Definitely, including intuition. 
E.P. What can be said about consciousness? You are a highly renowned expert, 
and you have reflected long on the idea of consciousness, even though they 
accuse you of being a reductionist. Have there been any new discoveries in 
this field since we last saw each other a couple of years ago? 
Da.D. I think we have made great progress where consciousness is concerned. 
We are dividing it into its constitutional parts. With that, we are gradually 
unearthing the idea that consciousness is a grand and mysterious thing, 
while we realize that it consists of al these parts and that there are grades 
of consciousness. If we examine bacteria, we would say that they have no 
consciousness whatsoever, that one bacterium is merely a small robot. 
Brain cells are identical of course, because they are also small robots. If we 
observe a tree, we can believe that it is not conscious. But it is alive; it may 
not have a consciousness, but it is sensitive: it distinguishes the world 
around it and measures whether it is too cold or hot, if it has enough water 
or wind. 
E.P. Or sunlight-
Da.D. Yes. It feels the lack of sunshine and turns toward the sun. It is a type of 
consciousness, a certain sensibility. Many people believe that you cannot 

D a n i e l  D e n n ett 
85 
use this sensibility as a basis to explain the sensibility of a tree to sunlight, 
or the response of the rod and cone cells of our retina to light or to build a 
theory of consciousness. Why not? Because when all is said and done, the 
lens or film of a camera are also sensitive. 
E.P. But neither lenses nor films have consciousness . . . .  
Da.D. But our retina itself has no consciousness either, and yet on the basis of 
its sensibility, it reacts when faced with light-dark diferences. This con­
sciousness is constructed. 
E.P. Some biologists ask themselves whether bacteria possess consciousness. It 
is amazing to see bacteria move as they follow magnetic currents, as though 
they were conscious. 
Da.D. In fact, the speed of movement is very important. When David 
Attenborough produced this marvelous television series on the secret life of 
plants, called The Private Life of Plants, he shot wonderful sequences that 
showed how the growth of plants accelerated during the filming. It showed 
how the vines grew; twisted, and strangled trees-
E.P. Consciously? 
Da.D. It looked as though the plants were conscious. But the effect is pro­
duced simply as a result of the time of the reaction. If we were to slow 
down a human to the rate of the growth of a tree, he would be very drawn 
out. You would think that this person was not in the least conscious, like a 
robot. We say that robots are not conscious, because robots look stupid, 
saying things like "I-AM-A-RO-BOT." But robots like C3PO and R2D2 from 
Star Wars seemed conscious, because they moved correctly at the same 
pace we do. 
E.P. Speaking of velocity, light travels faster than sound, but apparently the 
brain processes visual images much more slowly than auditory perception, 
so at a distance of ten meters, for example, sound and visual image reach 
the brain at the same time. I would like to ask you two questions: First, is 
that simultaneousness absolutely necessary for the brain to interpret what 
is happening? And secondly, seeing as there is no boss in the factory which 
.is the body, is there a point where this light, this entrance of visual image, 
and sound meet? 
Da.D. There is more than one point where signals meet. There are many, and 
it happens at different times. We need to understand that there is no place 
in the brain where the arrival of signal matters. There is no place where the 
stimuli act to concur "now that we are all here, we have crossed the finish 
line and here we are at the place of consciousness. There might be two 

86 
P B O P L B  P R I M A T E S  
points, ten, or two thousand. And in one part of the brain, light informa­
tion arrives before sound information stimuli for the same event. In another 
part the stimuli arrive in a diferent order. The brain may be able to 
organize, to reorder, to process al the stimuli; but it can be tricked. No offi­
cial office space represents "Here is consciousness; the buck stops here." 
Therefore, the question about what process took place first in the conscious 
perception, light or sound, is a poorly asked question that has no answer. 
E.P. What happens when the brain tells your toe to wiggle while it tells your 
eyes to look at a painting in the room? The distance between the brain and 
the toe is greater than the distance between the brain and the eyes, there­
fore the timing could be off. How does the brain manage to make them 
coincide? 
Da.D. The brain has had a lot of time, al the time of evolution, to find a solu­
tion to this "stimulus" problem. And it found it. When the brain initiates 
behavior by sending motor signals it also sets time expectations. Certain 
results are expected after some given time. If you send a letter from, let us 
say, Boston, to someone in California, you do not expect a reply the next 
day, but you do by the end of the week. The brain can be tricked by signals 
that arrive too quickly, and thus create an abnormal experience for the 
brain, because of its own internal expectations of time. In the end, the only 
way to confuse the brain with regard to simultaneity or lack thereof is by 
contradicting and canceling its own expectations. As long as events do 
happen as the brain expects them to happen, everything is fine. 

MIND, LIFE, 
AND 
UNIVERSE 
Conversations- with 
Great Scientists of Our Time 
EDITED BY 
Lynn Margulis and Eduardo Punset 
 A Sciencewriters Book 
CHELSEA GREEN PUBLISHING COMPANY 
WHITE R.iVBR jUNCTION, VERMONT 

 A Sclencewrlôers Book 
scientific lmowltdgt tkmugh endlalltllltlt 
Sciencewriters Books is an imprint of Chelsea Green Publishing. Founded and codirected by Lynn Margulis and 
Dorion Sagan, Scicncewriters is an educational parmcrship devoted to advancing science through enchantment in the 
furm of the finest posible books, videos, and other media. 
Copyright IC> 2007 by Lynn Margulis and Eduardo Punset. Al rights reserved. 
No part of this book may be transmitted or reproduced in any furm by any means 
without permision in writing from the publisher. 
Editor-in-chief. john Barstow 
Production Director: Bil Bokermann 
Project Editor: Collette Leonard 
Developmental Editors: Judith Herrick Beard, Dianne Bilyak 
Copy Editor: Canon Labrie 
Profreader: Robin Catalano 
Indexer: Marc Schaefer 
Designer: Peter Holm, Sterling Hil Productions 
Printed in the United States of America 
Pirst printing, July 2007 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3  2 1 07 08 09 10 
Our Commitment to Green Publlsblng 
Chelsea Green sees publishing as a tol fur cultural change and ecological stcWardship. We strive to align 
our book manufactuting practices with our editorial mission, and to reduce the impact of our business 
enterprise on the environment. We print our books and catalogs on chlorine-free recycled paper, using soy­
based inks, whenever possible. Chelsea Green is a member of the Green Press Initiative (ww.green 
presslnitiative.org), a nonprofit coalition of publishers, manufacturers, and authors working to protect the 
world's endangered furcsts and conserve natural resources. 
Mind, Life, and Univtlx was printed on Nature's Cream, a 50-percent posteonsumer-waste recycled, 
old-growth-forest-free paper supplied by Maple-Vail. 
Ubrary of Congress Cataloging-In-Publication Data 
Mind, life, and universe : conversations with great scientists of our time I edited by Lynn Margulis 
and Eduardo Punset. 
p.cm. 
Includes index. 
ISBN 978-1-933392-61-5 (hardcover)-ISBN 978-1-933392-43-1 (pbk.) 
I. Scientisu-Interviews. 2. Science. I. Margulis, Lynn, 1938-11. Punset, Eduard, 1936- III. Title. 
Ql41.M5 2007 
509.2'2-dcZZ 
Chelsea Green Publishing Company 
P.O. Bm428 
White River junction, VT 05001 
(802) 295-6300 
ww.chelseagrecn.com 
2007018552 

