Continuing Commentary
Perenin, M. T. & Vighetto, A. (1983) Optic ataxia: A specific disorder in
visuontotor coordination. In: Spatially oriented behavior, ed. A. Hein &
M. Jcunnerod. Springer-Verlag. 
[rFHP]
Pruvic, F. H. (1990) functional specialization in the lower and upper visual
fields in humans: Its ecological origins and neurophysiological
implications. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 13:519-59. 
[IQW]
(1991) A general theory concerning the prenatal origins of cerebral
lateralization in humans. Psychological Review 98:299-334. 
|rFHP]
VVhishaw, I. Q. & Pellis, S. M. (1990) The structure of skilled forelimb
reaching in the rat: A proximally driven movement with a single distal
rotatory component. Behavioral Brain Research 41:77-91. 
[IQW]
Commentary on Daniel C. Dennett and Marcel Kinsbourne (1992) Time and the observer: The where and when
of consciousness in the brain. BBS 15:183-247.
Abstract of the original article: We compare the way two models of consciousness treat subjective timing. According to the standard
"Cartesian Theater" model, there is a place in the brain where "it all comes together," and the discriminations in all modalities are
somehow put into registration and "presented" for subjective judgment. The timing of the events in this theater determines
subjective order. According to the alternative "Multiple Drafts" model, discriminations are distributed in both space and time in
the brain. These events do have temporal properties, but those properties do not determine subjective order because there is no
single, definitive "stream of consciousness," only a parallel stream of conflicting and continuously revised contents. Four puzzling
phenomena that resist explanation by the Cartesian model are analyzed: (1) a gradual apparent motion phenomenon involving
abrupt color change (Kolers & von Griinau 1976), (2) an illusion of an evenly spaced series of "hops" produced by two or more widely
spaced series of taps delivered to the skin (Geldard & Sherrick's "cutaneous rabbit" [1972]), (3) backwards referral in time, and (4)
subjective delay of consciousness of intention (both reported in this journal by Libet 1985a; 1987; 1989a). The unexamined
assumptions that have always made the Cartesian Theater so attractive are exposed and dismantled. The Multiple Drafts model
provides a better account of the puzzling phenomena, avoiding the scientific and metaphysical extravagances of the Cartesian
Theater. The temporal order of subjective events is a product of the brain's interpretational processes, not a direct reflection of
events making up those processes.
Descartes' fundamental mistake:
Introspective singularity
Joseph E. Bogen
Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90033
The thoughtful target article about consciousness by Dennett &
Kinsbourne (D&K) (1992) contains many different contentions.
This commentary is directed toward one of their specific argu-
ments, that there is no midline structure in the encephalon
where one could localize consciousness, hence consciousness
must be diffusely distributed.
My use of the term "encephalon" follows that of John Hugh-
lings Jackson (1874) who wrote:
The nervous system, I repeat, is double. . . . I use the word brain to
include the cerebral hemisphere and the subjacent motor and sen-
sory tract. [Whereas] I use the word encephalon to include all parts of
the nervous system within the skull.
I am in complete agreement with D&K's assertion that there
is no midline structure whose neural composition, connections,
and activation could be responsible for various perceptions,
ideas, feelings, and so on becoming momentarily conscious. But
it does not follow (even if it were to be true) that structures with
such composition and connections are nonexistent anywhere,
hence that the neural correlates of consciousness must be
diffusely distributed, as they assert. Their argument is erro-
neous because (1) it ignores some well-known facts, and (2) it
puts excessive emphasis on introspection. To show how they
have gone wrong, some introductory background is necessary.
As we will see, although they claim to criticize Descartes, they
have implicitly joined him in his most far-reaching error.
One of the most obvious facts about the cerebrum is that, in
almost all respects, its parts exist in duplicate. For every struc-
ture within each hemisphere, its near twin exists in the other.
This fundamental fact was well known to Descartes. Why then
did he look for an unpaired midline structure? And why the
pineal? To the first question he gave a single, psychological
answer. To the second, he gave three reasons, anatomico-
physiological.
Descartes looked for a single midline structure because of his
introspectively based conviction that consciousness is single.
He wrote, "cogito ergo sum," both verbs in the singular. In
addition, since almost all parts of the brain are double, "inas-
much as we have only one solitary and simple thought of one
single thing during the same moment, it must necessarily be
that there is some place where [the two come together]" (Clarke
& O'Malley 1968, p. 471).
In other words, Descartes gave his psychology greater weight
than he gave the anatomical fact of duality. His decision was
complemented by three other observations, all concerning the
pineal gland. First, the pineal is (as he said) "in the middle" and
"the most internal." Second, its destruction (he believed) re-
sulted in death. And third, it is ideally situated to control (he
thought) the flow of ventricular fluids (Clarke & O'Malley 1968;
McHenry 1969).
Descartes' proposal has been discredited for a variety of
reasons including his metaphysical dualism (see, for example,
Ryle 1949), but his dualism is irrelevant. A dualist could say that
the soul is manifest throughout the encephalon, or one could
say, as Fritsch and Hitzig (1870) said of their discovery of the
motor cortex, "such facts show that the origin of at least some
function of the soul is bound up with circumscribed parts of the
brain" (Von Bonin 1960, p. 78).
We should understand that the metaphysical argument (dual-
ism versus materialism) is orthogonal to the localization argu-
ment (special locales versus wide distribution). Descartes, tak-
ing a solidly dualistic position, was a bit less committed to a
special locale than is often thought; he wrote, "although the soul
is joined to the whole body, there is, however, a certain part in
which it exercises its functions more particularly than in all the
others" (Clarke & O'Malley 1968, p. 471). Similarly, one could
take a solidly materialistic position and believe that all thalamo-
cortical interaction is potentially conscious but that there is a
special locale where this potential is particularly realized.
For those who follow Descartes (and D&K) by insisting on the
supremacy of the usual introspection (consciousness is single),
the pineal is now thought to be a ludicrous candidate. Contrary
to the information then available to Descartes, pineal destruc-
tion need not result in death. Above all, our current view holds
that it is the flow of information between neurons, not ventricu-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1994) 17:1
175

Continuing Conunentary
lar fluid flow, that subserves the processes we call, in the
aggregate, mentation.
It is easy for us to ridicule Descartes now, but we should
remember Berry Campbell's criterion: the greatness of a man's
contribution can be measured by how long he has held up
progress. Half a millennium is surely world class! It is the
subsequent accumulation of empirical facts, not better philoso-
phy, that has rendered the pineal a poor choice for those who are
still looking for one or more special locales.
D&K recognize the nondependence of Cartesian localization
on metaphysical dualism. They mainly criticize what they call
"Cartesian materialism" for the assumption that there is a place
(in their words) "where it all comes together." And they insist
that the assumption of such a single place continues to pervade,
as a "bad habit," most people's thinking about consciousness.
Indeed it does! And it does so for D&K too! Their error is to
suppose a single consciousness, and in that, they follow Des-
cartes. And for D&K, there is a single place: "The brain itself is
Headquarters" (p. 185). They state, "As a matter of empirical
fact, nothing in the functional neuroanatomy of the brain sug-
gests such a [central] general meeting place" (p. 185). They
should have said "of the encephalon' rather than "brain" of
which (per Jackson) there are two. Their sentence seems rele-
vant only because they refuse to follow Hughlings Jackson, and
they do so because they insist that their introspective percep-
tion of the oneness of consciousness should have greater weight
than not only the fact of anatomical duality but the hemispherec-
tomy and callosotomy evidence for physiologic duality.
The fundamental mistake of Descartes was to assume singu-
larity, based on his own introspection. And a fundamental error
made by D&K is to follow him in this respect. Whatever the
neural substrate of consciousness, localized or distributed, we
must infer that it is double from evidence both anatomic and
physiologic. First, the anatomy exists almost entirely in dupli-
cate. Second, if either hemisphere is removed, the remaining
unpaired hemispheric structures can sustain consciousness.
This is a frequently observed fact, as contrasted with Kins-
bourne's fantasy that "there is no reason in principle why several
or many aware neural systems might not result [from repeated
subdivisions of the brain]" (Kinsbourne 1988, p. 252). Any
psycho-neuro-philosopher who, in these days, does not whole-
heartedly recognize and utilize these two facts (one of them
unknown to Descartes) is in the same epistemological ark as
theorizers on evolution who do not wholeheartedly accept the
multibillion-yearage of the Earth. In each hemisphere there are
a number of candidates (structures with widespread connec-
tions) for consideration as a "general meeting place" for those
who wish to localize. For those who do not wish to localize, there
is no evidence that a piece of a hemisphere can be conscious.
The behaviors of callosotomized cats, monkeys, and humans
are most reasonably interpretable on the view that conscious-
ness can proceed simultaneously and differently in each hemi-
sphere. As for the intact human, we can reasonably expect that
there will be occasions when the anatomic potential for duality
becomes a physiologic actuality, for shorter or longer times
(Bogen 1990). To believe otherwise is to make what I call the
"Assumption of Perpetually Obligate Synchrony." Suppose we
agree to this assumption. Suppose we accept, for purposes of
argument (in the nonsplit case), that a combination of callosal
and various subcallosal mechanisms keeps in essentially com-
plete synchrony the neural activities of the two hemispheric
systems for consciousness. Doing so does not allow one to
ridicule localizationist materialism on the basis that there is no
midline meeting place. Once the duality of consciousness is
recognized, a neo-Cartesian view has no need for such a single
encephalic meeting place, indeed it explicitly denies it. That
D&K use this argument shows how embedded within their own
approach is the idea of what Kinsbourne has acclaimed as "the
intact individual's unified awareness" (Kinsbourne 1988). This
grand delusion (common to us all) permeates their own position
no less than that of those they criticize, or of Descartes himself.
Until D&K (and others) give up their belief in conscious singu-
larity they will only be arguing about the structure of their own
preconceptions, rather than about the physico-chemical activ-
ities subserving consciousness.
A model devoid of consciousness
Bredo C. Johnsen
Department of Philosophy, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204-3785
Dennett & Kinsbourne (D&K) (1992) deny the charge that they
banish consciousness from the mind, but there is a stunning
feature of their work that makes the charge correct, and may
well explain their failure to grasp it: D&K's entire "conception"
of consciousness is that it is not phenomenal; that is, they have
no conception of it. So on their own terms, the so-called
Multiple Drafts model of consciousness (MD) can be no such
thing, since there is nothing for it to model.
This is easily missed, because D&K often talk in terms of the
very stream of consciousness whose existence they officially
reject in favor of "a parallel stream of conflicting and continu-
ously revised contents" (p. 185). They say, for example, that
experimental probes may disrupt the normal progression of the
stream of consciousness (p. 185). Even their summary remarks
are framed in terms of it: "The representation of sequence in the
stream of consciousness [my emphasis] is a product of the brain's
interpretive processes, not a direct reflection of the sequence of
events making up those processes" (p. 200). Indeed, one of their
basic strategies presupposes its existence: they accept the chal-
lenge of making sense both of "a primary phenomenological
aspect of our human existence" (Libet 1985, quoted in D&K, p.
187) and of anomalies that appear when one attempts to put the
subjective sequences into registration with objective ones. This
strategy presupposes not only the existence of a subjective
sequence, but reliable, independent access of its contents: "It is
only when we try to put the sequence of events . . . in the
objective . . . stream into registration with the . . . subjective
sequence as indicated by what the subject subsequently says
that we have any sign of anomaly at all" (p. 190).
Let me now show that D&K have no conception of conscious-
ness. Various things they say bear directly on the question,
Which events are conscious? (1) "The stream of conscious-
ness . . . is a parallel stream of conflicting and continuously
revised contents, no one . . . thread of which . . . [is] the true
version" (p. 185); that is, the question has no answer. (Note that
the notion of "a" parallel stream may be incoherent. Parallel to
what? Do they mean parallel streams of consciousness? With or
without conflict, this notion would be baffling, at best.) (2) This is
later escalated: "[On the MD model] these questions [whether
particular events were conscious] cannot meaningfully arise"
(pp. 194-95). Indeed, (3) the Cartesian Theater model (CT) is
faulted for the fact that according to CT it is a determinate
question whether a given event is conscious. And finally, (4),
"the fundamental implication of the Multiple Drafts model [is
that] if one wants to settle on some moment of processing in the
brain as the moment of consciousness, this has to be arbitrary"
(p. 194). This, like (3), is a matter of principle, not a trivial point
about fuzzy boundaries and, given the implicit assumption that
the conscious/unconscious distinction is to be drawn in terms of
brain processes, it amounts to denying that the concept has any
theoretical significance whatever.
In sum, our question has no significance, has no answer, is not
even determinate, and cannot meaningfully arise. But then the
question Which events does MD model? cannot meaningfully
arise either; MD cannot be a model of consciousness. In addi-
tion, there can be no anomalous relations between the stream of
consciousness and any "other" sequence of events. (Incidentally,
D&K beg the question against Goodman's [1978] account of the
176
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1994) 17:1

Continuing Commentary
color phi phenomenon when they reject it on the grounds that
there seems to be no point in the brain's "filling in the gap"; they
readily accept arguments by Shepard [1992] and Roskies &
Wood [1992] that the brain does fill in some gaps, without
providing any idea of what the point might be of its doing so.)
Actually, D&K provide one hint at how they may conceive of
conscious events: "Some . . . effects [of contentful states in the
brain] - for instance, influences on subsequent verbal reports -
are at least symptomatic of consciousness' (p. 184). But (1) this
obscure remark points, if anywhere, toward the classic stream of
consciousness and (2), to the extent that it suggests taking either
judgmental status or influence on subsequent judgments as the
mark of consciousness, it is a hindrance, not a help, since D&K
regard neither of these as sufficient for consciousness. They
attribute judgmenthood to many unconscious brain states (p.
184), and thus are inconsistent in saying of the color phi case that
the brain's judging that motion had occurred "would suffice [my
emphasis] for it to seem to the subject that . . . motion had
been experienced" (p. 194); and they are willing to say even of
verbally reported judgments only that they are normally suffi-
cient for consciousness (p. 194). (Admitting that they were
sufficient would of course bring D&K close to recognizing a
single stream of consciousness.)
Finally, notice how D&K's vacillation bears on a second, more
provocative, version of their summary remarks: "At [the time-
scale used in the experiments] the standard presumption [that
our experiences of events occur in the very same order as we
experience them to occur] breaks down" (p. 200). Clearly, this
sentence makes sense only if read as saying both that there is an
"order in which we experience events to occur," that is, a single
subjective sequence, and that it differs from the order in which
we experience the events; even more strikingly, to establish its
truth would require access to the content of both sequences.
D&K's provocative formulation of the "standard presump-
tion" is radically misleading. The presumption D&K have actu-
ally discredited is that the order in which we experience events
to occur is the same as the order in which our brains discriminate
them. But in doing so (1) they have relied on the classical
conception of consciousness, (2) they have left phenomenal
consciousness unscathed, and (3) they have constructed a model
of the brain's processing of perceptual information, not a model
of consciousness.
Had I space,! would trace the pernicious effects of D&K's
unstated assumption that there is a unified stream of conscious-
ness if and only if there is a place in the brain "where it all comes
together perceptually" and I would show the strength of the
view that would result from integrating MD as a model of brain
activity with the recognition of phenomenal consciousness.
The "Multiple Drafts" model and the
ontology of consciousness
Antti Revonsuo
Department of Philosophy, University of Turku, Turku SF-20500, Finland
Electronic mail: revonsuo@sara.utu.fi
We do not yet have any basic, universally accepted account of
what consciousness actually is. The current theories or models
have no common core because they stem from diverse philo-
sophical foundations. However, only a consensus concerning
the fundamental character of consciousness can guide future
empirical research, and the nature of consciousness should be
made as clear for cognitive science and psychology as the nature
of life has been made for biology. Thus, we need a clear answer
to the most profound question: What, basically, are conscious
phenomena? This is the question, as philosophers say, about the
"ontological status" of consciousness.
The target article by Dennett & Kinsbourne (D&K) (1992),
did not quite succeed in being clear about the ontology; in the
commentaries D&K were accused of, for example, totally re-
jecting the reality of consciousness. In their response, D&K
attempted to clarify their position, which they consider un-
problematically "realist" and materialist: "Conscious experi-
ences are real events occurring in the real time and space of the
brain. " But, D&K hurry to remind us, "Certain sorts of ques-
tions . . . have no answers because these questions presuppose
inappropriate - unmotivatable - temporal and spatial bound-
aries that are more fine-grained than the phenomena admit."
They say that the creation of conscious experience is a contin-
uous process, in which "microtakings" interact. A microtaking
"cannot just be inscribed in the brain in isolation; "it has to have
its consequences," for example, for "guiding action. ' Conscious
experience is "a succession of states constituted by various
processes occurring in the brain and not something over and
above these processes that is caused by them," and "becoming a
conscious experience does not clearly endow an event with
potencies it previously lacked." They say that "a contentful
event becomes conscious if and when it becomes part of a
temporarily dominant activity in cerebral cortex." However,
there are no principled answers to any detailed questions about
this process. They write: "There is no crisp way of telling exactly
which parts of the multiple parallel streams are conscious. Any
one of the streams sometimes contributes to awareness and
sometimes not. No one stream is necessarily conscious by its
very nature. . . . And that is our theory of consciousness."
These clarifications, I fear, are not very clarifying: we would
still like to ask, But what, exactly, is consciousness, according to
the theory? I propose that if we look at Dennett's philosophy of
mind, we can arrive at an illuminating way to interpret the
ontology of consciousness in the Multiple Drafts model. If this is
the correct interpretation, however, I am afraid that the worries
about the ontological status of consciousness were well
warranted.
Dennett (1987; see also 1988) divides psychology into two
radically different explanatory realms: subpersonal cognitive
psychology and intentional system theory. The latter is "a sort of
holistic logical behaviorism" and it "deals with the prediction
and explanation from belief-desire profiles of the actions of
whole systems" and "the subject of all the intentional attribu-
tions is the whole system rather than any of its parts" (Dennett
1987, p. 58). The concepts of subpersonal cognitive psychol-
ogy differ strictly from those of intentional system theory.
Whereas the latter name observer-relative "calculation bound
entities or logical constructs," the former concepts refer to
"posited theoretical entities." That is, the subpersonal theory
describes the real happenings of the brain in a functionalistic
language. The ultimate goal for the subpersonal theory is to
decompose the cognitive functions of the organism into more
and more simple subsystems, the operations of which can finally
be constructed at the implementational level (neurophysiology).
This box-model of cognition, or positing of many "stupid"
homunculi to explain the behavior of the whole, must be
conducted so that the homunculi do not duplicate the system-
level properties they are supposed to explain (Dennett 1978).
The natural question to ask now is, Where, in this scheme,
does consciousness belong? Although Dennett does not explic-
itly answer this question, the solution seems to be rather
obvious. Dennett (1978, pp. 150-54) says that the subject of
the access of personal consciousness is "the person and not any of
the person's parts" and that a subpersonal model "evades" the
question of personal consciousness. Thus, it seems clear that, for
Dennett, consciousness belongs to intentional system theory
and, consequently, shares the ontology of the other entities of
that theory. What, precisely, is that ontology? Let us compare
the best known concept of that theory, belief, with the Multiple
Drafts concept of consciousness. Dennett says that "all there is
to being a true believer is being a system whose behavior is
reliably predictable via the intentional strategy" (Dennett 1987,
p. 29). "There is no magic moment in the transition from a simple
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1994) 17:1
177

Continuing 
Commentary
thermostat to a system that really has an internal representation
of the world around it" (Dennett 1987, p. 32). And because there
is no unique "right" intentional interpretation of a system, it
follows that "no further fact could settle what the intentional
system in question really believed" (Dennett 1987, p. 40;
emphasis in original). "There could be two different systems of
belief attribution to an individual which differed substantially in
what they attributed . . . and yet where no deeper fact of the
matter could establish that one was a description of the individ-
ual's real beliefs and the other not . . . The choice of a pattern
would indeed be up to the observer, a matter to be decided on
idiosyncratic pragmatic grounds" (Dennett 1991a, p. 49; em-
phasis in original). Consequently, Dennett thinks that it is a
"mistaken conviction that our own beliefs and other mental
states must have determinate content" (Dennett 1987, p. 42).
The Multiple Drafts model, in turn, includes at least the
following claims: (1) It is impossible to classify brain events into
conscious and nonconscious. At the level of internal brain
processes, this distinction is arbitrary or meaningless. (2) Our
contents of consciousness are never determinate; there is no
single stream of consciousness. (3) Although there seems to be
phenomenology, there really is not (Dennett 1991b, p. 366).
The resemblance begins to come clear: like beliefs, conscious-
ness cannot be defined at the level of neurophysiology. Like
contents of beliefs, contents of consciousness are not determi-
nate. Just as there is no "right" or "true" interpretation of what
an intentional system really believes, there is "no single narra-
tive that is canonical" or no "actual stream of consciousness of the
subject." As there really are no beliefs, independent of ob-
servers and interpretations, there really is no phenomenology
"presented for the subject." So, is consciousness, like belief, an
observer-relative, "calculation-bound entity" or "logical con-
struct"? This certainly would make sense of D&K's tortuous
clarifications of the nature of consciousness. Why do "microtak-
ings" have to have their effects on "guiding action" before they
can reach the status of consciousness? Why is there "no crisp
way of telling exactly which parts of the multiple parallel streams
are conscious"? Is it because the "fact" is observer-relative, and,
as for beliefs, there is "no fact of the matter" because it is a matter
of interpreting "objective patterns" of behavior, not of discover-
ing some natural phenomenon?
In conclusion, D&K's realism about consciousness seems to
be of the same variety as is Dennett's (1991a) "mild realism"
(i.e., instrumentalism?) about beliefs; in fact, D&K refer to
exactly that article "for an extended version of this version of
realism." Perhaps the content of this version of realism explains
why D&K use quotation marks when talking about "realism." As
there are no real beliefs inside our minds independent of what
stance anybody adopts, so there are no conscious, contentful
traces independent of fixing the content from the outside. As
there is no "intrinsic intentionality" (Dennett 1990), so there are
no intrinsically conscious states. If my interpretation of the
ontological status of consciousness in the Multiple Drafts model
is appropriate, we ought indeed to be worried about the theory.
If the ontological foundation of consciousness research is an
observer-relative and calculation-bound entity, it renders a
natural science of the basis of consciousness a futile effort, a
disastrous category error. The "logical constructs" of intentional
system theory are not out there in nature to be discovered by us
in the same sense as, for example, DNA molecules - the basis of
life - were there even when we did not know the ontology of life.
I believe, however, that cognitive neuroscientists pursue a
natural science of consciousness and, therefore, the Multiple
Drafts ontology will not be able to serve them.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author is also affiliated with the Academy of Finland.
Authors' Response
Counting consciousnesses: None, one, two,
or none of the above?
Daniel C. Dennett and Marcel Kinsbourne
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155
Electronic mail: ddennett@peari.tufts.edu
In a minute there is time
For decisions and revisions which a min-
ute will reverse.
T. S. Eliot, "The Love Song of J. Alfred
Prufrock"
In a second there is also time enough, we might add. In
his dichotomizing fervor, Bogen fails to realize that our
argument is neutral with respect to the number of con-
sciousnesses that inhabit the normal or the split-brain
skull. Should there be two, for instance, we would point
out that within the neural network that subserves each, no
privileged locus should be postulated. (Midline location is
not the issue - it was only a minor issue for Descartes, in
fact.)
As one of us (Kinsbourne 1982) has pointed out, it
follows from the nonexistence of a privileged locus that
the limit on the number of consciousnesses that could
theoretically be housed in the brain (given suitable dis-
connections) is the minimal complexity of the neuronal
substrate that suffices for this kind of functioning. There
could be many, and certainly more than two. Not all these
consciousnesses may be to Bogen's liking. Given a lateral
(coronal) transection, the posterior sector may be pre-
cluded from controlling behavior, while the anterior one
be sorely lacking in information to guide spared action.
The separated left or right hemisphere, in contrast, is
more fully equipped with input and output possibilities,
depleted though they are.
Bogen claims that our argument "puts excessive em-
phasis on introspection." On the contrary, it goes further
to discredit introspection than Bogen himself can counte-
nance. What is the Multiple Drafts model if not a denial of
the singularity of consciousness? In our view, Bogen's
duality of consciousness is just as simplistic as Descartes'
singularity. Our references to (apparently) unified normal
awareness, to which Bogen takes such exception, are in
the service of the very position that pleases him: the
apparent unity is not a necessary reflection of any unity in
the neuronal substrate. So Bogen's arrow misses its mark;
or perhaps he was just using this occasion to ride his own,
unrelated hobbyhorse.
Johnsen's point concerns a confusion about the stream
(or streams) of consciousness. We speak of a "parallel
stream of conflicting and revised contents" and he asks:
parallel to what? Here is what we meant: the apparently
single and unified "stream" is in fact composed of many
different, largely independent, contemporaneously evolv-
ing content elements. These occasionally conflict with
each other, occasionally mutually support each other.
Coalitions of such elements take turns dominating their
alternatives until they all fade away. That temporary
178
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1994) 17:1

Continuing Coimnentary
ascendancy is our substitute for the more traditional idea
of an entrance into a privileged sphere or theater as the
"mark" of consciousness or awareness.
Some commentators have wanted to read our substitute
as a variation on, or version of, the traditional idea, and
because the crucial difference is hard to keep in focus, we
turn to an analogy that may help anchor the discussion -
but only if the points of comparison are carefully marked.
You go to the racetrack and watch three horses, Able,
Baker, and Charlie, gallop around the track. At pole 97
Able leads by a neck; at pole 98 Baker, at pole 99
Charlie, but then Able takes the lead again, and then
Baker and Charlie run ahead neck and neck for awhile,
and then, eventually all the horses slow down to a walk
and are led off to the stable. You recount all this to a
friend, who asks "Who won the race?" and you say,
"Well, since there was no finish line, there's no telling.
It wasn't a real race, you see, with a finish line. First one
horse led and then another, and eventually they all
stopped running." The event you witnessed was not a
real race, but it was a real event - not some mere
illusion or figment of your imagination. Just what kind
of an event to call it is perhaps not clear, but whatever it
was, it was as real as real can be.
Notice, first, that verificationism has nothing to do with
this case. You have simply pointed out to your friend that
since there was no finish line, there is no fact of the matter
about who "won the race" because there was no race. Your
friend has simply attempted to apply an inappropriate
concept to the phenomenon in question. That is just a
straightforward logical point. You certainly do not have to
be a verificationist to agree with it.
Notice that each horse's career can be precisely
tracked, including the spatio-temporal intervals during
which it led (if it ever did). The same must be true, surely,
for events occurring in the brain. At different times and
places different contentful processes may dominate ("be
in the lead"), but no such time or place is privileged (the
"finish line"). What counts in the analogy as being con-
scious? Simply running well - contributing to the "domi-
nant focus of neuronal activity" (Kinsbourne 1988) for
some (unspecified) period of time. No doubt the property
of being in the lead is a property which has precise
temporal boundaries in the case of the horses, and its
analogues in the brain may be presumed to be just as
determinable (e.g., some property of relative neuronal
dominance), but such domination does not confer some
extra property of awareness (so that moving into the lead
is becoming conscious, and ceding the lead is lapsing into
memory or unconsciousness). The succession of domi-
nance is what gives the stream of consciousness its seri-
ality (such as it is), but it is a feature within the stream of
consciousness, a sufficient but not necessary condition of
being a conscious content.
Johnscn claims that a sentence of ours makes sense
"only if read as saying both that there is an 'order in which
we experience events to occur,' that is, a single subjective
sequence, and that it differs from the order in which we
experience the events." This was not our intended read-
ing (if it even makes sense). We said what we meant: the
standard presumption breaks down — for quite mundane
reasons. Of course we can specify times before conscious-
ness of an item has begun and after which consciousness of
that item has ceased, but it is in the nature of the
phenomena that this timing principle does not apply at all
scales. Similarly, the standard presumption that political
events can be put into a unique time sequence breaks
down when we choose our events carefully. Which came
first: Clinton's victory or the closing of the polls? It is only
those who have a "finish line" model of consciousness who
cannot tolerate leaving such questions unasked and
unanswered.
Revonsuo summarizes our replies to earlier commenta-
tors and says they are not very clarifying. He correctly
analyzes Dennett's position in earlier work, and sees that
our joint view is consonant with it. As he says, subperso-
nal cognitive psychology "evades" consciousness, but this
only means: don't look for a consciousness module, any
more than you should look for an honesty module or a
shame module.
Revonsuo then asks some questions, to which we here
supply the answers:
"Is consciousness, like belief, an observer-relative
'calculation-bound entity' or 'logical construct'?" No, but
heterophenomenological 
objects 
are (see 
Dennett
1991b). (Feenomanism [Dennett 1978; 1991b] is a per-
fectly real phenomenon - a religion — but Feenoman is
not real.)
"Why do 'microtakings' have to have their effects on
'guiding action' before they can reach the status of con-
sciousness?" It is not that microtakings must first have
their effects on guiding actions and then acquire some
additional property of consciousness; their having these
effects is constitutive of their being conscious takings.
"Why is there 'no crisp way of telling exactly which
parts of the multiple parallel streams are conscious'?" Not,
as Revonsuo surmises, because of observer-relativity,
except in the minimal sense that it is the observers'
concept(s) of consciousness that break down (as noted
above) at this point.
Revonsuo perpetuates one large (but common, and
forgivable) misreading of Dennett's position on observer-
relativity and reality. Beliefs, according to Dennett, are
quite real even if no one ever attributes them to their
subject, and they are as discoverable-in-principle as
genes, to use Revonsuo's example. Notice, by the way,
that this comparison is particularly apt. According to
current thinking, there do not turn out to be any Men-
delian genes - Mendel did not quite carve nature at the
joints. So we face a terminological choicepoint: do we say
there never were any genes or that genes turn out to be
rather different from what their "discoverer" claimed they
were? In fact there has been some heated disagreement
among biologists, but the general trend certainly seems to
be to keep the term "gene" and abandon Mendel's defini-
tion. But in a free country (and science is a free country)
this lexical decision could go either way.
To those critics who claim that we have not so much
provided a model of consciousness as a denial of its very
existence, we can reply, in a similar spirit, that we take
consciousness to be rather different from what they think
it is, but those who hate to see consciousness robbed of
some of its "defining" properties can keep their "essences"
if they insist - we will simply have to declare then that
consciousness, so defined, does not exist. Something that
is rather like that consciousness - enough like it to be
called consciousness by the lexically lax! - does exist. That
is a realistic variety of realism.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1994) 17:1
179

Continuing Commentary
References
Bogen, J. E. (1990) Partial hemispheric independence with the
neocommissures intact. In: Brain circtiits and functions of the mind, ed.
C. Trevarthen. Cambridge University Press. [JEB]
Clarke, E. & O'Malley, C. D. (1968) The human brain and spinal cord.
University of California Press. [JEB]
Dennett, D. C. (1978) Brainstorms: Philosophical essays on mind and
psychology. MIT Press/Bradford Books. 
|rDCD, AR]
(1987) The intentional stance. MIT Press/Bradford Books. [AR]
(1988) Precis of The intentional stance. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
11:495-546. [AR]
(1990) The myth of original intentionality. In: Modelling the mind, ed. K. A.
Mohyeldin Said, W. H. Newton-Smith, R. Viale & K. V. Wilkes.
Clarendon Press. (AR]
(1991a) Real patterns. Journal of Philosophy 88:27-51. [AR]
(1991b) Consciousness explained. Little, Brown. 
[rDCD, AR]
Dennett, D. C. & Kinsbourne, M. (1992) Time and the observer: The where
and when of consciousness in the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
15:183-247. 
[JEB, BCJ, AR]
Fritsch, G. & Hitzig, E. (1870) On the electrical excitability of the cerebrum.
Translated in Von Bonin, G. (1960). 
tJEB]
Goodman, N. (1978) Ways of worldmaking. Harvester. [BCJ]
Jackson, J. H. (1874) On the nature of the duality of the brain. Medical Press
and Circulars. 1:19, 41, 63. Reprinted in: Selected writings of John
Hughlings Jackson, vol. 2, ed. J. Taylor (1932). Hodder &
Stoughton. [JEB]
Kinsbourne, M. (1982) Hemispheric specialization and the growth of human
understanding. American Psychologist 37:411-20. 
[rDCD]
(1988) Integrated field theory of consciousness. In: Consciousness in
contemporary science, ed. A. J. Marcel & E. Bisiach. Oxford University
Press. 
[rDCD, JEB]
Libet, B. (1985) Unconscious cerebral initiative and the role of unconscious
will in voluntary action. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 8:529-66. [BCJ]
McHenry, L. C. (1969) Garrison's history of neurology. C. C.
Thomas. [JEB]
Roskies, A. L. & Wood, C. C. (1992) Cinema 1-2-Many of the Mind.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 15:221-23. [BCJ]
Ryle, G. (1949) The concept of mind. Barnes & Noble. [JEB]
Shepard, R. N. (1992) Mental representation: Always delayed but not always
ephemeral. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 5:223-24. [BCJ]
Von Bonin, G., trans. (1960) The cerebral cortex, ch. 4. C. C.
Thomas. [JEB]
Commentary on Steven Pinker and Paul Bloom (1990) Natural language and natural selection. BBS 13:707-784.
Abstract of the original article: Many people have argued that the evolution of the human language faculty cannot be explained by
Darwinian natural selection. Chomsky and Gould have suggested that language may have evolved as the by-product of selection for
other abilities or as a consequence of as yet unknown laws of growth and form. Others have argued that a biological specialization for
grammar is incompatible with every tenet of Darwinian theory - that it shows no genetic variation, could not exist in any
intermediate forms, confers no selective advantage, and would require more evolutionary time and genomic space than is available.
We examine these arguments and show that they depend on inaccurate assumptions about biology or language or both.
Evolutionary theory offers clear criteria for when a trait should be attributed to natural selection: complex design for some function,
and the absence of alternative processes capable of explaining such complexity. Human language meets these criteria: grammar is a
complex mechanism tailored to the transmission of propositional structures through a serial interface. Autonomous and arbitrary
grammatical phenomena have been offered as counterexamples to the position that language is an adaptation, but this reasoning is
unsound: communication protocols depend on arbitrary conventions that are adaptive as long as they are shared. Consequently,
language acquisition in the child should systematically differ from language evolution in the species, and attempts to analogize
them are misleading. Reviewing other arguments and data, we conclude that there is every reason to believe that a specialization
for grammar evolved by a conventional neo-Darwinian process.
The functionality of the study of language
origin
Antoni Gomila
Philosophy Department, University of the Balearic Islands, 07071 Raima de
Mallorca, Spain
Electronic mall: dfldpt@ps.uib.es
Although I am sympathetic to the position of Pinker & Bloom
(1990) (P&B), I would like to point out two ways in which their
case could be strengthened. After clarifying what I take to be the
key question in the discussion, I try to show, against P&B's
claims, the importance of an evolutionary reconstruction of
language evolution. I further argue that taking this reconstruc-
tion seriously can turn out to be relevant to the question of the
nature of the language faculty. In other words, my contention is
that the relationship between language acquisition and language
evolution is not just unidirectional, with knowledge about lan-
guage acquisition helping determine how language evolution
took place, but it is bidirectional: evolutionary considerations
can also set constraints on the nature of the language acquisition
device (LAD).
1. The way out of the antinomy. P&B insist that the evolution of
the language faculty must be understood the way the evolution
of the eye is, and we must conceive of language as we conceive of
stereopsis; however, there are reasons to think that an important
asymmetry separates the two. Whereas the optical stimulation
required for the visual system to begin to work properly is
nonspecific (Hubel & Wiesel 1962), this is not the case with
respect to the acoustic stimuli necessary to develop a language -
not just any kind of sound will do. Another more radical
difference between the two capacities is that whereas the exis-
tence of optical energy is independent of the existence of a visual
organ, in the case of language the linguistic stimulation neces-
sary for the development of linguistic behavior presupposes the
existence of the same faculty for language (in someone else, of
course).
What these differences suggest, in my view, is that it is
misleading to think of language as merely a biological compe-
tence; it must be seen as a cognitive one. The particular
difficulties of accounting for the origin of language can then be
better understood. The requirement that linguistic stimuli be
available for language ontogeny raises the problem of how such
linguistic data became available in the first place (in phylogeny).
The problem can be formulated in the following antinomy
(which generalizes over Sperber's [1990] "paradox"):
An evolutionary account of the origin of language must take as
its starting point a situation in which language is absent and,
accordingly, one in which no specialized mechanism for lan-
guage acquisition has yet appeared. If such a mechanism is
180
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1994) 17:1

