 
 
Journal of Philosophy, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Journal of Philosophy.
http://www.jstor.org
Journal of Philosophy, Inc.
Review 
Author(s): Daniel C. Dennett 
Review by: Daniel C. Dennett 
Source: 
 
 
The Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 85, No. 7 (Jul., 1988), pp. 384-389
Published by: 
 
Journal of Philosophy, Inc.
Stable URL: 
 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2026956
Accessed: 29-02-2016 14:35 UTC
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
 
info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
This content downloaded from 202.28.191.34 on Mon, 29 Feb 2016 14:35:45 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

 384 THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY
 Psychosemantics. JERRY FODOR. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987.
 173 p. $19.95.
 In Word and Object, W. V. 0. Quine' acknowledged the "practical
 indispensability" in daily life of the intentional idioms of belief and
 desire, but disparaged such talk as an "essentially dramatic idiom"
 rather than something from which real science could be made in any
 straightforward way (ibid., p. 219). Many who agree on little else
 have agreed with Quine about this, and have gone on to suggest one
 or another indirect way for science to accommodate folk psychology:
 Wilfrid Sellars, Donald Davidson, Hilary Putnam, Richard Rorty,
 Stephen Stich, Patricia Smith Churchland, Paul Churchland, Ste-
 phen Schiffer, and myself, to name a few. This fainthearted con-
 sensus is all wrong, according to Fodor, whose new book is a vigor-
 ous-even frantic-defense of what he calls Intentional Realism:
 beliefs and desires are real, causally involved, determinately con-
 tentful states. "We have no reason to doubt," Fodor says, "that it is
 possible to have a scientific psychology that vindicates commonsense
 belief/desire explanation" (16).
 The first of the four chapters motivates the intricate set of argu-
 ments to follow with a spirited paean to the powers of commonsense
 psychology, but it adds up to less than its rhetoric leads one to
 expect. The opposition, after all, has not been unimpressed with
 what Quine called the practical indispensability of the intentional
 idiom; I, for one, have tirelessly sung the praises of what can be done
 from the intentional stance, and even Paul Churchland,2 the most
 radical of the critics, has acknowledged, and even offered a meta-
 physical analysis of, the systematic predictive power of propositional
 attitude attributions. What we doubters have not yet seen is the
 argument from the practical indispensability of propositional atti-
 tude talk to Fodor's hard-core realism, which this chapter should
 presumably provide. It stops short, however, with a tactical proposal:
 "we can't give them up because we don't know how to. So maybe we
 had better try to hold on to them" (10; see also the concession in
 footnote 2, p. 155). What then follows is a reasoned catalogue of
 what the hard-core realist is committed to: in the main, the Repre-
 sentational Theory of Mind, which claims there are "entities which
 like the attitudes-are both semantically evaluable and etiologi-
 cally involved" (26). Something has slipped, however. In which camp
 'Cambridge: MIT, 1960.
 2 Scientific Realism and the Plasticity of Mind (New York: Cambridge, 1979),
 pp. 101-107.
 0022-362X/88/8507/0384$00.50 ? 1988 The Journal of Philosophy, Inc.
This content downloaded from 202.28.191.34 on Mon, 29 Feb 2016 14:35:45 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

 BOOK REVIEWS 385
 would Fodor place someone who was a realist about entities which
 met these two conditions but were not enough like the propositional
 attitudes to constitute a (realist) vindication of commonsense psy-
 chology?
 Never mind. Fodor's tactical proposal is well worth adopting in the
 spirit of scientific opportunism: try for the boldest, simplest, most
 satisfying theory first, and see where it leads you. Recent history
 offers a nice example on Fodor's side: the proposal that we should be
 straightforward realists about Mendelian genes and treat them as
 tokens of expressions in the language of inheritance, straightfor-
 wardly realized in hunks of DNA, has been a vastly informative over-
 simplification. If, now that we understand the underlying mecha-
 nisms better, we see that there are theoretically important mis-
 matches between the language of "bean-bag genetics" and the
 molecular and developmental details-mismatches serious enough
 to suggest that, all things considered, there do not turn out to be
 genes (classically understood) after all-this is an understanding
 which would have been well-nigh inaccessible without the ladder of
 realist oversimplification. So we can proceed with the exploration of
 the implications of intentional realism, secure in the recognition that
 we can always back off to a position of instrumentalism (like the
 current instrumentalism about classical genetics) when we have
 learned more.
 The second chapter deals with the oft-explored problems posed by
 the Twin Earth thought experiments of Tyler Burge, Putnam, and
 others. If psychology is going to be science, it had better not posit
 mysterious action-at-a-distance, so a principle of the "superve-
 nience" of the psychological on the physiological must be honored:
 the brains of organisms differ whenever their minds differ (30). At
 the same time, if psychology is going to deal with real, determinate
 content, it must honor the principle that "extension constrains con-
 tent." The only way to meet both conditions at once is to distinguish
 notions of narrow and broad content. Narrow content is superven-
 ient on the organism's internal, causal states, and broad content is
 then held to be a function of narrow content relativized to environ-
 mental context. Plunking an organism into different contexts while
 holding its brain constant cannot change its narrow content, but can
 in principle alter the broad content of its psychological states. This is
 a proposal that has often been made before, for the same reasons
 (see, for instance, my defense of "notional attitude psychology"),3
 3"Beyond Belief," in Andrew Woodfield, ed., Thought and Object: Essays on
 Intentionality (New York: Oxford, 1982), pp. 1-95.
This content downloaded from 202.28.191.34 on Mon, 29 Feb 2016 14:35:45 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

 386 THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY
 but Fodor adds novel intricacies in its defense to counter the increas-
 ingly intricate objections that have been spawned in subsequent
 years. (If Fodor wants to fight this fight, I will happily hold his coat,
 suppressing, on this occasion, the doubts I have about some of his
 background assumptions.)
 It is in chapter three that Fodor begins to distinguish himself
 sharply from those he takes to be the enemies of scientific psychol-
 ogy. When everything is held to merge with everything else, when
 there are no clean joints at which to carve nature, science tends to
 wind down to a lazy halt: holism as the heat death of science. (The
 theory of "blending inheritance" which stymied Darwin might be
 cited as a telling example.) So Fodor sets himself up as the guardian
 of good crisp boundaries, and hence the enemy of all relativism,
 pragmatism, and various other unspeakable but fashionable doc-
 trines, banded together under the black flag of Meaning Holism.
 Science is nothing if not "naturalistic," however, and, when one tries
 to naturalize psychology, it begins to look more and more biological,
 and hence teleological, and hence functionalistic; its crisp traditional
 categories-in particular, propositional attitudes-begin to slide to-
 ward the murky relativity of functional interpretation, and beyond:
 to the indeterminacy of radical interpretation.
 Some version or other of meaning holism is the natural resting
 place of this slide, but it "really is a crazy doctrine," Fodor says (60).
 (This sort of statement should ring alarm bells in any author. What
 are the odds that all those worthy opponents out there are crazy
 enough to hold the crazy doctrine one is arguing against?) According
 to meaning holism, the content of any particular belief depends on
 what else you believe (now is that not the silliest thing you ever
 heard?). Fodor rebuts various arguments for meaning holism (un-
 persuasively, in my opinion, for reasons that would not fit in the
 space allotted me), but in the process he gives some hostages to the
 opposition.
 First, he distinguishes sharply between two brands of functiona-
 lism, and endorses only the weaker version:
 . all you need is the claim that being a belief is a matter of having the
 right connections to inputs, outputs and other mental states. What you
 don't need-and what the philosophical motivations for Psychofunc-
 tionalism therefore do not underwrite-is the much stronger claim that
 being the belief that p, being a belief that has a certain content is a
 matter of having the right connections to inputs, outputs, and other
 mental states (69).
 So Fodor ends up defending an eviscerated functionalism, and
 disagreeing with those of us, from Sellars to the present, who in one
This content downloaded from 202.28.191.34 on Mon, 29 Feb 2016 14:35:45 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

 BOOK REVIEWS 387
 way or another take "functional role semantics" to be the chief
 beauty of functionalism. For Fodor, content is not a function of
 function after all. Or, at any rate, it is not much of a function of
 function, for Fodor must yield another hostage: functional role "is a
 marginal-a not very important-determinant of meaning" (72). If
 content is not (primarily) a matter of functional role, what is it a
 matter of? Denotation. According to his alternative denotational
 semantics, "concepts are individuated by reference to the properties
 they express, thoughts by the states of affairs they correspond to, and
 so forth" (91). Independently of any functional role that a concept
 or mental representation might play within an interanimated set of
 its fellows, it can, as a matter of brute metaphysical fact, denote (or
 express) a property, thanks to its causal (but not functional) link to
 that property.
 The task then falls to him, in the last chapter, to make good on this
 by defining in nonsemantic, nonfunctional, nonteleological terms
 the conditions under which a mental representation expresses a
 property. In the end, after successive elaborations and improve-
 ments, we are offered the Slightly Less Crude Causal Theory of
 Content: a "sufficient condition for 'A's to express A is that it's
 nomologically necessary" that (1) "All instances of A's cause 'A's
 when (i) the A's are causally responsible for psychophysical traces to
 which (ii) the organism stands in a psychophysically optimal rela-
 tion"; and (2) "If non-A's cause 'A's, then their doing so is asymmet-
 rically dependent upon A's causing 'A's" (126).
 What with its mention of intact organisms and psychophysically
 optimal conditions, one can certainly doubt that this account suc-
 ceeds in avoiding appeal to teleological assumptions. Even if, by
 some marvel of circumlocution, it can be held to skirt those shoals,
 such exercises, like the desperate definitional evasions of the behav-
 iorists, do not so much defeat as pay homage to the contrary insight.
 Moreover, Fodor's account forces him to recant his analysis of the
 Twin Earth cases (if I have correctly traced out the requisite coun-
 terfactuals-Fodor gives the reader scant advice on this). Suppose
 some stray XYZ causes Fodor's Mentalese "water" symbol to light
 up; surely its doing this is not asymmetrically dependent on H20
 doing this; so 'water' for Fodor means H20-or-XYZ; Fodor and his
 Doppelganger are broad-content twins after all. So far as I can see,
 all the escape routes from this conclusion are blocked by conclusions
 even less palatable to Fodor.
 In any event, other pesky counterexamples suggest themselves,
 and Fodor himself acknowledges that his account still has some
 problems he does not yet know how to solve. In the meantime, he
 usefully draws attention to some of the implications he will invite us
This content downloaded from 202.28.191.34 on Mon, 29 Feb 2016 14:35:45 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

 388 THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY
 to swallow once he has sorted out those problems. Consider the
 young child who uses the word 'father', recognizes his father, etc.,
 but has so far given no sign of having the concepts MALE or PAR-
 ENT. Does he have the concept FATHER? The meaning holist is free
 to say that the child only gradually comes to approximate having the
 adult concept of FATHER, as he acquires more relevant beliefs,4
 but, for Fodor, the meaning atomist, there is a deep (and quite
 possibly unknowable) fact about what concept the child actually has.
 It may, unwittingly, already have the concept of FATHER, in spite of
 its disappointing responses to a variety of presumably telling tests:
 ''you can have the concept MALE PARENT without having access to
 its internal structure" (161). This independence of meaning from
 function on Fodor's view is even more striking in an objection he
 raises against himself: " 'On your view, entertaining (as it might be)
 the thought that three is a prime number could constitute an entire
 mental life?' This too is satisfactory as a reductio ad absurdum only
 on the assumption that its conclusion is false" (89). I do not think
 these implications show that meaning atomism is crazy, but as Fodor
 says, in a similar connection, "chaque 'a son rocker" (sic, p. 124).
 In an appendix, "Why There Still Has to Be a Language of
 Thought," Fodor offers three arguments for why the internal, se-
 mantically evaluable, etiologically involved states of intentional real-
 ism-the beliefs and desires-have to be organized in a language-
 like system. He is right to have isolated these arguments in an ap-
 pendix, for they are independent of his main argument; if you have
 bought the rest of his case, they do indeed sharpen his account, but,
 if you have not, there are ways of recasting them all to conform to
 your unrepentant meaning holism or even instrumentalism.
 The convolutions of argument found in Psychosemantics make it a
 difficult book to review fairly in short compass. The argument strat-
 egy adopted by Fodor throughout the book is to emphasize small
 disagreements and generally force all fence sitters to jump one way
 or the other. Then, by a series of nested arguments designed to
 corral the obstreperous dogies, he can end up having fenced off the
 only defensible territory. There are several weaknesses in such a
 strategy. First, a single gap in the fence is all it takes to escape
 Fodor's roundup, and so the argument tends to degenerate into
 fence-busting, fence-mending squabbles about minutiae-very im-
 portant minutiae, Fodor would insist, but I find it hard to believe
 that this is the way to make progress. Moreover, this emphasis on
 amplifying disagreements can backfire in the end, when it is time for
 4 Cf. my Content and Consciousness (Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1969), p.
 183.
This content downloaded from 202.28.191.34 on Mon, 29 Feb 2016 14:35:45 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

 BOOK REVIEWS 389
 Fodor to make his ecumenical concessions, as he does, to verifica-
 tionism or procedural semantics, to behaviorism or associationism,
 and the other heresies of previous chapters. It turns out that the
 crazies were not so crazy after all. "Whenever I tell this story to
 Granny, she grins and rocks and says 'I told you so' " (118). "All
 right, Granny, have it your way . . . Only do stop rocking; you make
 me nervous" (122).
 Finally, Fodor is too wise to think his series of arguments can flat
 disprove the claims of the opposition, so time and again he resorts to
 claims about shifting the burden of proof, begging the question,
 outsmarting by embracing the conclusions of reductions, and other
 exploitations of the rules of the game. The book is a tireless exercise
 of that philosopher's pastime, burden-tennis. Burden, burden, who
 has the burden of proof now? Fodor mostly plays solitaire burden-
 tennis, against an imaginary opponent often personified as Granny
 or Aunty, which permits him to express the opposition view in terms
 that suit his rebuttal, without having to address the issue of whether
 this is a sympathetic rendering of any real opponent's claims.
 All this fancy footwork and shadowboxing leads Fodor into an
 increasingly tight place, which reminds Aunty, bless her heart, of the
 time Winnie-the-Pooh got himself similarly stuck when trying to
 leave Rabbit's house. Pooh's idea was to fast for a week, while Chris-
 topher Robin read him a book. Fodor, in his increasingly desperate
 effort to free himself from the house of Gavagai, has written himself
 a book, and while it may not be to everyone's taste, Aunty thinks
 Psychosemantics is just the sort of book Pooh had in mind: "a Sus-
 taining Book, such as would help and comfort a Wedged Bear in
 Great Tightness."5
 DANIEL C. DENNETI
 Tufts University
 'A. A. Milne, Winnie-the-Pooh (New York: Dutton, 1926), p. 30.
This content downloaded from 202.28.191.34 on Mon, 29 Feb 2016 14:35:45 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

