6
Postscript on the Baldwin Effect and Niche
Construction
Peter Godfrey-Smith, Daniel Dennett, and Terrence W. Deacon
Peter Godfrey-Smith
My essay credits Deacon’s The Symbolic Species with a new version of the
Baldwin effect that overcomes, at least in principle, accusations that the
“effect” is trivial. Dennett objects that he cannot see much difference be-
tween what Deacon said and Dennett’s own exposition in Consciousness
Explained. Here is the difference. In Dennett’s case, a learning individual
hits on a “Good Trick” and “raises the bar” for getting by successfully in
that population. “Over generations, the competition becomes stiffer: even-
tually, unless you are born with (or very nearly with) the Good Trick, you
are not close enough to compete” (as quoted by Dennett). But this is not a
“niche construction” phenomenon in the sense I associate with Deacon’s
proposal. The selection pressure in Dennett’s case was there all along, but
was “dormant” because of a lack of the right kind of variation in the popu-
lation. Suddenly the right kind of variation appears (thanks to the learning
individual) and selection is able to operate. In Deacon’s cases something
different is happening. Rather than a selection pressure being activated by
the appearance of new variation in the population, the social life of the pop-
ulation changes in a way that creates a selection pressure that did not exist
before. Note that in Dennett’s case, an innately speciﬁed version of the
Good Trick would do very well, if it happened to arise, at any stage in the
process. (The population could jump from stage 0, to stage 2 without any
particular role for stage 1.) In the Deacon case, it is only the change in the
social ecology (due to stage 1 behaviors) that makes an innately speciﬁed,
highly sophisticated version of the trait so advantageous. This version of

the Baldwin effect may well not be original with Deacon, but I do not think
the discussions cited by Dennett hit the same point.
Daniel Dennett
I can see that Deacon’s proposal draws attention to a particularly interest-
ing variety of Baldwin effect, but I still don’t see that it is anything more
than a special case (a particularly interesting one) of the phenomenon I took
myself to be describing. I doubt if it is wise to talk about selection pressures
that are present but “dormant” because the relevant phenotypes aren’t pres-
ent. If I understand Godfrey-Smith correctly, there are right now a kazillion
dormant selection pressures on H. sapiens. Suppose smoking banana peels
(remember the Mellow Yellow hoax?) provides protection against HIV.
There is, then, a dormant selection pressure in favor of a proclivity to smoke
banana peels even if nobody ever thinks to try it out. There are no doubt mi-
crobes in the depths of the ocean whose effects on human beings, were any
ever to encounter them, would be variable; so right now there is a dormant
selection pressure in favor of those human phenotypes that happen not to
be vulnerable to those microbes. And so forth. Perhaps this is unobjection-
able, since “dormant selection pressures” don’t take up any space or en-
ergy, but I wonder.
Godfrey-Smith says that in the Deacon scenario, “the social life of the
population changes in a way that creates a selection pressure that did not
exist before.” Really? Why shouldn’t we say that the selection pressure in
question existed, but was “dormant”? It just needed a double (or multiple)
triggering to be awakened. If the selection pressure for smoking banana
peels exists in dormant form (and is not created by the behavioral innova-
tion that makes it visible to selection), why shouldn’t we equally say that it
takes a series of (social) actions and reactions to wake up a Deacon selec-
tion pressure?
I join Godfrey-Smith in appreciating Deacon’s point that interaction be-
tween individuals creates (or awakens—this has not yet been shown to be
importantly different) a novel (or heretofore dormant) selection pressure.
But is something more being loaded into the term “social”? What is the im-
portance of social interactions, in contrast with other interactions?
108
Peter Godfrey-Smith, Daniel Dennett, Terrence W. Deacon

I take it that the Good Trick of picking up a stick and wielding it as a club
against game would be just a boring old Baldwin effect with no new selec-
tion pressures (they were always there, just dormant). But what if the game
starts turning on us and ﬁghting back when we go at it with clubs? Is this a
“social” interaction that can engender altogether new selection pressures?
If not, then is wielding a club against conspeciﬁcs who wield back a novel,
Deacon-style Baldwin effect? Or does the Deacon social interaction effect
come into play only when, for instance, females start playing sexual selec-
tion games that favor males who carry big clubs (mine is bigger than yours,
etc., etc.), an effect that arguably depends on there being a widespread new
practice (just one club-wielder will not provoke or sustain female interest in
club size)?
Good Tricks depend on the environments in which they can operate.
Some environments are simple and others involve much layering of context
to come into their own. Someone who would be an excellent bluffer in
poker needs to ﬁnd a poker game in which to display his superiority. At the
end of his postscript, Godfrey-Smith points to what he thinks is a residual
difference: “Note that in Dennett’s case, an innately speciﬁed version of the
Good Trick would do very well, if it happened to arise, at any stage in the
process. (The population could jump from stage zero to stage 2 without any
particular role for stage 1.) In the Deacon case, it is only the change in the
social ecology (due to stage 1 behaviors) that makes an innately speciﬁed,
highly sophisticated version of the trait so advantageous.” But what
Godfrey-Smith is pointing to is the existence of something like an arms race
with a series of innovations and counterinnovations in it, and this is not re-
stricted to social ecology. A club-wielding hunter with an innate propensity
to plan a path of retreat in case his prey countercharges (stage 2) will simi-
larly have no selective advantage in a world where the prey haven’t yet
learned to ﬁght back (stage 1).
Terrence Deacon Responds
In my opinion both Godfrey-Smith (GS) and Dennett (DD) appear to miss
the point, though they miss different points in each case and get things right
in others, so I wonder how much of this is a “semantic” issue.
Postscript on Niche Construction
109

I would not at all want to suggest that we start to consider something like
“dormant” selection pressures (though I have no problem with the ubiqui-
tous presence of a sea of near-neutral variations). I have a suspicion, how-
ever, that GS introduces this unfortunate suggestion to make a different
point than DD comments on, but which gets lost in this exchange. Den-
nett’s caricature of a behaviorally implemented arms race of Good Tricks
does not in my interpretation even quite qualify as an account that Baldwin
would recognize. Baldwin at least recognized that selection could act on
something like a norm of reaction for a trait. Although the concept was in-
troduced later, Baldwin pretty accurately sketches it in 1896. In later for-
mulations Baldwin seems also to be suggesting that something like a
“frequency dependence” effect of a behavior (also in advance of his time)
plays a role. Both of these are implicit in my Symbolic Species (SS) account,
and at least the latter, frequency dependence, is implied in the paper by GS.
This point is made by his persistent comparison of my argument to “niche
construction” and his efforts to distinguish the argument in SS from that
view, as well as from Baldwinian theory proper (even if I didn’t do a great
job of making either distinction).
I also want to accept DD’s “cross-this-line” challenge to me about what
I “might” mean by “social.” I do indeed want to load something more into
the term “social” than seems to be imagined here, certainly more than in his
account, and which I believe gives us something more interesting than
“cranes” even if quite a bit less interesting than “skyhooks.”
The virtual future is limitless. The great value of the Darwinian evolu-
tionary paradigm is the way it helps us understand how what once was
“noise” (e.g., unselected-uncorrelated variation) can become new “signal”
under changing circumstances. There is nothing revolutionary in my
thoughts about this. I consider myself to be a pretty well committed Dar-
winian. Talking about “latent” or “dormant” selection will likely get us
into the same kind of hot water that the term “preadaptation” gets us in, or
that psychologists and philosophers ﬁnd themselves in when talking about
unexpressed predispositions. And I don’t think “exaptation” is much bet-
ter. Luckily there is something a bit more concrete to consider when talking
about ranges of phenotypic variation, norms of reaction, canalization, and
the fact that genetic and phenotypic random walks are constrained in in-
teresting and relevant ways (note: most traits develop in the context of com-
110
Peter Godfrey-Smith, Daniel Dennett, Terrence W. Deacon

plex epigentic linkages, episases, and pleiotropies—all of which add more
than just plausibility to such otherwise hollow concepts as “coordinating
conditions,” “phylogenetic inertia,” or “adaptive potential.”
All I am interested in are the ways that the brain-language coevolution-
ary dynamic might accomplish this “recruitment of new signal” differently
than do simpler Darwinian mechanisms. One doesn’t even have to stray
from the so-called ultra-Darwinian fold to recognize that the formulation
of natural selection theory is pretty generic, and that there is plenty of room
for interesting tail-wagging-the-dog possibilities within its conﬁnes. The
original Organic Selection conjecture was not after all about undoing Dar-
winism, but reinforcing it, as is my modest effort. No “skyhooks” please,
and no Lamarckian loopholes. But there may be other kinds of hooks (not
just cranes) from other directions that do merit consideration of a different
kind. Hence my pleading guilty to Dennett’s latter probe about how I think
about the nature of at least certain “social” factors.
The social phenomenon in question—language—is not just a passively
constructed niche, like a beaver dam, not just a sexually selected runaway
effect like peacock feathers, but is a complex dynamic niche, with some-
thing like a “life of its own,” or at the very least a powerful self-organizing
dynamic that can’t be reduced to mere social dynamics, much less passive
caricatures of natural selection. Dennett should appreciate this more than
anyone else in the group, and I was surprised that GS seems to drive this
point while DD seems to dismiss it. The ability to symbolize things and re-
lationships in the world, and the factors that allow symbolic systems to self-
organize, are new elements that take evolution in unexpected directions.
This is not just because language is subject to a partially uncorrelated evo-
lutionary dynamic of its own, but also because of the way symbolic repre-
sentational processes can recruit new kinds of “noise” into the larger
symbol-gene system, which can provide both a whole new realm of varia-
tions and of reciprocal selection pressures. The transindividual and trans-
generational niche-like effects of cultural-linguistic evolution introduce a
complex system dynamic, which vastly complicates things. I refer to this as
coevolution in the subtitle of SS for just this reason. It’s not just Darwin or
even Baldwin, as I think GS has accurately noted.
My sympathy for reintegrating systems thinking into evolutionary
theory (though in my opinion to do so doesn’t replace or even weaken the
Postscript on Niche Construction
111

centrality of Darwinian processes) becomes a full-ﬂedged endorsement
once symbolic processes are brought into the mix. The extent of the feed-
forward circularity of the selection processes linking brain and linguistic
evolutionary/self-organizational processes requires us to take into account,
or at least (in our current state of theoretical simplicity) appreciate, the way
complex systems dynamics have been an inescapable factor in human evo-
lution. There is a new level of “chaos” and “bias/noise ampliﬁcation” that
we must contend with, and for which our current intuitional models are in-
adequate. This is niche construction, but of a self-organizing asynchro-
nously evolving all-encompassing niche. Who but the most unimaginative
hyperreductionist could imagine that it’s just “evolution as usual”?
112
Peter Godfrey-Smith, Daniel Dennett, Terrence W. Deacon

Evolution and Learning
The Baldwin Effect Reconsidered
edited by Bruce H. Weber and David J. Depew
A Bradford Book
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

2003 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any elec-
tronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information
storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher.
This book was set in Sabon by Achorn Graphic Services Inc. and was printed and
bound in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Evolution and learning : the Baldwin effect reconsidered / edited by Bruce H.
Weber and David J. Depew.
p.
cm. — (Life and mind)
Based on a conference held in Nov. 1999 at Bennington College.
“A Bradford book.”
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-262-23229-4 (hc. : alk. paper)
1. Genetic psychology. 2. Learning, Psychology of. 3. Baldwin, James Mark,
1861–1934. I. Weber, Bruce H. II. Depew, David J., 1942– . III. Series.
BF701 .E59
2003
155.7—dc21
2002031992

