Mind & Language 
Vol. I No. I Spring 1986 
ISSN 0268-1064 
@ Basil Blackwell 
Forum 
3. Philosophy as Mathematics or 
as Anthropology 
DANIEL DENNETT 
The set text does indeed launch a rocket, and I have found it valuable, at 
least to myself, to try to formulate my own mid-course correction. 
The idea that philosophy is not only ’the queen of the sciences’ but an 
entirely aprioristic discipline - like mathematics - is as old as philosophy, 
and thus probably deserves to be called the traditional view, but it is 
hardly the received view today. One of the most durable fruits of the 
‘analytic’ movement in philosophy - including ‘ordinary language phi- 
losophy’ - is the dissipation of this dream, and its replacement by a more 
modest and realistic vision of the philosopher’s legitimate role and method 
of inquiry. 
Even if philosophy is primarily conceptual analysis (and that is about as 
accurate a two-word definition of the field as I can muster), we realize today 
that the concepts amenable to philosophical analyses are not, typically, as 
clean, pristine, and insulated as the concepts in mathematics that enable 
it to be (for the most part) a genuinely aprioristic field of inquiry. The 
concept of justice (or mind or cause or time or beauty) is an objet trouvi, 
embedded in practices, theories, institutions, preconceptions, and projects, 
not an already distilled and isolated essence, a hard-edged seed for crys- 
talline growths like those in mathematics. 
So the philosopher bent on analyzing one of these concepts (and what 
else is there for a philosopher to do?) has two choices: (1) propose some 
bold idealization of one of these messy concepts and then, having for- 
malized it, run like mad and hope that somebody else will get interested 
in playing the same game, or (2) settle for a more empirical, defeasible, 
and informal method of conceptual analysis. 
The philosopher who takes the former road does indeed engage in a 
quasi-mathematical enterprise. The benefits are obvious: genuine, irrefra- 
gable, rigorous proof and a minimum of rhetorical muddying of the waters. 
The risks, however, are great: 99 times out of 100, the particular ide- 
alization/formalization hit upon is of only ’academic interest’ - an intel- 
lectual toy that sheds precious little light on any abiding problem since it 

Forum: Philosophy and Psychology 
19 
formalizes a concept no one else would or should be interested in. Such 
toys often conceal this embarrassment by generating technical problems 
of their own to bemuse and distract the (limited) audience, sometimes for 
years, sometimes for generations. A huge portion of the ’standard liter- 
ature’ of philosophy consists of these artifactual problems and challenges, 
together with the array of attempted solutions, refutations of solutions, 
defenses, revisions and comparisons. 
Unfortunately, something approaching the same ratio of filagree to sub- 
stance besets the latter approach as well, in spite of a different trade-off 
betwen rigor of method and relevance of result. The ‘naturalized’ phil- 
osopher of mind (or language or justice or knowledge) treats conceptual 
analysis as more akin to anthropology or literary criticism, involving 
imaginative and critical interpretation of observed manners of speaking, 
presuppositions, and connotations, for instance, and as irreducibly infor- 
mal and non-algorithmic in its methods. Here philosophy appears as a 
meta-discipline, parasitic on the investigations conducted by others with 
other agendas; thus philosophy of mind appears not as the axiomatized 
theorems derivable from the definitions of ’believe’, ’see’, ’intend’, ’under- 
stand’ and the like, but as a branch of philosophy of science, dealing in 
a factually enriched arena with the conceptual puzzles that arise when 
psychologists, neuroscientists, linguists and such types attempt to do their 
jobs. And since empirical facts - especially new discoveries - contribute to 
the development of the concepts found in such a domain, the philosophers’ 
analyses can be jeopardized by the sort of claim our imagined psychologist 
makes, and hence vitiated by a philosopher’s empirical ignorance. 
There are still plenty of practitioners of the former sort. The Society for 
Exact Philosophy is alive and well, and not all its members would consider 
themselves to be primarily (or just) logicians. Their work provides waIls 
of constraint for the less formal sorts of philosophical scouting operations, 
and occasionally even provides scaffolding for theoretical and empirical 
work in other disciplines. 
Center for Cognitive Studies 
Tufts University 
Medford, Mass. 02155 

