science. Alters and Alters explain ‘creation science’
brieﬂy and well. In the past decade this movement,
which mostly consists of ‘young-earth’ creationists (those
who tend to accept the Bible more literally, and who do
not
accept
that
the
Earth
is
older
than
about
10 000 years), has been eclipsed by a more subtle
movement called Intelligent Design (ID). Its advocates,
who do not seem to realize that their arguments were last
espoused by William Paley in the 1700s and rejected
even then on both scientiﬁc and theological grounds,
propose that natural mechanisms are insufﬁcient to
account for the obvious ﬁttedness of organisms for their
roles in life, and that therefore a Designer must be
invoked. Downplaying their differences with the ‘young-
earth’ creationists, and careful not to reveal too much
about who this Designer is and what else they believe,
these apologists mix some of the standard ‘creation-
science’ arguments with crypto-scientiﬁc legerdemain
involving information theory, chance and probability,
supposed irreducible complexity, and complete confusion
about the difference between philosophical and meth-
odological naturalism.
Scientists on the whole remain unimpressed, except if
they already belong to that 25–30% discussed above. But
the IDers do not care to convince scientists, any more
than the ‘creation scientists’ do. They are aiming at that
50% in the middle of the American public. They are
trying
to
convince
these
people
that
‘Darwinism’
excludes God, is founded on unsupportable random
processes, and is morally and philosophically bankrupt.
They are gaining ground in some ‘mainstream’ Christian
forums, largely because mainstream theologians and
religious leaders seem too unsure of their own doctrines
to oppose them vocally. Alters and Alters spend less time
than they might on this movement, which is still deﬁning
itself. However, as ID becomes less of a moving target –
which it will as its principal spokesmen continue to
embarrass themselves with scientiﬁc inanities and public
pomposities – it may be hoped that Alters and Alters will
produce a follow-up volume to complement this one that
focuses on speciﬁc claims of the neo-Paleyites.
I hope that the foregoing paragraphs have convinced
you that this compact, informative, and straightforward
volume is about the best imaginable brief resource for
understanding arguments and orientations against evo-
lution, and in helping teachers of evolution and all
scientiﬁc disciplines craft approaches to explaining sci-
ence to their students. This volume is not designed to be
consulted for scientiﬁc information to dispel and debunk
all criticisms of evolution; the authors provide many
resources for those purposes. Its difference from other
very useful books, and therefore its strength, is in its
concise review of the history and background of anti-
evolutionary attitudes, and in its commendable and
diplomatic approaches to teaching the conﬂict. This book
should be near at hand to every scientist and teacher who
is confronted with the creation–evolution controversies.
Kevin Padian
Department of Integrative Biology,
University of California,
Berkeley, CA 94720-3140, USA
kpadian@socrates.berkeley.edu
Tarbutniks rule
A review by Daniel C. Dennett
Animal Traditions: Behavioural Inheritance in Evolution,
By Eytan Avital and Eva Jablonka. Cambridge University
Press, 2000. £50.00/US$80.00. ISBN 0 521 66273 7.
For thousands of years, we have been captivated by the
cleverness of animals, the elegant ways in which birds of
different species build their nests, the circumspection and
efﬁciency with which predators stalk their chosen prey.
The genius of ‘instinct’ comes in abundant variety, and
breeds true. ‘It must be in the genes’ – that’s what we
tend to conclude. But when we do, we may be jumping
to conclusions, because there are other possibilities: the
clever behaviour we observe could be the do-it-yourself
invention or discovery of the individual behaviour or it
could be a clever trick copied from an elder member of its
species, most likely one of its parents. The book provides
a wealth of examples drawn from studies of literally
hundreds of species (almost all mammals and birds); and
it addresses the theoretical problems posed for evolu-
tionary theory by cultural transmission and its interac-
tion with genetic transmission. But also, by the very
strenuousness of its efforts to overcome the prejudice
against its main thesis, it inadvertently throws a spotlight
on the way received opinion in science can close
investigators’ minds. Some sidelong enquiries convinced
me that the mindset they seek to overturn is actually
quite common. So this is an important book, potentially a
major investigation-shaper in the years to come, for in
addition to the widespread work they discuss, they point
to a much larger array of still-to-be-done studies,
eminently possible, that have never been done simply
because nobody thought to do them.
The ﬁrst task of the authors is to establish the
theoretical possibilities of cultural transmission, which
they do with a delightful thought experiment about an
imaginary species of small mammals, tarbutniks (from the
Hebrew word tarbut, meaning culture). These are declared
by ﬁat to be all clones of each other, with zero genetic
diversity and hence zero genetic evolution by natural
selection. The population comes to be divided, as popu-
lations so often do, and in one group a pioneer digs a hole
in the ground (it might just be an accident, or the result
of a ‘bad’ habit of this individual) and this novel act
happens to inspire some of the onlooking conspeciﬁcs to
332
Book reviews
J . E V O L . B I O L . 1 5 ( 2 0 0 2 ) 3 2 9 – 3 3 4 ª 2 0 0 2 B L A C K W E L L S C I E N C E L T D

do likewise. Why? Just because the tarbutniks are
postulated to have a genetically maintained penchant
for imitation, unlike a less fortunate strain of tarbutniks
that were restricted to individual, risky, trial-and-error
learning, and became extinct. Because it happens that
hole-digging is beneﬁcial in their local environment (it
provides some protection, or gives access to a good
underground food source), those who dig holes do better
than those who do not. The habit spreads, but not
genetically: the young pick it up by ‘social learning’ from
their parents, or others in their community. Hole-digging
leads to tunnel-digging that leads to giving birth in the
underground tunnels, and in due course this lineage of
tarbutniks have all adopted behaviours and a diet of the
sort observed in moles. The other population takes up
berry-picking, living in the protection of the underbrush,
and its diet and habits are likewise moulded by natural
selection of behavioural tradition, not genes. One group
has a problem with the acidity of its diet, corrected by
eating a bit of dirt, a trick pioneered by one and copied by
others, which then opens up other food sources hereto-
fore toxic, and so on. Eventually they have become as
different as two closely related but distinct species can be
– all without any genetic change at all. The authors want
us to notice that there is a broad-band informational
pathway that runs roughly parallel to the genetic
pathway that can transmit adaptations just as well as –
sometimes better than – genes can.
The next task is to demonstrate that the contributions
of transmitted tradition or culture to animal behavioural
design are in fact substantial. Here the authors provide
more informed speculations than conclusive demonstra-
tions, but in addition to the wealth of circumstantial
evidence they cite, they do point to key studies that point
the way to conﬁrmation. The way to test their claims is to
interrupt one transmission channel or another and see
what gets through. Cross fostering is the most obvious
manipulation: to see if young exhibit the behaviours of
their foster parents instead of their ‘biological’ parents.
(Notice how strong the association has become between
genes and biology – as if there were nothing in biology
except genes!) The authors report the results of cross
fostering studies already undertaken, as well as studies
that block the paths of social learning in one way or
another, and the results they cite certainly support their
contention, but there is much more to be done.
Before researchers can be enlisted to embark on these
long-term investigations, they have to be persuaded that
they are likely to hit paydirt. That is where the thought
experiments and speculative scenarios come in. Time and
again, the authors offer a persuasive redescription of the
setting of some well-studied behaviour – food preferenc-
es, predation techniques, nest-building, danger-avoid-
ance, mating tactics – and consider what could be the
case about how it is installed in each generation. Along
the way, they consider and disarm a host of objections,
and present reasons for thinking that evolution ought to
avail itself of cultural transmission whenever possible. In
the ﬁrst place, such social learning is clearly safer – less
risky – than individual trial and error by novices, surely a
large beneﬁt that would be recognized by natural
selection. Moreover, the cultural transmission of newly
discovered Good Tricks (my term, not theirs) is orders of
magnitude swifter than the incorporation into the
genome of whatever it takes to specify the Good Trick
genetically. Cultural transmission works as an enhance-
ment of pure trial and error: when an old trick outlives its
usefulness because of a change in environment, the
lineage does not have to wait for many generations for
the right new combinations or mutations to come along.
The individual animals can revert to trial and error
immediately, and as soon as one explorer ﬁnds a new
trick in the right direction, others can copy it and
abandon their riskier explorations. Of course they may
also be led down the path to destruction by copying an
innovation that is only apparently an improvement;
social learning has its own risks.
If this is all so obviously adaptive, why have investiga-
tors been so prejudiced against it as a major possibility?
There are many reasons. As ‘culture’ is commonly taken to
be one of the prime idiosyncrasies distinguishing Homo
sapiens from all other species, anything that smacks of the
exploitation of culture by non-human species promises to
blur a boundary many want to keep as hard-edged as
possible. Then there is the ever-present fear of lapsing into
‘Lamarckian’ heresy. But the main source of covert
resistance comes from the genocentric assumptions that
have apparently swept to ﬁxation in the minds of many
biologists.
A mistaken ground for suspicion of the idea of
transmission of behavioural tradition is the hunch that
since there is no proprietary code (like A, C, G, T) in
which such information is couched, transmission cannot
be sufﬁciently high-ﬁdelity to count as replication.
Codes do indeed make a big difference. We human
beings have symbolic codes – natural languages composed
of ﬁnite vocabularies of words anchored to norms of both
production and meaning – and this gives our practice of
cultural transmission a hugely different proﬁle of com-
petence compared with other species. ‘Since animals
cannot represent information symbolically, .... the focus
must be the social and ecological conditions that lead to
the manifestation and re-generation of essentially similar
patterns of behaviour’ (p. 95). Or, to turn the point
around, symbolic representations (of behaviours and
other topics) have built-in self-stabilizing features (the
norms) that can permit them to survive drastic changes in
supporting ecological conditions essentially intact, some-
thing quite impossible in the animal world.
The comparison with human cultural transmission
presents a delicate problem for the authors. Choosing
their battles carefully, they go somewhat overboard in
distancing themselves from the controversial topic of
memes, which arouses blind animosity in so many
Book reviews
333
J . E V O L . B I O L . 1 5 ( 2 0 0 2 ) 3 2 9 – 3 3 4 ª 2 0 0 2 B L A C K W E L L S C I E N C E L T D

(Dawkins). What they are mainly concerned to argue is
that transmitted tradition is another path to genetic ﬁtness
of behaving organisms – it is information that creates
adaptations in the extended phenotype. They are not
concerned with the ﬁtness as replicators of such designed
behaviours themselves. One cannot blame them for
wanting to secure a little good will by hastening to
endorse some of the standard (but inconclusive) objec-
tions to memes, but in fact their own account is consistent
with the more careful formulations about memes, and
they make many of the favourite points of memeticists in
their own terms. They point to the possibility of the spread
of traits with no ﬁtness advantage (pp. 131–136), and
stress (as Dawkins did) the fact that transmission is via
copying the phenotype. They point to the ease of remem-
bering as a factor in transmission of a trick that may move
it away from what otherwise would be the ‘engineering’
optimum (p. 135). But right here they might beneﬁt from
the memeticists’ perspective, for it is easier to see that
memorability is itself just as much a question of ‘engin-
eering’ if one is thinking of the ﬁtness of the remembered
items themselves, instead of their possible contribution to
the ﬁtness of their hosts. And by concentrating on vertical
transmission of culture (from parent to offspring), they
ignore the predictable prospect of virulent, parasitic habits
being more readily spread obliquely, an insight that
beckons once one adopts the meme’s-eye point of view.
(See also the review by Matteo Mameli of this book in
Biology and Philosophy 16(5), 2001.)
Occasionally, the authors overstate their best case. For
instance, wishing to provide a striking alternative to the
received wisdom about parent–offspring conﬂict in, e.g.
tits (p. 173) they ask ‘who really controls the allocation of
resources in the tit family?’ and go on to argue that there is
an alternative story to the story of genetic conﬂict that can
be told, in which the parents are teaching their offspring,
not being blackmailed by them. There may well be
something to their perspective on this, but the question
they do not address is this: is there also an argument
against the existence of genetic conﬂict? If we already have
reason to believe that there should be genetic conﬂict,
their alternative might be a useful supplement, but not an
alternative. They say ‘Translating agonistic behaviour
among family members into evolutionary conﬂict may
mislead us’ (p. 182). This is true. The question is: does it
mislead us in fact? They say that the conﬂict theory’s
assumptions ‘are not substantiated by any data’ (p. 185) –
because their alternative ﬁts the data equally well – but
then they are equally in no position to assert, as they do.
‘Looked at in this way, the squabbles between parents and
young are not an outcome of evolutionary conﬂict, but are
inevitable results of the learning process and the some-
what painful transition to the youngsters’ independence’
(p. 184). The bland truth may turn out to combine both
ideas, with the genetic conﬂict harnessed into an oppo-
nent process system of teacher and learner.
Some of the most exciting suggestions appear in their
discussion of the Baldwin effect, or Waddington’s genetic
assimilation, and the possibilities of a sort of teamwork
between cultural and genetic transmission in the design
of elaborate adaptations.
One ﬁnal comment was inspired by the authors’
occasional lapses of overselling. A brute fact about
evolution that is rhetorically inconvenient, when confront-
ing skeptics, is that it is ... shy about displaying its powers.
It works when it works, but usually it does not. Every
time a parent gives birth to offspring, this is potentially
the initiation of a speciation event, but it almost never is.
Similarly, every time a habit is picked up by one animal
from another, a potential cultural tradition is born, but it
almost never is. Only slightly less rare, presumably, are
ephemeral group habits, commonalities in behaviour
that spread through a neighbourhood or population, but
that are too minor and evanescent to count as traditions,
passing fancies that do not even rise to the status of fads.
One should not be put off by this; it would be theoret-
ically tidy to be able to say that whenever such and such
happens, a tradition results. But it is a fool’s errand to try
to prescribe the sufﬁcient conditions for such momentous
innovations. The likeliest candidates almost never pan
out, in fact. But sometimes they do. When it happens, it
happens. Tradition-creation in evolution, like speciation,
can be both an all but invisibly rare event and a highly
signiﬁcant force in the design processes that create the
cleverness we observe.1
Daniel C. Dennett
Centre for Cognitive Studies
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155, USA
1I am indebted to Matteo Mameli for discussions of this book and
an earlier draft of this review.
334
Book reviews
J . E V O L . B I O L . 1 5 ( 2 0 0 2 ) 3 2 9 – 3 3 4 ª 2 0 0 2 B L A C K W E L L S C I E N C E L T D

