
 Inside Jokes 


 Inside Jokes 
 Using Humor to Reverse-Engineer the Mind 
 Matthew M. Hurley, Daniel C. Dennett, and Reginald B. Adams, Jr. 
 The MIT Press 
 Cambridge, Massachusetts 
 London, England 

 ©   2011   Massachusetts Institute of Technology  
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any 
electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information 
storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher. 
 For information about special quantity discounts, please email special_sales
@mitpress.mit.edu 
 This book was set in Stone Sans and Stone Serif by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited. 
Printed and bound in the United States of America.  
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Hurley, Matthew M., 1977 – . 
 Inside jokes: using humor to reverse-engineer the mind / Matthew M. Hurley, 
Daniel C. Dennett, and Reginald B. Adams. 
  p.   cm. 
 Includes bibliographical references and index. 
 ISBN 978-0-262-01582-0 (hardcover: alk. paper) 
 1. Laughter — Psychological aspects.   2. Laughter — Philosophy.   3. Wit and humor —
 Psychological aspects.   4. Wit and humor — Philosophy.   I. Dennett, Daniel 
Clement.   II. Adams, Reginald B.   III. Title. 
 BF575.L3H89   2011 
 152.4 ′ 3 — dc22 
   2010044707 
 10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1 

 Contents 
 Preface  
 ix 
 1  
 Introduction  
 1 
 2  
 What Is Humor For?  
 9 
 3  
 The Phenomenology of Humor  
 15 
 A.  
 Humor as a Property of Objects or Events  
 16 
 B.  
 Duchenne Laughter  
 19 
 C.  
 The Systematic Ineffability of Humor  
 24 
 D.  
 Funny-Ha-Ha and Funny-Huh  
 27 
 E.  
 The Knowledge-Relativity of Humor  
 31 
 F.  
 Mating and Dating  
 34 
 4  
 A Brief History of Humor Theories  
 37 
 A.  
 Biological Theories  
 37 
 B.  
 Play Theories  
 38 
 C.  
 Superiority Theories  
 40 
 D.  
 Release Theories  
 44 
 E.  
 Incongruity and Incongruity-Resolution Theories  
 45 
 F.  
 Surprise Theories  
 53 
 G.  
 Bergson ’ s Mechanical Humor Theory  
 54 
 5  
 Twenty Questions for a Cognitive and Evolutionary Theory of 
Humor  
 57 
 6  
 Emotion and Computation  
 61 
 A.  
 Finding the Funny Bone  
 61 
 B.  
 Does Logic or Emotion Organize Our Brains?  
 63 
 C.  
 Emotions  
 67 
 D.  
 The Rationality of Emotions  
 73 
 E.  
 The Irrationality of Emotions  
 80 

vi 
Contents
 F.  
 Emotional Algorithms  
 83 
 G.  
 A Few Implications  
 89 
 7  
 A Mind That Can Sustain Humor  
 93 
 A.  
 Fast Thinking: The Costs and Beneﬁ ts of Quick-Wittedness  
 93 
 B.  
 The Construction of Mental Spaces  
 95 
 C.  
 Active Beliefs  
 104 
 D.  
 Epistemic Caution and Commitment  
 109 
 E.  
 Conﬂ ict; and Resolution  
 112 
 8  
 Humor and Mirth  
 117 
 A.  
 The Contamination of Mental Spaces  
 117 
 B.  
 Mirth among the Epistemic Emotions: The Microdynamics  
 122 
 C.  
 Rewards for a Dirty Job Well Done  
 127 
 D.  
 “ Getting It ” : Basic Humor in Slow Motion  
 130 
 E.  
 Interfering Emotions  
 139 
 9  
 Higher-Order Humor  
 143 
 A.  
 The Intentional Stance  
 143 
 B.  
 The Difference between the First Person and the Third Person  
 148 
 C.  
 Anthropomorphism and Anthropocentrism  
 155 
 D.  
 Intentional Stance Jokes  
 157 
 10  Objections Considered  
 177 
 A.  
 Falsiﬁ ability  
 177 
 B.  
 Epistemic Undecidability  
 182 
 C.  
 Apparent Counterexamples  
 187 
 D.  
 A Brief Glance at Others ’  Models  
 201 
 E.  
 Graeme Ritchie ’ s Five Questions  
 208 
 11  The Penumbra: Nonjokes, Bad Jokes, and Near-Humor  
 213 
 A.  
 Knowledge-Relativity  
 214 
 B.  
 Scale of Intensity  
 216 
 C.  
 Boundary Cases  
 220 
 D.  
 Wit and Other Related Phenomena  
 246 
 E.  
 Huron on the Manipulation of Expectations  
 250 
 12  But Why Do We Laugh?  
 257 
 A.  
 Laughter as Communication  
 257 
 B.  
 Co-opting Humor and Laughter  
 264 
 C.  
 The Art of Comedy  
 270 
 D.  
 Comedy (and Tragedy) in Literature  
 278 
 E.  
 Humor That Heals  
 283 

Contents 
vii
 13  The Punch Line  
 287 
 A.  
 Twenty Questions Answered  
 289 
 B.  
 Could We Make a Robot with a Sense of Humor?  
 296 
 Epilogue  
 301 
 References  
 305 
 Index  
 329 


 Preface 
 In April 1975, Martin Gardner reported, in his  Scientiﬁ c American magazine 
column  “ Mathematical Games, ” that a new computer chess program 
invented at MIT  “ had established, with a high degree of probability, that 
pawn to king ’ s rook 4 is a win for White. ” Tragedy! If this were so, the 
noble game of chess would be killed for all time, no more challenging than 
tic-tac-toe. Even if the algorithm purportedly discovered by the program 
was tediously complicated, something no human chess-player could hope 
to memorize, the mere knowledge that there was a mindless recipe for 
winning any game of chess would drain all the glory, all the art, out of the 
contest. Who would want to devote years to honing skills, enduring gruel-
ing tournaments, hunting for exquisite new strategies, all the while 
knowing that there was an easier way to win, a cheap trick that could not 
be thwarted? Nobody knows how many readers were taken in, but surely 
Gardner ’ s unwelcome news struck at least momentary dread in the hearts 
of some chess-lovers, before they tumbled to the date and chuckled with 
relief. April Fools ’ ! 
 Late one night a few years later, the sex researchers William Masters 
and Virginia Johnson, authors of  Human Sexual Response (1966), were 
analyzing their voluminous data on orgasm and noticed a subtle but 
striking pattern: they had discovered, to their amazement, that the uttering 
of a simple verbal formula, a string of words (in any language) that exhib-
ited an arcane pattern based on the Fibonacci series, would bring any 
normal postpubescent human to orgasm within a minute. They rechecked 
their data, ran just a few conﬁ rmatory experiments, and then . . . destroyed 
their notes, salted their data with misleading falsehoods to conceal the 
pattern from future eyes, and took a solemn vow not to reveal the secret 
they had uncovered. Thanks to their heroic sacriﬁ ce, sex as we know it 
lives on. 

x 
Preface
 In early 2010, Hurley, Dennett, and Adams put the ﬁ nishing touches 
on their evolutionary/neurocomputational model of humor and wondered 
if, just possibly, they had cracked the mystery that had bafﬂ ed intrepid 
analysts and researchers for several millennia: it seemed they might have 
not only uncovered the neural mechanisms of humor but in the process 
devised a foolproof recipe for generating humorous  stimuli of all varieties, 
from slapstick to witty retorts, from dirty jokes to high comedy. Set the 
dial and turn the crank and out comes Oscar Wilde, Charlie Chaplin, 
W. C. Fields, P. G. Wodehouse; nudge the dial and turn the crank again 
and out comes Steve Martin, Jim Carrey, Dave Barry, Gary Larson . . . 
Reductionistic science has triumphed again, and humor, as we know it, 
will soon be dead. 
 OK, we lied about Masters and Johnson. And we lied about the humor 
recipe. Not only does the theory in this book not uncover such a recipe, 
it shows why it is extremely unlikely that anybody — or any bank of 
computers — will ever ﬁ nd one. Art really is different from science, and 
comedy is art, like music and, well, art. Art does involve a kind of technol-
ogy ( techne in Greek,  technique that one can master), but all the technique 
in the world only takes the would-be artist partway; our model helps 
explain why this is so, why the neural mechanisms engaged by humor —
 and they are, at bottom,  “ just ”  fantastically complex mechanisms, no 
 wonder tissue involved at all — are quite systematically tamperproof. Nobody 
can  prove that there will never be an algorithm for perfect chess; it is known 
that chess, which is a ﬁ nite game, is ofﬁ cially vulnerable to brute-force, 
exhaustive, algorithmic solution, but it is also clear that no physically pos-
sible computer could complete that algorithmic search. That does not rule 
out the (tragic) possibility that there is a discoverable shortcut. Similarly, 
nobody can  prove that there is no shortcut to humor, but the vast space of 
possible humor is much, much larger and more complicated than the space 
of chess, and changing all the time, so nobody should be too worried. Still, 
we appreciate that many people will confront our book with mixed emo-
tions: curiosity — why on earth is there humor at all? how  could it work? —
 competing with the hope that mystery will triumph, that nimble art will 
scamper out of the path of the lumbering juggernaut of science yet again. 
We share those mixed emotions and are happy to report that, if we are 
right, both will be gratiﬁ ed. We will explain why humor exists, how it 
works in the brain, and why comedy is an art. Let ’ s begin with the ﬁ rst of 
these questions. 

Preface 
xi
 There was an old woman who lived in a shoe. 
 She had so many children she didn ’ t know what to do . . . 
 (Their rooms were piled high with the playthings of boys: 
 comic books, ﬁ shing rods, discarded toys, 
 model planes, model trains and the dirt that goes with them 
 and huge piles of laundry that ﬂ owed out to the kitchen. 
 And try as she may to get them to sweep — 
 she ’ d scold them, and threaten, implore them, and weep; 
 she ’ d given them dust-cloths, and vacuums and brooms — 
 she just could not get them to clean up their rooms.) 
 So she gave them some broth, without any bread, 
 and whipped them all soundly, and put them to bed. 
 . . . and, then, one night the old woman got a new idea: 
 She made them pajamas and bed socks of Swiffer cloth, and the next night 
while they slept she hid lots of candies around in their rooms, under the 
beds, under the piles of toys and clothes. In the morning when the children 
discovered the ﬁ rst of these candies, they went on a gleeful rampage, piling 
and sorting their belongings in the hunt for all the candies. By noon they 
were stuffed with candy — and their rooms were as orderly and clean as 
Martha Stewart ’ s front parlor. 
 That may be an unlikely story, but we propose that Mother Nature — 
natural selection — has hit upon much the same trick to get our brains 
to do all the tedious debugging that they must do if they are to live 
dangerously with the unruly piles of discoveries and mistakes that we 
generate in our incessant heuristic search. She cannot just order the 
brain to do the necessary garbage collection and debugging (the way a 
computer programmer can simply install subroutines that slavishly take 
care of this). She has to bribe the brain with pleasure. That is why we 
experience mirthful delight when we catch ourselves wrong-footed by a 
concealed inference error. Finding and ﬁ xing these time-pressured mis-
leaps would be constantly annoying hard work, if evolution hadn ’ t arranged 
for it to be fun. This wired-in source of pleasure has then been tickled 
relentlessly by the  supernormal stimuli invented and reﬁ ned by our come-
dians and jokesters over the centuries. We have, in fact, become addicted 
to this endogenous mind candy in much the way long-distance runners 
become addicted to the endorphins their strenuous efforts pump into their 
blood streams. Humor, we will try to show, evolved out of a computational 
problem that arose when our ancestors were furnished with open-ended 
thinking. 

xii 
Preface
 This book grew out of Matthew Hurley ’ s dissertation at Tufts University, 
completed in 2006, supervised by his two coauthors, Daniel Dennett and 
Reginald Adams, Jr. Since then it has undergone substantial revisions and 
enlargements, but the central novelties are Hurley ’ s and the essential 
details of the theory remain unchanged since its earlier dissertational form. 
Humor has been a major research interest of Adams for years, and he led 
the way into the vast literature on humor for his coauthors, correcting 
myopic interpretations and misapprehensions, and holding their feet to 
the ﬁ re when their ideas were less clear and precise than they should be. 
For Dennett, this project discharges a promise unkept for almost twenty 
years. Here, at long last, is  “ a proper account of laughter ” (and amusement) 
that  “ moves beyond pure phenomenology ” ( Consciousness Explained , 1991, 
pp. 64 – 66) that he can endorse wholeheartedly. 
 This is a book about humor, but it ’ s not  just about humor. It is a book 
about the epistemic predicament of agents in the world and a class of 
models of cognition that can successfully deal with that predicament. It 
argues that emotions govern  all our cognitive activities, large and small, 
and that humor is thus a rich source of insights into the delicate machinery 
of our minds. Armed with the right theory, we can use humor as a sort of 
mind-reading device, exposing both the covert knowledge and the inner 
workings of the amused mind. Our theory draws extensively on earlier 
work in the ﬁ eld, but it adds a perspective, both evolutionary and compu-
tational, that has been largely missing. Humor cannot be just a happy 
accident of our biology, and the problem it is designed — by evolution — to 
solve must be a problem that is unique to our species (though we may see 
primitive or proto-versions of humor in other species). The theory we 
present attempts to answer questions that earlier work didn ’ t even ask, and 
it is probably not quite right but it gives us all something to ﬁ x that is, we 
think, a signiﬁ cant advance over the earlier efforts. 
 We are indebted to a number of people for their contributions through-
out the development of the ideas presented in this book. First, we would 
like to thank the late Alexander (Sasha) Chislenko whose own theory of 
humor — a kind of surprise theory (personal communication, 1998) — ﬁ rst 
inspired Matthew to look for an evolutionary answer to the riddle. Our 
theory differs from his, but if it wasn ’ t for Sasha ’ s insights this project 
might never have been undertaken. 
 As the project progressed, we received extensive insightful comments 
and discussions from David Huron, Deb Roy, V. S. Ramachandran, Justina 
Fan, Leo Trottier, Alexander Ince-Cushman, Paul Queior, Seth Frey, Lindsay 

Preface 
xiii
Dachille, Eric Nichols, Barry Trimmer, Keith Morrison, and several anony-
mous reviewers for MIT Press, all of whom read and remarked on early 
drafts; likewise, David Krakauer, Donald Saari, Gil Greengross and others 
engaged in thoughtful discussion of our theory with us at the Santa Fe 
Institute colloquium on May 3, 2010, and the May 5, 2010, colloquium 
sponsored by the Computer Science Department at the University of New 
Mexico. Numerous others have offered useful reactions to our theory. We 
are very grateful for all these exchanges. Additional thanks go to a number 
of friends and colleagues from around the world who provided discussion 
about terms in other languages that have two senses that are similar to the 
two main senses of the English word  “ funny ” (see chapter 3). These people 
are: Rodrigo Correa, Gaston Cangiano, Priscilla Borges, Gilles Fauconnier, 
Ina Lieckfeldt, Bettina Seidl, Doreen Kinzel, Athina Pantelidou, Van Agora, 
Vera Szamarasz, Csaba Pleh, Miro Enev, Kaloyan Ivanov, Adriana Belencaia, 
Yuliya Yaglovskaya, Takao Tanizawa, Toshiyuki Uchino, Heejeong Haas, 
Angie Huh, Ally Kim, David Moser, Stephanie Xie, Jenny Prasertdee, Johan 
Vaartjes, Katerina Lucas, and G ü ven G ü zeldere. Douglas Hofstadter and the 
Center for Research on Concepts and Cognition (CRCC) at Indiana Uni-
versity provided much appreciated support during a large part of the 
writing of this manuscript; we thank Doug as well as Helga Keller from the 
CRCC, and also Teresa Salvato at the Center for Cognitive Studies at Tufts 
University for their help and support. We owe our gratitude also to Tom 
Stone, Philip Laughlin, Judy Feldmann, and the rest of the team at MIT 
Press who helped bring the manuscript to production. Lastly, but most 
importantly, all of us would like to thank our families for their constant 
support throughout the process of writing, especially Justina Fan, Susan 
Dennett, and Katharine Donnelly Adams. 
 Matthew M. Hurley 
 Daniel C. Dennett 
 Reginald B. Adams, Jr. 
 2011 


 1    Introduction 
 The most exciting phrase to hear in science, the one that heralds new discoveries, 
is not  “ Eureka! ”  (I found it!) but  “ That ’ s funny. . . . ” 
 — Isaac Asimov 
 Comedy is half of life, according to the theater. (The other half is tragedy.) 
A large portion, in any case, of people ’ s time is spent attempting to get 
each other to laugh. Stories are told, jokes recounted, and witticisms 
cracked whenever possible. In only the most solemn occasions is 
humor deemed inappropriate, and innovators are pushing the envelope of 
propriety all the time. When we ﬁ nd humor in a situation, we feel com-
pelled to share it with others. Today, our taste for comedy apparently 
outstrips our taste for tragedy. Much of our entertainment industry, in 
every medium (aside from music), consists of humor. If there is not enough 
comedy in our daily lives, we turn to our televisions and let professional 
comedians ﬁ ll the gap, almost in the way we insist on ﬁ lling our waking 
hours with recorded music. Like music, alcohol, tobacco, caffeine, and 
chocolate, humor is a modern human addiction. And if we are to under-
stand humor, we need to adopt a biological perspective from which we 
can observe — and formulate testable hypotheses about — the evolution of 
this addiction. 
 Every cell in our bodies needs sugar — glucose — the fuel that keeps us 
alive. A good source of glucose is fructose, the sugar in ripe fruit, which 
the liver can readily convert to glucose. As it turns out, the common 
natural sugar with the highest subjective sweetness rating — the one the 
sweetness sensors in our tongues are most tuned to detect — is fructose. 
So evolution has engineered a powerful fructose-harvesting system 
and given it a high priority — our cells operate on the rough principle: 
Whenever the opportunity to harvest fructose is detected, act on it. Honey, 
which is mainly glucose and fructose, is a particularly good opportunity 

2 
Chapter 1
for harvesting. It is hard to believe that the yumminess of chocolate 
cake or maple syrup or strawberry jam all boils down, almost literally, to 
the deeply practical glucose imperative, but it does. That ’ s the way to 
understand why we have a sweet tooth. Why do we have a funny bone, a 
similar craving for, and appreciation of, humor? For a similarly practical 
reason: We  need to devote serious time and energy to doing something 
which, if we didn ’ t do it, would imperil our very lives. . . . Nature has seen 
to it that we act vigorously on this need, by rewarding that action 
handsomely. 
 The phenomena of evolution are not as simple as they are often por-
trayed. It is not just a matter of the natural selection of  “ genes for ” this or 
that — whichever feature of living things catches the attention and curiosity 
of the researcher. In particular, it is important to consider not just the ends 
but the means, the organic machinery that is going to do the work, what-
ever it is. The How questions of biology are just as important as the Why 
questions (Francis 2004), and some evolutionary puzzles are systematically 
unanswerable without information about the constraints on the perfor-
mance of the system, and even an educated guess about those constraints 
depends on having at least a crude model of the machinery. The evolution 
of our  “ sense of humor, ” we will show, could not possibly be explained 
without hypotheses about the functional architecture of our brains, for the 
simple reason that what different humorous items have in common is  only 
the similar effects they have on those brain systems and the resultant 
 subjective experiences. At various points in this book we draw attention to 
physical complications that really matter, but just as often we slide over 
complications that we deem — perhaps too riskily — to be ignorable for our 
purposes. In particular, we set aside for another occasion questions of the 
complex and dynamical role of development in the relations between 
genes, organisms, and environment. 
 As prominent as humor is in our lives, it is at least equally as mysteri-
ous. Why does humor exist at all? Why is this category of our experience 
such a salient feature of our lives? Another question: Why is humor enjoy-
able? Why shouldn ’ t we simply detect jokes without feeling anything? And 
why do we laugh (as opposed to belching or scratching our ears, say) when 
something is funny? These questions are vexing, and our inability to 
answer them with ease seems at ﬁ rst to be due to our inability so far to 
answer the question that has led to most of the existing research in humor: 
What is the  essence of humor? What features are both necessary and suf-
ﬁ cient to differentiate between those things that are funny and those that 

Introduction 
3
are not? We will argue that this question is ill posed; as usual in the 
post-Darwinian world of biology, it is a mistake to concentrate on ﬁ nding 
presumed essential features since one is more likely to ﬁ nd lineages of 
similar items, evolving according to changing selectional pressures. 
 The essentialist quandary has two faces. We ’ ve just mentioned the dif-
ﬁ culty with deﬁ ning the features for the category of interest, but on the 
other side there is danger of conﬂ ict with nearby categories that may share 
some of the same features: In the space of human cognitive traits in the 
neighborhood of humor we also ﬁ nd such categories as nonhumorous 
riddles, wordplay, and problem solving, as well as other kinds of apprecia-
tion of wit and intellect such as the happiness one feels when witnessing 
a virtuoso performance. Humor experiences blend in with many of these 
other kinds of experience without clear boundaries between them. Word-
play can be fun without being funny, and so can ﬁ shing or gardening or 
doing one ’ s job. In every case, there can be relatively intense periods where 
one ’ s emotion borders on glee, and one may even laugh out of sheer plea-
sure. There is little prospect of drawing a boundary that separates the 
subspecies  funny from the genus  delightful . They are all cognitive joys of 
one sort or another. Such categories are notoriously difﬁ cult to provide 
with essences (Wittgenstein 1953; Lakoff 1987). We can replace the essen-
tialist question with an improvement: What makes us feel that some things 
are funny? 
 This question calls for some sort of causal answer, in terms of processes 
going on in our minds, and it is our goal to provide a preliminary sketch 
of not just a cognitive model, but an emotional and  computational model 
of humor. This may seem at ﬁ rst to be not just outrageously ambitious, 
but positively incoherent. The very idea of a  computational entity that has 
a sense of humor has long been considered impossible. Even in science-
ﬁ ction stories that involve artiﬁ cially intelligent agents (such as the char-
acter Data from  Star Trek ), such characters are typically portrayed as lacking 
the capacity for emotions in general, and especially for particular behaviors 
such as humor generation and appreciation.  1 The writers of such stories 
apparently believe that it is not possible to give these traits to a nonbio-
logical computational agent — or else they are tactically conceding this 
point of ambient prejudice since overcoming it would require too much 
expository and justiﬁ catory effort. We propose to tackle this prejudice 
1.   But see  Star Trek: The Next Generation , episode 30:  “ The Outrageous Okona, ” in which Data 
attempts to acquire humor.

4 
Chapter 1
head on, arguing that a truly intelligent computational agent could not be 
engineered  without humor and some other emotions. These emotions — or 
their functional equivalents — are requirements of any agent, biological or 
not, that has human-level intelligence. 
 When we use the word  computational here, we intend it more broadly 
than is typical in cognitive science. We do not yet intend to build a practi-
cal testable model, say via neural-network architecture; rather, we are 
beginning where good design always begins — we want to specify the  func-
tional requirements of such a computational system so that one day a more 
technical approach (ideally from computational neuroscience) can provide 
detailed working blueprints based on the outline we have sketched. We are 
working toward a theory that would allow humor, as it is experienced — and 
created — by human beings, to be computed and experienced by a nonhu-
man agent, a digital machine of some kind that not only can make jokes 
but that can truly be said to have a  “ sense of humor ” much like the human 
sense. This is not a straightforward requirement, by any means. At a 
minimum, it is not sufﬁ cient to say that an agent ’ s manifestation of  behav-
ioral expressions of humor under many or most of the circumstances that 
elicit such responses in humans indicates a genuine sense of humor in that 
artiﬁ cial agent. In order to count as artiﬁ cial computational humor, the 
behavioral expression, although necessary as an indicator (how else could 
it be known that humor was felt?), must also emerge from or be produced 
by some of the same underlying processing methods and informational 
contents as natural humor. What aspects of these processes matter? Not 
the presence of proteins or other biochemical substances, we will argue, 
but more abstract features of the information-handling processes  and the 
reasons for their existence . We will argue that a strict algorithmic approach 
will be inadequate to imbue an agent with a sense of humor, because the 
structure of humor is dictated by the riskiness of heuristic processes that 
have evolved to permit real-time conclusion-leaping, and by the safeguards 
that have also evolved to protect our minds from these risks. The pivotal 
causes of genuine amusement and laughter are not simply intrinsic features 
of the triggering stimuli that are somehow  “ detected, ” but  internal responses 
that could not be elicited by the triggering stimuli in agents that didn ’ t 
have a rather speciﬁ c computational architecture that depends on pro-
cesses exploited by humorous items. 
 It will come to light, as we proceed, that computational humor is what 
we may call an  AI-complete problem . (In the theory of computation, theo-
rists have developed a classiﬁ cation scheme, in that branch called  complex-
ity theory , that sorts all computational problems into, roughly, the easy, the 

Introduction 
5
hard, and the  “ impossible. ”  The most difﬁ cult set of problems are called 
 NP-complete problems — they require nondeterministic polynomial time to 
solve, in case you wondered — and if you can solve one of them, you should 
be able to solve them all.) We use the term  AI-complete to refer to a class 
of problems that are no less difﬁ cult than the problem of  strong AI (Searle 
1980) or general intelligence — if you can solve any one of them, you ’ ve 
done it by making an artiﬁ cial agent that  really thinks.  2 Humor, we will 
argue, depends on  thought — it is not just a reﬂ exive response to a stimulus 
that is inherently funny; it requires a certain category of information pro-
cessing involving most of the faculties of thought, including memory 
recall, inference, and semantic integration. It follows, then, that our book 
must sketch a theory of the kind of general intelligence that could support 
a genuine sense of humor. 
 Consider, in contrast, some recent attempts at creating computational 
humor algorithms. These attempts include JAPE and STANDUP (Binsted 
1996; Binsted and Ritchie 2001; Ritchie et al. 2006), WISCRAIC (McKay 
2000), and HAHAcronym (Stock and Strapparava 2005). All of these models 
are algorithmic and syntactical in nature — using punning riddles, phono-
logical word substitution, and acronyms, respectively, as a speciﬁ c gram-
matical structure of humorous sentence and then making semantic or 
phonological substitutions out of lexical tables to create the joke. The 
largest drawbacks of all the models are that they cannot evaluate the 
humor they have created, nor can they even be said to know in any sense 
that they are creating humor. In fact, they do not always create humor; 
rather, at best they have a higher than chance likelihood of creating a 
stimulus that can evoke a mildly amused response in humans. They have 
no critical capacity to understand or evaluate the humor created by others, 
to say nothing of the capacity to be amused by it.  3 Instead of a  “ sense of 
2.   This complexity class has not been proven to have the property of reducibility that is found 
in complexity theory; take our comparison metaphorically, for now. We ’ re told that the class 
of AI-complete problems was ﬁ rst described by Fanya Montalvo. Salvatore Attardo may have 
been the ﬁ rst to apply the similar term  “ AI-hard ”  to humor in his book  Humorous Texts: A 
Semantic and Pragmatic Analysis (2001).
3.   We are aware of one attempt at computational humor detection: Mihalcea and Strapparava 
(2005) used Na ï ve Bayes classiﬁ ers and Support Vector Machines to separate  “ one-liner ”  jokes 
from other one-line text snippets with impressive results. However, we must interpret these 
results carefully; these and other machine classiﬁ cation methods notoriously segment the data-
sets they are given based on features that are not necessarily apparent to the experimenter. In 
this case, it is very likely that the superﬁ cial content or grammatical structure of these one-liners 
(rather than their effects on the mind) is enough information to suggest which are jokes and 

6 
Chapter 1
humor, ”  then, they have a very strict generation algorithm reminiscent of 
traditional grammar-based natural language processing models. Recent 
research in sentence comprehension suggests that the grammar-based 
model of language processing does not describe the human mechanism 
that performs the same job (Jackendoff 2002). We agree, and we will argue 
moreover that a nonalgorithmic approach is more suited to the problem 
of comprehension in general, and to the problem of humor comprehen-
sion and appreciation in particular. 
 As we have said, we do not yet offer any running computational models. 
Instead, we will show what features a good computational theory should 
contain, and what subproblems we will have to solve on a path to getting 
to that theory. Its key novelties are a new evolutionary explanation of the 
origin of humor; an ecologically motivated theory of the emotional com-
ponent of mirth; and a cognitive theory of humor and laughter (based on 
insightful earlier theories, but made more precise here) that lays out some 
of the informational and procedural requirements for a computational 
substrate that could support artiﬁ cial humor. The base capacity for humor, 
the innate  4  “ funny bone ” that provides the underlying machinery without 
which humor could not exist, is described for the ﬁ rst time, but it is only 
part of the story. We also deal with how the base capacity has been exten-
sively exploited by our highly social species. We show how the intentional 
stance — the involuntarily adopted perspective that  “ automatically ” 
attempts to attribute beliefs and desires to every complex moving thing 
we encounter — has allowed humor purveyors and aﬁ cionados to extend 
the reach of their art. Being funny is not just for fun; humor has been 
exapted as a tool in mate selection and sexual competition, allegiance 
which are not — no cognitive processing is being performed whatsoever. Although not an 
instance of humor detection, such a computational humor indicator is interesting because it 
points to cues that humans (or machines) can use to determine whether they are being told a 
joke before they ﬁ nd the humor in it, thus giving them a head start in looking for mirth-
inducing content.
4.   A note on nativism: We are aware that claims of innateness may immediately offend the 
sensibilities of many developmentally minded researchers. Those readers will certainly, and 
correctly, note that many factors about our subject of study — or any biological subject of study —
 will be determined through environmental inter action during ontogeny. If you are one of these 
readers, we ask you to withhold your judgment for just a moment, while we explain: There is 
certainly a complex developmental path from pure genetic information to the behavioral char-
acteristic of humor; however, if environmental regularities ensure that this path is taken in all 
healthy members of the species so that some fundamental aspect of the trait is shared in us all, 
then  in a useful manner of speaking , the trait is innate. In this fairly regular environment, the 
genes specify the trait.

Introduction 
7
probing, belief extraction, and the building of social capital, for instance. 
Our theory is an unabashedly eclectic theory, drawing heavily on existing 
work on humor while providing a novel unifying framework for that work 
that accounts both for the patterns already discerned by generations of 
earlier humor theorists and for their failure to ﬁ nd a satisfactorily deep 
account of the biological mechanisms that account for those patterns. 
 Humor is a hard problem. Consider how wildly diverse a collection you 
can make of funny things: 
 1.   Puns and wordplay 
 2.   The rubber-faced antics of Jim Carrey or the deadpan gestures of Charlie 
Chaplin 
 3.   Caricatures 
 4.   Situation comedies 
 5.   Musical jokes 
 6.   Cartoons 
 7.   “ Real-world ” humor, the perhaps uncategorizable  objets trouv é s that 
occur in daily life, and cause us to laugh, whether or not they get turned 
into items of comedy 
 What could these possibly have in common — aside from the fact that 
they can all be very funny? This bafﬂ ing diversity (and there ’ s more) tempts 
everyone to concentrate on a few favored genres that work well for one ’ s 
theory and set aside the others  “ for the time being. ” Moreover, everywhere 
one looks, one discovers the lack of sharp boundaries or thresholds. For 
instance, some caricatures are entertaining without being amusing, some 
provoke a smile or a chuckle, and others are downright hilarious; the 
spectrum of wordplay runs from intriguing puzzles to laugh-provoking 
puns, with every intermediate shade well exempliﬁ ed. To make matters 
worse, there is tremendous variability in who ﬁ nds what funny. Humor 
is heavily dependent on shared background assumptions, moods, and 
attitudes. Then there are the secondary effects or metaeffects, such as the 
pleasure that a good joke brings to someone who has heard it before, a 
pleasure that is less  “ emotional ”  than  “ intellectual ” — the appreciation 
from a critical standpoint of the excellence of design of the particular item. 
(This is like a chef ’ s pleasure in just thinking about the perfect sauce for 
some dish.) 
 Taking the evolutionary perspective seriously is the only way, we think, 
of ﬁ nding the unity in this diversity. Before Darwin articulated his theory 
of evolution by natural selection, life forms were bafﬂ ingly diverse — 
what did they have in common aside from being alive? Darwin drew on 

8 
Chapter 1
a vast repository of excellently observed and codiﬁ ed natural history, a 
magniﬁ cent database waiting to be turned into evidence by a suitably 
fundamental theory. Following his example, we will canvass the treasury 
of earlier work on what might be called the natural history of humor, 
taking advantage of the many insightful analyses and observations to be 
found there and trying to show how to position them into a theoretical 
structure that can explain both the patterns and the exceptions. 
 
 
 
 

 2   What Is Humor For? 
 Q:  How do you tell the sex of a chromosome? 
 A:  Pull down its genes. 
 Much of the recent research on humor has been devoted to determining 
what makes a thing funny (or  how a particular stimulus makes us laugh). 
This investigation, while interesting and insightful, is incomplete in that 
it explores the effects of possible mechanisms of discernment without 
considering their ultimate purposes. Knowing the purpose of any 
mechanism can help one understand the operation of that mechanism, 
while knowing the operation can often make apparent the purpose. Arthur 
Koestler expressed his own puzzlement about the purpose of humor 
eloquently: 
 What is the survival value of the involuntary, simultaneous contraction of ﬁ fteen 
facial muscles associated with certain noises that are often irrepressible? Laughter 
is a reﬂ ex, but unique in that it serves no apparent biological purpose; one might 
call it a luxury reﬂ ex. Its only utilitarian function, as far as one can see, is to 
provide temporary relief from utilitarian pressures. On the evolutionary level 
where laughter arises, an element of frivolity seems to creep into a humorless 
universe governed by the laws of thermodynamics and the survival of the ﬁ ttest. 
(Koestler 1964, p. 31) 
 Consider the old-fashioned device pictured in ﬁ gure 2.1. If the purpose 
is not already known to you, it might take you quite a while to ﬁ gure out 
how all the parts interact with gratifying efﬁ ciency to peel, core, and slice 
an apple in one fell swoop. When you know its purpose, its procedures of 
operation — the affordances it provides within the context of an apple —
 become obvious, however elusive they were before. A sense of humor is 
like the apple peeler without any apples around. It is a complex trait, seem-
ingly unique to our species, with some awkward facets that make it look 
as if it was designed for some very speciﬁ c purpose that we cannot yet 
deduce. What could it be for?  

10 
Chapter 2
 Sometimes a trait may be something that was an adaptive solution to 
a problem that now no longer exists. (For example, though effective for 
our hairier hominid ancestors, goose bumps from a shivering chill, in rela-
tively hairless humans, provide only a futile attempt at trapping an insulat-
ing layer of air.) Perhaps humor served a difﬁ cult-to-deduce purpose in 
times past that it no longer is required to serve. (Our sweet tooth no longer 
serves us well, but it was a ﬁ ne adaptation in earlier environments. Perhaps 
our funny bone is like that.) Or perhaps we might discover that evolution 
did not design the trait at all — it is just a nondebilitating by-product of 
another trait that  has enhanced the ﬁ tness of the bearer ’ s progenitors. 
Music appreciation — and the concomitant desire to make music — is a plau-
sible (but contentious) candidate for an example of such a by-product 
(Patel 2007; Huron 2006; Pinker 1997; Dennett 2006; cf. Levitin 2006).  1 
Perhaps humor is like this. 
 Here is another possibility: If some aspects of our sense of humor were 
designed, they may have been designed for the beneﬁ t of some replicators 
other than us. The swift, broadband information highway that language 
 Figure 2.1 
1.   Though see Minsky 1981 for a conjecture that is quite in line with the current theory of 
humor in explaining the evolutionary beneﬁ t of the joy in music.

What Is Humor For? 
11
provides our species is no doubt a major adaptation, permitting huge 
amounts of valuable (acquired) information to be transmitted from 
parents to their offspring, but this highway can also be used by other 
trafﬁ c, such as oblique transmission of possibly maladaptive information 
by manipulative nonkin (Boyd and Richerson 2005; Richerson and Boyd 
2006; Sterelny 2003), and various species of opportunistic  junk . Just as 
cold viruses have evolved to exploit the sneezing reﬂ ex, the better to 
broadcast their progeny to infect new hosts, so informational viruses may 
have evolved to exploit the human dispositions to communicate so as to 
spread themselves through a population of (amused) hosts. This  meme ’ s 
eye perspective (Dawkins 1989, 1993; Dennett 1990, 1991, 1995, 2006; 
Blackmore 1999) highlights the possibility that our communicative adap-
tations make available a new kind of niche in which certain kinds of 
cultural replicators may thrive. Humorous memes seem to be a particu-
larly plausible candidate for fecund cultural replicators that may not be 
particularly good for us, though they fuel their own replication by provid-
ing us with a bounty of pleasure. (It has often been speculated — but not 
yet proven — that sexually transmitted disease vectors may have adapta-
tions that enhance sexual pleasure or desire and thus promote promiscu-
ity, the better to ensure their own spread to new hosts. Similarly, the 
pleasure we take in humor may be less a sign that it is good for  us than 
that it is good for the replicative prowess of the memes that provoke it, 
exploiting a susceptibility that evolved for other purposes.) 
 On the other hand, whether or not humor started out as a neutral 
or even parasitic cultural symbiont, it may have been appropriated at 
some point for various ﬁ tness-enhancing purposes. An obvious 
possibility is that human hosts who have a large store of high-quality 
humor to dispense (and dispense well) are more popular, more likely 
to inﬂ uence others, and hence more likely to accumulate the social 
capital that enhances their reproductive ﬁ tness. A more direct link to 
ﬁ tness would be proposed by a sexual selection hypothesis: Females use 
sense of humor (in males) as a hard-to-fake advertisement of intelligence 
and power: 
 Some theories of humor have proposed that laughter evolved to promote group 
bonding, discharge nervous tension, or keep us healthy. The more laughter the 
better. Such theories predict that we should laugh at any joke, however stupid, 
however many times we have heard it before, yet we do not. A good sense of 
humor means a discriminating sense of humor, not a hyena-like shriek at every 
repetitive pratfall. Such discrimination is easy to understand if our sense of humor 

12 
Chapter 2
evolved in the service of sexual choice, to assess the joke-telling ability of others. 
(Miller 2000, p. 241) 
 Since humor is hard to fake, both in the creating and in (the suppres-
sion of) appreciation, it is particularly valuable as a litmus test not just for 
intelligence but for enduring personality traits, hidden loyalties, and 
socially crucial attitudes and beliefs. A young man who cannot abstain 
from snickering when presented with a juvenile scatological remark wears 
his immaturity on his sleeve; people who cannot chuckle at satire when it 
is deftly on target may betray their political loyalties, just as someone who 
casually makes a racist quip betrays a cast of mind that might otherwise 
be concealed. Detecting these signs, and other such practical uses of humor, 
may well have become established in societies without the (full) apprecia-
tion of the individuals who adopt them. Cultural evolution of valuable 
behaviors such as these does not depend on the behavers ’  understanding 
the rationales of their value, any more than cuckoo chicks have to under-
stand the point of their precocious attempts to murder their nestmates in 
order to get a larger share of the food provided by their foster parents. For 
instance, people may not have the slightest idea just why they distrust 
various others who laugh or don ’ t laugh at various moments; these folks 
just  “ strike them the wrong way, ” while others, whose laughter is felt to 
be genuine and which synchronizes with their own, are sought out and 
categorized as friends. But before any of these effects can evolve culturally, 
there has to be a genetically evolved basis with a more fundamental ratio-
nale, a proclivity that can be harnessed by these social ends, wittingly or 
unwittingly. 
 We think we have identiﬁ ed the core mechanism from which humor 
indirectly emerges. It is part of our genetic endowment, a design feature 
that evolved to solve a computational problem faced by our brains that 
has not heretofore been identiﬁ ed. In short, we have Chevrolet brains 
running Maserati software, and this strain on our cerebral resources led to 
the evolution of a brilliant stopgap, a very speciﬁ c error-elimination 
capacity that harnessed preexisting  “ emotional ” reward mechanisms 
and put them to new uses. Using terms that we will explain in due course, 
here is our theory in a nutshell: 
 Our brains are engaged full time in real-time (risky) heuristic search, 
generating presumptions about what will be experienced next in every 
domain. This time-pressured, unsupervised generation process has neces-
sarily lenient standards and introduces content — not all of which can be 
properly checked for truth — into our mental spaces. If left unexamined, 

What Is Humor For? 
13
the inevitable errors in these vestibules of consciousness would ultimately 
continue on to contaminate our world knowledge store. So there has to 
be a policy of double-checking these candidate beliefs and surmisings, and 
the discovery and resolution of these at breakneck speed is maintained 
by a powerful reward system — the feeling of humor; mirth — that must 
support this activity in competition with all the other things you could be 
thinking about. 
 


 3   The Phenomenology of Humor 
 He who laughs last thinks slowest. 
 In its original meaning,  phenomenology refers to a reasoned catalog of 
phenomena — patterns of features or behaviors — in advance of theory. 
Thus William Gilbert compiled a brilliant phenomenology of magnets —
 what they do, where they are found, how they can be inﬂ uenced — in 
1600, centuries before there was a good theory of magnetism. Many 
have tried to produce theories of humor, without much success, but 
they have left us with the good beginnings of a phenomenology of 
humor, the set of phenomena — both subjective and objective — that any 
good theory must account for. We will draw heavily on this work, but 
none of these writers has yet drawn all the features together in one 
place, a task which we will attempt to do. We will also draw attention 
to some features either not mentioned or underappreciated by other 
theorists, features on the outskirts of humor, or even outside humor 
altogether, but important, we believe, in understanding the central 
phenomena. 
 The dependence of humor on intelligence is made manifest in a variety 
of English words.  Nonsense and  absurdity both play dual roles, alluding to 
incoherence, contradiction, or ungrammaticality on the one hand — fail-
ures of reason in a fairly strict sense — but also being used to characterize 
amusing anomalies and nonserious wordplay. The absurdity of Albert 
Camus is not the absurdity of the Marx Brothers, but it takes considerable 
intelligence to appreciate either of them. The terms  ridiculous and  ludicrous 
remind us that something absurd can be an object of ridicule or mockery. 
Being a  fool is being stupid, whereas  playing the fool can be a demanding 
exercise of intelligence. When one  feels foolish , one is embarrassed by one ’ s 
own display of low intelligence. A quick- witted person is smart but not 
necessarily funny, whereas a  witty person is endowed with a talent for 

16 
Chapter 3
creating (mainly verbal, intellectual) humor. The witless fool and the witty 
comedian both have the capacity to make us laugh heartily, one inadver-
tently and the other intentionally. 
 A.   Humor as a Property of Objects or Events  
 I wondered why the Frisbee was getting bigger, and then it hit me. 
 If you tell a joke in the forest, and nobody laughs, was it a joke? 
 — Steven Wright 
 As usual, when broaching a puzzling phenomenon about which people 
have strong convictions and pet theories, we need to say a bit about how 
we propose to deﬁ ne humor, casting aside some of the misbegotten 
common conceptions of it. The  Oxford English Dictionary mirrors common 
thought when it states that humor is: 
 a.   That quality of action, speech, or writing, which excites amusement; oddity, 
jocularity, facetiousness, comicality, fun. 
 b.   The faculty of perceiving what is ludicrous or amusing, or of expressing it in 
speech, writing, or other composition. 
 The  American Heritage Dictionary proposes  “ the quality that makes some-
thing laughable or amusing; funniness. ” There is a tight little circle of 
deﬁ nitions that go from  humor to  funny and  amusing , and then to  that 
which causes laughter  — and when you look up  laughter you ﬁ nd that it is 
the expression made when something is funny, amusing, or humorous. 
From this, and from our daily lives, two apparent truisms emerge: humor 
causes laughter, and humor is a  quality of the things that we laugh at. Both 
truisms are in need of serious adjustment. The ﬁ rst has already been argued 
against by Provine (2000) and others: Although humor is often followed 
by laughter, laughter is not always, and is perhaps only seldom, the effect 
of humor. We will consider these points in due course. Laughter has a 
variety of causes, and when we look more closely at how (and why) laugh-
ter is caused, the idea of humor as a quality of perceived objects and events 
will also have to be abandoned, or at least transformed into something 
quite unfamiliar. 
 The obvious ﬁ rst adjustment to the idea of humor as a quality 
is to avail ourselves of the familiar distinction, ﬁ rst formulated by 
Charles 
Boyle 
in 
the 
seventeenth-century 
and 
most 
famously 
articulated by John Locke (1690) shortly thereafter, between  primary 

The Phenomenology of Humor 
17
qualities like size, shape, and solidity, and  secondary qualities like color, 
taste,  1 smell, or warmth, which can be seen to be  dispositions to produce 
experiences of certain sorts in organisms of certain kinds. Primary qualities 
may be thought to be  “ intrinsic, ” owing nothing to the idiosyncrasies of 
any observer, whereas secondary qualities are — and must be — deﬁ ned and 
identiﬁ ed by virtue of their common effects on a reference class of (normal) 
observers. What all red things have in common is just this: They provoke 
the  red response (something to be deﬁ ned in terms of phenomenology, 
psychology, neurophysiology . . .) in normal human beings, for instance. 
No matter how similar, chemically or structurally, the surface of B may be 
to the surface of red object A, if people don ’ t see B as red under normal 
circumstances, B is not red; and no matter how different the surfaces of A 
and B may be, if normal human observers can ’ t tell them apart visually 
and declare them both red, they are both red. 
 So, is the humor in a joke or cartoon like redness, a Lockean secondary 
quality? First we should note that humor is deﬁ nitely not a primary quality 
of anything, in spite of the conclusion one might uncritically draw from 
some observations. One of the colloquial views of humor is that it is an 
intrinsic property of certain things in the world. Jokes have been said to 
be  “ context free ” in comparison with other speech acts, for instance (Wyer 
and Collins 1992). But humor is deﬁ nitely not context free, and it is not 
a simple intrinsic property of things in the world. We may or may not  “ see 
the humor in the situation ” depending on the contents of our mind at the 
time. This is not like failing to appreciate the size or shape of something 
we see because we are distracted. The joke, rather than being funny 
intrinsically, can be seen as an object that reliably provokes the sense of 
humor in a mind. 
 Humor is like redness in that it is best understood as a product 
of the way we have been designed by evolution to detect a certain type 
of information about the world. There is a type of information in the 
world (information presented to us by what we call red objects) that, 
because of a cognitive architecture that has evolved for detection of 
1.   The chemical phenylthiocarbamide is often used as a demonstration of this fact: It tastes 
bitter to the majority of people, but about 30 percent of the population can ’ t taste it at all! 
Clearly, there is nothing intrinsically bitter about phenylthiocarbamide — it ’ s not that those 30 
percent are deﬁ cient in being able to taste  “ phenylthiocarbamide ’ s bitterness. ” Rather, there is 
a category of people whose perceptual constitution creates the sensation of bitterness when 
tasting this chemical, and another category of people, built differently, for whom no bitterness-
receptors are activated by this chemical.

18 
Chapter 3
exactly this type of information, produces the sense of redness in us. 
Similarly, there is a type of information in the world (presented by jokes, 
for instance) that, also because of the architecture that evolved to 
detect it (among other things), produces the sense of something funny or 
humorous in us. 
 In the absence of any object that normally produces redness in us, we 
can still experience redness. For example, we can experience it while 
looking at white objects, in a white light that has been ﬁ ltered by red 
sunglasses to let only red through. So a red object — an object normally 
seen as red — is not necessary for the experience of redness. Any object 
might do. Alternatively, we could trick our minds by closing our eyes and 
stimulating our optic nerves in the proper manner to make our minds 
think there is redness somewhere in the world. The only thing that is 
necessary for an experience (veridical or hallucinatory) of redness is an 
architecture of sensation and perception designed to detect a certain kind 
of information, and a history of sensing that kind of information. This 
history is  “ practically ”  necessary because, barring a miracle or cosmic 
coincidence — of the imaginary sort philosophers are fond of talking out — it 
is the history of interactions, of use of this kind of information, that shapes 
the architecture to make it sensitive to just this kind of information. 
 The same goes for humor. Redness has evolved in plants as a sign to 
attract pollinators on the one hand or to alert potential grazers to their 
toxicity on the other, and just as we can ’ t understand what redness has 
evolved to mean to us and other species by a microscopic examination of 
the structural details of red surfaces or red pigments, so we will fail to 
understand humor by a focused and tunnel-visioned examination of the 
intrinsic or structural features of jokes, funny pictures, and other humor-
ous objects and events. 
 What does it mean, then, to call something funny? It means that the 
item in question is a package of information that can reliably be predicted 
to evoke the humor response in certain people. Likewise, saying that 
someone is funny means that that person often says or does things that 
evoke the humor response in people — who have a sense of humor. (Red 
things don ’ t evoke the red response in those who are color-blind.) 
 What we are proposing has a kinship with David Hume ’ s account of 
our experience of causation: We see B following A on many occasions 
and eventually acquire a disposition to expect B as soon as we encounter 
A; this feeling of anticipation, which is a habit in us, we tend to misidentify 
as a direct perception of causation outside us. This foible of externalization 
or misattribution has many well-known instances, such as when we 

The Phenomenology of Humor 
19
mislocate our own anger in others. There are even jokes about it:  “ I think 
you should stop drinking; your face is getting all blurry. ” Funny things, we 
will argue, are like blurry faces — they depend on the subjective state of the 
audience for their existence. We are going to call this fallacious tendency —
 to consider the blurriness as a property of the face — the projection error . 
 Consider an example of how the projection error can inﬂ uence even 
our scientiﬁ c inquiries into humor. Provine (1993, 2000) provides some 
evidence that we laugh at many things that are not humorous. In survey-
ing the statements made before laughter during casual settings between 
friends and strangers at social gatherings, he found that  “ only about 10 
percent to 20 percent of prelaugh comments were estimated by [his] 
assistants to be even remotely humorous ” (2000, p. 40). As it stands, this 
claim risks serious misunderstanding, since there are at least two distinct 
kinds of laughter. 
 B.   Duchenne Laughter 
 Why do Germans laugh three times when you tell them a joke? First, when you 
tell it, second, when you explain it, and third, when they get it. 
 Provine claims that laughter has its own reason for being, and that laughter 
is neither necessary nor sufﬁ cient for humor — and we agree. On the other 
hand, however, laughter and humor are clearly not disconnected phenom-
ena. We want to pursue a somewhat different claim: The relation between 
humor and laughter has some similarity to the relation between thought 
and speech. Thoughts  “ happen in the mind, ” but their expression in 
speech acts is usually indirect, monitored, and often censored. There is 
thought without speech and speech without thought. (As Mose Allison ’ s 
song puts it,  “ Your mind is on vacation and your mouth is working over-
time. ” ) Laughter and humor also come apart, but in somewhat different 
ways. Laughter, like speech, must be understood as a social phenomenon, 
not just a feature of individual psychology or physiology, though its 
evolved physiological basis is very important. 
 Let ’ s ﬁ rst review the difference between amused and merely social 
laughter. Laughter comes in two physiologically distinct varieties: sponta-
neous — expressed heartily by smiling and laughing with the brow fur-
rowed and the corners of the mouth turned up strongly by pull from the 
 orbicularis oculi — and simulated (either consciously or not), in which the 
orbicular muscle plays little or no part. Guillaume Benjamin Duchenne de 
Boulogne (1862) ﬁ rst noted this difference in his patients, and so the 

20 
Chapter 3
former variety is now known as  Duchenne laughter . It has been shown that 
true enjoyment only occurs with Duchenne laughter, whereas non-
Duchenne laughter usually implies some ulterior purpose in laughing 
other than as an expression of enjoyment. Duchenne ’ s conclusions have 
been shown to be robust by many studies (Duchenne 1862; Frank, Ekman, 
and Friesen 1993; Frank and Ekman 1993; Keltner and Bonanno 1997). 
The Germans in the joke above emit non-Duchenne laughter twice, and 
Duchenne laughter the third time. 
 It has been argued that Duchenne laughter may be a reliable indicator 
of humorous emotion, but (as noted by Gervais and Wilson 2005) Provine 
doesn ’ t draw the distinction between Duchenne and non-Duchenne laugh-
ter, so the possibility that non-Duchenne laughter makes up a portion of 
his results needs to be investigated. It is also possible, of course, that his 
data include cases in which non-Duchenne laughter is used to express the 
detection of humor — for instance, by those who have already heard a joke, 
or are not particularly amused but wish to support the mood — and this 
also needs exploration. Answering these questions would require a differ-
ent and far more difﬁ cult methodology from that which Provine has used 
thus far. Simple observation of when people laugh, and what stimuli pre-
ceded the laugh, is a good start, but it will not do for the larger picture. 
To determine whether there really was humor in the things that subjects 
laughed at, a researcher would need to interview the people who laughed 
and ask, one way or another, if they felt that something was funny when 
they laughed; and, if so, what was funny, and why? (It might not be at all 
obvious to the researcher, but very obvious to the in-group being studied.) 
The  “ what and why ” will be a complex tale of semantic integration between 
speech, memory, gesture, and inference data — not simply a review of the 
comment made before the laugh. Some of these factors would be very hard, 
or impossible, to measure experimentally in the natural environment 
that Provine was collecting his data in. If captured, those data would 
then need to be further explored experimentally to determine whether 
the same stimuli, presented in the same order, were objectively funny to 
other subjects (in various categories, with some level of statistical signiﬁ -
cance). It would be useful, too, of course, to determine whether the laugh-
ter was of the Duchenne variety or not. Although this would not be an 
easy task, anything less leaves too many important questions unresolved. 
We think Provine is right that not (quite)  all of laughter is provoked by 
humor, but we would expect that much more of laughter would prove to 
be associated with humor if Provine ’ s experiments were extended in light 
of these details. 

The Phenomenology of Humor 
21
 The theory sketched in this book predicts that if someone were to 
pursue such studies, they would reveal that even non-Duchenne laughter 
often indicates some level of humor detection by the laugher (according 
to the deﬁ nition of humor to be given here). For now let ’ s continue pursu-
ing the hypothesis that we do laugh, at least sometimes, at things that are 
not humorous. It is difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd incontrovertible evidence for this 
hypothesis, but we will evaluate some prospects here. 
 The usual anecdote surrounding the behavior of laughing without a 
proper humor stimulus (often called  inappropriate laughter ) is the idea of 
laughing at a funeral. However obtrusive or disturbing it is, the  “ inappro-
priateness ”  of this behavior does not imply that there was nothing humor-
ous running through the mind of the laugher. The laugher may be laughing 
appropriately as the result of any number of humorous thoughts in their 
internal monologue, or at a bit of public fumbling that is — unfortunately 
for the solemn occasion — hilarious. What is inappropriate is imposing this 
reaction on an unreceptive public audience who cannot be expected to 
share the amusing content. 
 There is another possible trigger of laughter at funerals — one that arises 
in other situations as well. We ’ ve all experienced laughing in times of 
nervousness when (apparently) nothing funny has happened. Yet this 
(anecdotal) evidence is also difﬁ cult to distinguish from the humor that 
may occur internally due to a wandering mind. Among these possible 
wanderings is laughing at oneself for being inordinately nervous. A differ-
ent explanation might be that the laughter has been faked (non-
Duchenne) for various reasons, including a conscious (or even subconscious) 
attempt to disarm oneself or one ’ s audience or to mask other perhaps 
embarrassing emotional expressions. 
 Further evidence that we have the capacity to laugh in the absence of 
humor comes from cases of neurological damage as well as studies in neu-
roscience. Diseases such as Angelman disorder, pseudobulbar palsy, and 
gelastic epilepsy seem to provide unprovoked laughter, as does Kuru, 
a prion-based neurodegenerative disease similar to Creutzfeldt – Jakob 
disease (Provine 2000; Black 1982). Santiago Arroyo and his colleagues 
report an epileptic patient who presents with frequent seizures that include 
laughing and crying. The patient self-reports a high level of confusion at 
her own behavior because she does not feel any level of joy or mirth asso-
ciated with the laughing (Arroyo et al. 1993). Another patient was observed 
(Sperli et al. 2006) who would smile and laugh, but reported no sense of 
mirth whatsoever, when his cingulate cortex was stimulated electrically. 

22 
Chapter 3
These cases suggest that there is a  functionally discrete network in the brain 
that controls laughter and perhaps another that is involved in the feeling 
of mirth. This is interesting, because although there must be  some complex 
causal chain (possibly redundant and replete with recurrent loops  2 ) between 
the discrimination of humor and the normally resulting laughter, absent 
these indications from neurological irregularity, there would be no strong 
reason to suppose it was organized into discrete parts that might become 
dissociated cleanly by pathology. Additionally, the confusion reported by 
Arroyo ’ s patient indicates a sense that something is wrong when laughter 
does not accompany mirth, suggesting that even our subconscious under-
standing is that laughter and mirth are associated. 
 Lastly, there is research claiming to show that people are prone to laugh-
ing in the presence of other laughers even when they are not provided the 
stimulus that caused the others to laugh. The wide use of television and 
radio laugh tracks is predicated on research into a related effect, the 
enhancement of the perception of humor in experienced content by the 
presence of laughter in others. Provine (2000) removed the confound of 
associated content by presenting listeners with canned laughter from a 
laugh-box in the absence of other stimuli. He says that almost half of the 
student participants in his test, given no humorous content, laughed when 
they heard the laughter the ﬁ rst time. To be cautious, we should note that 
it is possible that the idea of someone laughing when nothing seems to be 
humorous may be found to be humorous itself, and we also need to con-
sider the prospect that this laughter is of the non-Duchenne type. The 
social demands of the experimental situation may be an additional 
confound. 
 All told, there is some evidence, though none is overwhelming, that 
laughter can occur without humor, but probably not as often as Provine 
suggests. The question remains whether there is any Duchenne laughter 
without humor. We are inclined to agree with Gervais and Wilson that 
2.   Parvizi and colleagues (2001) have reported on a patient with pathological laughter and 
crying disorder who reported that, if his irregularly triggered laughter lasted long enough, he 
usually began to feel mirth, which indicates the existence of some kind of feedback loop that 
allows laughter to trigger mirth, even though mirth typically triggers laughter. Researchers have 
also found evidence that facial expressions including Duchenne smiling and laughing (Laird 
1974; Lanzetta, Cartwright-Smith, and Eleck 1976; Soussignan 2002; Strack, Martin, and Stepper 
1988) can in fact be  determinants of emotion. It is not clear why this may be the case, but one 
idea is that there is a beneﬁ t — of commitment — to actually feeling an emotion you may have 
chosen to fake. It is possible that such reports may someday also help inform an explanation 
of the mechanism of contagion in laughter.

The Phenomenology of Humor 
23
there is not — except perhaps in neuropathological cases. It is also possible 
that fabricated, non-Duchenne laughter is frequently conjured intention-
ally to exhibit appreciation of circumstances that are at least  similar to 
humorous ones, or simply very weak forms of humor that don ’ t have the 
potential to drive us naturally into Duchenne laughter. For instance, you 
can appreciate the humor in a circumstance — a joke, a line in a comedy, 
a stereotypic situation — that you ﬁ nd too familiar to evoke genuine mirth 
in you on this occasion, but you may wish to acknowledge that the occa-
sion really is funny, and join in the laughter. In chapter 12, we will consider 
whether non-Duchenne laughter may have arisen in an evolutionary arms 
race: A false display of laughter, if convincing, may help a suitor impress 
a potential mate. 
 Nonetheless, the simple existence of volitional (nonspontaneous) non-
Duchenne laughter is enough to tell us that not all laughter need be in 
response to humor. (In Batesian mimicry, a poisonous snake that is brightly 
marked to warn off predators may be imitated by a nonpoisonous variety 
that sports the same colors. The warning signal on the nonpoisonous snake 
is still  “ about ”  poison — it is just a false signal. Non-Duchenne laughter can 
similarly be  “ about ”  humor, even when humor is not its direct cause.) On 
the other hand — we don ’ t need experimental evidence to show us this — we 
don ’ t always laugh when we do ﬁ nd something funny. For instance, you 
will encounter jokes in this book that you may ﬁ nd funny to a mild extent 
and yet they do not make you laugh out loud. (If you want to describe 
yourself as  “ laughing on the inside, ” this is what we call the  feeling of 
humor or mirth.) There is apparently something of a continuum: Some-
times we see the humor that others are laughing at but do not ﬁ nd it 
particularly funny, funny enough to provoke our laughter; other times we 
ﬁ nd ourselves — for one social reason or another — stiﬂ ing our urge to laugh, 
and sometimes this is quite a strain.  3  
 Laughter, then, is neither necessary nor sufﬁ cient for humor. This 
double dissociation suggests that laughter exists — or used to exist — for its 
own purpose aside from humor, that it arose originally to serve other bio-
logical, psychological, or social ends and has been exapted into its current 
normal, but exceptioned, role. Humor cannot be deﬁ ned simply as what 
we laugh at, even though — as we all know from our own experience —
3.   Ekman and Friesen (1971) theorize a similar relationship between all emotions and their 
expressions, suggesting there is a one-to-one relationship and that although each emotion com-
monly begets its attendant expression, volitional control can allow us to, at least sometimes, 
feign or mask these expressions.

24 
Chapter 3
 laughter consistently accompanies humor. A thorough explanation of 
humor should give a reason for humor to exist independently of laughter, 
a separate purpose for laughter, and an explanation of the relationship 
between the two that describes why laughter normally expresses the 
detection of humor. 
 C.   The Systematic Ineffability of Humor 
 Circular deﬁ nition:  see Deﬁ nition, circular.  
 I don ’ t have to tell you it goes without saying there are some things better left 
unsaid. I think that speaks for itself. The less said about it the better. 
 — George Carlin,  Braindroppings (1997) 
 We are confronted by a tight circle of interlocking, and hence uninforma-
tive, deﬁ nitions. Humor lies in the recognition — a sense we have in the 
mind — that something is funny. Funny things provoke the feeling of 
mirth. Mirth is the response to humor. 
 Saying, informatively, what humor is proves to be as difﬁ cult as saying 
what redness is. We all know these things well from our own private expe-
rience, but something prevents us from engaging in any further analysis 
of those experiences. It may seem that we are even unable to tell if our 
own mirth or our subjective experience of red is similar to others ’ . This is 
an instance of the notorious philosophical  “ problem of other minds, ” and 
the difﬁ culty deﬁ ning humor looks suspiciously similar to the particularly 
frustrating case of the possibility of  “ inverted qualia ” or  “ inverted spec-
trum ”  (see, e.g., Dennett 1988, 1991, pp. 389 – 398). 
 The etymology of the term provides an interesting but in the end not 
very satisfying intuition: The  humors were, in ancient physiology, the four 
ﬂ uids of the body (blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile). As the 
proportions of these ﬂ uids was thought to determine our temperament, 
the term  humor came to be associated with mood — one could be  in good 
humor , meaning one ’ s ﬂ uids were in balance. Eventually, the word came 
to be associated primarily with the positive temperament of amusement, 
as it still is today, but the only insight this chronicle of historical develop-
ment provides into the nature of the phenomenon is that we use the term 
to refer to some kind of enjoyment. 
 We can close in a little on the phenomenology. Mirth — alternatively 
called amusement or hilarity — is, like most emotions, a graduated phenom-
enon. It ranges from a gentle tickling of the mind to an intense and 

The Phenomenology of Humor 
25
overwhelming emotion. It sometimes forces uncontrollable laughter on us, 
and at other times, when we feel just a mild blush of amusement, we still 
feel compelled to indicate the feeling with intentional (non-Duchenne) 
laughter or perhaps just a smile. What is common in all of these conditions 
is, well, a feeling, the feeling we get about the things we laugh at when 
we are genuinely entertained. When you  “ get ”  a joke, there is enjoyment —
 including a kind of satisfaction in having ﬁ gured it out. (We will explore 
the relation of humor to problem solving and discovery in detail in a later 
chapter.) Moreover, humor, like beauty, is  “ in the eye of the beholder. ” If 
others say that nothing was funny, one may still be willing to claim that 
 “ it was funny  to me . ”  And if pressed further about why it was funny one 
may ﬁ nd that one cannot answer, but not be willing to rescind the claim, 
saying something such as  “ I ’ m not sure why it was funny,  it just was. ” 
 Earlier we discussed Arroyo ’ s patient who laughed during seizures 
without knowing why. Arroyo also reports two patients in whom laughter 
was elicited through electrical stimulation of the fusiform and parahip-
pocampal gyri. For both of these latter patients, mirth did accompany the 
elicited laughter, but neither of the patients could speciﬁ cally attribute the 
mirth to a particular humorous content. The ﬁ rst made attributions such 
as  “ ‘ the meanings of the things changed ’  in a funny way, and  ‘ things sound 
really funny, ’  ” whereas the second attributed the mirth to simply a funny 
feeling, denying any particular thoughts (Arroyo et al. 1993). A similar 
result was reported many years ago by Wilder Penﬁ eld, who, through elec-
trostimulation of the brain in conscious patients, found a region in the 
frontal lobe that, when stimulated, also caused a patient to laugh (Penﬁ eld 
1958). Itzhak Fried has duplicated Penﬁ eld ’ s ﬁ ndings in a patient undergo-
ing tests for her epileptic seizures. When asked what exactly was making 
her laugh, the patient invariably announced that it was the particular 
stimuli she seemed to have been attending to at the moment of the exter-
nal stimulation (Fried et al. 1998). Electrostimulation can clearly cause 
spurious or hallucinated feelings of humor, presumably analogous to 
phantom limb pains, d é j à  vu experiences (hallucinated feelings of 
familiarity), and hallucinated odors and auras during epileptic seizures. 
 The type of feeling we call mirth can be readily enough located in its 
normal milieu of circumstances and reactions, but we want to know why 
there should be such a sort of feeling at all — not just what causes the 
feeling, but  why those causes provoke such a feeling. Yet, the only access 
we have to humor is the self-report of its occurrence. Dennett (1991) 
draws our attention to the inscrutability of the matter with a thought 
experiment: 

26 
Chapter 3
 There is a species of primate in South America, more gregarious than most other 
mammals, with a curious behavior. The members of this species often gather in 
groups, large and small, and in the course of their mutual chattering, under a 
wide variety of circumstances, they are induced to engage in bouts of involuntary, 
convulsive respiration, a sort of loud, helpless, mutually reinforcing group panting 
that sometimes is so severe as to incapacitate them. Far from being aversive, 
however, these attacks seem to be sought out by most members of the species, 
some of whom even appear to be addicted to them. 
 We might be tempted to think that if only we knew what it was like to be 
them, from the inside, we ’ d understand this curious addiction of theirs. If we 
could see it  “ from their point of view, ” we would know what it was for. But in 
this case we can be quite sure that such insight as we might gain would still leave 
matters mysterious. For we already have the access we seek; the species is  Homo 
sapiens (which does indeed inhabit South America, among other places), and the 
behavior is laughter. (Dennett 1991, p. 62) 
 What is it like to be a human experiencing humor  “ from the inside ” ? 
Attempts to answer for ourselves lead us round and round the circle if 
we restrict ourselves to what we can  “ introspect. ”  The question, still con-
spicuously unanswered, of what all funny things have in common has 
been called the  “ central conundrum ” of humor research by an anony-
mous reviewer of our manuscript, and even though there is agreement 
among many theorists of humor that the answer to this conundrum 
 must lie in the internal processes that are provoked in the subject by 
humorous stimuli, most researchers have simply not been prepared to 
theorize realistically, and in sufﬁ cient detail, about possible cognitive 
and emotional brain mechanisms churning away behind the veil of con-
scious access. Faced with the inability to just  see the internal structure, 
the decomposition of parts, the way the gears mesh, when people  “ look 
inward ”  at hilarious moments, they often cannot resist the urge to 
become impromptu theorists. The traditional confound in research that 
uses this kind of data is that subjects claim to be able to know not only 
 that something is funny, but also  why it is funny. Taking their accounts 
as authoritative descriptions of humor would oblige us to accept many 
folk theories, uninformed explanations about what lies behind the invis-
ible wall. An alternative to the traditional phenomenological approach is 
 heterophenomenology (Dennett 1991, 2007a), a perspective that accepts 
people ’ s claims  that they have a certain phenomenological sense, but 
reserves judgment about their claims as to  why they have that sense. 
Once the claims about how it  seems to subjects are isolated by the 
heterophenomenological approach, this opens the path to using other 

The Phenomenology of Humor 
27
external sources of data (and logical analysis and empirical theory-
construction) to explain why in fact people have the phenomenal expe-
riences they do. 
 The approach this book takes toward explaining what humor is and 
how it operates will thus not rely on people ’ s reports about how and why 
they see the humor in jokes. It will be informed by such reports but will 
not take such data as authoritative or decisive. We will ﬁ rst try to discover 
the universal features that seem to coincide with the feeling of mirth. Once 
we have a theory sketch that tells an evolutionarily plausible story about 
how and why the phenomena might arise, we can begin sketching a blue-
print toward engineering an artiﬁ cial agent that can detect, and respond 
appropriately to, humor. 
 D.   Funny-Ha-Ha and Funny-Huh 
 Q:  How do you know if the head chef is a clown? 
 A:  When the food tastes funny.  
 During a lecture the Oxford linguistic philosopher J. L. Austin made the claim 
that although a double negative in English implies a positive meaning, there is 
no language in which a double positive implies a negative. To which the philoso-
pher Sidney Morgenbesser responded in a dismissive tone,  “ Yeah, yeah. ” 
 As already mentioned, there is an undeniable similarity between the joy 
of humor and the joy of problem solving. When we  “ get ”  a joke we feel a 
sense of discovery rather like the sense of triumph when we solve a 
problem. And when we are unable to solve a problem, there is a sense of 
confusion or missing knowledge that is reminiscent of the feeling we get 
when we are unable to get a joke. 
 The multiple senses of the English word  funny may help prime an intu-
ition about humor and its relation to these and other feelings. The primary 
sense is the one we have already been discussing: that synonymous with 
 humorous , the provoker of the emotion of mirth. The second sense of the 
word  funny is more subtle: We use the word at times when we don ’ t feel 
like laughing but rather ﬁ nd some event or state of the world to be unusual 
or strange in a mildly disturbing way. Unexpected discoveries, such as 
coming home to ﬁ nd the lights on when you know you left them off, can 
cause this feeling and make us say,  “ That ’ s funny, I remember turning them 
off . . . ” The joke about the clown chef is a pun that depends on our 
understanding of both senses of the word. (A third, closely related, sense 
just means peculiar or atypical, as in a funny [looking] tree or snowdrift 

28 
Chapter 3
or pebble. Whether the anomaly is in any way noteworthy or threatening 
is another matter.) 
 Related to this second sense is one of trickiness or deceitfulness. The 
old lady next door asks the kids,  “ What kind of funny business are you up 
to? ”  when she sees them skulking around, planning something secret. The 
question implies that she is suspicious, not that she expects to be amused. 
Another example offers yet another shade of meaning:  “ Doctor, my head 
is feeling funny. ” In this patient ’ s claim,  funny is used to mean  “ My head 
is feeling a way that I am unfamiliar with, a way that I am suspicious of. ” 
The adjective  funny in both senses —  “ funny-ha-ha ” and  “ funny-huh ” — is 
applied colloquially to the noun  bone to produce strikingly different mean-
ings: Your  funny bone is the unprotected part of the ulnar nerve by the 
elbow; when you hit your funny bone, especially the ﬁ rst time it happens 
as a child, the feeling is anything but laughable; but you may also speak 
of your sense of humor as your funny bone (parallel to your sweet tooth). 
 Are these secondary uses of  funny just a lexical coincidence, like the fact 
that  bank can mean a river ’ s margin or a ﬁ nancial institution, or might 
there be a deep relation between them? We will argue that, somewhat 
surprisingly, there is indeed an important clue lurking in this family of 
meanings, one that is not restricted to English. 
 An informal survey of linguists and native speakers of a number of 
languages shows that, although far from universal, it is quite common for 
there to be a term for funny-ha-ha that carries a second sense that means 
something along the lines of unusual, strange, unexpected, illogical, or 
senseless. In Mexican Spanish, although not in other dialects, we ﬁ nd that 
two words each carry this meaning. The ﬁ rst,  chistoso , is used in the 
following ways: 
 (A)  “ ¡ Que chistoso! Pens é  que habia cerrado la puerta pero ahora esta 
abierta, ”  which is translated as  “ How strange! I thought that I ’ d closed 
the door, but now it ’ s open. ” 
 (B)  “ Ayer vi una pelicula muy chistosa, ” which means  “ Yesterday I saw 
a very humorous movie. ” 
 The second term is  gracioso , which can be substituted into the same 
sentences and offers the same two senses but with a more formal ﬂ avor: 
 (A’)  “ ¡ Que gracioso! Pens é  que habia cerrado la puerta pero ahora esta 
abierta. ” 
 (B’)  “ Ayer vi una pelicula muy graciosa. ” Or:  “ Ayer vi una pelicula que 
me hizo mucha gracia. ” 

The Phenomenology of Humor 
29
 In a very regional dialect of Argentine Spanish, we have been told, the 
word  loco , which primarily means crazy or insane (a type of senselessness), 
can be used to describe both things that are found to be out of the ordinary 
and things that are humorous. 
 In (Brazilian, if not all) Portuguese, the word  engra ç ado does both these 
jobs. Apparently, it is rather signiﬁ cant — not deﬁ nitive, but an aid to dis-
ambiguation — to alter the intonation and speed of pronunciation of the 
word to change its sense. Said quickly and lightly, it means funny-ha-ha —
 “ Este ﬁ lme  é  mesmo muito engra ç ado! ”  ( “ This movie is really funny ” ) — but 
spoken slowly and deliberately and intoned with a bit of confusion usually 
implies the second sense —  “ En-gra- ç a-do, eu achei que tinha deixado a 
minha chave na bolsa . . . ” ( “ Funny, I thought I had left my keys in my 
purse . . . ” ). 
 The French have a number of words with this property too. First, the 
word  dr ô le carries those two senses exactly. The word  marrant also means 
humorous, and, although it doesn ’ t conventionally mean  “ strange, ”  it can 
be used with that implication in many contexts (e.g.,  “ that ’ s  marrant , I 
could have sworn my keys were on the table ” ). The word  rigolo has similar 
usages as well. In German the word is  komisch , and is used commonly in 
both senses: A joke can be  komisch , or one could say  “ that ’ s  komisch , I 
thought I left my keys right here. ” In Greek, the same term is   α σ τ ε ί  ο ( astio ), 
while   γ έ λ ι ο ( gelio ), the term for laughter, is clearly tightly related to   γ ε λ ο ί ο ς 
( gelios ), the word for ridiculous. This is the same in Hungarian, which uses 
 nevets é g for scornful laughter and  nevets é ges for ridiculous. While  komisch 
and   α σ τ ε ί ο connect  “ funny ”  to  “ strange, ”  the extensions of the multiple 
senses of  gelios and  nevets é ges show the link between the senseless or ridicu-
lous and the laughable. It is a short semantic step from the kind of strange-
ness or sense of unusual/unexpectedness that is carried by the English term 
funny-huh to the kind of senselessness or sense of irrational/unexpected-
ness that is carried by  nevets é ges and  gelios (in their second senses). Hungar-
ian has another word,  vicces , which commonly means  “ humorous ”  or 
 “ funny ”  but can also (though, only occasionally, we are told) be used to 
mean  “ puzzling, ”  as in  “ That ’ s  vicces , I thought the lights were off when 
we left. ” 
 Other related senses for words that mean funny can be found too. In 
Bulgarian, the word   ɫ ɦ е ш  ɧ  ɨ  ( smeshno ), translated directly as  “ humorous, ” 
can also be used to mean stupid or irrational. For instance,  “ С ɦ ɟ ɲ ɧ ɨ  ɟ  ɞ а 
 ɫ ɟ  ɦ и ɫ ɥ и ,  ɱ ɟ  ɬ ɨ в а  ɦ  ɨ  ɠ  ɟ  ɞ а  ɟ  ɬ  а ɤ  а ” ( “ Smeshno e da se misli, che tova moje 
da e taka ” ) means  “ It ’ s stupid/ridiculous to think that this could be so, ” 
and  “ Н ɟ  ɦ и ɫ ɥ и ɲ  ɥ и ,  ɱ  ɟ  ɟ  ɫ ɦ ɟ  ɲ  ɧ ɨ  ɞ  а  и ɫ ɤ  а  ɲ  ɬ  а  ɤ и в а  ɧ ɟ ɳ а ? ”  ( “ Ne mislish li, 

30 
Chapter 3
che e  smeshno da iskash takiva neshta ” ) translates to  “ Don ’ t you think 
it ’ s absurd to want such things? ”   С ɦ  е ш  ɧ  ɨ  ɣ ( smeshnoy ) in Russian does the 
same job, and  der î s in the Moldovan dialect of Romanian is quite the 
same. Another Russian word,   ɤ  у  ɪ  ɶ  е з  ɧ  ɵ ɣ ( kurieznii ), reminds us of a related 
English word,  curious . In Russian, as well as in English, the term can be 
used to describe a strange or outlandish incident that may provoke a 
smile or laugh — one could say  “ a  kurieznii thing happened on the way to 
the forum ” and then go on to tell an actually funny story of the 
incident.  
 The trend is also found in some Asian languages. The Japanese have a 
similar word for funny which has a second sense that is subtly related to 
 gelios and  nevets é ges . Their word,  お か し い ( o-ka-shi-i ), is used in the follow-
ing two sentences:  
 (C)  彼 は お か し い 人 で す ね 。 
 (D)  彼 の 頭 は お か し い 。  
 In the ﬁ rst sentence, the word provides the meaning  “ He is a humorous 
person, isn ’ t he? ” In the second sentence, the translation, we are told, 
is more or less like  “ There ’ s something wrong with his head, ” 
implying that he is being irrational in some way. In Korean, the word 
 웃 기 다 ( woot ggi da ) also carries both the senses of the English word  funny . 
It can be used in the primary sense to say simply,  “ That ’ s  woot ggi da , ” 
meaning the foregoing situation was humorous. In the secondary sense 
the usage can be,  “ That ’ s  woot ggi da , I thought I left my keys right here 
on the table, ” where  woot ggi da is translated as something akin to  “ unusual ” 
or  “ strange. ” 
 This collection of terms is the result of an informal survey, not a rigor-
ous linguistic exploration, and we have not even begun the glossogenetic 
inquiry to determine whether the two senses for these terms in each lan-
guage emerged in isolation from the other languages. Whether this is 
convergent cultural evolution with many independent adoptions of mean-
ings, or the result of a few particularly persistent threads of inherited 
meaning, the sheer volume and variety of responses  4 and the fact that 
modern speakers of these languages seem eminently comfortable with the 
relationship should stimulate the intuition that there ’ s something funny 
about the word  “ funny. ”  
4.   The terms reported here reﬂ ect about 60 percent of our respondents. We were told (not 
conclusively, mind you) that there is no term that serves this double meaning in Chinese, Thai, 
Dutch, European Spanish, or Czech.

The Phenomenology of Humor 
31
 E.   The Knowledge-Relativity of Humor  
 What do Alexander the Great and Winnie the Pooh have in common? 
 They both have the same middle name. 
 The humor of a situation is dependent upon knowledge that you may or 
may not have. 
 You can tell a joke in one crowd and be rewarded with laughs, yet in 
another group be repaid with anger.  5 Here ’ s a joke that some ﬁ nd funny, 
though others might not agree and some may even be offended:  
 (1)  Q:  What has two legs and bleeds? 
 A:  Half a dog. 
 Perhaps only those who are able to distance themselves from any emotion 
while hearing this joke ﬁ nd it humorous. 
 Much humor is culturally speciﬁ c. In the most extreme case it depends 
on features of a particular language, including puns, rhymes, grammatical 
constructions, or homonymy. This type of humor cannot easily survive 
translation. Here is an example:  
 (2)  A:  昨 日 鎌 倉 で お し ゃ れ な タ ケ の 箸 を 売 っ て る 店 が あ っ た よ ° 
 B:  へ  そ れ で ?   何  か  買  っ  た ? 
 A:  な ん に も タ ケ の 箸 は 5000 円 も す る ん だ !  こ れ タ ケ  な と 思 っ た !   
 A:  Yesterday in Kamakura there was a shop selling stylish bamboo 
chopsticks. 
 B:  Did you buy any? 
 A:  Nope, those bamboo chopsticks cost 5000 yen! Expensive! 
 The humor from this joke derives from the fact that in Japanese, the words 
for  bamboo and  expensive are homonyms. Other jokes can be translated 
without loss, but depend for their humor on background information that 
is restricted to one culture. Consider, for instance, the joke translated 
below.  
 (3)  엄 마 한 테  혼 날 걸  뻔 히  알  면  서  소  금  물  이  랑  맑 은  물 을  계 속  섞 어 대 는 
 사 람 이  어 딨 어 ?! 
5.   We concentrate on jokes as examples in this book not because all humor is jokes — think of 
comedies from Aristophanes to  The Ofﬁ ce — but because jokes are compact, self-contained mirth-
delivery systems that require little or no context, and hence enable us to focus instantly on the 
fundamental machinery in action.

32 
Chapter 3
 Who in their right mind mixes salt water and clean water back and 
forth knowing his mother will give him a beating?! 
 We have been told that this can be funny to Koreans of middle- or 
high-school age because of three pieces of cultural information: First, in 
Korean schools there is a common type of mathematics word problem that 
involves mixing salt water and fresh water to calculate proportions. Second, 
it is obvious to Koreans that you would do this (mix salt and fresh water) 
in the kitchen. And, third, Korean children wouldn ’ t dare make messes in 
their mothers ’  kitchens. Given this background information, an English 
speaker can understand why the statement is funny to Koreans, but is very 
unlikely to feel the humor. 
 This draws attention to another important feature of humor: It is not 
just dependent on background knowledge; the  way that background 
knowledge is exploited is critical. This is why explaining a joke drains it 
of its humor. It is typically the case that telling a joke in the wrong order 
ruins it. 
 (4)  A man walks up to a hot dog vendor and says  “ make me one with 
everything. ” Oh, and the man is a Buddhist.  6  
 Dennett (1987, p. 76) notes that many jokes are  enthymematic . That is, they 
depend on leaving one or more  “ premises ”  tacit or unexpressed. In a suc-
cessful telling of the joke, the enthymematic expression provokes the 
audience to  “ ﬁ ll in ” an implication or assumption, or even a series of 
assumptions, without which no humor can be detected. 
 (5)  A man went to visit his friend the Newﬁ e [Newfoundlander, a 
traditional ethnic slur of Canadians] and found him with both ears 
bandaged.  “ What happened? ” asked the man, and his friend replied,  “ I 
was ironing my shirt and the phone rang. ”  — “ That explains one ear, but 
what about the other? ” — “ Well, I had to call a doctor! ” 
 This joke would be diminished or ruined by explicit mention of any of the 
many facts one needs to know in order to get it. Indeed, this joke is fast 
on its way to extinction, because few telephones these days have a shape 
and heft similar to an iron, and for that matter many young people today 
have never seen anyone ironing clothes. You will have to explain it to your 
6.   The standard joke is, of course,  “ A Buddhist walks up to . . . . ” We ’ ve recently heard this 
amusing extension: When the hot dog vendor hands him a hot dog, the Buddhist pays and 
asks for his change. The vendor smiles and replies,  “ Change comes from within. ” 

The Phenomenology of Humor 
33
grandchildren:  “ Well, back in the old days, telephones were hefty, station-
ary things, with a corded piece you grabbed  like so , more or less the way 
you had to grab the handle of an iron, another corded piece of metal of 
some weight that has a very hot surface when you use it — hot enough to 
burn ﬂ esh. ” At that point it would be about as funny to them as the Korean 
joke is to us. 
 In-group humor among people of the same religion, hobby, or profes-
sion is an extreme example of this highly speciﬁ c knowledge-dependence. 
For instance, among computer engineers there is the following joke: 
 (6)  There are only 10 kinds of people in the world — those who read 
binary and those who don ’ t. 
 If you don ’ t know that  “ 10 ”  is the binary representation of the number 2, 
you are left wondering what the other eight kinds of people are.  7 
 In the limiting case, there are instances of humor that have single indi-
viduals as their sole target audience, depending as they do on allusions to 
or tacit assumptions about particular events in that person ’ s private biog-
raphy. This accounts for the phenomenon of the lone chuckler who 
declines to tell an inquirer what they are laughing about; it really was 
funny  to them , but they ’ d have to explain it, and then it wouldn ’ t be funny. 
One can only laugh about what one can think about  in a particular order 
and way . The folk notion that humor is  “ universal ”  is actually an artifact 
of a misunderstanding of statistical samples: since  most of the people we 
encounter in contexts where humor might arise do share a massive amount 
of common knowledge with us, the idea that  everybody would see the 
humor in anything that was  “ really funny ” naturally arises and seems to 
receive conﬁ rmation. Then it is puzzling to us — but shouldn ’ t be — when 
we encounter putative examples of humor that depend on shared knowl-
edge that we don ’ t share. It is not that Koreans have a weird sense of 
humor; it is simply that they share knowledge with each other that we 
don ’ t share with them. 
 Ted Cohen (1999) gives us the joke about Winnie the Pooh, and goes 
on to observe: 
 Of course I want you to like the one about Winnie the Pooh. I want you to like 
it because I like you and I want you to have something you like, and I want you 
7.   This joke is a rarity in that it only works in a written (and silently read!) format. How should 
one pronounce  “ 10 ” ? If you say  “ There are only  ten kinds of people in the world . . . ” the joke 
is destroyed; and if you say  “ one-zero ”  the humor of the joke is given away before it can be 
discovered.

34 
Chapter 3
to be grateful to me for supplying it. But I also need you to like it, because in your 
liking it I receive a conﬁ rmation of my own liking. I put this by saying that the 
joke is  funny , as if this were an objective matter; like there being damned little 
sand along the coast of Maine, but what I mean is that I laugh at it, and if every-
one laughed at it, then it would really  be funny (or as good as funny), and I do 
so want you to laugh at it. (Cohen 1999, pp. 31 – 32) 
 His last point is slightly mistaken. He shouldn ’ t mean that if  everyone 
laughed at it, then it would  really be funny; what he means (or ought to 
mean) is that if everyone  “ like us ” laughed at it, then it would really  be 
funny — to us, and we ’ re the ones who count right now. The fact that 
something is  really funny to a select reference class of appreciators is just 
as objective as the fact that ripe tomatoes are  really red (to normal human 
observers).  8 
 F.  Mating and Dating 
 Two behaviorists lie in bed after making love. One of them says to the other,  “ That 
was good for you, how was it for me? ” 
 You know  “ that look ” women get when they want sex? Me neither. 
 — Steve Martin (quoted in Carr and Greaves 2006, p. 140) 
 Provine (2000) draws attention to one more feature ignored by many 
earlier theories of humor: gender differences. In his studies of conversa-
tional laughter, female listeners laughed far more often than did male 
listeners, regardless of the gender of the speaker, and male speakers were 
met with far more laughter than female speakers by either gender of lis-
tener. Moreover, in personal ads more than twice as many women as men 
seek  “ a sense of humor ” or someone who will make them laugh (Smith, 
Waldorf, and Trembath 1990). Women also tend to seek humor more than 
offer it, whereas men are more likely to offer a sense of humor than to 
seek it, in both their ads and natural conversation (Crawford and Gressley 
8.   It is often observed that the large literature on humor is remarkably solemn, and the jokes 
discussed are typically lame at best. But before we go searching for an explanation of why people 
with no comedic talent or taste are drawn to humor theory, we should note that, as this chapter 
explains, humor travels poorly, in both space and time. We have no doubt at all that many of 
the examples of humor we have included here will fall like bricks outside the rather narrow 
circle of early twenty-ﬁ rst-century Anglophone academics and other well-informed book-
readers, our primary intended audience.

The Phenomenology of Humor 
35
1991; Provine 2000). Bressler, Martin, and Balshine (2006) found that when 
further interrogated, men reported that their view of a woman with a good 
sense of humor is, in effect, a good humor appreciator, whereas women 
reported that their view of a man with a good sense of humor is a good 
producer. Provine also reports studies that observe the dating behavior of 
men and women, showing a positive correlation between the amount of 
female laughter and the self-reported level of desire of both men and 
women to meet again.  9  
 Other researchers have found a further gender divide in production 
performance: McGhee (1976) reports that boys (between the ages of 6 and 
11) attempt to initiate humor signiﬁ cantly more than girls of the same age 
group (see also Goldstein and McGhee 1972; McGhee 1979; Chapman, 
Smith, and Foot 1980; and Ziv 1984). Weisfeld (1993) notes, though, that 
the early developmental pattern of male humor production coincides 
rather well with the stabilization of dominance hierarchies in children and 
thus may simply be an artifact of the latter (see also Omark, Omark, and 
Edelman 1975). Additionally, Greengross (under review) provides evidence 
that cartoon captions written by men, as opposed to those written by 
women, were rated as funnier by independent blind judges of both genders. 
Of course, this may not indicate natural differences in capacity, but rather 
that men may have more practice at the skill, or even just that they may 
try harder at the task. 
 For humor appreciation, at least, the gender differences are also reﬂ ected 
in brain activity: While engaging in a cartoon-rating task during functional 
magnet resonance imaging (fMRI), aside from many shared regions of 
activity, women were shown to have greater activation than men in the 
left prefrontal cortex (PFC) as well as in mesolimbic structures including 
the right nucleus accumbens (NAcc) (Azim et al. 2005). The authors suggest 
that this indicates women use more language and executive processing (as 
per the PFC activation) during humor comprehension and have less 
reward prediction (in the NAcc) and thus more predictive error signal at 
the actual reward. Whether or not these conclusions hold up, the neuro-
physiological differences they found do indicate some gender disparity. 
 Taken together, these studies suggest, if nothing more, that being funny 
is at least a desirable trait for men, and appreciating men ’ s sense of humor 
is a desirable trait for women. These curious facts will be addressed later 
in the book. 
9.   These effects may be culture dependent. Most of this work, to date, has been performed in 
a Western cultural context.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4   A Brief History of Humor Theories 
 A gentleman entered a pastry-cook ’ s shop and ordered a cake; but he soon brought 
it back and asked for a glass of liqueur instead. He drank it and began to leave 
without having paid. The proprietor detained him.  “ You ’ ve not paid for the 
liqueur. ”   “ But I gave you the cake in exchange for it. ”  “ You didn ’ t pay for that 
either. ”   “ But I hadn ’ t eaten it. ” 
 — Freud (1905); also cited by Minsky (1984) 
 Many theories of humor have been offered over the centuries, and each 
seems right about some aspect or type of humor while overlooking, or 
being just wrong about, the rest. Ideally one would like to combine their 
strengths and compose a full theory that can explain all aspects of humor 
in a uniﬁ ed way. Although most overviews list three categories of humor 
theory ( superiority ,  release , and  incongruity ), Patricia Keith-Spiegel (1972) 
gives an analysis that arrives at eight primary categories, each of which 
treats some aspect of humor capably. Combining and adjusting these 
categories, and updating them with an analysis of more recent work, we 
can get a bird ’ s-eye view of the terrain. Though the boundaries are rather 
fuzzy and the blending together of some cases is common, the primary 
categories are:  biological ,  play ,  superiority ,  release ,  incongruity-resolution , and 
 surprise . We ’ ll mention a few other views that resist categorization but 
introduce elements that shouldn ’ t be ignored. 
 A.   Biological Theories 
 Instead of working for the survival of the ﬁ ttest, we should be working for the 
survival of the wittiest — then we can all die laughing. 
 — Lily Tomlin 
 Biological theories are motivated by the observation that humor and 
laughter are innate. Each notes that laughter appears spontaneously in 

38 
Chapter 4
early infancy (and even in congenitally blind and deaf children — see, e.g., 
Thompson 1941; Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1973), and that the existence of humor is 
universal throughout human cultures (although it varies in its manifesta-
tions). The fact that laughter and humor seem to have positive physiologi-
cal effects is sometimes cited as further grounds for seeing humor as a 
genetic adaptation, but this claim, tempting as it may be, is unwarranted. 
Why couldn ’ t people — whole societies — have stumbled upon a practice 
that had positive physiological effects but did not have an instinctual 
foundation? It might be passed on for its (apparent) good effects whether 
or not these were understood or underwritten by an instinct. Suppose it is 
true that an apple a day keeps the doctor away, and imagine that we all 
ate apples daily and thrived thereby. We wouldn ’ t need an apple-eating 
instinct to account for this regularity — culture alone might sufﬁ ce. 
 If laughter and humor were selected for, the traits must have had a 
raison d ’  ê tre, served an adaptive function, and the blueprint for these 
 “ instincts ”  must have been somehow encoded in our genes. Keith-Spiegel 
cites some instinct theories that have emotional components, such as the 
hypothesis that laughter (incited by a sense of the ludicrous) is a corrective 
for the depressing effects of sympathy. Others, of varying plausibility, 
propose that  “ laughter and humor are but  vestiges of archaic adaptive 
behaviors ”  (Goldstein and McGhee 1972, 6), such as the hypotheses that 
laughter was originally a signal of safety to the group, an expression of 
unity in group opinion prior to language, or a relic of ﬁ ghting behavior. 
These explanations begin to probe the important question of what beneﬁ ts 
humor and laughter could have conferred upon our predecessors, but a 
more detailed analysis of the underlying mechanisms will provide better 
clues. These biological theories all treat laughter as a communicative 
expression of the recognition of humor, and each one attempts to build a 
communication-centered explanation of the beneﬁ t of laughter. This idea 
is in some regards a good one, and we will keep it in mind when we later 
explain laughter; but as Provine emphasizes — and we agree — humor and 
laughter are not as coextensive as once believed. 
 B.   Play Theories 
 When I was young we were so poor that if I hadn ’ t been a boy, I ’ d have had 
nothing to play with. 
 — Dickie Scruggs, quoted by Peter Boyer in  “ The Bribe, ”  New Yorker , May 19, 2008  1 
1.   Humor can be touchy. Jokes are not always in good taste. We decided, while writing 
this book, that avoiding any particular kind of humor — even distasteful and prejudiced 

A Brief History of Humor Theories 
39
 Play theories are an important subcategory of biological theories, and the 
ﬁ rst of them was proposed by Darwin himself (Darwin 1872), who said 
that humor was a  “ tickling of the mind. ” Ernst Hecker (1873) proposed 
quite the same thing, and the suggestion that there is a similarity or iden-
tity between the underlying mechanisms of tickling and humor has since 
come to be known as the Darwin – Hecker hypothesis (e.g., Fridlund and 
Loftis 1990; Harris and Christenfeld 1997).  2   Gervais and Wilson (2005) 
recently seconded this, arguing that both humor and tickling are causative 
of Duchenne laughter and that there is an  “ undeniable relationship ” 
between the laughter that results from jokes, tickling, rough-and-tumble 
play, and even infant laughter that results from such things as peek-a-boo. 
Given that some species of apes also produce a kind of repetitive noise 
similar to laughing when tickled, and that they try to tickle each other 
sometimes, it is highly likely that laughter due to tickling was phylo-
genetically prior to other uses of laughter, including modern humor 
(Provine 2000). 
 Play theories on the whole tend to focus on the connection between 
laughter — not humor — and play. More recently, though, theorists have 
claimed that the laughter from humor is associated with the laughter 
from tickling (the natural bridging-concept between play and humor) 
(Ramachandran and Blakeslee 1998; Ramachandran 1998; Provine 2000; 
Gervais and Wilson 2005). There is no suggestion within these theories 
that play  is humor, just that humor evolved out of play and has thus 
forms — would be, in some way,  “ biasing the data. ” That last phrase is in scare-quotes because, 
of course, we haven ’ t used any advanced data analysis methods with statistical tests here — this 
is  theoretical , not experimental, cognitive science (analogous to the same distinction in the 
discipline of physics). But, nonetheless, in order to avoid biasing our theoretical analysis of the 
phenomena we wanted ourselves, and our readers, to engage with all humor: racist, sexist, 
religion-ist; crude and clean alike. In doing so, we ran across some gems in every genre. And, 
in our writing, we found a number of very relevant, yet crude or sexist, epigraphs for sections 
of this book, which we eventually (at the suggestion of some reviewers) chose to omit. Some 
others (see the above, or chapter 5, e.g.) were retained in the main text, perhaps against better 
judgment, in order to offer a balanced review.
2.   The Darwin – Hecker hypothesis has recently found some experimental support. Fridlund and 
Loftis (1990) found a signiﬁ cant correlation between self-reported susceptibility to tickling and 
self-reported tendencies to laugh, and Harris and Christenfeld (1997) demonstrated that indi-
viduals who are objectively more ticklish, in that they are observed to laugh more, also produce 
more laughter when viewing comedy. Both studies measured  expression , not mirth, so they are 
not conclusive, but they are insightful. Harris and Christenfeld also found evidence against the 
Darwin – Hecker hypothesis, which they consider stronger. We take this issue up later when we 
discuss tickling in more detail.

40 
Chapter 4
maintained the similar expression. For instance, Gervais and Wilson (2005) 
suggest that Duchenne laughter promoted social play during early bipedal 
life and that  “ a general class of nonserious social incongruity, ” which 
indicated times of relative safety, began to be a useful elicitor of this laugh-
ter. This nonserious social incongruity has evolved into our modern humor. 
This is an interesting hypothesis, but it is unclear how detection of a non-
serious social incongruity can assure you of safety. One might think that 
hominids at play — and laughing — expose themselves to attacks from out-
siders and predators by being louder and paying reduced attention to pos-
sible threats. There should be some beneﬁ t to humor and laughter other 
than simply stating that it  “ seems relatively safe. ” Still, the link between 
play, tickling, and humor pointed out by Gervais and Wilson is undeniable 
and needs to be accounted for. It is possible that humor developed for 
another purpose and then appropriated aspects of the apes ’  play behavior. 
Perhaps, for instance, as Gervais and Wilson and others (Eastman 1936) 
suggest, the use of laughter to  express humor evolved from its use in facili-
tating nonaggression in play and tickling. 
 Play theories of humor recognize that we need an explanation of how 
humor developed evolutionarily, how laughter came to express humor, 
and what the relationship between tickling and humor is. All of these 
relationships should be accounted for by a complete theory of humor. 
 C.   Superiority Theories 
 Texan:  “ Where are you from? ” 
 Harvard grad:  “ I come from a place where we do not end our sentences with 
prepositions. ” 
 Texan:  “ Okay — where are you from, jackass? ” 
 The only thing that sustains one through life is the consciousness of the immense 
inferiority of everyone else, and this is a feeling that I ’ ve always cultivated. 
 — Oscar Wilde 
 Superiority theories are presided over by Thomas Hobbes ’ s deﬁ nition of 
laughter as a  “ sudden glory ” or triumph that results from the recognition 
or sense that we have some level of superiority or eminency over some 
other target, the butt of the joke, as we say, or the protagonist in some 
humorous episode. Humor ’ s role is to point out problems and mistakes for 
the purpose of boosting one ’ s current view of oneself in comparison with 

A Brief History of Humor Theories 
41
the disparaged party. Hobbes tells us that the target can even be an earlier 
version of oneself as long as one has overcome the inﬁ rmity at which one 
is laughing (Hobbes 1840). Aristotle, too, supported a similar theory, saying 
that humor is the recognition of a failing or a piece of ugliness, resulting 
from an implied comparison between a noble state of a person or thing 
and an ignoble state. 
 Certainly a vast quantity of jokes and social instances of laughter ﬁ t 
well under this rubric. We often laugh  at people . And the implied superior-
ity is what makes sense of the familiar disclaimer: I ’ m not laughing  at you; 
I ’ m laughing  with you (or: I ’ m laughing at myself, or: at the situation). The 
pleasure of trouncing an opponent in competition is often expressed with 
a triumphant laugh. We laugh at the behavior of drunkards or fools, and 
ignorant and ill-mannered folks are known to laugh at the plight of the 
disabled (not to mention that the genetically or developmentally deformed 
were once employed alongside jesters for exactly this purpose). Schoolyard 
taunting, too, is often if not exclusively derisive in nature. Laughing, espe-
cially in social settings, typically does imply membership in an elite 
group — those who laugh at this matter in some way, in contrast to those 
whose acts and circumstances are the occasion for the laughter — and this 
is no doubt often reassuring, and hence pleasurable, to the laughers, but 
it is still far from clear that humor exists for the purpose of generating such 
feelings of superiority. 
 Here are some jokes that exemplify the superiority theories:  
 (7)  Four surgeons were taking a coffee break and were discussing their 
work. The ﬁ rst said,  “ I think accountants are the easiest to operate on. 
You open them up and everything inside is numbered. ” 
 The second said,  “ I think librarians are the easiest to operate on. You 
open them up and everything inside is in alphabetical order. ” 
 The third said,  “ I like to operate on electricians. You open them up 
and everything inside is color-coded. ” 
 The fourth one said,  “ I like to operate on lawyers. They ’ re heartless, 
spineless, gutless, and their heads and their asses are interchangeable. ” 
 (8)  When asked his opinion, in 2005, about the  Roe v. Wade decision, 
President Bush responded that he  “ didn ’ t care how they got out of New 
Orleans. ” 
 Other jokes are hard to explain under such a model: 
 (9)  Theater sign typo: Ushers will eat latecomers. 

42 
Chapter 4
 Neither the ushers (who don ’ t intend to eat latecomers) nor the latecomers 
(who don ’ t fear, or deserve, being eaten) are being laughed at. A careful 
supporter of superiority theory might argue that we are laughing at the 
incompetence of the person who mis-lettered the sign, but the ﬂ aw may 
not be attributable to a mistake by the sign-maker — we could as easily 
imagine the letter  “ s ”  falling off the sign, or even being removed by a 
mischievous teenager, and we would still ﬁ nd the sign comical. It seems 
more reasonable that we are laughing at the disparity between what we 
recognize that the sign should say and the unexpected meaning found in 
the actual sign. Such a large effect created by such a small change! Some 
puns are equally hard to ﬁ t into the mold:  
 (10)  Two goldﬁ sh were in their tank. 
 One turns to the other and says,  “ You man the guns, I ’ ll drive. ” 
 Eastman (1936) points out one more place where there is clearly no 
derision in humor. He remarks,  “ I suspect [superiority theorists] not only 
of never having seen a baby, but of never having been one. ” Anyone who 
recognizes the na ï ve enjoyment of babies and children or who recollects 
their own such episodes should carefully reassess their superiority theory 
to perhaps exclude this category of humans. 
 Superiority theory has had many proponents over the years, and is 
perhaps the second most popular explanation for humor, for good reason. 
It covers a large proportion of instances, enough to motivate some theorists 
to work hard to shoehorn the awkward remainder (see Bain 1875, for 
example) — but with diminishing persuasiveness. The claim that a value 
judgment is implied in all humor may owe much of its plausibility to the 
fact that judgment is involved in just about every conception one can 
have. To identify a thing (as an  F or a  G ), perceived or conceived, is always 
to raise the issue of whether it is a good or bad  F , an exemplary  G or at 
least a good  G for our purposes. Moreover, the disparagement based on 
this judgment, so typically found in humor, is not a sufﬁ cient requirement 
for humor. There is derision in many instances of human communication 
that is not humorous and is not expected to elicit laughter in anyone. Not 
all comparative value judgments are grounds for ridicule. 
 The core weakness of superiority theory, however, is that although it 
provides a generic reason underlying much (if not all) humor, it does not 
provide a  mechanism of humor, and thus it also doesn ’ t provide a reason 
for the reason! It tells us that (in fact) we laugh when something makes 
us feel superior; but what makes us do that, and why? What beneﬁ t do we 

A Brief History of Humor Theories 
43
get from having a strong disposition to express a feeling of superiority? 
Could the question betray a mistaken assumption? Might humor have 
never had any purpose at all and simply be a universal glitch in our 
nervous systems, a  “ frozen accident, ” to use Francis Crick ’ s term for 
something ﬁ xed in our genes by historical happenstance, a mutation that 
survived for no reason at all? This is  logically possible, of course, but why 
should this accident have persisted in just one species of mammal, and 
why hasn ’ t it been selected against? 
 A thorough superiority theory should at least address the question of 
what the adaptive signiﬁ cance of our sense of humor might be, but such 
a theory has never been offered. Such a theory would need to explain 
(1) how we come to the realization that someone or something is lesser in 
some way; (2) how we distinguish the humorous instances of these value 
comparisons from the others; (3) what purpose is served by our normal 
enjoyment of such discriminations; and (4) what purpose is served by 
communicating this through laughter. If we have evolved such a 
discrimination-leading-to-laughter system in our brains, we need to ask 
what boost to reproductive ﬁ tness this system confers on those who have 
it. To ﬁ rst appearances, such a system would appear to be an extravagant 
waste of both emotional and communicative energy, and moreover might 
encourage risky delusions of superiority, luring an agent, too boldly, into 
danger. 
 Still, the motivation for the superiority theory is a good one. It reminds 
us that we do feel pleasure in humor — laughing is not like a reﬂ ex knee-
jerk, however automatic it may be. And it highlights the fact that humor 
is used competitively, even if this was not its original or grounding func-
tion. Humor points out failures, as Aristotle told us; we use it to point out 
each others ’  failures, and perhaps the competitive nature of humans that 
has always existed for other reasons co-opted humor for this purpose. 
Finally, and most importantly, it draws our attention to the role of negative 
value judgments in humor. But what are we judging to be somehow 
ﬂ awed? Superiority theory sees the fault in the butt or target of the humor, 
but we will argue that the fault lies in ourselves, in our dynamic models 
of the world and its denizens, and recognizing this, and correcting it, 
is the occasion for the intense pleasure, the  “ sudden glory, ” of humor. 
Our tendency to perceive humor in the faults and mistakes of others is 
parasitic on our capacity to detect such ﬂ aws in ourselves, and the transfer 
or externalization highlighted by superiority theories has its own reasons 
for occurring. 

44 
Chapter 4
 D.   Release Theories 
 Last night I made a Freudian slip. I was having dinner with my mother, and I 
wanted to say,  “ Please pass the butter, ” but it came out as,  “ You bitch, you ruined 
my life! ” 
 Release theories construe humor as a form of relief from excessive nervous 
arousal. Keith-Spiegel separates the psychoanalytic theory of humor from 
release theories, but we will discuss them together.  3 In general, release 
theories claim that tension from thought can build up, and when this 
tension is released by a positive emotion that results from further thought, 
the energy is transformed into (or spent by) laughing. Herbert Spencer ’ s 
(1860) version of this theory spoke of purposeless nervous energy that 
needed an outlet. Freud ’ s version (Freud 1928, as cited in Keith-Spiegel 
1972) works on the principle that certain events create repressed sexual 
and/or aggressive energy, and when that tension is undone in a dramatic 
way (suddenly or surprisingly), rather than gradually, the nervous energy 
is released, and relief ensues in the form of humor. This builds on his earlier 
(1905) theory of jokes, which indicated that they were one way to over-
come our internal mental censors that forbid certain thoughts — the joke, 
by fooling the censor, allows the repressed energy to ﬂ ow, thus creating 
the pleasure of mirth and releasing that energy through laughter. 
 Release theory has lost popularity for a variety of reasons. First, in the 
information age, the metaphor of psychic energy, and the tensions and 
pressures that build up as this ghostly gasoline accumulates in the imag-
ined plumbing and storage tanks of the mind, seems old-fashioned and 
na ï ve. Why would one build up a special reserve of a strange kind of  energy , 
and where would one save it, instead of simply dissipating it in the ﬁ rst 
place? Perhaps, though, with the increased recognition of the importance 
of neuromodulator imbalances, and the appreciation of the opponent 
processes that work to achieve homeostasis among all the different partici-
pant systems, aspects of these quaint theories can be rehabilitated and put 
to good use. Relief from what we still call  tension (in spite of abandoning 
the pseudo-physics that underwrote that term) is a salient psychological 
phenomenon, and the alternation between tension and relaxation that 
strikes many as a hallmark of humor may still prove to be an important 
3.   Keith-Spiegel also provides another category, which she labels ambivalence theories, which 
hold that humor arises out of the conﬂ ict between two or more incompatible emotions. We see 
this as a specialized case of the incongruity theory (see below) where the incongruity is simply 
between emotions.

A Brief History of Humor Theories 
45
element of the theory we are looking for, but only if we can transform and 
clarify the constituent notions.  4 
 Although humor involving emotionally charged topics fares rather 
well in release theories, other kinds of humor, such as logical humor, are 
not well explained by them. For instance, simple puns and grammatical 
traps such as the following involve neither aggressive tension nor sexual 
tension: 
 (11)  What, according to Freud, comes between fear and sex? F ü nf! 
(Cohen 1999) ( Eins, zwei, drei, vier, f ü nf, sechs . . . ) 
 (12)  Email is the happy medium between male and female. (Hofstadter 
2007) 
 (13)  Photons have mass? I didn ’ t even know they were Catholic. 
 (14)  The face of a child can say it all, especially the mouth part of the 
face. 
 One of the attractions of release theory is that it purports to explain, in 
a way different from superiority theory, the prominence of sexual and 
aggressive content in humor. And it gives prominence to the emotional 
nature of our  response to humor — after all, it does usually  feel very relieving 
to release a hearty laugh. And on a related point, it at least attempts to 
account for the energy  spent in laughing (and in seeking out humorous 
things to laugh at). Unlike most other theories, it recognizes that we need 
to posit some  reason for that expenditure, since it is a fundamental fact of 
biology that such an expenditure of energy needs a purpose, even if that 
purpose has expired or been directed to new ends. 
 E.   Incongruity and Incongruity-Resolution Theories 
 Humor is reason gone mad. 
 — Groucho Marx 
 Of the current theories of humor, the most strongly championed is the 
incongruity-resolution (I-R) theory. As its name implies, this theory says 
humor happens whenever an incongruity occurs that is subsequently 
resolved. A classic example from Suls (1972) is this:  
4.   Huron (2006) has done just that, in his account of the role of  “ contrastive valence ” in his 
 “ ITPRA ”  model of expectations, which he applies both to music and to humor. We will follow 
him in several regards and depart from him in others.

46 
Chapter 4
 (15)  O ’ Riley was on trial for armed robbery. The jury came out and 
announced,  “ Not guilty. ”  
 “ Wonderful, ”  said O ’ Riley,  “ does that mean I can keep the money? ” 
 Suls explains the humor of this joke as arising from the fact that O ’ Riley ’ s 
response is incongruous with the situation of being not guilty, although 
on second thought it can be reinterpreted to make sense. The concept is 
quite effective for a large range of cases, but it has its ﬂ aws too. Most 
notably, I-R theory may be able to tell us that incongruity plays a role in 
humor, and it may even help point out which stimuli should be humorous; 
but this does not give any explanatory power to the theory — it is little 
more than descriptive. If incongruity plays a role, we still need a theory of 
 how and  why it plays a role. What is it about incongruity that is funny? 
There are many descriptions in the literature that analyze the incongruous 
pair of elements and how they get resolved, and they may help us 
categorize stimuli as humorous or not; but that doesn ’ t go far to tell us 
what humor is or why it exists. 
 Another trouble with I-R theories is that the theorists do not all use an 
agreed-upon deﬁ nition of incongruity. Each author has an intuitive sense 
that some kind of incongruity is involved when they see humor, but on 
just what kind of incongruity, or what exactly it means to be incongruous, 
they do not all agree. Some of the uses of the word invoke ambiguity, or 
a deviation from the customary, or a pair of simultaneous schemas that 
just don ’ t logically match (i.e., nonsense). Semantic script theorists claim 
that, for narratives, the incongruity is between opposing scripts that arise 
at different points in the narrative (Attardo 2001; Raskin 1985). Even those 
who agree on what incongruity is differ on what role it plays in humor. 
Ritchie (1999) points out that Shultz (1976) and Suls (1972) — whose I-R 
theories are two of the earliest and best regarded models — have fairly dif-
ferent interpretations of how incongruity operates. Shultz claims that the 
setup is ambiguous and that an incongruity of one interpretation with the 
punch line forces recognition of the other interpretation. Suls says that 
the punch line creates an incongruity with respect to the setup, and that 
logic resolves the incongruity thereafter. Both writers give good examples 
of their concepts, and although the examples certainly have incongruities, 
the two models have very different informational requirements. It is hard 
to ﬁ nd something theorists can all agree on that says anything more than 
that  “ some aspect of the incongruous ” is involved. Still, we agree with the 
widespread opinion that I-R theories provide at least a good foundation 
for a model of how and why humor happens, and we shall try to provide 
a more rigorous and informative account of incongruity. 

A Brief History of Humor Theories 
47
 Kant gives the ﬁ rst rendition of the basic incongruity theory. In his  Cri-
tique of Judgment (1790), he writes that  “ In everything that is to excite a 
lively convulsive laugh there must be something absurd (in which the 
understanding, therefore, can ﬁ nd no satisfaction). Laughter is an affection 
arising from the sudden transformation of a strained expectation into 
nothing. ”  To illustrate this  “ expectation ”  Kant tells a joke about an Indian 
who sees a freshly opened bottle with beer foaming out and expresses his 
surprise. When asked by an Englishman why he is surprised, the Indian 
announces that the reason for his surprise is not that it is ﬂ owing out, but 
rather surprise about how they got it in. In Kant ’ s joke, we experience an 
expectation, the same as the Englishman in the story does, of wondering 
why this Indian is surprised that the beer comes out of the bottle — it seems 
natural to us that there is nothing to be surprised about there. The Indian 
surprises us, though, in showing us that our expectation was wrong: he was 
never surprised about that — our expectation was false. (Or the English-
man ’ s expectation was false.) The additional information the Indian gives 
us causes that expectation to disappear instantly — to be suddenly trans-
formed into nothing. We no longer have reason to expect it. There is cer-
tainly more to the story, but Kant has given us an excellent starting point. 
 Kant did not elaborate his model much beyond saying that an expecta-
tion disappears, so a lot is left to our interpretation. A more speciﬁ c version 
of it may work well. The most inﬂ uential version of I-R theory started with 
Schopenhauer (1969), who tells us that Kant ’ s model fails easily under 
counterexamples of expectations that dissolve but are not humorous. 
Schopenhauer may be right, and Kant ’ s model may need more details, but 
there is much merit in his use of the term  “ expectation. ” 
 Schopenhauer ’ s model is the basis for many of the modern theories, 
although most of the more recent versions neglect some of his details. He 
starts with a comment that speciﬁ es a bit more precisely what incongruity 
he is talking about.  “ My theory of the ludicrous, ” he says,  “ also depends 
on the contrast, which I have . . . so forcibly stressed, between  representa-
tions of perception and abstract representations ” (Schopenhauer 1969, our 
emphasis). The incongruity, Schopenhauer makes explicit, must be between 
a representation in the mind (for which he sometimes uses the word 
 “ concept ” ) and a real object (by which he means a perception of an object). 
The incongruity occurs to the extent that the concept was mistaken and 
the perception was veridical. It is a very persuasive model. Let us restate it 
for clarity: Humor occurs when a perception of the world suddenly corrects 
our mistaken preconception. Schopenhauer adds that the extent of the 
feeling of mirth and ensuing laughter is proportional to the degree of 
surprise involved within the correction. Before this suggestive claim can 

48 
Chapter 4
be recast in anything approaching a testable formulation, we must con-
struct a more precise identiﬁ cation of the key categories of concepts and 
perception, a task we will address in a later section. 
 Incongruity theory is effective. By most estimates it manages to explain 
at least as many cases of humor as superiority theory does, and can even 
be used to explain the laughter that results from tickling (Ramachandran 
and Blakeslee 1998; Ramachandran 1998 — more on this later). Addition-
ally (and quite importantly) it draws our attention in a way that no 
other theory does to the fact that we have, in humor, a sense of nonsense —
 that is, it shows the deep relationship between the laughable and the 
illogical. 
 The primary argument against the incongruity theory has been given 
in the form of counterexamples. Alexander Bain, for instance, gives a list 
of incongruities that he says do not instill in us a sense of the ludicrous. 
He illustrates: 
 A decrepit man under a heavy burden, ﬁ ve loaves and two ﬁ shes among a multi-
tude, and all unﬁ tness and gross disproportion; an instrument out of tune, a ﬂ y 
in ointment, snow in May, Archimedes studying geometry in a siege, and all 
discordant things; a wolf in sheep ’ s clothing, a breach of bargain, and falsehood 
in general; the multitude taking the law in their own hands, and everything of 
the nature of disorder; a corpse at a feast, parental cruelty, ﬁ lial ingratitude, and 
whatever is unnatural; the entire catalogue of the vanities given by Solomon, are 
all incongruous, but they cause feelings of pain, anger, sadness, loathing, rather 
than mirth. (Bain 1875, p. 257) 
 As Pinker (1997) points out, motion-sickness is another counterexample 
that makes this case. It occurs when the perception from the vestibular 
system does not correlate with the perception from the visual system. For 
instance, when one is below deck on a ship tossing in a storm, the visual 
system may be provided with input that suggests that one ’ s body is hardly 
in motion with respect to its surroundings, while the balance system 
records every bump and sway in a violent vestibular cacophony. The effect 
of the collision between these two incongruous inputs is hardly amusing. 
Not laughter but vomiting is the irresistible impulse triggered, probably a 
by-product of circuitry designed by evolution to expel accidentally ingested 
neurotoxins from the stomach when dizziness occurs. Reﬂ ecting on the 
example may help remind us that however natural laughter seems to us 
as the appropriate response to humor, we need to explain  why it is more 
appropriate than, say, vomiting. Why should we be wired up to  laugh when 
something strikes us as funny, and why should anything strike us as funny 
in the ﬁ rst place? 

A Brief History of Humor Theories 
49
 Some of Bain ’ s examples could be put in contexts where they would 
indeed strike us as funny, and some instances of visual-vestibular incon-
gruity may also make us laugh (think of some of the highlights of a 
carnival funhouse  5  ). When an instrument is out of tune, sometimes the 
sound it makes surprises us with its oddness and forces a laugh. Encoun-
tering falling snow in May might well be so incongruous as to provoke 
laughter along with wide-eyed wonder. The sheer outrageousness of an 
instance of parental cruelty (as in  “ sick jokes ” and the theater of cruelty) 
may sometimes cause an urge to laugh, if the behavior is not just mean 
or vicious, but bizarrely unreasonable, or preposterous.  6 So Bain is no 
doubt right that not all instances of incongruity cause us to laugh, but 
there may still be something worth pursuing in incongruity theory. It is 
telling that we can often if not always devise some kind of context in 
which an incongruity turns into a humorous circumstance, and reﬂ ect-
ing on how this is accomplished may help us in uncovering some further 
differentiating factor(s) so that we can tighten up, and save, the incon-
gruity theory. 
 Suls (1972) offered an expansion on incongruity theory requiring that 
an incongruity must not only be detected, but also  resolved by reason for 
there to be humor. According to this incongruity-resolution (I-R) theory, 
the incongruity exists between the setup of a narrative and the punch line. 
The resolution happens when the mind, following a logical rule, ﬁ nds a 
way to make the punch line follow from the setup, and when this resolu-
tion is discovered, we laugh. Wyer and Collins (1992) show, again, that 
even the resolution of an incongruity does not always produce humor. 
Here is an example (drawn from a recent conversation): A friend speaks of 
his ill father, describing his symptoms as  incongruous. The doctors are 
bafﬂ ed about why he has this unusual mix of symptoms, which don ’ t 
belong together, based on their experience. Suppose a solution presented 
itself suddenly — for instance, the doctors ﬁ nd an article in a medical 
5.   A particularly memorable example consists of a stable bridge across a space that has a rotating 
painted tube surrounding it. When walking on this bridge, because of the visual input, one 
cannot help expecting that the bridge is spinning and that there is a fall impending. The illusion 
is so strong that one overcompensates and falls in the other direction, against the side of the 
still stationary bridge. The typical response is laughter, not panic, but that may be a result of 
the carnival atmosphere more than anything else. Encountering such a phenomenon in, say, a 
factory or a mine may not produce mirth.
6.   In chapter 10, we will walk through one of Bain ’ s counterexamples to show how it can be 
turned into an occasion for humor according to our model.

50 
Chapter 4
journal recounting a rare disease that does exhibit this exact range of 
symptoms. This resolution would no doubt provoke excitement, and 
perhaps glee, but not mirth. Problem solving sometimes provides sudden 
resolutions to incongruities but does not always produce humor in the 
process. Once again, we could no doubt imagine ways in which this same 
circumstance  could be funny — if, for instance, the doctors discovered it was 
something that they think they  should have known, something even 
obvious that they had overlooked. It appears that still further qualiﬁ cation 
needs to be placed on the incongruity resolution. Wyer and Collins suggest 
additional requirements for a theory of I-R+, based on a model presented 
by Michael Apter (1982). Apter ’ s proposal contains two more facets, which 
Wyer and Collins call  nonreplacement and  diminishment . The principle of 
nonreplacement says that, when a reinterpretation is made, for humor to 
exist the new interpretation and the old must both be valid rather than 
the new one forcibly supplanting the older one. The principle of diminish-
ment, reminiscent of superiority theory, says that the new interpretation 
should be in some way reduced in value relative to the initial interpretation 
(Wyer and Collins 1992). 
 By this point the term  “ incongruity ”  means something different than 
it did when proposed by Schopenhauer or alluded to by Kant. It is no 
longer an incongruity between an expectation and that which dissolves 
the expectation or between an object of perception and an object of con-
ception. Attardo and Raskin (Attardo 2001; Raskin 1985) offer a more 
sophisticated version of the incongruity theory in which the stimulus itself 
is not claimed to be humorous; rather, the scripts that elements of the 
stimulus activate in the mind are found to be overlapping yet opposing 
(or incongruous) and therefore excite the sense of humor. So, for instance, 
in the joke that Attardo and Raskin both use as an example: 
 (16)  “ Is the doctor at home? ” the patient asked in his bronchial 
whisper.  “ No, ”  the doctor ’ s young and pretty wife whispered in reply. 
 “ Come right in. ” 
 The Doctor script is evoked by the patient ’ s question and conﬁ rmed by his 
bronchial whisper, but the doctor ’ s wife ’ s reply informs us that another 
script, that of Lovers, could as well describe the situation. These opposing 
scripts are what make the joke funny because both can ’ t be invoked at the 
same time. This model is very good for a limited domain of verbal humor, 
but it fails to offer an actual explanation for humor, not only because it 
remains purely descriptive (and, at that, descriptive only of  some verbal 

A Brief History of Humor Theories 
51
humor), but also because until we know how scripts are invoked, we have, 
at best, description without explanation (more on this in chapter 6). More-
over, to repeat our standard theme, there are cases in which overlapping 
and opposing scripts are aroused by texts that do not cause humor. Most 
notably, a joke told in the wrong order, with the punch line ﬁ rst, maintains 
the overlap of opposing scripts but is typically devoid of humor. And Apter 
(1982) throws another bit of cold water on any version of I-R theory by 
reminding us that there are instances of humor that provide incongruity 
in the stimulus without any speciﬁ c resolution — for example:  “ the phrase 
 ‘ Don ’ t panic, ’  spoken in a frightened voice. ” The entire class of humorous 
non sequitur provides a bounty of further counterexamples, such as these 
gems from Steven Wright:  “ OK, so what ’ s the speed of dark? ” and  “ I 
couldn ’ t repair your brakes, so I made your horn louder. ” Here ’ s another 
case of non sequitur: 
 (17)  A man at the dinner table dipped his hands in the mayonnaise 
and then ran them through his hair. When his neighbor looked 
astonished, the man apologized:  “ I ’ m so sorry. I thought it was spinach. ” 
(Freud 1912, as cited in Minsky 1984) 
 Minsky (1981), noting that Freud ’ s censor model and release theory 
could not explain logic-based humor or grammatical humor (such as the 
puns in examples 12 – 16), attempted to expand the model. His innovative 
claim was that aggressive and sexual humor may not be too different 
from what he designated as nonsense humor: Humans need to learn to 
avoid irreparable mistakes in reasoning by anticipating and preventing 
them via something like Freudian censors. These censors, unlike Freud ’ s, 
prohibit certain types of  logical operations rather than certain types of 
 content .  “ Intellect and Affect seem less different once we theorize that the 
 ‘ cognitive unconscious ’  considers faulty reasoning to be just as  ‘ naughty ’  
as the usual  ‘ Freudian ’  wishes ” (Minsky 1984, 176). Under this model, 
having a morally wayward thought is treated similarly to having a logically 
inconsistent thought — both are things that the mind wants to develop 
ﬁ lters against. 
 Minksy operationalized his faulty-logic model using the language and 
concepts of  frames and frame-shifting in addition to censors. Frames are 
similar to Schank and Abelson ’ s (1977)  scripts , which underlie both Raskin ’ s 
and Attardo ’ s models: They are general knowledge representation packages 
that are called to mind and ﬂ eshed out during comprehension by binding 
details of the actual situation to terminals that represent variables of the 

52 
Chapter 4
frame (cf. Minsky 1974, 1975, 1984; Coulson 2001).  7 Thus a normal 
modern human being in our culture would have a birthday-party frame, 
a restaurant-meal frame, a getting-money-from-the-ATM frame, a ﬁ nding-
one ’ s-car-in-the-parking-lot frame, a slipping-on-a-banana-peel-frame, 
but probably not a tiger-wrestling frame or a scythe-sharpening frame, or 
a deciding-which-demon-to-invoke-while-mixing-a-potion frame. Minsky 
suggests that what causes the mistake in logic to be discovered in jokes is 
 “ an improper assignment-change ” (often discovered by a contradiction in 
the bindings) that causes a frame shift — a reanalysis and replacement of 
the frame being used to represent the event being comprehended. The 
newly shifted-to frame should be more consistent with all of the binding 
details than the original frame. 
 Although it is related to Freud ’ s understanding of humor, we list Min-
sky ’ s theory under incongruity resolution because of its more signiﬁ cant 
reliance upon contradiction-detection (incongruity), frame-reanalysis (res-
olution), and related cognitive features rather than the emotions, tensions, 
and psychological censors of release theories. Although the idea of cogni-
tive censors (either Freudian or Minskian) does not persuade us, we think 
there is something deep and right about Minsky ’ s mention of faulty reason-
ing, and we will pursue this line of thought later. But we should remember 
that not all humor is the result of performing faulty reasoning (for instance, 
slapstick  8 ), and not all faulty reasoning is followed by humor (you don ’ t 
usually laugh when you discover that you forgot to carry the one while 
solving a cumbersome addition problem). 
 Coulson and Kutas (Coulson and Kutas 1998, 2001; Coulson 2001) 
further championed the frame-shifting model — a concept that Coulson 
(2001) has developed much further than Minsky had taken it — in a series 
of ERP (event-related potential) experiments, which measure electrical activ-
ity from the brain. They pointed out that frame-shifting seems to be opera-
tive in a number of jokes but did not go so far as to claim that this was an 
explanation for all humor. In fact Coulson (2001) gives a thorough treat-
ment of frame-shifting, showing that it is pervasive in much of our semantic 
construction, yet most of these semantic processes are not humorous. 
7.   See also Bartlett ’ s (1932) notion of  schemata , made perhaps more popular by Piaget ’ s similar 
use of the term (e.g., Piaget 1952) for another similar construct. We don ’ t discuss schemata 
because the concept has seldom been used in historical humor theory and does not play a role 
in our own theory.
8.   Perhaps Minsky would suggest a Freudian aggression censor is in play here, rather than one 
of his own faulty-reasoning censors.

A Brief History of Humor Theories 
53
 While semantic reanalysis seems to be present in many jokes, frame-
shifting as a model of humor suffers from the same problems as do incom-
patible overlapping semantic-scripts and other incongruity-resolution 
theories: Although it may sometimes be associated with humor and can 
describe humor to some extent, it does not  explain humor. Why do some 
frame-shifts produce humor and others not? Is there still humor if the same 
frame-shift occurs in a different context, or a different frame-shift in the 
same context? We need to answer the more fundamental question: What 
is it about frame-shifting that is — can be — funny ? 
 F.   Surprise Theories 
 An atheist explorer in the deepest Amazon suddenly ﬁ nds himself surrounded by 
a bloodthirsty group of natives. Upon surveying the situation, he says quietly to 
himself  “ Oh God, I ’ m screwed! ” 
 There is a ray of light from heaven and a voice booms out:  “ No, you are  not 
screwed. Pick up that stone at your feet and bash in the head of the chief standing 
in front of you. ” 
 So the explorer picks up the stone and proceeds to bash the living heck out of 
the chief. 
 As he stands above the lifeless body, breathing heavily and surrounded by a 
hundred natives with a look of shock on their faces, God ’ s voice booms out again: 
 “ Okay . . .  Now you ’ re screwed. ” 
 Some theories claim that surprise is at least a necessary feature of humor, 
if not sufﬁ cient. Descartes claimed that humor was a mixture of joy and 
shock. Our release theorists required that the tension be undone  “ suddenly 
and surprisingly. ” Surprise is mentioned by both our incongruity theorists 
and our superiority theorists: Hobbes, as noted, said laughter is due to a 
 “ sudden glory, ” and Schopenhauer often stressed the occurrence of the 
element of surprise in the resolution. Aristotle noted, when speaking of 
riddles and  “ novelties, ”  that  “ In these the thought is  startling , and, as 
Theodorus puts it, does not ﬁ t in with the ideas you already have. . . . The 
effect is produced even by jokes depending upon changes of the letters of 
a word; this too is a surprise. You ﬁ nd this in verse as well as in prose. The 
word which comes is  not what the hearer imagined ” ( Rhetoric , Book III, ch. 
11, our emphasis). Surprise is typically deﬁ ned as the characteristic emotion 
caused by something unanticipated, but this way of putting it conceals an 
error. Not just anything that is unanticipated can cause surprise. The world 
as we experience it consists largely of activity that we do not have the 
ability to anticipate: people speaking particular sentences to us, birds ﬂ ying 

54 
Chapter 4
by, somebody honking their horn in the distance, being dealt two sevens 
and a nine, a change in the weather. Yet we are not constantly in a state 
of surprise. What surprises us is not unexpected things — most of the things 
that happen were not expected to happen just there and then — but rather 
things we expected  not to happen — because we expected something else 
to happen instead. It is the contradiction between an anticipated event or 
state and a perceived event or state that surprises us. 
 G.   Bergson ’ s Mechanical Humor Theory 
 A lawyer was approached by Mephistopheles, who offered him a brilliant career 
as a defense attorney, leading to a seat on the Supreme Court, and a Hollywood 
movie biopic — in exchange for the souls of his wife and three children. The lawyer 
thought and thought, sweat pouring off his brow. Finally he looked up at Mephis-
topheles and said,  “ There ’ s a catch, right? ” 
 Bergson (1911) said that  “ society will be suspicious of an inelasticity of 
character. ”  A body, a mind, or a society that is inadaptable is given respec-
tively to inﬁ rmity, mental deﬁ ciency, or misery and crime. So, Bergson 
suggests, a mechanism that enforces adaptability would be a solution to 
all of these problems. It is rigidity that causes humor, according to Bergson, 
or rather: Humor is the solution to rigidity. Laughter acts as a  “ social cor-
rective. ”  If one ’ s behavior is inelastic, laughter from others reminds one of 
this and acts as a pressure to cause one to behave more adaptively. Another 
striking claim from Bergson is that  “ laughter has no greater foe than 
emotion. ”  According to him, humorous circumstances appeal strictly to 
the intellect. 
 The comedian Mike Myers, in an e-mail to the author of a  New Yorker 
article on humor, says  “ Comedy characters tend to be a ______ machine; 
i.e., Clouseau was a smug machine, Pepe Le Pew was a love machine, Felix 
Unger was a clean machine, and Austin Powers is a sex machine ” (Friend 
2002). This excellently illustrates the Bergsonian theory of humor. The 
designers of these characters choose a central humorous aspect for the 
character ’ s personality, and mechanize it — make it a rigid and dominating 
determinant of the character ’ s responses. Then we can see humor in how 
that characteristic makes the character behave in nonadaptive ways, per-
forming actions that are not normal (or not expected) for the situation at 
hand, yet typical and obvious given the way the character has been 
sketched. 

A Brief History of Humor Theories 
55
 Bergson ’ s model has several strengths worth noting. It provides a ben-
eﬁ cial purpose — a raison d ’  ê tre — for humor. It sketches a more or less 
mechanical method for detecting or producing humor. And it purports to 
explain the social signiﬁ cance of humor as well. It shares aspects with 
superiority theory as well as an aspect of incongruity theory (in that the 
rigid mechanical behavior is incompatible with the expectedly appropri-
ate adaptability of the human mind) and suggests that these aspects may 
be smoothly compatible. Still, while his model makes good predictions for 
certain forms of the comic, such as the comedy resulting from deformity 
(caricature and the like), physical situations (someone slipping on a 
banana peel), and  “ mechanical ”  behavior, it draws a blank on the sorts of 
humor found in many jokes and witticisms. Koestler (1964, p. 47) ﬁ nds a 
number of counterexamples:  “ If rigidity contrasted with organic supple-
ness were laughable in itself, Egyptian statues and Byzantine mosaics 
would be the best jokes ever invented. If automatic repetitiveness in 
human behaviour were a necessary and sufﬁ cient condition of the comic 
there would be no more amusing spectacle than an epileptic ﬁ t; and if we 
wanted a good laugh we would merely have to feel a person ’ s pulse or 
listen to his heart-beat with its monotonous tick-tack. If  ‘ we laugh each 
time a person gives us the impression of being a thing, ’  there would be 
nothing more funny than a corpse. ”  
 Lastly, Bergson reminds us that humor is strictly human (Koestler calls 
us  “ homo-ridens , ”  the laughing animal). He notes not only that only 
humans laugh but that  “ [We] might equally well have deﬁ ned [human-
kind] as an animal which is laughed at. ” We laugh only  at humans or 
animals or objects to which we have assigned anthropomorphic character-
istics. This suggests that humor is the intellect laughing at the human, or 
at a failing of the human, and more particularly, at a  mental failing of a 
human. Perhaps, then, only humans laugh because only humans have the 
capacity to be  higher-order intentional systems, that is, to adopt the inten-
tional stance (Dennett 1987) toward other entities.  9 This will be a feature 
of our model explained in detail below.  
9.   In the last twenty-ﬁ ve years there has been a vigorous and controversial body of research 
attempting to demonstrate that nonhuman species, especially great apes and dolphins, are — or 
are not — higher-order intentional systems, but the results are inconclusive in spite of many 
ingenious experiments. See, e.g., Premack and Premack 1983; Tomasello and Call 1997; Hauser 
2001. Even if some apes do have something like a  “ theory of mind, ” it does not ramify as 
exuberantly as the effortless  “ folk psychology ” of human beings.

 
 
 
 
 
 

 5   Twenty Questions for a Cognitive and Evolutionary 
Theory of Humor 
 There are two rednecks in a ﬁ eld: 
 Bobby Joe:  “ Hey, you wanna play twenty questions? ” 
 Billy Bob:  “ Sure. Lemme thinka somethin ’ . ” 
 Bobby Joe:  “ Got it? ” 
 Billy Bob:  “ Yeah, got it. Ask me. ” 
 Bobby Joe:  “ Is it a thing? ” 
 Billy Bob:  “ Yeah. ” 
 Bobby Joe:  “ Can you fuck it? ” 
 Billy Bob:  “ Yeah. ” 
 Bobby Joe:  “ Is it a goat? ” 
 Billy Bob:  “ Yeah. ” 
 This brief summary of the history of humor theory yields a laundry list 
of the features that would comprise a complete cognitive theory of the 
subject. The list is presented here in the form of questions. Each question 
has been raised before, and even, to some degree, answered. Our goal is 
to synthesize the best points from the existing theories into a uniﬁ ed 
model that answers all of the questions. A good model should not over-
look any recognizable variety of humor and should not identify items as 
humorous that don ’ t provoke mirth. A very good model should, more-
over, make some surprising predictions: It should tell us how to turn a 
humorous event into a nonhumorous event by making minimal changes, 
and, ideally, it should give us good recipes for generating humor. It is one 
thing to be able to account for the favored cases purportedly accounted 
for by earlier theories; it is another thing to generate new classes of 
cases, or new taxonomies of existing cases, showing how  and why 
they are humorous. In short, a good model should be testable in a variety 
of ways. We will address general concerns of refutability in more detail 
in chapter 10. 

58 
Chapter 5
 1.   Is humor an adaptation?  Is there a beneﬁ t that is conferred upon the 
genes by the humor trait and, if so, what is that beneﬁ t? What might the 
trait do to increase the likelihood of reproduction to the genes of its 
bearer? Humor is innate (see footnote 4, p. 6) and it is pervasive across all 
human cultures. Laughter shows up in infants ontogenetically early, and 
appears apparently spontaneously in congenitally blind and deaf chil-
dren. The humor trait has not genetically drifted out of any population. 
Why not? 
 2.   Where did humor come from?    Do other species have humor, or anything 
like it? We should be able to tell a clear story about the behavioral precur-
sors to humor, and eventually even plot the path of mutation from those 
precursors to the modern-day phenotype of the trait. 
 3.   Why do we communicate humor?    Making unnecessary noise draws the 
attention of predators. Communication also costs the organism in energy 
expenditure. There ought to have been some adaptive purpose to the early 
communication of humor. How does the communication differ from 
humor itself and what, if any, beneﬁ t is conferred upon the genes by such 
behavior? 
 4.   Why do we feel pleasure in humor?    We not only feel happy when we 
laugh; there is also a particular quality to that form of pleasure that is 
unique to humor: mirth. In what ways is mirth qualitatively different from 
other pleasures, and can we explain why this should be? Is there a beneﬁ t 
to our genes that pays for the energetic costs of the speciﬁ c phenomenon 
of mirth? 
 5.   Why do we feel surprise in humor?  Most, or at least many, humorous 
stimuli contain an element of surprise, to the point that some have pos-
tulated surprise as the root cause of humor. (Others tack on surprise or 
suddenness as an additional but unmotivated requirement at the end of 
their theories.) Why is it so pervasive? 
 6.   Why is judgment a ubiquitous component in the content of humorous 
stimuli?  Superiority theorists often claim that judgment between a noble 
state and an ignoble state of a thing causes humor. But judgment exists 
extensively outside of humor as well. Why is there such value comparison 
in humor? What would be the purpose of a humor that made such 
judgments? 
 7.   Why does humor often get used for disparagement?  To  make fun of some-
thing is to disparage it; when we  make fun of people we often humiliate 
them — although there is also the derived practice of light-hearted mocking 
or roasting,  “ just for fun, ” which people are supposed to endure with good 
humor. Why does this occur? You can insult someone, but you can ’ t  make 

Twenty Questions for a Theory of Humor 
59
fun of or mock someone, without using humor. Superiority theorists think 
this is why humor exists. Should this be part of our theory? And is there 
a reproductive beneﬁ t derivable from disparagement or the feeling of 
superiority? 
 8.   Why does humor so often point to failures?  Aristotle claimed that humor 
points out failings. Even in good-hearted humor, there is often an aspect 
of mistakes made: mistaken identity, misunderstanding, misperception, 
and so on. Why does this connection exist? 
 9.   Why, in humor, do we have a sense of nonsense?  There are many models 
of incongruity — all different. Is there a simplifying view that treats them 
all as subclasses of a more general base class? (Relatedly, what is the role 
of expectation as Kant saw it? How can we explain Schopenhauer ’ s model 
of perception versus conception? Can we explain each of Suls ’ s, Shultz ’ s, 
Attardo ’ s, and Raskin ’ s models all under one rubric?) 
 10.   If incongruity causes humor, how does it do it?  We need something more 
than a descriptive account here. What causal mechanisms are triggered 
by incongruity and why? (See Ritchie ’ s questions about incongruity in 
chapter 10.) 
 11.   Why is it that we laugh only at humans or anthropomorphized objects?  It 
seems that only things that have minds, or are interacting somehow with 
things that have minds, can be humorous. Some aspect of the mind, then, 
might be the source of humor. What is it about humans that make them 
the topic of humor and not just the perceivers of humor? 
 12.   What is right about Bergson ’ s claim that mechanical behavior is humor-
ous?  Bergson notes that it is detrimental to act nonadaptively, and a tell-
tale sign of mechanical behavior is its failure to mesh adaptively with 
subtleties in the environment. Is he right that humor is a way to keep us 
in check? Is mechanism a marked subclass of humor? 
 13.   Why can humor be used as a social corrective?  Why do we laugh at 
someone when they do something inappropriate? What makes us judge 
that some kinds of inappropriate behavior are laughable while others are 
not? Why do we feel humiliated when people laugh at us? Does this 
process make us change our behavior? Does it tend to return us to  “ normal ” ? 
 14.   What unites the broad variety of types of humorous stimuli?  As Socrates 
never tired of saying when given a collection of examples: That ’ s ﬁ ne, but 
what do they all have in common? 
 15.   How does play relate to humor?    What aspect of play is similar to humor? 
Both have an aspect of the nonserious in their content and both lead to 
pleasure. Play often leads to laughter. What common cause may there be 
for both? What is their relationship to tickling? 

60 
Chapter 5
 16.   What is the relationship between problem solving, discovery, and humor?  We 
tend to exclaim  “ Aha! ”  when we discover something new or solve a 
problem. Occasionally we even laugh. The same emotion of discovery 
occurs when we  “ get the joke. ” What is the relationship between these 
phenomena? 
 17.   Why do we desire humor so intensely?  We are motivated to seek out 
humor. We lay our credit cards on the counter at the box ofﬁ ce for com-
edies and wait in line to hear standup comedians. Situation comedies and 
animated cartoons dominate commercial television. Magazines keep their 
subscribers happy by inserting humorous cartoons every few pages, and 
every bookstore has a proﬁ table humor section. Billions of dollars are spent 
annually on the comedy industry. Why is comedy such an attractive 
commodity? 
 18.   What is the peculiar speciﬁ city often found in humor?  Humorous stimuli 
often have less than universal appeal. In the limit, an  “ in-joke ”  may have 
a qualiﬁ ed audience of one. What features qualify one for what varieties 
of humor? 
 19.   What is the generality in humor?  On the other hand, much humor is 
universal. Some humor will reliably provoke mirth in almost everyone in 
the world. And why do we typically desire to spread humor to a wider 
public? Why is humor so seldom a solitary pleasure? 
 20.   Why are there gender differences in humor?  Why do men get more laughs 
and women give more laughs? Why do women, more than men, seek  “ a 
sense of humor ” when writing personal ads? And why are there over-
whelmingly more male comedians than female? 
 Each of these questions points to an important part of humor, and a theory 
that doesn ’ t answer to them all satisfactorily will be missing something. 
Of the many models in the previous chapter, only incongruity-resolution 
is a serious contender today, although a few theorists (e.g., Alexander 1986; 
Gruner 1997) and many armchair theorists — interview your friends and 
you ’ ll ﬁ nd some — are still trying to give the superiority theory a run for 
its money. However, as we explained in the previous chapter, while on the 
right track, even current incongruity theories have fallen short of describ-
ing all the phenomena in this list. The theory we offer in the next few 
chapters is, in some ways, simply a new twist on the incongruity theory; 
but in other ways, it offers something quite different. We claim it answers 
all twenty questions. 

 6   Emotion and Computation 
 A.   Finding the Funny Bone 
 We have reason to believe that man ﬁ rst walked upright to free his hands for 
masturbation. 
 — Lily Tomlin 
 The last few chapters, our brief survey of the phenomenology of humor, 
and our even more cursory survey of the attempts by researchers to explain 
it all with a single theory, should drive home the following conclusions: 
 1.   It is very hard — verging on impossible — to see what puns, slapstick, 
classic comedy, and dirty jokes have in common aside from being (poten-
tially) funny. As legions of partial theories attest, if there is something that 
unites these very different species of humor it is far from obvious. 
 2.   Humor is dependent on (or sensitive to) both content restrictions and 
the dynamics of presentation. A hilarious joke lamely told, out of order or 
with poor timing, will have  almost all mirth drained out of it, and a good 
comic actor can milk a laugh out of  almost any line chosen at random from 
a book. The key word is  “ almost. ”  There is excellent humor that exists in 
written (or drawn) form, with little or no discernible help from the dynam-
ics of presentation — for example, variation in font, type size, lighting, or 
the speed of reading by the audience. And some physical humor seems to 
be almost entirely dynamics: the juxtaposition of disparate sights and 
sounds at just the right tempo and volume to trigger a guffaw. 
 3.   Since there is no  topic that is intrinsically comic, the content require-
ment must be something to do with how the content (on whatever topic) 
is derived, obscured, used, or misused. That is, it must be a function of the 
 cognitive processing of the content. 
 4.   Since dynamics is so important, there must be conditions of humor that 
depend (somehow) on the actual physical,  “ mechanical ”  parameters of 

62 
Chapter 6
operation of this cognitive processing: the variable speed of processing, the 
variable rate of increasing arousal, the variable intensity and duration of 
phases in the processing, and so forth. Whatever the details of this neuro-
physiological story, they will be completely inscrutable to the subject, and 
no more  “ intuitive ”  than the details of the operation of digestion or blood 
clotting. (Thus we can imagine that there could be a drug that turned off 
or disrupted or heightened one ’ s sense of humor  “ simply ”  by preventing 
the buildup of some neuromodulator, or changing the relative speed of 
two semi-independent processes, mechanical disruptions that would  make 
no sense in a theory attempting to explain  humor , independently of a very 
speciﬁ c model of the machinery underlying humor detection.) 
 5.   This innate neural system for cognitive processing — the  “ funny bone ” 1 —
 must be for something. What is it for? Here we turn to elementary evolu-
tionary considerations. It must have been designed by evolution to perform 
some substantially important cognitive task, since it is ubiquitous in 
human beings, and its activity is powerfully rewarding. This task should 
be at least uniquely well-developed in human beings, since there is nothing 
that looks much like our humor in other species.  “ What do we do better 
than we otherwise would do, thanks to the mechanisms that carry with 
them, as a price worth paying, our susceptibility to — our near addiction 
to — laughter? ”  (Dennett 1991, 63). 
 6.   Whatever pressing need was met by wiring us up this way may not show 
much resemblance to the roles humor now plays in our lives. For instance, 
the humor system might have compensated for some strain that human 
beings once put on their brains, but which no longer has much if any 
adaptive signiﬁ cance. Consider a parallel: We know that  ensuring reproduc-
tion is the important project that pays, in evolutionary terms, for the 
existence of libido in human beings. Getting the gametes united is nature ’ s 
1.   The neural  “ funny bone ” should not be imagined to be a single brain region. It is actually a 
very complex, temporally and structurally distributed system that requires a coordinated 
network of responses involved in generating expectations and associations, perceived incon-
gruities, revision and coherence, and of course the affective and expressive responses. Mobbs 
et al. (2003) found mesolimbic  “ reward ”  activation, including the ventral tegmental area, 
nucleus accumbens/ventral striatum, and amygdala; as well as activation in a variety of cognitive 
and semantic regions including the inferior frontal gyrus (involved in generating initial expecta-
tions), the temporo-occipital junction (involved in detection of contradiction), and Broca ’ s area 
and the temporal pole (involved in establishing coherence or resolution). Other regions likely 
related to the expression of humor, including supplementary motor area and dorsal anterior 
cingulate gyrus, were also activated.

Emotion and Computation 
63
highest imperative, more important even than staying alive in many 
species, and yet in our species this project is very often systematically 
thwarted, leaving the underlying machinery with a host of derived roles 
to play that do not contribute at all to anybody ’ s genetic ﬁ tness, such as 
providing the reward system that underwrites pornography and the use of 
sexual imagery in advertising. At a conference on the evolution of religion 
in 2007, Dennett was challenged to give even a single example of a ubiq-
uitous human phenomenon, genetically based but culturally evolved and 
transmitted, that didn ’ t have positive adaptive signiﬁ cance as an enhancer 
of genetic ﬁ tness. His answer: masturbation. To his amazement, several of 
the interlocutors went on to try to argue that masturbation  had to be  “ good 
for something ” if it survived; perhaps it was rehearsal designed to improve 
one ’ s techniques of impregnation, for instance! We must guard against this 
na ï ve understanding of evolution when we canvass the legitimate possibili-
ties for humor. Enthusiasm outruns rigor among the fans of evolutionary 
explanations of psychological phenomena, and we recognize that this has 
led some skeptics to choose the simplistic path of dismissing all of it, but 
that is just as unscientiﬁ c a position as that of the silliest evolutionary 
psychologists. A good evolutionary theory will account for a wide variety 
of independently observed phenomena that have heretofore deﬁ ed any 
uniﬁ ed explanation, and will offer the prospect of clear empirical tests that 
could falsify the theory. 
 This is the set of inferences that led us to the model we develop in the 
coming chapters. It is  one hypothesis that ﬁ ts all the requirements quite 
handily; there may well be another, better hypothesis, but we can ’ t think 
of one, so we ’ re making the case for this one, the best candidate for the 
task we have been able to construct, and using it to illuminate how a 
theory of humor might be a particularly effective bridge for uniting our 
evolutionary, neurocomputational, cognitive, and social understanding of 
ourselves. Before we present our model, however, we need to clear the 
decks. There are several common misapprehensions about brains and com-
puters, emotions and logic, that we need to expose and expel, replacing 
them with foundations on which our model can be built. 
 B.   Does Logic or Emotion Organize Our Brains? 
 There can be no knowledge without emotion. We may be aware of a truth, yet 
until we have felt its force, it is not ours. To the cognition of the brain must be 
added the experience of the soul. 
 — Arnold Bennett 

64 
Chapter 6
 The intellect without the emotions is like the jockey without the horse. 
 — Laurence Gonzales (2003) 
 In a long tradition going back to Aristotle and his syllogism, logicians have 
deﬁ ned proper reasoning according to a set of rules that originally come 
from  intuitions . The intuitions of everyday reasoning once were the only 
source, the only judge, of what was rational or illogical. Aristotle presented 
his syllogistic logic in a book called the  Organon , a Greek word for  tool ; he 
had devised a thinking tool, a prosthetic device that was meant to sharpen 
and systematize the intuitions one encountered when thinking  “ with the 
bare hands, ” in effect. These rules were formalized and, subsequently, in 
the nineteenth century they were developed further into symbolic logic, a 
 technology — memetically evolved, and  “ formal ”  in Haugeland ’ s (1985) 
sense. This symbolic, or mathematical, logic nowadays pervades philoso-
phy, computer science, and engineering and is even sometimes applied, 
when special care needs to be taken (writing contracts and insurance poli-
cies, for instance), in everyday reasoning and argument. The internal con-
sistency of mathematical logic is so convincing that it usually evades 
questioning. Although logicians occasionally make forays into the realm of 
alternative internally consistent systems, thereby questioning whether all 
these intuitions are appropriate, here instead we question not their sound-
ness but their origin: What makes it  seem right — to any person on earth —
 that you  cannot have  p and not- p both be true?  2 Or that either  p or not- p 
 must be true? Whence do such beliefs originate? It is often said that a few 
basic rules such as these are  “ a priori ” or  “ self-evident logical principles ” 
(e.g., Russell 1912), but even if this verdict is sustained, it remains to be seen 
how the psychological and neurophysiological constitution of our brains 
guarantees that such a principle will be judged self-evident. For instance, 
infants, without training, discover such logical constructs as object 
permanence apparently on their own (Piaget 1936/1952, 1937/1954).  3 
2.   Certain philosophers and logicians who take various  “ paraconsistent ”  logics to be valid 
disagree with the fundamental nature of the law of noncontradiction. Under such views, some 
contradictions may in fact be valid. We are agnostic on all this; our point here is that the sub-
jective sense of validity in a particular  kind of mind — the kind of mind that we humans typically 
have — is the source, historically, and the (defeasible) testbed against which all logics — logical 
tools — are judged.
3.   Experimenters looking for evidence of infants ’  appreciation of object permanence have 
proposed — and used — indicators from which they attempt to infer a child ’ s level of surprise or 
lack thereof. These indicators include such measurables as preferential looking, emotional 

Emotion and Computation 
65
It is tempting to interpret their startle reaction when confronted with trick 
cases of object  im permanence as indicating their innate allegiance to the 
law of noncontradiction — manifesting an instance of their belief that  not 
 ( p and not-p ), but articulating the precise content of  p in such an instance 
is not a task for the fainthearted. In any event, there seems to be something 
innate — or at least innately learnable sans supervision — about such self-
evident principles of reasoning. 
 Although this self-evidential nature was certainly a boon in getting 
formal logic off the ground (one needs axioms before one can derive theo-
rems), it has been the source of endless trouble for another group of 
researchers: the architects of reasoning systems. Many of those who would 
endeavor to sire an artiﬁ cial intelligence (e.g., GPS — the General Problem 
Solver — as reported in Newell and Simon 1972) have imported the formal 
system of reasoning into their designs directly — often including, for their 
brainchildren to employ, as many of the theorems that have fallen out 
from these axioms as possible — with very limited success. These early 
architects and those following in the tradition after them can be forgiven: 
Logic is the basis of programming in modern computing substrates — it is 
only natural to want to extend its ambit into the minds of their intellectual 
progeny when delivering them into life upon those very same substrates. 
Yet, it may be more suitable, we suggest, to endow these models only with 
a sense, similar to ours, of the self-evident axioms, and then to allow the 
employment of these endowments to help those agents engage in nonfor-
mal reasoning (much like ours) as necessary to solve the problems they 
come to face in their ecological niche, and perhaps to eventually discover 
the theorems of formal logic. It is well accepted, by now, that humans are 
not normatively rational thinkers, yet are often, under the right condi-
tions, capable of rational thinking (Samuels, Stich, and Bishop 2002). The 
heuristics and biases that characterize our thinking may be the result of a 
certain kind of cognitive apparatus, yet to be fully described, which reasons 
informally based on some approximations to the axioms of logic, but 
which also provides the cognitive scaffolding (Clark 1997; Clark and 
Chalmers 1998) and tools necessary to learn technologies such as formal 
systems that allow for more effective nonheuristic truly rational 
reasoning. 
expressions, and pulse rate. The attribution of actual belief in  “ object permanence ” is a theoreti-
cal extension of these measurements, but what any of these experiments shows in any case is 
that infants show what we  take to be the emotion of surprise.

66 
Chapter 6
 The ﬁ eld of artiﬁ cial intelligence was founded on the presumption that 
with the advent of computers, formal reasoning could be straightforwardly 
mechanized and automated, creating  “ inference engines ” that could churn 
away on large sets of  “ axioms ”  to deduce all the propositions needed to 
inform and guide the behavior of an intelligent agent, whether a robot 
lumbering around in the real world or a bedridden agent playing chess and 
answering typed questions on all manner of topics. Tremendous progress 
has in fact ensued, creating large systems packed with real-world data 
presided over by inference engines that, like reference librarians, are adept 
at ﬁ nding the right stored items and putting them together to infer the 
answers to many questions (e.g., Lenat and Guha 1990). But the idea that 
a human being ’ s brain is basically a computer with a large database in 
memory and a superb inference engine to update and exploit it (what 
Dennett 1984 calls the  “ walking encyclopedia ” model of the mind) has 
fallen on hard times. It has long been recognized that, in one way or 
another, such a hyperrational agent would almost certainly ﬂ ounder 
in the real world, unable to direct its cognitive resources in a timely and 
appropriate fashion. 
 Some cognitive scientists have taken the moral of the story to be that 
logic  is not enough . To get a behaviorally adroit and resourceful agent, you 
have to supplement your  cognitive system, with its perceptual subsystems 
and memory subsystems and inference subsystems and the like, with an 
 emotional subsystem (or two or three or more). But we — along with others 
(e.g., Damasio 1994; de Sousa 1987; Elster 1996; Frank 1988) — want to 
draw an even more radical conclusion: Emotions are not a set of important 
subsystems sitting alongside the cognitive subsystems; in the brain, emo-
tions  rule . We mean this literally.  All control in the brain, all prioritizing, 
all organizing, all demoting and promoting, starting and stopping, enhanc-
ing and squelching  within cognitive processes, is done by what we refer to 
as the  cognitive emotions or, more precisely, the  epistemic emotions. 4 These 
4.   While it may be the more proﬁ table taxonomic label for our category, the term  “ cognitive 
emotions ”  is apt to be misconstrued owing to the broad usage of the term  “ cognition, ” which 
often refers to all the results of mental processing, both epistemic and pragmatic (Kirsh and 
Maglio 1994). Also, some (e.g., Grifﬁ ths 1997) have already used the term  “ higher cognitive 
emotions ”  to refer to emotions that require cognitive appraisal in their triggering mechanisms. 
Such a taxonomy is not at odds with, but runs orthogonal to ours, which carves up emotions 
according to which kinds of behaviors are motivated by each rather than which mechanisms 
are involved in the transduction of their objectives.

Emotion and Computation 
67
are a set of emotions that, together, have the effect of encouraging the 
mental behaviors that constitute a certain form of reasoning and epistemic 
assurance. This is not the ﬁ rst time this idea has been explored. In  “ Expla-
nation as Orgasm, ” Alison Gopnik (1998, 109) described insight, or the 
sense of discovery, in similar terms: she remarks,  “ We not only know an 
explanation when we have one, we want explanations, and we are satisﬁ ed 
when we get them. ” There is a motivation toward explaining things. We 
 want the world to make sense. Insight is not the only emotion in the set. 
Before we look at  mirth , the motivation for a mind to search out subtle 
oversights made in reasoning that could infect the integrity of our knowl-
edge, we should brieﬂ y survey other members, each of which seems to 
have a different purpose, but all of which are important in organizing the 
particular kind of reasoning that humans perform. 
 C.   Emotions 
 I ’ ve read that the brain is the most amazing thing in the universe (but look what ’ s 
 telling  us that). 
 — Emo Philips 
 We know why we are born curious: We are, as George Miller once said, 
 informavores . Our hunger for novelty drives us to ﬁ ll our heads with facts 
we might need some day, and this is a feature we share with vertebrates 
in general, and at least some of the other clever locomotors — cephalopods 
most strikingly. Some of our innate experiential hungers are tuned to spe-
ciﬁ c topics (Dennett 2006). For instance, we know what  libido is for, even 
if we don ’ t know the details of its evolutionary history. It evolved to ensure 
that mating opportunities would be seized more often than not, by install-
ing a nearly irresistible urge (not as irresistible as the urge to breathe, but 
able to hold its own against the urge to eat, to stay safe and sound, to 
sleep, to go ﬁ shing . . .). We also know what our  sweet tooth is for: We 
evolved with a hard-wired preference for high-energy food. And we know 
why we are also suckers for  cuteness ; our perceptual-motivational systems 
have a bias for infant faces that serves those infants well when they depend 
on our willingness to give their care and protection a higher priority than 
they otherwise would have. In each case, the deeper, evolutionary explana-
tion almost inverts our everyday wisdom: We don ’ t like sugar because it ’ s 
intrinsically sweet (whatever that would mean!), it ’ s sweet because we ’ re 
wired up to like it; guys don ’ t go for girls (or guys, for that matter) who 

68 
Chapter 6
are intrinsically sexy, we go for those who are perceived by us to be sexy;  5 
the cuteness of babies is an effect derived from the triggering of our nurtur-
ing instincts, not the cause of our nurturing.  6 These three built-in  “ ﬂ avors ” 
of experiential hunger are now exploited by culturally evolved systems of 
artifacts designed to tickle our fancies for many ulterior purposes. We have 
pornographers and confectioners; we have cartoonists who know how to 
make a cute mouse, bear, alligator, or ogre; and we have advertisers who 
know how to exploit any or all these tastes to sell things that can ’ t be 
mated with, eaten, or nurtured. (We will eventually show how comedy 
similarly exploits the mirth-instinct.) 
 All emotions are anchored in our neurophysiology, but they also have 
physiological effects outside the brain. Various emotions cause us to sweat, 
salivate, cry, modulate our breathing, pulse, and/or blood pressure, dilate 
or constrict our pupils, blush or pale, tighten or relax various muscles. 
These effects are mediated by internal diffusion of hormones and neuro-
modulators whose distinct identities, in ebb and ﬂ ood, we can discern both 
 “ directly ”  (by discerning some of their internal effects — such as an adrena-
line rush, or a blissful bath of oxytocin) and indirectly (by observing their 
external effects, in ourselves and others).  7 
 William James ’ s well-known theory of emotion (James 1884; see also 
Lange 1885; James 1890) maintains that the physiological effects of the 
emotions are created in response to certain perceptual and cognitive 
events, and the ensuing sensory detection of these physiological effects is 
what gives the emotions their phenomenological qualities — the qualities 
that allow us to feel a consistency in them from episode to episode. If we 
did not blush, what would embarrassment feel like? James and Lange 
would claim that it wouldn ’ t feel like anything at all. This position is 
another inversion of everyday wisdom: We don ’ t cry because we ’ re sad, 
we ’ re sad because we cry! This is perhaps an oversimplifying tagline, but 
5.   Likewise, the inverse holds as well. The natural wiring  inside a perceiver  that detects various 
gender-speciﬁ c traits is what makes people with those traits sexy.
6.   Somewhat more circumspectly: The spatial properties we perceive as cuteness would not be 
so perceived independently of our evolved disposition to nurture infants that  looked like that . 
The cuteness we perceive is as much an  effect of our evolved way of responding as an indepen-
dently existing perceptible property.
7.   Notice that the phenomenal sensations available to us from our bodies are far from exhausted 
by those senses we can enumerate with the words in our languages. There is a plethora of 
internal sensory transducers that provide distinct  “ feels ”  for various physiological events (e.g., 
interoceptors for carbon dioxide in the bloodstream, or, as noted above, for oxytocin or 
epinephrine).

Emotion and Computation 
69
it gets the idea across. Some (e.g., Grifﬁ ths 1997; Solomon 1976) have 
argued against this position, insisting that certain emotions (e.g., envy, 
guilt, jealousy) can occur without physiological responses. Others have 
challenged the James – Lange view, underscoring that severing the viscera 
from the spinal cord does not seem to alter emotional behavior (e.g., 
Cannon 1927; see also Chwalisz, Diener, and Gallagher 1988) and that 
identical physiological changes can lead to different emotions (Cannon 
1927; Mara ñ on 1924; Schachter and Singer 1962). In our view, Prinz suc-
cessfully defends a version of the James – Lange theory, discounting the 
Cannon and the Schachter and Singer results as inconclusive and multiply 
interpretable (see Prinz 2004 for details). He also says that the jealousy that 
Grifﬁ ths has in mind is a disposition to be jealous, rather than an occur-
rent instance of jealousy. Such dispositions may make us hope our lover 
comes home on time every evening; but occurrences, which only happen 
when that lover actually is late, do have physiological effects. 
 Extensions of the James – Lange model (by, e.g., Damasio 1994, and Prinz 
2004, who calls emotions  “ embodied appraisals ” ; see also Niedenthal 2007, 
for a concise review of the ways in which emotional information is embod-
ied) argue that emotions are a type of informational feedback loop that 
takes place not just in the brain but in the rest of the body — some stimulus 
causes a cognitive event, which releases hormones into the body, which 
in turn create the physiological changes that are then perceived through 
proprioceptive senses and become an integrated sensorial element of that 
event. These loops have properties that a purely cerebral processing system 
would not — could not — have. The ﬁ rst important property is temporal: 
Emotions are extended over time as the physiological effects that are initi-
ated and the signaling chemicals that are released by the sympathetic and 
parasympathetic nervous systems to induce those effects both require sig-
niﬁ cantly more time than purely cognitive events — the ﬁ ring of neurons —
 to run their course. 
 Second, emotions always have  valence ; they are positive or negative.  8 
Valence means that events that we sense through these kinds of feedback 
8.   The physiological effects of the emotions and the perception of those effects are involun-
tary — if the emotion occurs, you will feel it. But, the behaviors that are associated with those 
emotions are at least semivoluntary. That is to say, different kinds of pains (and pleasures) of 
varying intensities are an impetus to act, but inasmuch as they are sensory input, they can then 
be cognitively modulated with respect to other goals, given other simultaneous emotions or 
pragmatic information — pains can be disregarded and pleasures resisted, if necessary. We are 
setting aside, for present purposes, a host of interesting questions on the interaction of 

70 
Chapter 6
loops are not just things that we recognize can beneﬁ t or injure us, but 
things that we perceive as  good or bad for those reasons.  9 With valenced 
feedback of this sort, a  “ merely cognitive ” event (e.g., witnessing a death 
or watching your child win a spelling bee) can become painful or pleasur-
able  in the same way that more  “ bodily ”  events (e.g., orgasm, weariness, 
and satiation) are painful or pleasurable — that is, the value of the event is 
known because there are valence-coupled physiological repercussions 
played out through the body.  10 In the more visceral conditions the pleasure 
or pain is directly (physically directly) caused in the body (by, e.g., sexual 
activity, hard work, or eating), and in the emotional feedback loop it 
requires the quick (automatic) assessment of factual or implicit content to 
impact the emotional system and instigate it to then signal the bodily 
response. In this way, the intangible quite literally becomes tangible — a 
thing that could only be cognitively assessed before now has substantial 
material value, and we can say without metaphor that watching the 
opening scene of  Saving Private Ryan , for instance, is a truly  visceral 
experience. 
 It is well known that crude but effective danger-transducing sensory 
circuits can swiftly trigger orientation responses before the cause of the 
danger is identiﬁ ed by a slower cognitive process that can declare a false 
alarm and cancel the incipient adrenaline rush, if there is probably no 
danger (see, e.g., LeDoux 1998, 2002). This can result in  almost imperceptible 
and vanishingly brief emotional twinges, which can still have potent 
ongoing motivational effects. Emotions, in general, must be  felt , but we 
shouldn ’ t make this true by deﬁ nition, since there are fundamentally 
similar processes that lurk just beneath the threshold of noticeability. 
 This rather broad deﬁ nition of emotion is quite contrary to some more 
speciﬁ c categorizations (e.g., Descartes 1649/1988; Ekman 1992, 1999; 
Tomkins 1962; Izard 1971; Oatley and Johnson-Laird 1987),  11 but it has 
cognition and emotions, such as appraisal theories and their critics. See Arnold 1960, Zajonc 
1984, and Lazarus 1984.
9.   A pain without valence is a qualitatively similar sensation that we just don ’ t see as problem-
atic — as attested by patients on morphine (Melzack and Casey 1968). For a detailed account of 
anomalous pain, see Grahek 2007.
10.   For arguments considering pains to be a subclass of emotions, see Craig 2003, Gustafson 
2006, and Vogt 2005.
11.   Though Prinz (2004) does not offer a categorization of emotions, he might theoretically 
disagree with our broad deﬁ nition. He considers pains, desires, and hungers to be affective 

Emotion and Computation 
71
had several recent excellent defenses, among them those by Damasio 
(1994, 1999) and Huron (2006). 
 When classifying the emotions, it is often noted that the time scale of 
emotional episodes is widely variable, sometimes operating only on a scale 
of seconds, and other times, as in the emotion of love, over a span of years. 
This perception is a mistake. The love that lasts years is not an uninter-
rupted stream of loving, but rather a strong tendency, over those years, to 
repeatedly feel discrete instances of the emotion of love (see, e.g., Solomon 
1976). So, the love that a person has for their spouse is not a continuous 
activity, but rather a disposition to experience a protracted series of rela-
tively brief emotional episodes that may be experienced over the course of 
many years. These episodes may occur multiple times per day, and one 
may be well aware of them. Such episodes may in fact interrupt (deli-
ciously) whatever train of thought one is engaged in, but they do (nor-
mally) soon end, at which point one ’ s attention is free to return to other 
topics, other projects. They may nevertheless have cumulative effects far 
beyond the introspective reach of the person, solidifying bonds of loyalty, 
trust, and sympathy, creating a long-term relational state that is also 
known as love, but is not itself an emotional state. 
 In contrast, a number of emotions such as anger, giddiness, or guilt 
often seem to last uninterruptedly for at least hours, if not days, without 
apparent episodic interruption over those time scales. But this kind of 
consistency can be explained as a series of overlapping episodes. There is 
either a constant stimulus or a feedback loop that is reinitiating the 
emotion regularly. If the stimulus that causes an emotion is consistently 
present, then the emotion may be continually triggered. More interest-
ingly, if the event that triggered an emotion is dwelled upon owing to the 
intensity of the emotion, then the ensuing thought can, as a surrogate for 
the initial stimulus, consistently retrigger the emotion. If you keep think-
ing about what made you dejected in the ﬁ rst place, you ’ ll become more 
miserable. These feedback loops, as we all know well, can be difﬁ cult to 
escape. 
motivational states, but not emotions. We think this is just a disagreement in terms. Prinz admits 
the same category of valenced motivators that we label as emotions and ﬁ nds it very important 
that they all form a category; he just prefers to reserve the word  “ emotion ”  for one subset of 
these — those that are instigated by cognitively transduced feedback — while calling the others, 
variously, pains and hungers. We are content to coclassify the valenced motivations under the 
name emotions, as we think the differentiating factor (the complexity of the transduction 
process) is less of a deﬁ ning characteristic than the motivational function.

72 
Chapter 6
 This triggering of an emotion from conception rather than perception 
plays another signiﬁ cant role in the minds of thinking agents like humans. 
Most animals apparently have emotions associated with expectations and 
memories — a dog viewing a bowl of food will most likely have a  “ thought ” 
of eating that drives an emotional desire. So it is with us, too; in this way, 
not just our experiences, but our memories and expectations, can have 
valence. Coupling this with our perhaps unique ability to dream up hypo-
thetical futures and counterfactual pasts not only allows us to live out 
those imaginary events, but also to  evaluate them. Damasio (1994) termed 
this notion the  somatic marker hypothesis and suggested that because of the 
availability of these evaluations we have the capability to choose between 
alternative futures by comparison of the emotional values of potential 
events as measured by their similarity to past events. (See also Huron 2006 
on anticipation-driven emotions.) 
 In sum, an emotion is an internally induced pleasure or pain — a valenced 
perception — caused by a variety of processes of transduction of informa-
tion in the world. In being valenced, they provide value — a sort of 
default motivation — to their associated stimuli. We are not  indifferent to 
emotionally valenced perceptions. In being perceptual, they are capable 
of taking part in informational processing in the mind much like other 
perceptual data. This allows cocategorization of emotionally similar 
events, but perhaps more importantly it allows for emotional priming, in 
which a memory or a thought may awaken a feeling, or a feeling may 
reference a memory.  12   Such priming may underlie the operation of somatic 
markers providing the ability to make informed decisions by evaluating 
potential futures. Generally, emotions occur on the time scale of the physi-
ological changes in the body that are caused by neuromodulator and 
hormonal ﬂ oods and their reabsorption or diffusion refractory period —
 seconds to minutes. But briefer, less noticeable effects — indeed, subliminal 
emotional effects — are not ruled out, and may play important roles in 
the dynamics of experience (Booth 1969; Huron 2006). In any event, 
when they and their effects are gone, you no longer  feel the emotion, 
though effects way beyond this may occur as a result of the way the cogni-
tive system or the world interacts with the triggering content for that 
emotion. 
12.   Bower (1981) showed that inducing emotional states that are congruent with those occur-
ring during an event facilitates recall of the event.

Emotion and Computation 
73
 D.   The Rationality of Emotions 
 We really need to change that historic dichotomy of cognition on the one hand, 
emotions on the other hand, and realize that our emotions are the fuel that gives 
rise to social behavior but also to different levels of intelligence. 
 — Stanley Greenspan 
 Both the English words  emotion and  motivation derive from the same 
Latin root,  movere (meaning  “ to move ” ), indicating that, early on, it was 
recognized that the emotions are motivations to action. A number of 
modern theories of emotions also conclude that the purpose is to motivate: 
Zajonc (1980) saw that a number of emotions seemed to characterize their 
attendant stimuli as things that we like or dislike and induce in us a ten-
dency to approach or avoid those kinds of phenomena; Frijda (1986) used 
the term  “ action tendency ” to describe an emotion as something that 
increased the likelihood of particular behaviors; and, Prinz (2004) argues 
for a similar position that assigns motivation not to the appraisal quality 
of the emotion but to the valence. It should be clear that our view of the 
emotions (as pleasures and pains not different from hunger and satiety) is 
aligned with these theories (see also Damasio 1999). 
 Now that we have framed the higher emotions as corporeal feedback 
systems that provide valenced assessment of contents which do not have 
direct sensory transducers (see above, p. 68), we can see that their effect 
on behavior can be much the same as external rewards  13 and punishments; 
though content-mediated, they still have the power to reward or punish a 
reinforcement learning system in the same ways that resident corporeal 
pains and pleasures can. Thorndike ’ s (1911)  “ law of effect ” — the idea that 
punishment or reward will increase or decrease the likelihood of recurrence 
of the associated behavior — applies equally to these mediated sensations 
as to direct sensations, and behavioral tendencies are thus equally modiﬁ ed 
by emotional feedback as by rewards such as food, sugar squirts, or cocaine. 
It is, in fact, unnecessary to posit any motivations beyond those that ﬁ t 
13.   External rewards such as food are of course  “ directly ”  valuable to organisms, as means to 
their survival, but they serve as rewards  by way of causing physical stimuli ( “ pleasures ” ) which 
trigger internal rewards in the limbic system (Olds and Milner 1954). Since physical pains and 
pleasures are registered in the limbic system as are emotional pains and pleasures, there is a 
kind of central system for reward regardless of whether the distal mechanism is an emotional 
content or an  “ external ”  reward such as food.

74 
Chapter 6
the law of effect when the full range of emotions is seen as identical with 
the other corporeal, valenced sensations. In some instances, when the 
behavior at issue is external and writ large, this is obvious. Hunger pangs, 
gustatory pleasure, nausea, and satiation (and even the dull ache of having 
an overstuffed belly) orchestrate our schedule of eating behaviors. Less 
readily discernible emotional modulations, with several emotions working 
in concert, or in opponent processes, provide the net motivation for 
further sorts of behaviors, including covert, internal behaviors: whatever 
the behaviors are that are likely to be effective at reducing the pains or 
achieving the pleasures. 
 Thorndike argued that, if the learning curve was smooth (which he 
found to be the case), then we needn ’ t posit a rich internal mental life to 
explain an animal ’ s behavior. Reinforcement learning alone would explain 
such learning as long as the reward increased the behavioral likelihood in 
a regular fashion — something that Herrnstein (1970) later formulated 
mathematically. The contingencies in the environment — regularities of 
rewards and punishments — will structure the behavioral tendencies of the 
animal,  modulo its inherent sensitivities to each particular reward as well 
as interaction effects between types of rewards and punishments. Under 
this formulation, the emotions as motivators provide a  kind of rationality. 
They direct our behaviors, and they had better direct them in a reasonable 
manner, or evolution will punish them with extinction. For such  “ visceral ” 
urges as hunger, thirst, disgust, and libido, the beneﬁ t to our genes ’  replica-
tive imperative is obvious. Thanks to these kinds of peremptory sensations, 
we know when to eat, sleep, and mate; we know to avoid sharp or too-hot 
or too-cold objects; we know to avoid bumping into hard objects; when 
our muscles are overworked; when to hold our breaths, and when to gasp 
for more. These behaviors are most often performed at precisely the right —
 the most reasonable — moments. But it is not quite as clear what roles the 
more sophisticated emotions play. Why should we well up with pleasure 
when seeing cute children (or animals), fall into romantic love, blush with 
embarrassment, or behave in destructive ways (even to ourselves or our 
own families) when enraged? 
 Frank (1988) clariﬁ es these cases and others. His evolutionary account 
takes an economic stance on the passions, arguing that the emotions were 
each naturally selected for as a way of creating behavioral beneﬁ ts to the 
(genes of the) individual that the individual would not have chosen on 
their own given a purely rational outlook. For instance, love and guilt, he 
says, are solutions to the  commitment problem . A commitment problem 

Emotion and Computation 
75
 “ arises when it is in a person ’ s interest to make a binding commitment to 
behave in a way that will later seem contrary to self-interest ” (1988, p. 47). 
The belief that one ’ s prospective mate might shop around and try to ﬁ nd 
a better mate than oneself can leave two rational — overly rational — agents 
in the mating marketplace unwilling to settle for a deal that may be the 
best they can ever get. Exhibiting the exaggerated and moonstruck behav-
iors of  “ falling in love ” can be a ﬁ ne guarantor of one ’ s steadfastness, but 
only because it is not (apparently) within the rational control of the 
agent.  14 Moreover, without these emotions, cuckolding and philandering 
would run rampant in the population. People who otherwise might stray 
instead feel a compulsory commitment not to do so as a result of the 
physiological effects of the gratifying sense of attachment and the agoniz-
ing sense of loss furnished by love, as well as the deeply anguished 
sense of wrongdoing provided by guilt. The beneﬁ ts, to our genes, of 
causing us to feel these emotions are that we do make commitments to 
family unions — a type of implicit economic agreement that raises the 
likelihood of offspring survival.  15  
 Another example, elaborating on Trivers ’ s (1971) account of reciprocal 
altruism, is that of the emotion of guilt, which, as Frank ’ s hypothesis 
asserts, is meant to discourage social cheating and/or encourage 
redress — a set of behavioral patterns that create a future social-capital 
surplus that exceeds the spurious short-term beneﬁ t of the social cheat-
ing episode. You don ’ t steal your neighbor ’ s dinner when he ’ s not 
looking, because collaborating with him gains you more than just a 
dinner in the long run.  But , on Frank ’ s account,  you don ’ t need to know 
that ’ s the beneﬁ t — you only need to know that you feel guilty about the 
thought of stealing his dinner. Evolution, which has learned the larger 
14.   There will be more on Frank ’ s account of the  expression of emotions in chapter 12.
15.   Konner (1982) provides an account of romantic love that suggests its purpose is for the 
passionate start to new relationships as opposed to relationship maintenance and instead moti-
vates behaviors such as mate  desertion . Grifﬁ ths (2003) claims that this position opposes Frank ’ s. 
We have two notes to make on this: First, it seems that the two emotions that Konner and Frank 
are describing are different ones. The new, passionate love of an affair is of a very different 
nature and quality than the familial love of a long-term partner. Each has its own purpose but, 
like many emotions, they may sometimes come into conﬂ ict with each other. Moreover, if only 
one of these stories is right it harms neither Frank ’ s overall thesis that the emotion helps us 
give a well-backed signal of our commitment nor the additional thesis that the emotions are 
evolution ’ s way of directing behaviors we would not otherwise choose.

76 
Chapter 6
social calculus for you, simply takes care of making you feel guilty, and 
you, unwittingly, do the rest. 
 Each emotion begets a related set of behaviors that generate a lasting, 
durable advantage, which sometimes, perhaps, is immeasurable to the 
organism ’ s sensors but which evolution has found usually outweighs a 
smaller short-term beneﬁ t that may be more directly obvious to the organ-
ism. Each emotion is, in this way, tied to  particular behaviors for the simple 
reason that those are precisely the behaviors that have been learned to 
have a causal effect on inducing the pleasure or relieving the pain that is 
that emotion.  16 The reinforcement learning system that is intertwined with 
this emotional motivation model, using the kind of learning curve that 
Thorndike described, will learn how to balance (roughly) all of these plea-
sures and pains to optimize the behaviors it stumbles upon in achieving 
the goals it has evolved for. All together, the system of emotions interacting 
with one another drives a kind of behavioral decision making that, for the 
most part, makes reasonable choices (although see the next section for 
ways in which this system fails).  17 
 This kind of rationality conferred upon us by these kinds of emotions 
is useful for a great many tasks. It is the kind of rationality that helps all 
animals navigate the physical world — and even some aspects of the social 
world — and choose reasonable paths of behavior most of the time. But 
there is a kind of rationality that distinguishes humans from other animals: 
the kind of methodical, logical reasoning founded (supposedly) on axioms 
such as the law of noncontradiction. This is the kind that helps us solve 
riddles, for instance. For that kind of rationality, a different set of emotions 
are necessary, different not in operation (for they are emotions, after all), 
but in the kind of content that can trigger or relieve them. Said another 
way, the difference is only in the kinds of behaviors they induce — only in 
the kinds of things that we approach and avoid as a result of these epis-
temic emotions. Much of our epistemic behavior consists of covert behav-
iors occurring in the brain; but they are, nonetheless,  behaviors , with most 
of the other features of overt behaviors, including that they are often 
16.   In direct transduction motivators, the short-term cost to be overcome is not as complicated 
as something like social cheating. It is often as simple as the expenditure of energy to act, rather 
than to not act.
17.   The prediction made here is that, with an extremely similar general mental architecture, 
most of the diverse behavioral differences seen in the denizens of the animal kingdom can be 
explained primarily by differences in bodily structure and differences in emotional structure.

Emotion and Computation 
77
deliberate activities that tend to require attention, are usually instigated 
by perceived events, and can even be conditioned. 
 It is both customary and intuitive to draw a distinction between think-
ing and doing. But to take this distinction strictly and nonmetaphori-
cally — assigning thinking as a process that is not something that  “ is 
done ” — would be dualist, indeed. The claim made here is that it is not only 
a physical process, but a motivated and deliberate physical process. We 
view the distinction between thinking and doing simply as whether or not 
the neural process that is occurring terminates on motoneurons or on 
other internal neurons that don ’ t excite motor activity, but that perhaps 
correspond to concepts involved in the thought. In the case of dancing, 
the motoneurons must be activated such that the body actually glides 
about in the world; but it is likely that, in the case of simply thinking about 
dancing, most of the rest of the neurological process is the same except 
that the motoneurons are inhibited from causing actual movement.  18 
 Then, broadly, a cognitive behavior is a mental function — an inten-
tional (in the casual sense of the term) change of intentional (in the phi-
losopher ’ s sense of the term) states. They effect some change of state in 
the brain, which restricts the possible future states of the neural dynamics. 
Some examples of regularized cognitive behaviors may make the point 
clearer: certain kinds of data collection (e.g., the direction of attention —
 the search through perceptual space — in order to detect some necessary 
piece of information to support ongoing semantic processing), various 
parts of the act of problem solving (which often consists of the selective 
insertion or deletion of information from a mental space [a term, borrowed 
from Fauconnier 1985, that we lay out in more detail in the next chapter] 
in order to see if the consistency of the new sum total can reduce the path 
18.   It is not unlikely, given the research on mirror neurons (e.g., Gallese et al. 1996; Rizzolatti 
et al. 1996) showing identity between neurons involved in activity and perception of the same 
activity as well as recent work suggesting identity between the neural machinery involved in 
both perception and conception (see Goldstone and Barsalou 1998 or Kosslyn, Ganis, and 
Thompson 2001 for reviews), that the neurons active in Popper ’ s simulated worlds are the same 
ones that move muscles in real activity, but that other simultaneous circuits are inhibiting the 
actual motion of the muscles in the real world. Proponents of the ideomotor theory of percep-
tion and action (James 1890) and its successor, the common code theory (e.g., Hommel et al. 
2001), also support the notion that perception and action share common representations and 
are thus functionally intertwined. See also Chalmers, French, and Hofstadter 1995 for arguments 
that conceptual processes cannot exist without perceptual components.

78 
Chapter 6
to a conclusion or suggest something about the validity of the inserted or 
deleted premise), and creative acts of semantic recombination. 
 Just as overt behaviors require emotional motivation — social behaviors 
are directed by social emotions and survival behaviors are directed by 
survival emotions — so too do covert behaviors such as cognitive behaviors 
require incentive to drive an actor to perform them. Dennis Profﬁ tt recently 
began an essay saying  “ Perception is effortless. It just happens. Unlike 
perception, acts of thinking, remembering, speaking, and reasoning often 
require some effort and planning ” (Profﬁ tt 1999). Not only do we have to 
be coaxed into doing the tasks of thinking, but we also have to be shown 
just  how to do it. We are not natural-born thinkers — we have to be taught 
both when and how to think. Of course, this requires supervision, but the 
supervision need not come from other humans — parents and teachers — as 
we might expect. Instead, it is a kind of  auto-supervision performed within 
the system, by the epistemic emotions, which tell us — just as pain tells us 
when to withdraw a hand from a heat source — when to question, when to 
imagine, and when to laugh. 
 Gopnik and colleagues noticed that problem solving in children is 
associated with a positive affective response (and often a concomitant 
expression of joy), which she aptly named the  “ theory drive ” (Gopnik 
1998). The idea is that the positive emotion (which she calls  “ explanation ” 
but we will refer to as  “ insight ”  or  “ discovery ” ) that is associated with the 
successful accomplishment of creating an explanation — the sense of  “ Aha! ” 
that comes with the piecing together of a consistent theory of the situation 
at hand or a string of related events — is a prime motivational factor for 
performing the kinds of covert cognitive behaviors of theory development 
that lead to those kinds of theories/explanations. We are innately endowed 
with a desire to work on building theories. Gopnik continues to explain 
that theory-construction in both infants and scientists is the same behav-
ior, lying on an unbroken continuum, where the scientists ’  version of 
theorization is simply a socially organized extension of the child ’ s (really, 
everyone ’ s) basic theory-construction device (Gopnik and Wellman 1994; 
Gopnik and Meltzoff 1997; Gopnik 1998). In fact, children discover and 
verify their theories in quite the same way as scientists do: through experi-
mentation. They manipulate the world and discover regularities of causa-
tion from those manipulations. Why do they do it? The discovery of 
regularities comes with a pleasurable burst of insight, which all of us, but 
especially children and scientists, continuously long for like bonbons or 
opium. Gopnik takes Frank ’ s (1988) argument seriously when she says, 

Emotion and Computation 
79
 “ Again, the analogy to sexual drives should be obvious. Nature ensures 
that we do something that will be good for us (or at least our genes) in the 
long run, by making it fun (or at least compelling) in the short-run ” 
(Gopnik 1998, p. 107). 
 Insight does not stand alone in performing this job, and theory develop-
ment is not the only cognitive job that needs to be motivated. A series of 
other epistemic emotions are involved in driving us to construct a stable 
and faithful  “ representation ”  of the world. If insight is like orgasm as 
Gopnik ’ s metaphor declares, then, likewise, curiosity might be the ana-
logue of lust. The epistemic hunger of curiosity — a burning desire to ﬁ nd 
reason and order — prompts us to fervently advance upon situations that 
require explanatory exertion (often to exhaustion) that ultimately leads to 
that religiously adored moment of insight. And just as lust suddenly dis-
solves into triviality with orgasm, so does the hungry feeling of curiosity 
hastily retreat upon the achievement of insight. Though it may have killed 
the cat, curiosity more than compensates for its cost: Without it we 
mightn ’ t seek answers or theories at all. 
 Not all of the epistemic emotions ﬁ t so aptly to the sexual metaphor; 
cognition is probably not as simple as sex. Boredom has its place in driving 
us out from cognitive malaise. Though curiosity inspires our cognitive 
apparatus into detailed exertion surrounding particular as-of-yet-
unexplained regularities, we would scarcely commence toil at all without 
the dull pain of boredom to keep us from the simple irresponsibility of 
just doing nothing. If there is no pressing topic to think about, we still 
bother to think, and incessantly so, because it hurts not to. 
 While curiosity and boredom oppose insight in the same way that 
hungers oppose satiation, there is another kind of counterpart to discovery. 
More of a pain than a hunger (and certainly not a pleasurable feeling such 
as the wonder of discovery), this converse is the emotion of confusion. 
One version of confusion is that  nagging sort of anxiety when you sense 
that something is funny-huh. Rather than rewarding one for achieving 
a consistent theory, this negative signal punishes one for inconsistency 
and encourages the rapid resolution of contradiction. When things make 
sense we feel great (insight); but, on the contrary, when sense is lost we 
feel a distinct pain in the mind: a deep, and sometimes desperate, 
confusion.  19 
19.   Let us not neglect the close cousin of confusion, doubt, an also negative but less strong 
sensation which indicates not quite a full contradiction but a partial inconsistency.

80 
Chapter 6
 Epistemic uncertainty — the lack of a persuasive answer to a pressing 
question — has its own emotional accompaniment, also called uncertainty, 
and this is the negative emotion that accompanies and drives cautious 
probing, heightened sensitivity to alarm, putting orientation-responses on 
a hair-trigger. There are likely to be more epistemic emotions than those 
described here, or more reﬁ ned subdivisions among these.  20 What we have 
given is a start at analyzing cognitive/epistemic behaviors in terms of the 
emotions that motivate and direct them. Much more can be said about 
the mechanics of thought and how simple pleasures and pains 
administered at just the right moments can direct those mechanisms in 
meaningfully rational ways, but that is a much more extensive work for 
another time. 
 E.   The Irrationality of Emotions 
 Love is like pi — natural, irrational, and very important. 
 — Lisa Hoffman 
 Nothing deﬁ nes humans better than their willingness to do irrational things in 
the pursuit of phenomenally unlikely payoffs. This is the principle behind lotter-
ies, dating, and religion. 
 — Scott Adams 
 How did reason come into the world? As is ﬁ tting, in an irrational manner, by 
accident. One will have to guess at it as at a riddle. 
 — Friedrich Nietzsche 
20.   E.g., recent ﬁ ndings (Reber, Brun, and Mitterndorfer 2008) have linked truth and beauty. 
Things that incite our sense of aesthetics are more likely to be believed as true regardless of their 
actual truth value. Perhaps this aesthetic sense is one of the epistemic emotions. Also, current 
theories about play (Fagen 1993; Byers and Walker 1995; Spinka, Newberry, and Bekoff 2001) 
indicate that it may be for the purpose of honing skills — physical, mental, and social. A useful 
trait, indeed, but only if one performs it. The emotion of  “ fun ”  or  “ playfulness ”  is what encour-
ages us to spend the energy on the games that constitute play. However, it is not yet clear to 
us whether this notion of fun is a separate emotion in its own right, or whether it is a catch-all 
term used to refer to any of a number of other positive emotions including various kinds of 
social enjoyment, insight, and the like. The joy of carving a good corner on a waterski or a 
snowboard may be the reward of sustaining a delicate vestibular perceptual balance, along with 
making a proper prediction and perhaps conjoint with a bit of social ego-stroking from looking 
good in front of onlookers.

Emotion and Computation 
81
 In the previous section we argued that the emotions, broadly construed, 
are rational motivators that encourage us to do the right things at the right 
times in order to balance all the survival and reproductive needs we face, 
assuming we live in roughly the same (physical and social) environment 
in which our genes underwent selection. Thanks to the emotions of physi-
cal fatigue and mental weariness, we know when to spend energy and 
when to save it. Moving beyond that, hunger tells us when to forage for 
more energy; thirst, when to hydrate; and fear, when to run for our lives. 
An agent that can manage the coordinated timing of just these behaviors 
already will have solved a number of important environmental challenges. 
Augmenting this view with Frank ’ s explanation, we realize that superﬁ -
cially irrational emotions, such as romantic love, solve even more compli-
cated natural quandaries such as the commitment problem, allowing us to 
engage successfully in even more complicated social environments. Lastly, 
we suggested that the most complex problems — problems that require 
open-ended thinking — are also solved by a certain set of emotions: curios-
ity, boredom, doubt, confusion, insight, mirth, and the like. 
 In spite of all this well-planned behavioral control handed down to us 
by evolution, we are still quite unreasonable people. Some emotions make 
us behave in ways that seem to be overreactions, with costs that seem to 
outweigh their beneﬁ ts: extreme outbursts of violence due to either jeal-
ousy or rage, or suicide in the wake of heartbreak, for instance. Ending up 
in jail for murdering the fellow who made you a cuckold may seem beyond 
reason, but recall that for much of the history of our species, until quite 
recently, there were no systems of law with such a consequence. So, one 
explanation for this apparent irrationality might be that the environment 
in which these emotions evolved was not the one we live in today. The 
better answer, we think, is that these emotions may occasionally have had 
the cost of overreaction, but the sum beneﬁ t these emotions provide over 
a lifetime, in their usual circumstances, simply outweighed such infrequent 
costs. Overreaction is one kind of irrationality, but there is an even more 
pervasive — and thus more important — way that we act unreasonably. 
 We helplessly procrastinate when we have important jobs; we smoke 
cigarettes from packages printed with images of lung cancer; we become 
addicted to liquor and drugs and then watch them destroy our careers, 
families, and social lives; we cheat on our diets; we cheat on our spouses; 
we fail to save for the future; and we gamble away our hard-earned cash 
when we know the odds are against us. Why didn ’ t evolution provide us 
with the right emotional constitution to restrain us from engaging in these 

82 
Chapter 6
damaging behaviors? Though some of them, such as cocaine and diets, are 
relatively new environmental challenges, this is not the primary reason. 
Cheating and procrastination are age-old problems. And, though we might 
just chalk it up to evolutionary oversights, problems yet to be solved but 
which aren ’ t markedly injurious to reproductive success, there is another 
more convincing answer: Because it can ’ t. 
 Each of the above examples is due to a runaway — but necessary — desire 
that participates in a heuristic system that chooses behaviors by balancing 
and time-sharing control of resources between various necessary goals. 
These are all forms of addiction. Drugs, alcohol, and gambling are all well 
known as addictive activities. Procrastination is an addiction to laziness —
 an effective energy-conservative strategy; diet cheating is an addiction to 
the joys provided by the ﬂ avors of sugars and fats; spousal cheating is an 
addiction to various social and sexual emotions; and wasting your savings 
may be a result of an addiction to any number of things. The key point 
here is that each of these behaviors is one that we should be motivated to 
do — in moderation (except drugs, which hijack our reward systems at a 
chemical level) — but when the balance is thrown off by improper valua-
tions we behave irrationally. 
 Choosing how to behave under uncertainty requires a heuristic choice 
process. Good heuristics give excellent approximations much of the time. 
But, in the (restricted-by-design) areas where they fail, they give predict-
ably — even pathologically — poor results. The emotions are rational, but the 
system is a heuristic driver of behavior that operates on incomplete infor-
mation; so we must accept that the emotions will fail us in some ways, 
such as overreactions and addictions, that are irresolvable. 
 Ainslie ’ s (2001) discussion of hyperbolic discounting is a brilliant 
account of just where the system we have fails, but he also shows how 
over the centuries we have cobbled together layers of corrective ploys 
that — when they work — can smooth out some of the awkward bulges in 
our emotional control systems. Many moves familiar from personal experi-
ences and hundreds of ﬁ lms and dramas emerge from his analysis, such as 
Ulysses ’  encounter with the Sirens, where he tied himself to the mast and 
plugged his crews ’  ears with wax so that he could resist temptation. These 
ploys are also favorite targets of humor. Raising the stakes for ourselves 
changes the task of self-control we confront, for instance: 
 (18)  As the old-time Maine farmer began to hitch up his overalls after 
using the outhouse, a quarter rolled out of his pocket and fell down the 
hole.  “ Dang! ”  he said, and pulled a ﬁ ve-dollar bill out of his wallet and 

Emotion and Computation 
83
threw it down the hole after the quarter.  “ Why on earth did you do 
that? ”  he was asked.  “ You don ’ t think I ’ m going down there for a 
quarter, do you? ” he replied. 
 F.   Emotional Algorithms  
 Figure 6.1 
 ©  Tribune Media Services, Inc. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission. 
 The mind has often been viewed as a tripartite organ, comprised of distinct, 
but interacting, processes for cognition, emotion, and conation or will 
(Hilgard 1980 ). Cognitive science has consistently focused well on the ﬁ rst 
of these — the information processing that allows for perception, categori-
zation, and rational decision making — but has mostly left the studies of 
emotion and motivation to psychologists and even, recently, economists. 
Joseph LeDoux, for one, sees this as shortsighted: 
 The kind of mind modeled by cognitive science can, for example, play chess very 
well, and can even be programmed to cheat. But it is not plagued with guilt when 
it cheats, or distracted by love, anger, or fear. Neither is it self-motivated by a 
competitive streak, or by envy or compassion. If we are to understand how the 
mind, through the brain, makes us who we are, we need to consider the  whole 
mind, not just the parts that subserve thinking. (LeDoux 2002, p. 24) 

84 
Chapter 6
 Modeling cognition, emotion, and motivation together is difﬁ cult; so 
cognitive scientists have decided to  modularize their work, and focus ﬁ rst 
on what seems the more important part — the thinking — while leaving 
emotions and motivation for separate studies. The problem with modular-
izing the work is that it has the tendency also to modularize the models 
of the mind produced from such work in ways that may not reﬂ ect natural 
divisions. This book suggests, instead, that what was once seen as pure 
rationality may itself be intricately bound up with emotions and 
motivations. 
 LeDoux makes an excellent point: A science of the mind does need to 
account for all of the aspects of mind, not just an idealized cognitive ratio-
nality; not just perception and reason. And, it must not only account for 
all of the aspects, but they must be accounted for  together, in the same mind . 
This issue has been partially addressed. More and more, these days, the 
emotions and motivations are being welded together to form a unifying 
notion in which behavior is driven principally by a reward system that, 
while perhaps neurologically complicated, is phenomenologically com-
prised simply of the passions (Frank 1988; Ainslie 2001; Damasio 1994, 
1999, 2003). On Ainslie ’ s account (see ch. 4 of Ainslie 2001) pleasures and 
pains, as well as itches, hungers, addictions, compulsions, and desires — and 
our various proclivities for giving in to each by executing the behaviors 
associated with them — are all results of the same hyperbolic discount func-
tion being applied, on different time scales, to emotional valences derived 
either from direct experience or from expectations. 
 This would still leave us with a dichotomy between cognition and the 
passions. But, we think our sketch of an account of the epistemic emotions 
is another step in unifying the trichotomy. By seeing thought as consisting 
of behaviors, albeit largely internal  mental behaviors, and as fully moti-
vated by a subset of the passions in the same way that overt behaviors are, 
we can classify higher cognition — reasoning, puzzling, and decision mak-
ing — as simply a resultant component of the emotional mind. 
 High human cognition depends on a large range of these emotions —
 without them there would be no curiosity, no discoveries, no problem 
solving, no creativity, and no humor. One might presume that those joys 
and skills are  luxuries that are afforded only after the basics of rational 
thought have been acquired — add-ons that piggyback atop standard ratio-
nality — but we submit that the epistemic emotions do not simply encour-
age us to use our reasoning;  they control it . 
 For instance, without a sense of confusion, we claim, you would not 
know what a contradiction is — it is  only the inclusion in your biology (and 

Emotion and Computation 
85
thus in your phenomenology) of this exceptionally strange pain that 
allows you to notice contradictions. This is not a quantitative matter; it is 
not that confusion helps you to use a rationality, which already knows 
how to see contradiction, just to see more of them. Rather, what we are 
suggesting is that, without confusion, there would be no underlying sense 
that contradiction exists (and is bad!)  at all . (Jackendoff 1987, chs. 15 and 
16, and 2007, ch. 3, develops a pioneering version of this claim.) An expla-
nation of rationality that assumed a skill at contradiction detection, rather 
than positing a mechanism for it, would be no explanation. Confusion 
(together with its neural-level trigger)  is the detection mechanism and the 
fundamental basis for our innate appreciation of the law of noncontradic-
tion. (To be clear, while pain tells us when our skin has been cut or bruised, 
it requires a special kind of nerve — nociceptors — to do so; likewise, confu-
sion will require some kind of neural level  “ absurdiceptor ”  to trigger it. 
There are connectionist toy models for this [e.g., Shastri and Grannes 
1996], but we currently have no idea what kind of homology such models 
have with actual neural structures.) 
 The same can be said for each of the epistemic emotions. And, collec-
tively, they provide a much more complicated and nuanced kind of 
rationality: a kind that detects contradictions and abhors them as if 
they were hangnails; a kind that looks for and longs to solve problems 
even when there is no problem to solve; a kind that thrills with excite-
ment when it ﬁ nds a missing puzzle piece; and, as we will show in the 
next chapter, a kind that is mirthfully delighted with itself when it sud-
denly discovers that it has made a bold mistake. Higher cognition in its 
many forms — what it means to think like a human — is simply the chasing 
of the pleasures and the avoidance of the pains that are supplied by 
this eclectic group of cognitive, but of course ultimately neurobiological, 
emotions. 
 Saying that  “ cognition is simply  X , ”  no matter what  X you are touting, 
is bound to be an oversimpliﬁ cation. Human cognition consists of analogy, 
metaphor, and conceptual blending (Hofstadter and the Fluid Analogies 
Research Group 1995; Lakoff and Johnson 1980, 1999; Fauconnier and 
Turner 2002), and happens in a rich embodied context with distributed 
extension and much scaffolding (Hutchins 1995a; Clark 1997; Clark and 
Chalmers 1998). And it is based on innate and automatic skills of percep-
tion, categorization, attention, and memory that we share with animals 
(though they don ’ t show humor, complex logic, and human-like 
creativity). But at the outset we are going to embrace this simplifying 
imprecision for its rhetorical value, to push back against the traditional 

86 
Chapter 6
view. Our point is that our higher intelligence largely consists in the use 
of these basic faculties  in the service of the epistemic emotions. We are using 
the same metonymy here as people do when they credit the directors of a 
company for the whole company ’ s achievements — we are crediting the 
epistemic emotions for the work that they direct, though it is performed 
by the whole mind. 
 Our focus on the epistemic emotions has another implication for cogni-
tive science: It suggests a radical revision of some fairly standard assump-
tions of computational modeling. We endorse the challenge of designing 
what we will call  emotional algorithms. 21 It will not be an easy job. Emo-
tional architectures, of the kind we envision, will be of a fundamentally 
different nature than today ’ s machine-learning algorithms and integrated 
AGI models (such as SOAR [Laird, Rosenbloom, and Newell 1987], ACT-R 
[Anderson 1976], OSCAR [Pollock 2008], and LIDA [Franklin and Patterson 
2006; Franklin 2007]).  22   These existing architectures don ’ t account for 
emotion in any way at all — but to revise them would not consist of adding 
an  “ emotion module ” alongside the working memory modules and the 
symbol-manipulating  “ inference engines. ” Our notion of emotional algo-
rithms implies a control structure that relies on emotional states in com-
petition and collaboration for inducing state changes in the system to drive 
both its bodily  and cognitive behavior, not algorithms that compute emo-
tional content as if it were simply an output. Emotional algorithms, in our 
sense, are not algorithms that have a state variable, for instance, called 
 “ anger ”  that gets adjusted up or down by events, and can then be read off 
by an observer who would subsequently compare it to a threshold value 
to determine whether the system is or is not angry, or which would be 
read by another subroutine that then perhaps  “ decides to initiate anger 
behaviors, ”  as in robotic architectures such as those discussed by Mochida 
et al. (1995), Shibata, Ohkawa, and Tanie (1996), and Yamamoto (1993) 
(but see Kismet [Breazeal 2000] for some early baby steps in the right direc-
tion). Rather, we envisage an architecture for cognition in which the 
functional implementations of emotions are the computational substrate 
from which reason emerges by way of  motivating the manipulation of data 
21.   This endorsement applies generally to the modeling of decision making that is mediated 
by emotions. However, we are especially interested in the epistemic emotions.
22.   AGI (artiﬁ cial  general intelligence) is the recent term for the ﬁ eld of research that distin-
guishes its goals from those of the more common ﬁ eld of machine learning AI. These used to 
be known, respectively, as strong AI and weak AI.

Emotion and Computation 
87
in various ways that engender, among other activities, data-gathering (curi-
osity, boredom), recombinant thought (discovery), contradiction avoid-
ance (confusion), and — we ’ re getting to this soon, we promise — mistake 
recovery (mirth). Here we would distinguish the underlying  “ logical ” com-
petence that automatically generates implications from the  reasoning that 
must emerge from, and be guided by, the interplay of epistemic emotional 
algorithms. 
 The contrast we are proposing can perhaps best be appreciated by con-
sidering the layperson ’ s contrasting stereotypes of computation and human 
mentality. People understand that computers have been designed to keep 
needs and job performance almost entirely independent. Down in the 
hardware, the electric power is doled out evenhandedly and abundantly; 
no circuit risks starving. At the software level, a benevolent scheduler doles 
out machine cycles to whatever process has highest priority, and although 
there may be a bidding mechanism of one sort or another that determines 
which processes get priority, this is an orderly queue, not a struggle for life. 
(As Marx would have it,  “ From each according to his abilities, to each 
according to his needs. ” ) It is a dim appreciation of this fact that probably 
underlies the common folk intuition that a computer could never  “ care ” 
about anything. Not because it is made out of the wrong materials — why 
should silicon be any less suitable a substrate for caring than organic 
molecules? — but because its internal economy has no built-in risks or 
opportunities, so it doesn ’ t have to care.  23  
 Computational models in cognitive science have adopted the hierarchi-
cal control and ruthless efﬁ ciency of traditional software development for 
the obvious reason: There is a lot of number crunching to be done as 
swiftly as possible, so proﬂ igacy is to be avoided. But the result has been 
models that could not afford to be emotion driven, and, as a result, have 
left out the  underlying level of processes we propose as necessary to explain 
higher human cognition — and, of course, humor. These processes are 
 “ wasteful, ” 24 often seriously at cross purposes, and under no higher level 
of control (unlike the benign opponent processes that are  called up by 
23.   This paragraph is drawn, with revisions, from Dennett 2007d.
24.   The scare-quotes are here to indicate our disagreement with this term,  wasteful . These pro-
cesses are simply inefﬁ cient  on this measure . Any architecture that utilizes resources to accom-
plish a goal necessarily embodies a variety of trade-offs — to optimize for one factor means to be 
inefﬁ cient on another front. This so-called wastefulness is the cost — in fact a small cost, and a 
necessary trade-off — paid in order to reap the beneﬁ t of a very different computational result.

88 
Chapter 6
higher-level controls in traditional computational systems, given a task to 
do, and then dismissed when the task is done). Such processes are still 
computational in the sense that they are ultimately information-driven 
and information-modifying processes whose only product is the induction 
and control of various behaviors. (In the same extended sense, what 
happens on the trading ﬂ oor of the New York Stock Exchange is also a 
computational process, however unruly and competitive; its only products 
are the exchange of ownership of shares; today its by-products include 
exhaled CO 2 , ulcers, and body odors, but the components that yield these 
by-products could be, and are on the verge of being, replaced by compu-
tational machines that are just as competitive, just as acquisitive, just as 
information-hungry.) 
 It may seem disconcertingly inhibitive that we think AGI researchers 
should attempt to replicate the mechanisms of human thought instead of 
trying any of a number of different methods to solve the problems they 
face. As one of our anonymous reviewers put it:  “ If you can make an emo-
tionless machine that can play chess better than humans (such as Deep 
Blue), why could you not do this for a host of other skills? ” The answer is 
that you  can for many skills, but whether you can or not is very much 
contingent upon the demands of the particular skill or problem being 
solved. The emotionless machine that plays chess better than humans does 
so in a very different way than humans do. Hofstadter and colleagues 
(1995) argue convincingly that, although Deep Blue can beat us, the exis-
tence of such a machine says more about the domain of chess than it does 
about intelligence: Chess is the kind of problem that does not necessarily 
require full human intelligence in the same way that other domains do. It 
is not an AI-complete problem.  25 So, in many domains, AI researchers 
certainly can and should do as the reviewer suggests — a system for playing 
chess, or doing limited-domain household chores, or recommending books 
you might be interested in (cf. Amazon.com) will not require an emotional 
architecture. On the other hand, we think  AGI researchers, who intend to 
create general-purpose thinking machines, should carefully consider the 
epistemic challenges their agents are facing and ask themselves whether 
the architecture they are building has a heuristic decision-making process 
to choose, under time-pressure, which behaviors to perform at which 
25.   The game of Go, on the other hand, has proven much more resistant to AI; while it may 
or may not be AI-complete, it surely requires much deeper modeling of human spatial thinking 
than chess does. See M ü ller 2002.

Emotion and Computation 
89
times, often blending multiple drives into singular actions; and, further-
more, whether it has some embodiment of epistemic drives that competes 
with those other drives in order to perform the covert epistemic behaviors 
that an open-ended thinker inevitably must perform. 
 Our call for emotional algorithms is not necessarily a call for a wholly 
alternative cognitive modeling architecture (though it might come to that). 
Each of the currently competing paradigms of cognitive model captures 
some important features of cognition (perhaps like the blind folks captur-
ing various important features of the elephant).  26 We are eager to adopt 
and adapt as much of this insightful work as possible. While we have 
argued against the weak form of augmentation which would implement a 
separate  “ emotion module, ” we expect the epistemic emotions may be 
implementable as more fundamental and pervasive augmentations of one 
or more of the existing paradigms that do account well for some aspects 
of memory, learning, and comprehension. For the time being, we want to 
avoid premature commitment to any operational suggestions that might 
limit the breadth of exploration. 
 G.   A Few Implications 
 A rope walks in to a bar. He calls the bartender and says  “ Barkeep, gimme a beer. ” 
The bartender says,  “ I ’ m sorry, we don ’ t serve ropes in here. ” 
 Frustrated, the rope walks out. But this is the only bar in town, so he thinks 
about it a little. Then, in a spark of insight, he gets himself into a bind and frizzles 
his ends and walks back into the bar, and says,  “ Barkeep, gimme a beer. ” 
 The barkeep says,  “ Aren ’ t you the same rope that came in here earlier? ” The 
rope answers,  “ Nope, I ’ m a frayed knot. ” 
 Implications for the Axioms of Logic 
 The axioms from which we derive logic are not coded in us at birth as 
propositional knowledge, though the intuition to believe this is partially 
26.   We have in mind symbolic architectures (as argued for by Fodor and Pylyshyn 1988; Fodor 
2004a,b); connectionist models (McClelland, Rumelhart, and the PDP Research Group 1986; 
Rumelhart, McClelland, and the PDP Research Group 1986; Elman 1991; Elman et al. 1996); 
dynamical systems models (see, e.g., Thelen and Smith 1994; van Gelder and Port 1995); the 
integrated AGI systems mentioned above; or some sui generis or hybrid designs such as Leabra 
(O ’ Reilly 1998; O ’ Reilly, Munakata, and McClelland 2000), or the  “ active symbol ” model in 
parallel terraced scan architectures (Hofstadter and the FARG 1995; French 1995). See also 
Marcus 2001 for a theoretical description of a connectionist-symbolic hybrid.

90 
Chapter 6
correct — they are, in some way, innate, as Socrates demonstrated in the 
 Meno with the example of the slave boy and his ﬁ rst geometry lesson. A 
learning process  of sorts can bring the axioms into awareness, but they 
are not a part of the natural environment (outer  or inner ) to which a 
learning system would have direct access. The self-evident logical prin-
ciples that Russell (1912) took for granted as the foundation of reason 
are brought to our attention via a feedback loop of  auto-supervision . They 
are embodied not as principal propositions in a database of knowledge, 
but as covert generators of emotional reactions to certain structures of 
content perceived in the world. Evolution has learned that by simply 
enticing us with properly balanced rewards and punishments, by build-
ing in the proper auto-contingencies, she can make us behave as coher-
ent and (somewhat) rational thinkers. Reﬂ ection on our native talents 
and habits of thought led Plato and Aristotle, and others, to formulate 
good rules for thinking, laying the foundations for formal logic and 
other technologies for extending and improving the cogency of our 
thinking. 
 Such a system could not replace the long-established form of cognition 
that exists in animals; it can only supplement it. Indeed, it is just one part 
of the emotional motivation-and-decision-making system that controls all 
behavior. Human behavior and decision making are based, like the behav-
ior of other animals, on the outcome of interplay among the full array of 
emotions. It is only knowledge maintenance and higher-level thought that 
are managed by the cognitive-emotional subsystem. The choice to breathe 
is made prerationally. You do so because it hurts not to. The choice to eat 
is also made prerationally, driven by the  “ emotion ”  of hunger, just as it is 
in chimpanzees and other animals. But in people, unlike other animals, 
these brute passions have been partially supplanted by the ever more ﬂ ex-
ible and nuanced behavioral control provided by the epistemic emotions. 
No matter how hungry we are, we can choose not to eat food that we 
reason may likely have been poisoned by our enemies. We can choose not 
to stay and breathe in a garage deemed likely to be full of carbon monox-
ide — without  detecting that the air is unbreathable, we can  reason to that 
conclusion. Complex thoughts like these require the logical construction 
of mental spaces — and doing so requires the emotions that can produce 
such logic. 
 If rational thinking is an emotional process, it is clearly in competition 
with other emotion-driven processes. Emotional episodes must compete 
for time, energy, and functional real estate in the landscape of temporal 

Emotion and Computation 
91
embodiment where their existence is played out; and they must compete, 
just as other senses must, for attention from the perceptual system. This 
makes clear why humans are apt to have their reason overcome by such 
emotions as panic, distress, or rage. It outlines why, although we have an 
innate competence for rational thinking, we often lapse into performance 
that is less than reasonable. Reason is just as liable to succumb to cognitive 
temptations, to be forgone because of hyperbolic discounting (Ainslie 
2001), as any other drive. Nonetheless, it is our ability to reason, at least 
occasionally, that allows us to build a complicated understanding of our 
world, and that differentiates  Homo sapiens from apes. 
 Implications for Epistemology 
 If the methods of reason that we use to create inferences are a result of 
emotional processing, then belief itself is dependent on these emotions. 
Even the most unmodulated, basic beliefs — the beliefs about the layout of 
the world most directly anchored to current perception — depend on the 
play of emotions to the extent that they can be disrupted or distorted by 
strongly unbalanced emotions. The effects of wishful thinking begin right 
in the optic and auditory nerves (see McKay and Dennett 2009 for an 
analysis of putative cases of adaptive misbelief). To say that you believe 
something is to say that that information successfully passed through your 
mind without triggering the emotions of confusion or humor, but quite 
possibly having triggered the sense of insight. We will make this much 
clearer in the coming chapters, but, in short, human epistemic capacities 
are emotional capacities. 
 Implications for Embodiment 
 Descartes thought that all abstract conscious thought occurred in an imma-
terial system, a  res cogitans (thinking thing) that had no corporeal proper-
ties; but although materialism has now become the default presumption 
in all of cognitive science, as it is in the rest of the natural sciences, residual 
images and connotations of reasoning and comprehension as  disembodied 
phenomena still persist. These have been combated by the new traditions 
of distributed, situated, and embodied cognition, and we concur: We see 
knowledge maintenance, reasoning processes, and comprehension as 
richly embodied processes that cannot be disengaged from the emotions 
that play out in varieties of bodily sensation. Not only are the concepts 
that make up our thoughts derived from embodied interaction with the 
world (as per, e.g., Lakoff and Johnson 1980, 1999; Lakoff and Nu ñ ez 

92 
Chapter 6
2000), but the methods for manipulating these concepts, rather than being 
somehow purely abstract and disinterested rule-following, are also richly 
entangled with bodily feedback. We  feel whether something makes sense 
or whether something  strikes us as  “ true ” ; and we  feel our way through 
problem-solving episodes — in the same way that we feel a stomachache or 
a cool breeze. The most abstract thought and the most abstruse and rareﬁ ed 
logic can only come to be because of bodily sensation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 7   A Mind That Can Sustain Humor 
 A.   Fast Thinking: The Costs and Beneﬁ ts of Quick-Wittedness 
 Stick-up robber:  Your money or your life! 
 Jack Benny:  . . . . . . 
 Stick-up robber:  Your money or your life! 
 Jack Benny:  I ’ m thinking, I ’ m thinking!  1 
 Why should speed matter? For the same reason that it matters in a  “ Star 
Wars ”  system designed to detect the lift-off of enemy missiles. No matter 
how reliable the sensors and software are, if they cannot deliver their 
accurate verdict in time to trigger an appropriate response before the 
deadline for action is past, the system is of no use. All brains, from the 
simplest nervous systems of invertebrates to our own magniﬁ cent organs, 
are anticipation-generators. Their primary function is to extract informa-
tion on the ﬂ y from the world around them and generate expectations 
that will serve the organism well in its odyssey through an uncertain and 
often hostile world. There is nothing mysterious or alchemical about this 
power that brains have, and there is quite a variety of proven techniques 
in machine learning for deriving predictions from experience through 
both supervised error-driven methods as well as unsupervised associative 
methods. 
 The brain confronts an unrelenting risk of combinatorial explosion, in 
which every detail of every unfolding situation could be explored literally 
 ad inﬁ nitum for relevant threats and opportunities, a game of speed chess 
1.   The radio and early television comedian Jack Benny contrived a lot of humor from his sup-
posed miserliness. This was his best line, and although it has been endlessly recalled since his 
death, it will probably nevertheless soon go extinct. A joke that needs a footnote is not long 
for this world, as we noted in the discussion of the Newﬁ e joke in chapter 3.

94 
Chapter 7
with thousands of pieces and millions of legal moves. Unlike chess, the 
games we play against time — and speciﬁ cally against other agents acting 
in time — are ultimately a matter of life and death. Whether or not the 
world we inhabit is as saturated with purpose as we tend to assume, our 
brains are designed to impute purpose whenever and wherever possible. 
Purpose is like the air we breathe; we don ’ t think about it or notice it until 
it is absent, and then we panic. One of our purposes is not falling down 
and hurting ourselves — by slipping on a banana peel, for instance. Another 
is simply staying alive. In this time-pressured behavioral environment, the 
brain ’ s task of producing real-time anticipations on all important topics is 
accomplished by processes that have been engineered by evolution to take 
many, many risks in the interests of timeliness.  
 The development of heuristic search mechanisms meant to take these 
 “ calculated ”  shortcuts is an unavoidable task in the process of designing a 
mind. The structure of any architecture of thought necessarily embodies a 
strategy — or set of strategies — both for taking these risks and for either 
accepting or recovering from the failures that inhere within them. These 
strategies are not calculated by the agent acting in real-time; they are cal-
culated by the designer who deploys a metric of ﬁ tness, external to the 
mind of the agent, used to measure the success of those strategies. The 
risks of the heuristics we are talking about are built-in  architectural risks; 
although an agent may use  learned heuristics to calculate the risks of certain 
behaviors, the agent does not have a sense of the functional qualities of 
the kind of brain it has. 
 Evolution faced this problem when designing us, and human engineers 
will need to face the same problem when laying out the blueprints for an 
artiﬁ cial cognition. There may be a number of different solutions to the 
problem — a number of different ways to make an efﬁ cient heuristic search 
 Figure 7.1 
 Reprinted by permission of United Feature Syndicate, Inc., doing business as United 
Media ( “ UM ” ). 

A Mind That Can Sustain Humor 
95
tool — but we are interested in the one that Mother Nature has stumbled 
upon primarily because it is a known working variety that interfaces suc-
cessfully with the solutions to the rest of the problems of open-ended 
cognition (i.e., perception, attention, categorization, etc.). Our quick wit-
tedness as humans is a result of a series of evolutionary kluges stacked one 
upon another — one of which is the humor trait. This chapter lays out the 
features of thought that create a niche for humor. 
 A brief disclaimer is necessary: A good theory of thought would explain 
not only how we think — how we recombine information into new beliefs 
and anticipations — but how we think  validly about just the right things —
 and not too much else  — in order to perform just the tasks we need to. At 
this point in our science, it would be excessively bold for anyone to 
commit to a full model of thought. Nonetheless, something along those 
lines will be necessary in order to buoy up what we are trying to offer: a 
full model of the cognitive trait called humor. As we said in the introduc-
tion, humor is an AI-complete problem and requires most of the still-
unexplained faculties of cognition. In order to present our model clearly 
within this broader context, we are going to begin by drawing an impres-
sionistic sketch of a particular model of thought. This sketch is not meant 
to provide a novel account of all cognition; it is meant only to provide the 
assumptions underlying our work and will consist primarily of extensions 
and regroupings of pieces already on offer by other theorists. As the sketch 
is drafted, we will employ just the  interfaces it provides to frame and con-
strain our model of humor. Keep in mind as we proceed that the commit-
ment to this model of cognition is very open — we are allowing space for 
further discoveries in the understanding of cognition to reﬁ ne the model 
over time. What we expect to remain of our account, as cognitive science 
proceeds to shed further light on the human mind, is exactly these inter-
faces — the ways in which humor  relates to thought (whatever the details 
of the latter turn out to be) and how it interacts with the rest of cognition 
and emotion. 
 B.   The Construction of Mental Spaces  
 Perceptions do not remain in the mind, as would be suggested by the trite simile 
of the seal and the wax, passive and changeless, until time wears off their rough 
edges and makes them fade. No, perceptions fall into the brain rather as seeds 
into a furrowed ﬁ eld or even as sparks into a keg of gunpowder. Each image breeds 
a hundred more, sometimes slowly and subterraneously, sometimes (as when a 
passionate train is started) with a sudden burst of fancy. 
 — George Santayana 

96 
Chapter 7
 The key problems, again, are the relevance and validity of our thoughts. 
Our minds must be designed to think — and think well — about primarily 
the things that matter. Although it seems logically possible that we might 
think about penguins while frying eggs, it doesn ’ t ever happen (except 
maybe the next time you are frying eggs after reading this) because there 
is no relevant reason to do so in the ongoing situation or in your experi-
ential past.  2 Thought just doesn ’ t work like that. We are designed with 
minds that think relevantly and validly, most of the time. 
 This sets the brain an extremely difﬁ cult task, ﬁ rst clearly articulated by 
McCarthy and Hayes (1969) and called by them the  frame problem (for an 
introduction, see Dennett 1984, reprinted in Dennett 1998). How is the 
brain to do a passable job of thrifty search without lapsing into combinato-
rial explosion on the one hand or failing to represent key elements on the 
other? It is important that we neither squander all our precious time and 
energy in an exhaustive consideration of the prospects (which we might 
call  Hamlet ’ s problem  3  ) nor let ourselves be blindsided a dozen times a day. 
 Figure 7.2 
 Comic by Randall Munroe,  < http://xkcd.com/248 > . 
2.   Although penguins do lay eggs, it is entirely irrelevant because most of us never think of 
penguin eggs as food — it ’ s not part of our culture or experience.
3.   Or  Elliot ’ s problem : Damasio (1994, pp. 46 – 50) reports on a patient named Elliot whose emo-
tional impairment, Damasio hypothesizes, causes him to do just this with respect to social 
decisions, quite to his own detriment — he can be sidetracked for hours contemplating the 
possibilities, and as a result, he literally never decides.

A Mind That Can Sustain Humor 
97
One way to conceptualize the frame problem is to note that a perfect solu-
tion to the frame problem would be an essentially unsurprisable agent. 
There would be many things the agent couldn ’ t predict, of course, but it 
would have neither positive nor negative expectations about these matters 
(like coin ﬂ ips — neither heads nor tails is a surprise). The expectations it 
actually generated would all be fulﬁ lled. It would be a virtuoso anticipator/
extrapolator who managed to do this without combinatorial explosion. 
Very probably the perfect solution to the frame problem is like a perpetual 
motion machine: strictly impossible. The furniture of the world is just too 
loosely tied down to admit of being perfectly anticipated on the basis of 
a ﬁ nite examination. So any solution will have to be an approximation, a 
workaday bag of tricks that does a pretty good job keeping us  au courant 
and unfazed. 
 A crucial move made by evolution in addressing this design problem 
has been endowing the mind with a skill for the on-demand creation of 
 mental spaces via a process of  spreading activation . Theorists of cognition 
have long postulated various mental structures — frames, scripts, schemas —
 designed to render learning and comprehension more efﬁ cient and tame 
the frame problem. We will consider these in due course once we have 
described a more fundamental design feature:  mental spaces . Gilles Faucon-
nier ’ s analyses of the complex cognitive powers of the adult human mind 
led him to propose a role in the process of information absorption and 
manipulation for what he calls a  mental space (Fauconnier 1985; Faucon-
nier and Turner 2002; see also Ritchie 2006). A mental space is a region of 
working memory where activated concepts and percepts are semantically 
connected into a holistic situational comprehension model. (It should go 
without saying that these are functional places — logical spaces — not ana-
tomical regions of the brain!) They are built incrementally and revised 
constantly. Unlike frames, scripts, and schemas or other  idealized cognitive 
models (ICMs) (Lakoff 1987; Fauconnier and Turner 2002), which can be 
thought of as data structures resident in long-term memory and ready to 
use when needed, mental spaces are  constructed during comprehension 
tasks as well as during abstract and creative thought. Fauconnier proposed 
mental spaces as a foundation to support a theory of reference, which later 
evolved into a theory of  conceptual blending (Fauconnier and Turner 2002), 
in which spaces are combined through mappings to provide creative, 
comprehensible combinations in thought maintaining separate referents 
in multiple spaces. We are persuaded by the general notion of their account, 
though we have reservations about their incorporation of ICMs as the raw 
materials of construction. We will return to that shortly. 

98 
Chapter 7
 Whereas a simple mind might contain only the one mental space 
that corresponds to present ﬁ rst-person reality (in which case the concept 
might well be superﬂ uous), in a more complex mind, such as a modern, 
noninfantile human mind, these mental spaces act as containers that 
delineate regions of thought. This is what enables us to have a daydream 
while watching a movie and keep both separate from each other, as well 
as separate from our ongoing sense of reality. When you hear Hamlet 
tell Ophelia,  “ Get thee to a nunnery, ” you can put this into the mental 
space that you created to contain that story and thereby avoid coming 
to believe that Hamlet was telling you where to go. Studies of attention 
indicate that perhaps only one mental space can be active at a time 
(Broadbent 1958; Treisman 1960), but that we may quickly, and with 
little effort, slip back and forth between them (Lachter, Forster, and 
Ruthruff 2004). 
 New spaces are promptly constructed with ease in a variety of ways: 
Space-building expressions such as prepositional phrases ( in this picture ) or 
connectives ( if___then___ ) are among the many ways in which new spaces 
may be initialized, and numerous methods for the further elaboration of 
these spaces have been enumerated (Fauconnier 1985). Whenever a new 
 topic is confronted, whether introduced by the direct perception of a novel 
circumstance, or by hearing a speech act, or by an endogenous  “ remind-
ing ”  of one sort or another, if this topic cannot be routinely or seamlessly 
incorporated into the currently constructed and active space, a new space 
is created to host that information. A sort of  unconscious triage generates 
new spaces as needed. In particular, whenever details become salient that 
contradict a current space so that that space becomes unusable for the new 
information, a new space needs to be constructed to accommodate it 
(Coulson 2001). Fictional worlds, in fact, can be conjured up in their own 
mental spaces, having their own local consistency. The demand for local 
coherence (within each mental space) is part of what drives the generation 
of new mental spaces, and as Ritchie (2006) notes, the same search 
for coherence is what yields the discoveries that mark the recognition 
of humor. 
 Sentence comprehension has recently been shown to be both incremen-
tal and predictive (Kamide, Altmann, and Haywood 2003; Spivey 2007). 
Garden-path sentences are a much-studied variety of sentences that lure 
hearers into false expectations, because of misleading syntactic — or some-
times just semantic — features. 
 (19)  The horse raced past the barn fell. (A famous example discussed 
by Chomsky) 

A Mind That Can Sustain Humor 
99
 (20)  That deer ate the cabbage in my garden surprised me. 
 (21)  She told me a little white lie will come back to haunt me. 
 (22)  Uncle Henry ﬁ nally found his glasses, on the mantelpiece, ﬁ lled 
with sherry 
 (23)  Bundy beats latest date with chair. (An actual headline when the 
serial sex-murderer, Ted Bundy, representing himself, won a reprieve in 
his attempt to avoid the electric chair) 
 Many garden-path sentences are often found to be funny. They have a lot 
in common with, and sometimes simply are themselves, puns. 
 Experimental studies of comprehension show that humans regularly 
predict the meaning of an ambiguous sentence fragment and then readjust 
their mental space as disambiguating information arrives (Spivey et al. 
2002; Chambers et al. 2002; Kamide, Altmann, and Haywood 2003; Cham-
bers, Tanenhaus, and Magnuson 2004; Spivey 2007). This means that a 
mental space is built incrementally: As each word of the sentence arrives, 
the space is augmented to model the full set of data then available. Data 
from these studies also show that pragmatic, conceptual, and perceptual 
information is added to the space-building task as soon as it becomes avail-
able, suggesting that not just sentence comprehension but also situation 
and event comprehension operate incrementally in a uniﬁ ed continuous 
system. Altogether, these results (and others — e.g., Marinkovic 2004) 
strongly favor the view that comprehension is always accomplished by a 
 “ holistic ”  attempt to integrate the information, from all sources, that has 
arrived in the brain up until that point, and that when further information 
(from any semantic source) arrives that can disambiguate an earlier piece 
of information, the model is adjusted accordingly. During the process of 
comprehension, the mind does not wait passively until it has  “ enough ” 
information in a buffer to complete the disambiguation of what it has so 
far received but rather attempts to disambiguate by assumption until 
proven otherwise. These predictions may be  “ educated ” assumptions due 
to quite explicit  noticing of a telling feature, local priming that makes one 
possibility appear more likely than another, or they may be due to a 
subliminally learned statistical regularity that suggests the likelihood of 
one meaning rather than another.  4  
4.   Psycholinguists have shown that, to a ﬁ rst approximation,  all meanings of a term are accessed 
simultaneously in the course of sentence comprehension until disambiguating information 
arises (see, e.g., Swinney 1979 and Tanenhaus, Leiman, and Seidenberg 1979). This is normally 
beneath notice, but it has clearly discernible downstream effects that have been tested.

100 
Chapter 7
 In the past, the reassessment process in disambiguation has been called 
 frame-shifting and has been implicated as a mainstay of ordinary compre-
hension, not just a feature in joke-comprehension (Minsky 1984; Coulson 
2001). Frame-shifting is the process of jettisoning a frame that was previ-
ously invoked and rebinding the information from it into another frame 
that ﬁ ts the whole of the data more completely. Minsky (1984) notes that 
frame-shifting  “ is done very swiftly because the  ‘ corresponding ’  terminals 
of related frames are already pre-connected to one another. This makes it 
easy to change a  faltering interpretation or a frustrated expectation ” (p. 183, 
emphasis ours). Minsky ’ s theory of humor involves frame-shifts being initi-
ated by the contradiction of bindings. The semantic script theories of 
humor (cf. Raskin 1985 and Attardo 2001, or see above, pp. 50 – 51) simi-
larly use the notion of scripts to describe humor as arising from the incom-
patibility of two scripts, each evoked by some overlapping parts of the 
humorous context. Given the historical reliance in humor theory on these 
kinds of representations, we need to pause for a moment and neutralize 
the charm of such a representational scheme. Although Minsky and Schank 
certainly saw a salient pattern in cognition, they made a mistake in treating 
it as a core theoretical entity — a basic kind of  “ data structure ” in the brain. 
In fact, scripts and frames are more like clouds. They ’ re real enough, quite 
visible, but  not basic meteorological entities (Hofstadter and the FARG 1995, 
p. 125). Here ’ s why: 
 It is difﬁ cult to say what should constitute a frame or script for a par-
ticular type of event. Let ’ s take, for example, the classic  going to a restaurant 
script. Details for going to a restaurant vary considerably across cultures 
and levels of afﬂ uence. It would be as difﬁ cult to put bounds on the set of 
necessary terminals for this frame as it would be to give necessary and 
sufﬁ cient conditions for being a game (Wittgenstein 1968). Yet, having a 
separate frame for every ethnic variation of restaurant-goings is the ﬁ rst 
step down the slippery slope toward having a separate frame for every 
individual possible restaurant-going at all. This is a slope that ends in a 
heap of frames that no longer have any of the generality for which they 
were originally proposed. If, in order to salvage the theory, it is proposed 
that in addition to a set of very general frames (with some completely 
arbitrary threshold for what constitutes generality) there are additional, 
more meticulous tools for adjusting each to the idiosyncratic semantic 
contents of individual situations, then it seems obvious to wonder next 
why these more ﬂ exible and adroit tools for detailing don ’ t simply do all 
the work of semantic construction. The latter is exactly what we think 
happens. 

A Mind That Can Sustain Humor 
101
 In place of whole categorically delineable structures, such as frames, 
scripts, or ICMs, we are going to lean on a model of  just-in-time spreading 
activation (JITSA) — a process that can account for Minsky ’ s and Schank ’ s 
intuitions and approximate the structure of frames without requiring 
their existence as fundamental entities. The term  “ spreading activation ” 
has been used somewhat loosely among modelers in cognitive science 
(e.g., Collins and Loftus 1975; Bower 1981; Anderson 1983; Hofstadter 
and the FARG 1995) because the notion can be applied to many kinds of 
models. Activation may spread between concepts in either active 
concept models or semantic nets, or it may spread between nodes in 
either localist or distributed representation neural networks. Since, as we 
said, we ’ re giving a high-level view of just the interfaces of cognition, we 
don ’ t need to commit to either a neural or superneural implementa-
tional model here. It ’ s the general notion that counts: Initial semantic 
contents are activated by sensation in working memory mental spaces, 
and the process of perception and any deeper thought ensue from the 
diffusive triggering of related semantic contents and interference pat-
terns therein. 
 We must acknowledge at the outset that we don ’ t know — nobody yet 
knows — how to implement in neural structures a system of JITSA that can 
detect contradictions or even maintain enough consistency to be a reliable 
updatable store of world knowledge. There are small,  “ proof of concept ” 
models (Collins and Loftus 1975; French 1995; Shastri and Grannes 1996) 
that show how in principle some such competences could be achieved by 
networks, but there are doubts about how these models would scale up, so 
we are just helping ourselves to the assumption, at this point, that the 
brain ’ s functional architecture will prove to bear a useful resemblance to 
such models. This is the weak spot in our theory: Taking inspiration from 
a wide variety of exploratory work in cognitive science (see references cited 
above), we are supposing that the brain can be modeled as a JITSA system 
with the information-handling capacities we describe, and then looking at 
how humor could emerge from such a system. 
 It is also important to specify that the model, borrowing the term from 
data provision models in software engineering, uses  “ just-in-time (JIT) 
processing ”  (see also Milner and Goodale 2006 for a discussion of psycho-
logical experiments indicating JIT processing in the brain). JIT processing 
is an economic model of processing (or  thought , in our case) in which 
computation is not performed until the moment it needs to be, on demand, 
as it were. This is, of course, not just biologically likely (whenever there is 
a choice, organisms are energy-conservative) but also realistic with respect 

102 
Chapter 7
to how thought works phenomenologically. It may not always seem well 
directed, but on reﬂ ection we realize that thought is never random. There 
is always some link back to pertinent recent perception, desire, or emotion. 
To clarify this issue: If processing were not done only on demand, then 
there would be a very deep quandary as to just how much (and which) 
forethought a mind need perform. Remember, speed matters. Needlessly 
computing all manner of thought is not a rapid strategy, not to mention 
that it also violates the economic principle. 
 We want to head off a complaint that might arise here. It might seem 
that JIT processing implies a lack of foresight, whereas earlier in this 
chapter, we characterized humans as the ultimate anticipation generators. 
There is no contradiction. People do generate — ceaselessly — a bounty of 
pertinent anticipations about the world, but such anticipations are not 
created through effortful enumeration of all possibilities followed by the 
comparisons of individual assessments of likelihoods for each possible 
future. Rather, the expectations we have at hand each are the result of 
current situation-pertinent thought or recollections of other pertinent-at-
the-time thoughts each of which are the result of JITSA. We expect future 
events to fall in line with our experiences and with such inferential antici-
pations as we have had occasion to create now or during historical com-
prehension of events. This adds up to quite a number of expectations, 
though it is not nearly as many as an enumeration-machine might create. 
It is our good luck (thanks to evolution by natural selection) that the 
expectations created by JITSA happen to be, on the whole, the most  relevant 
anticipations, out of an inﬁ nite space of logically possible thoughts. This 
relevance follows for the simple reason that these anticipations are most 
applicable to precisely the environment from which they are drawn. 
 Just-in-time processing can be performed piecemeal, in keeping with 
the comprehension data mentioned earlier. Instead of thinking of a set of 
carpentered frames that get looked up and installed in mental spaces 
wholesale, we prefer to think of the  functional near-equivalents of frames 
being  grown by JITSA in a large network of meaningful nodes. Thanks to 
probabilities and associations already incorporated into the strengths and 
proximities in the network, this spreading activation has the capacity to 
take on the functional structure of a particular instantiation of a frame, 
with chains of nested conditional probabilities.  5 The speed, alone, created 
5.   Thus the probability of MENU given RESTAURANT is higher than MENU given DENTIST, 
and then, given MENU, the probability of the FIRST COURSE meaning of  “ starter ”  is higher 
than the GUY WITH THE STARTER PISTOL or ELECTRIC MOTOR TO CRANK THE ENGINE 
meanings.

A Mind That Can Sustain Humor 
103
by the parallel processing of spreading JIT activations in the brain causes 
an illusion of cognitive completeness in working memory, or a  frame-
illusion , as we might call it. The frame-illusion is due to the simple fact 
that comprehension, thought, and recall (as opposed to the more effortful 
problem solving described in a later section) happen so fast that we seem 
to have instantaneous access to a number of elements about any situation 
or thought  as if all these details are already actively loaded into working 
memory.  6 In reality, some details will be strongly activated, some will be 
on the fringe (there may be wine glasses in your current restaurant model, 
but you haven ’ t speciﬁ ed whether they are glasses for red or for white), 
and some details will not be activated at all. Yet, all of these things are 
instantly accessible upon the slightest inquiry because of the capacity for 
JIT activation. 
 Thus, when you learn of a ﬁ ctional character entering a restaurant, 
spreading activation may turn on nodes for tables and chairs, waiters and 
menus, and other customers, with some of the links  appearing obligatory 
(part of the  “ very deﬁ nition ” of a restaurant) and others appearing as likely 
options, perhaps with highly favored  “ default ” values included in the 
frame, and demanding to be accepted without checking or else bumped 
out by experience. We think that such dynamic structures of activation 
can account for the frequency of spurious  “ ﬁ lling in ” of the sort that 
is one of the main contributors to falsehood in mental spaces. For exam-
ple, when you are told that Tom and Bill are playing catch on the beach, 
there are several different constructions you may make, unbidden, in 
your mental space that will show up if you are then asked what kind of 
ball it was. The JITSA model would suggest that you  may have already 
thought of some statistical default — a baseball, football, or beach ball — and 
inserted it thoughtlessly (without notice) in your mental space. On the 
other hand, you may not have thought of any kind of ball at all, but upon 
interrogation, your exceedingly nimble just-in-time activation allows you 
to supply one so quickly that it may seem  to you — not just to your ques-
tioner — as if it had been there from the start, much like a frame-terminal 
6.   Ironically, this speed of access was one of the impetuses for the advancement of frame 
theory in the ﬁ rst place (Minsky 1974, 1984). We ’ re not sure why the JIT possibility didn ’ t seem 
better at the time. The opposite of JIT is just-in-case, the representation-heavy kind of  full data 
model processing that was widely in practice when frame and script theories were proposed 
some years ago. We suspect that the frame-illusion, coupled with this engineering practice, may 
have led earlier theorists to posit these unwieldy and unsustainable models of cognitive 
mechanisms.

104 
Chapter 7
default.  7 Yet another possibility is that you may not have thought of any 
ball to begin with, nor are you ready to commit to a particular kind upon 
interrogation. There just may never have been a ball in your mental space 
at all. The answer  “ I don ’ t know ” is a perfectly reasonable one, though 
perhaps less likely, empirically, given the social pressure to provide an 
answer when confronted with an interrogation. You might  “ explain ” 
your answer by noting that no ball seems any more likely to you than 
any other, or you might say that it is  probably a beach ball but might be 
something else. 
 This invocation of probability raises the issue of variable levels of epis-
temic  commitment . If you entered an  uncommitted default — you  “ ﬁ lled in ” 
with a baseball, let ’ s say — and later it emerges that it was a beach ball, you 
may hardly notice the revision. On the other hand, if it turns out that Tom 
and Bill were playing catch with a live ﬁ sh, this is bound to interrupt your 
complacency since you were at least committed, in your mental space, to 
the default (but generic)  ball . We will discuss epistemic commitment in 
more detail in an upcoming section. 
 The JITSA model provides a foundation for the interfaces of cognition 
that are necessary for humor. Building on that foundation, we can now 
give the rest of those interfaces. 
 C.   Active Beliefs 
 Q:  What is alive, green, lives all over the world, and has seventeen legs? 
 A:  Grass. I lied about the legs. 
 A belief is a commitment to a fact about the world. You probably believe 
that the sun rises every day. You may believe that Neil Armstrong stepped 
onto the surface of the moon on July 20, 1969. You certainly believe that 
you are reading a book right now. Such commitments allow us to act in 
the world, with some assurance that our actions will have their intended 
7.   As we shall see in the discussion of Huron (2006) below, one of the most liberating ideas in 
cognitive science is the recognition that subthreshold or even deeply unconscious (and unre-
coverable) versions of conscious cognitive actions and processes are often implicated by the 
phenomena, once a good model is posited that requires them. Transformational linguists long 
ago got fearless in positing unintrospectible  moves , some of which have proven bogus in due 
course, but the idea that we are not, in general, authoritative about what we have and haven ’ t 
been thinking is now widely recognized.

A Mind That Can Sustain Humor 
105
consequences. This bland and uncontroversial generalization obscures the 
fact that there are different  kinds of commitments. In this section and the 
next we distinguish between various kinds of belief that are necessary for 
describing the mechanism of humor. 
 Working-memory beliefs are, for our purposes, the most important 
beliefs — these are the contents of mental spaces. They occur as both causes 
and effects of dawning comprehension and during problem solving, and 
they may have any of a number of semantic sources. All of the following 
are ways of coming to a working-memory belief: Someone may tell you 
that the liquid in a cup is coffee (and you believe her). Or you might taste 
it and ﬁ nd out it is coffee. Or you might infer what it is from its color and 
the fact that it ’ s in a coffee cup. Or you might have left it there from 
yesterday morning ’ s coffee break, and simply recall the fact. Linguistic 
comprehension, quite  “ direct ”  sensory perception — tasting — or inference — 
 “ looks like coffee to me ”  — or long-term memory can all provide working 
memory beliefs.  8 While such sources themselves are only  potential contents 
of thoughts, once information becomes a working-memory belief, it par-
ticipates in a thought. Let ’ s call the participating contents of working 
memory  active beliefs. 
 Long-term memory beliefs, on the other hand, are better seen as  acquired 
dispositions to have particular active working-memory beliefs. We have 
learned things in our lives that dispose us to a likelihood of activating 
certain beliefs in working memory under certain circumstances of spread-
ing activation. Consider long-term memory as a sort of surrogate world; 
just as the external world is a vast source of information (about itself) that, 
thanks to our sensory systems, triggers active beliefs when attended to, so 
long-term memory is a source of additional information, not currently 
perceivable in the external world but readily available on demand. So, 
unless you have some reason — some cue from the environment or from 
spreading activation — to be thinking about the Falkland Islands War, you 
do not have an  active belief about the conﬂ ict, however much you may 
8.   Caution : These illustrations are, perforce,  articulated (as if they were more or less spoken to 
oneself) so that they can be easily distinguished by the reader, but no judicious inference 
( “ Hmm, I believe her ” ) or  salient conscious act of recollection ( “ Ah, yes! From the coffee break! ” ) 
need mark the transition to active belief. If retrospectively queried about which path was 
followed we may even be quite uncertain, or our ready answer ( “ I tasted it ” — “ No, you didn ’ t; 
you just looked at the cup ” ) may be confabulatory guesswork. We have less  “ privileged access ” 
to the workings of our minds than some philosophical traditions suppose.

106 
Chapter 7
know — and hence believe in the long-term sense — about it. The fact that 
dispositions to believe are only potential thoughts contrasts with the active 
status of working-memory beliefs. While we each have billions of long-
term memory beliefs, at any particular moment we have only a few active 
beliefs. 
 There is an all too common vision of this distinction that we must 
vigorously oppose here: the idea that long-term memory is a storehouse 
of sentence-like things (propositions expressed in the  “ language of 
thought ” ) that can be  retrieved and  moved (or copied) to a special place, 
 working memory , rather the way data are copied from your disk drive to 
RAM or from RAM to the accumulator, where all the work happens. First 
of all, as already hinted in footnote 7, the individuation of content into 
isolated beliefs (billions of them!) is an artifact of our need, in exposition, 
to draw attention to focal aspects of the information in long-term memory, 
and should not be taken to imply a GOFAI processing model (Dennett 
1987, 1998). More important, in this context, is the mistaken image of 
working memory as a  place where things are sent . The antidote to this vision 
is to remind yourself that we are developing a spreading activation model: 
Working memory is simply that distributed portion of the vast neural 
network that is current  working , awakened, not dormant. (Nothing is  moved 
anywhere.) This is a difference that naturally comes in degrees. For instance, 
as noted above, the work of Swinney and others shows that  all the mean-
ings of an ambiguous word are  activated when it is perceived, but typically 
only one will be so much more strongly activated as to be noticeable. (It 
took subtle experiments to show that the introspectively dormant mean-
ings were actually awakened, if not wide awake.) When we speak of active 
beliefs we will typically mean the most strongly activated beliefs, but as 
we shall soon see, many effects in humor depend crucially on there  not 
being a sharp threshold between what we might call wide-awake beliefs 
and drowsy beliefs. 
 A good way to see the bearing of this is to consider in more detail the 
phenomenon of surprise. To be surprised by something, it must have been 
 unexpected — and this does  not mean just not expected. Suppose you are 
expecting us, and we arrive at your house driving a blue car. That it is blue 
will not surprise you (you weren ’ t expecting it to be any particular color), 
but if it is a Kandy-Kolored Tangerine-Flake Streamlined Baby (Wolfe 1965) 
you will be surprised (unless you already know or have surmised that we 
are the sort who would have such a car). Suppose we glue the coffee cup 
to the kitchen table and you manifest surprise when you can ’ t pick it up. 

A Mind That Can Sustain Humor 
107
If the belief that coffee cups are typically movable, not glued to tables, 
were not  somewhat active (in our sense), there would be no expectation 
violated by your failure to raise the cup, and you wouldn ’ t exhibit surprise. 
The level of activity may be low, but it is just the sort of activation that 
the JITSA voluminously and swiftly produces in rolling response to the 
ﬂ ow of stimulation arriving from your senses. In reaction to your unfolding 
experience it has  “ conﬁ dently ” placed you in a normal kitchen situation 
(constructing, on the ﬂ y, the normal-kitchen frame or script, in effect, as 
contrasted with the funhouse frame or script), which is why you are genu-
inely surprised when you can ’ t raise the cup. Likewise you would be sur-
prised if the hot water faucet  did detach itself when you grabbed it. In an 
unfamiliar environment — a biochemistry lab, say, or an assembly line in a 
factory — you would altogether  lack expectations about many such things, 
and hence would be informed, but not surprised, by whatever you 
discovered. 
 How far does such automatic expectation-generation go? This is an 
empirical matter, depending sensitively on the individual and varying 
circumstances. Each of us embodies an approximate solution to the frame 
problem, and we share a lot of common strategy while also having our 
differences. To anticipate our humor theory a bit, if Tom and Dick get a 
joke and Harry doesn ’ t, it is likely because Harry ’ s solution to the frame 
problem (in this setting) doesn ’ t make the same heuristic prunings that 
Tom and Dick have made. 
 The opportunistic and individualistic heuristic paths taken by each 
person ’ s JITSA seem to be governed by two different kinds of  “ forces ” that 
limit and modulate the spread of activation: 
 1.   Friction :   The activation racing down one path or another just  “ runs out 
of steam ” of its own accord, petering out without making even a crude 
contribution of speciﬁ c content. Whatever the energy limitations on 
spreading activation are, the energy budget for this activation avenue is 
exhausted and it ceases operation wherever it is. 
 2.   Closure :   Something about the content in some avenue actively  closes 
off further exploration:  “ Nothing down these alleys! Save your time and 
energy! ”  This kind of heuristic search terminator is necessarily risky and 
crude,  not involving further analysis of the path. When a chess player 
riskily  ignores his opponent ’ s surviving bishop (tacitly asking: How could 
that bishop possibly play an interesting role in this part of the game?), 
this is distinct from simply not having found time to consider the bishop 
at all. 

108 
Chapter 7
 All the cognitive power of an individual person ’ s JITSA system lies in 
the use of closure, since friction is as good as content-blind, stopping the 
search  for no reason at all other than running out of time or energy. Closure, 
in contrast, is teachable, adjustable by experience. We can think of it as a 
thrifty triage system, helping not-quite-blindly to allocate resources, by 
 “ selﬁ shly looking for excuses ” to terminate its own activation any time its 
local hunch is that the current task is unlikely to engage its talents pro-
ductively and so it should conserve its resources for a better occasion to 
shine.  9 
 Long-term beliefs that remain dormant on an occasion because of fric-
tion are simply not assigned any probability at all in the circumstances, 
and generate no expectations. Long-term beliefs that remain dormant 
because of closure are different; the closure generates some kind of signal 
that does create an active — but typically  “ drowsy ”  and generic — expecta-
tion. When you imagine an ofﬁ ce, for instance, the belief that there are 
no hyenas there does not, typically, become active. There are also no 
baboons or wildebeests in your imagined ofﬁ ce, but your brain doesn ’ t 
deal with each of these possibilities in turn as an active belief, because 
closure has weakly activated the catch-all belief that (of course) there are 
no wild animals whatsoever in the ofﬁ ce. That is why the presence of a 
hyena (or a wildebeest or a baboon or . . .) would genuinely surprise you, 
violating an expectation. If asked (by somebody else  or by yourself ) whether 
there are baboons in the ofﬁ ce, you might  “ instantaneously ”  respond that 
of course there are not, but this very question alters the cognitive situa-
tion, provoking your JITSA to generate and activate the belief you express 
in response. Contrast this with the question of whether there are any 
potted plants in the ofﬁ ce, or lawyers. Here, perhaps, friction has set in, 
and your JITSA never got around to opening, or closing, this search 
avenue. 
 The issue of what to include and what to exclude in such a setting has 
been called, by John McCarthy, the  qualiﬁ cation problem , vividly illustrated 
via the famous puzzle of the missionaries and the cannibals: 
9.   It is instructive to compare this view of heuristic search with the problem facing the US 
intelligence community in its massive attempt to keep terrorists from blindsiding the nation. 
Every agency has a budget and must make a risky attempt at thrift, expending resources only 
when its personnel believe they can make a signiﬁ cant contribution to the immediate 
situation.

A Mind That Can Sustain Humor 
109
 Three missionaries and three cannibals come to a river. A rowboat that seats two 
is available. If the cannibals ever outnumber the missionaries on either bank of 
the river, the missionaries will be eaten. How shall they cross the river? Obviously 
the puzzler is expected to devise a strategy of rowing the boat back and forth that 
gets them all across and avoids disaster. . . . Imagine giving someone the problem, 
and after he puzzles for a while, he suggests going upstream half a mile and cross-
ing on a bridge.  “ What bridge? ” you say.  “ No bridge is mentioned in the statement 
of the problem. ” And this dunce replies,  “ Well, they don ’ t say there isn ’ t a bridge. ” 
You look at the English and even at the translation of the English into ﬁ rst order 
logic, and you must admit that  “ they don ’ t say ” there is no bridge. So you modify 
the problem to exclude bridges and pose it again, and the dunce proposes a heli-
copter, and after you exclude that, he proposes a winged horse or that the others 
hang onto the outside of the boat while two row. You now see that while a dunce, 
he is an inventive dunce. Despairing of getting him to accept the problem in the 
proper puzzler ’ s spirit, you tell him the solution. To your further annoyance, he 
attacks your solution on the grounds that the boat might have a leak or lack oars. 
(McCarthy 1980, pp. 29 – 30) 
 Getting  “ on the same page ” with this puzzler requires sharing enough of 
a JITSA with him so that the two of you can share a setting of the puzzle 
without articulating it (an endless task, apparently) precisely. A similar 
convergence is required, as we shall see, for effective humor. 
 D.   Epistemic Caution and Commitment 
 What gets us into trouble is not what we don ’ t know; it ’ s what we know for sure 
that just ain ’ t so. 
 — Mark Twain 
 Another distinction between kinds of beliefs is necessary for humor. You 
might think that a particular restaurant downtown is open this afternoon, 
but suppose you are also aware that there is some likelihood it is not. If 
you drive down for lunch, you might be disappointed but you won ’ t be 
 surprised to ﬁ nd the shop closed between lunch and dinner or for renova-
tion or holiday. This kind of common, uncommitted belief can be con-
trasted with what we ’ ll call  committed active belief. 
 When you go bungee jumping or skydiving you are betting your life on 
the integrity of the apparatus — whether through direct knowledge and 
checking of the equipment or via the proxy beliefs of trusting the knowl-
edge and intentions of the adventure sport operator you ’ ve paid. Beliefs 
you would bet your life on are some of the many committed beliefs 
we have. 

110 
Chapter 7
 Consider another example: When you go to anchor your boat and 
throw the anchor overboard, you have a variety of beliefs. You have a 
rather general belief that it will land somewhere below the bow, but you 
aren ’ t committed to exactly where. If it hits bottom a few feet to the left 
of where you expected it to, there is no surprise or confusion. On the other 
hand, you are likely to be committed to the belief that the bitter end of 
the anchor line was fastened to a cleat on the deck, and when you watch 
the tail end of the rope run into the water behind the anchor, you will be 
shocked. In certain circumstances (which we ’ ll explain later), you may 
even ﬁ nd it funny. Another person, watching you, almost certainly will. 
 Committed active beliefs like this are beliefs that we act boldly on. 
Epistemic caution is the foretaste of behavioral caution, and epistemic 
commitment engenders behavioral audacity. This holds generally, apart 
from whether the cautious or audacious behaviors are overt or covert. If 
you are uncertain whether the running tap water is hot, you will carefully 
test it. But if you are certain it is not scalding, you won ’ t hesitate to stick 
a hand right in. And if it ’ s something you  “ know for sure that just ain ’ t 
so, ”  you will burn yourself. Likewise, for the covert behaviors of semantic 
comprehension: Upon hearing the sentence fragment,  “ they were in a tank 
. . ., ” if you are uncertain what  “ tank ”  means, you will be cautious about 
whether to infer things about ﬁ sh tanks, gas tanks, tanks of molasses, or 
military tanks. But if someone tells you they  “ went to the pet store and 
brought home a tank of ﬁ sh, ” you won ’ t hesitate to conclude that the tank 
at their house is transparent, full of water, and smaller than a Buick. The 
goldﬁ sh pun takes advantage of just this — tricking us into thinking we 
know something for sure that just ain ’ t so by giving just enough informa-
tion (the context of ﬁ sh, and the use of the word  “ tank ” ) to make us 
prematurely commit to a ﬁ sh-tank belief when the word  “ tank ”  still isn ’ t 
completely unambiguous. 
 The level of commitment to a belief is entirely orthogonal to the level 
of activity. Your readiness to plunge your hand into the tap water does not 
at all depend on how  “ consciously ”  you have deemed the water to be safe; 
indeed, the weakness, the peripherality, of your  strong conviction that the 
water is safe probably explains why your belief hasn ’ t been tempered by 
doubts — you haven ’ t got around to wondering whether your default com-
mitment is justiﬁ ed in this instance. 
 Belief commitment is an integral part of the trafﬁ c on the two-way street 
between the long-term and working-memory systems. The level of com-
mitment of a belief in working memory accompanies the belief as it turns 

A Mind That Can Sustain Humor 
111
into long-term memory and, when recalled, returns again to new working 
memory spaces. If you watch a raccoon, with its masked face, cleverly try 
to open your trash can, you will remember the fact and be committed to 
the belief that there is a raccoon in the neighborhood. If you catch a 
glimpse of a raccoon (well, wasn ’ t it a raccoon — what else could it be, and 
it moved so fast?) darting into your garage you ’ ll approach the belief that 
there is a raccoon in the neighborhood with some reservation and epis-
temic caution. We expect that the degree of certainty of such a belief is 
embodied somehow — perhaps by something like Damasio ’ s somatic mark-
ers — in differences in the way the spreading activation modiﬁ es the neural 
network. Such markers on beliefs indicate how much we can trust the belief 
and thus how much we can trust the inferences drawn from those beliefs 
when they become active. 
 This reveals its importance when the system goes wrong. A committed 
belief in working memory is likely to become a committed belief in long-
term memory, and a committed belief in long-term memory is a disposi-
tion to construct future active beliefs and use those contents in acts of 
reasoning. Allowing this ballooning process to continue unchecked when 
one of our committed beliefs just ain ’ t so can generate a cascade of false 
beliefs resulting in a substantially faulty world representation. This problem 
can be enormous. The information we ultimately remember from an expe-
rience is not a high-resolution copy of the experience, however vivid it 
may have been, but rather a low-resolution transformation of the experi-
ence in which much of the originating context has been lost to compres-
sion. If recall leaves out the contextual information, debugging an error 
later discovered in a descendant belief becomes difﬁ cult. The solution is 
to nip it in the bud — to try to catch false beliefs as often as possible before 
they become compressively encoded, while we still have the context to 
work on them, and before we end up with a disposition to reactivate that 
false belief. 
 Evolution has provided us with a couple of solutions, exploiting our 
epistemic emotions. First, confusion, as described in the last chapter, helps 
us detect conﬂ icts in working memory, thus casting doubt upon the con-
ﬂ icting beliefs and allowing them to be expeditiously reviewed for repair. 
Better, detecting an improper commitment before it has a chance to create 
a long-term memory belief can protect us from the whole string of faulty 
inferences. This is what we will propose, in the next chapter, is the original 
purpose of humor — the very important task that pays for its expensive 
reward system by protecting us from epistemic catastrophe. 

112 
Chapter 7
 E.   Conﬂ ict; and Resolution 
 I celebrated Thanksgiving the old-fashioned way. I invited everyone in my neigh-
borhood to my house and we had an enormous feast, and then I killed them and 
took their land. 
 — Jon Stewart  
 The King of Poland and a retinue of dukes and earls went out for a royal elk hunt. 
Just as they approached the woods, a serf came running out from behind a tree, 
waving his arms excitedly and yelling,  “ I am not an elk! ” 
 The king took aim and shot the serf through the heart, killing him instantly. 
 “ Good sire, ” a duke said,  “ why did you do that? He said he was not an elk. ” 
 “ Dear me, ” the king replied,  “ I thought he said he was an elk. ” 
 — Cathcart and Klein (2007) 
 We feel epistemic conﬂ ict when there is a contradiction between active 
belief elements in working memory. Conﬂ icts between beliefs in long-term 
memory can lie dormant side by side, unrecognized. It is only when they 
are both brought into the same working-memory space — awakened, not 
transported — that two beliefs can participate in an epistemic conﬂ ict. 
 There are three possible outcomes to an epistemic conﬂ ict. In  unresolved 
conﬂ icts we ﬁ nd ourselves confused and both pieces of information are 
stored with the conﬂ ict between them noted (perhaps by something 
like a somatic marker of the emotion of confusion) such that recollecting 
one of the beliefs will rather easily (via JITSA) often bring its uncertainty 
and the other conﬂ icting belief to mind. In  cooperative resolution we may 
ﬁ nd a way to accept the truth of both beliefs through a creative insight 
that dissolves an apparent contradiction into a compatibility. And in 
 uncooperative resolution , one of the beliefs will survive while the other is 
destroyed. 
 Any two beliefs, no matter how they were originally derived, may par-
ticipate in a conﬂ ict, but  getting them to participate in a conﬂ ict is often 
the outcome of hard work — or luck! A whole society can be blissfully igno-
rant of the contradictions harbored in their  “ common knowledge ” until 
some reﬂ ective and industrious thinker rubs their noses in the quandary —
 or some chance event draws everyone ’ s attention to the problem. Science 
and literature are among the focal sets of processes that have gradually 
uncovered and resolved a host of conﬂ icts for everybody, and we each have 
our own scientiﬁ c agenda: rooting out and ﬁ xing the residual conﬂ icts in 
our personal world knowledge. (It is amusing to realize that a comedian 
can be seen to be a sort of informal — but expert — scientist, leading the way, 

A Mind That Can Sustain Humor 
113
helping us expose and resolve heretofore unnoticed glitches in our common 
knowledge.)  10 Simple temporal juxtaposition — getting both beliefs active 
at the same time — is the necessary ﬁ rst step, kindling the confusion that 
sets in motion (motivates) the frantic search for resolution. And just as 
scientists often use thought experiments — readily comprehended, simpli-
ﬁ ed ﬁ ctions — to help resolve their theoretical difﬁ culties, we have all come 
to appreciate that ﬁ ction is as good as true narrative in drawing out the 
conﬂ icts in our everyday understanding. When a conﬂ ict is resolved by 
discarding the  “ false ”  belief, it is as often as not false only in the local 
context of a ﬁ ction we are considering, not false objectively. 
 At this point our model begins to differ from Schopenhauer ’ s, which 
invoked a distinction between perceptions and conceptions. Recent work 
suggests that any distinction between these two categories may be artiﬁ cial 
or, at least, drawn too sharply — perception and conception in fact recruit 
much of the same circuitry (for a review, see Goldstone and Barsalou 1998; 
and also Kosslyn, Ganis, and Thompson 2001). The important factor in 
Schopenhauer ’ s attempt to differentiate between perception and concep-
tion is not in how they are or might be neurologically instantiated, but 
simply in their temporal relationship to each other:  “ Conceptions ”  are 
already in the mind when  “ perceptions ”  arrive to conﬂ ict with them. Since 
 “ conceptions ”  themselves may be very recent arrivals (from  “ perception, ” 
typically) this temporal distinction is a treacherously slippery slope. How 
soon after information arrives in a mind via perception can it settle in and 
acquire the status of knowledge or presumption? There is no obvious way 
to draw such a line, nor need we insist that there be a bright line. Scho-
penhauer presumably saw humor as a perception that defeats a conception 
because it is  frequently the case that incoming perceptual information 
modiﬁ es existing conceptions by afﬁ rming, buttressing, challenging, or 
integrating with them. Yet this common case is not the only possibility. 
An endogenously arising  “ conception ”  may just as readily disrupt or 
challenge an ongoing  “ perception ”  or two perceptual features may conﬂ ict, 
as in the ﬁ gures from Roger Shepard where the hips and the feet of 
the elephant indicate contradictory legs or the intersections of the spokes 
both with the hub and with the rim indicate different orientations for 
the wheel.  
10.   It is also amusing to us to notice that we science-minded theorists keep ﬁ nding deep paral-
lels between humor and scientiﬁ c investigation. We wonder: Would bankers come up with a 
theory of humor as really all a matter of risky investments, and plumbers see humor as all a 
matter of pressure and leaks?

114 
Chapter 7
 Figure 7.3 
 Reprinted by permission of Roger Shepard. 
 Alternatively, a  “ conception ”  may defeat another  “ conception ” — as 
when a daydream interrupts a mental calculation and then is challenged 
in turn by a conscientious self-admonition to get back to work. We will 
consider all forms of information that are involved in the construction and 
modulation of a mental space as equals for our purposes without distin-
guishing between conception and perception. What matters, instead, is 
degree of epistemic commitment. Schopenhauer ’ s conception/perception 
distinction closely aligns with two ends of this spectrum. 
 In comprehension that proceeds incrementally, activated beliefs are 
somewhat serially entered into mental spaces, and upon entry they are 
immediately subjected to a process of bidirectional epistemic reconciliation 
with the current contents of that space. Figure 7.4 shows a coarse sche-
matic version of the reconciliation chart that shows approximately what 
occurs when two active beliefs (not dispositional beliefs!) come into con-
ﬂ ict. The top axis of the chart indexes the epistemic status of one belief 
and the left axis does the same for the other belief. The shading of the 
square at the intersection of each row and column indicates what occurs 
when these two kinds of belief contradict each other. As you can see at a 

A Mind That Can Sustain Humor 
115
glance (the darker gray areas), a number of these are  “ no-brainers ” that 
dissolve without a ﬁ ght: When a committed belief encounters an uncom-
mitted belief (or a stronger uncommitted belief encounters a weaker one), 
the latter (always uncommitted) typically extinguishes itself ( “ I give up. 
Never mind ” ). No battle ensues (and  since no battle ensues, you  “ hardly 
notice ” — not enough  “ fame in the brain ” [see Dennett 2005] to  “ rise to 
consciousness ” ). But when two equally powerful beliefs clash, something 
has to give, and the battle is joined. Confusion arises and they duke it out, 
enlisting allies, becoming (however brieﬂ y) famous in the brain, and 
eventually there may be some resolution. Resolution is not guaranteed, of 
course: It depends on how strong the allies on either side are. But, when 
it occurs, one of the beliefs falls into a more committed category, and the 
position of the conﬂ ict on the reconciliation chart shifts off from the black 
line into either a light gray or a dark gray area. When it doesn ’ t occur —
 when a conﬂ ict is irresolvable — we call this  epistemic undecidability. Cases 
of this kind are examined in detail in chapter 10.  
Figure 7.3
(continued)

116 
Chapter 7
 As the chart in ﬁ gure 7.4 indicates, we consider information from our 
senses to be more reliable than information from later in perception, the 
latter being modiﬁ ed (by both integration with other senses and top-down 
cognitive pressures) and compressed relative to the former. Our senses may 
be fallible, but they are typically more reliable than our perception; and 
inferences take us still further from the originating sensory information, 
as they are further modiﬁ ed and compressed versions of things we have 
perceived from the environment. 
 (24)  Who are you going to believe? Me? Or your lying eyes? 
 The light gray regions of the chart are areas where humor can happen. 
Like the darker gray regions, one belief has more epistemic power than the 
other and this causes the weaker to forfeit the conﬂ ict, but only in the 
light gray regions are those weaker beliefs also ones that a person was  com-
mitted to. Those are the beliefs that would have been stored in long-term 
memory, the beliefs that we are prepared to act unreservedly upon; they 
are the beliefs that can have lasting impact on us. So this little corner of 
the reconciliation chart, where committed beliefs clash, is importantly 
different from the rest of the chart; only here can humor happen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7.4 

 8   Humor and Mirth 
 A witty fellow being asked by a chatting barber,  “ How shall I cut it? ” replied,  “ In 
silence. ” 
 — Bubb (1920) 
 Our sketch of the computational architecture of cognition and the dynamic 
role of emotions in controlling the processes that can occur in that archi-
tecture gives us a map of sorts, in which we can, ﬁ nally, locate the  basic 
or  primitive phenomena of humor and mirth. (As we shall see, human 
ingenuity and cultural evolution have combined to elaborate the ways of 
exploiting the underlying mechanism prodigiously. Before there could be 
high comedy, cunningly designed by experts to tickle our funny bones, 
there had to be a sort of low comedy, relatively simple and low-powered 
moments of cognitively driven pleasure, not jokes or witticisms but the 
ancestors of jokes and witticisms.) 
 In short, (basic) mirth is the pleasure in unearthing a particular variety 
of mistake in active belief structures. And (basic) humor is any semantic 
circumstance (any convergence of contentful elements at a particular 
time) — exogenous or endogenous — in which we make such a mistake and 
succeed in discovering it. 
 A.   The Contamination of Mental Spaces 
 Look out for number 1, and don ’ t step in number 2, either. 
 The phenomenon of  automatic heuristic search has the effect that lots of 
information gets incorporated into our current representations on a proba-
bilistic basis without thorough examination.  1   The oversimpliﬁ cations and 
1.   This phenomenon of automatic heuristic search is to be distinguished from the conscious 
(and often but not always deliberate) use of speciﬁ c heuristics — such as the  “ ﬂ uency ” 

118 
Chapter 8
biases that thereby accumulate in this background machinery are normally 
harmless — indeed highly useful — approximations of the truth, but they are 
always potential weaknesses, dormant sources of potentially fatal errors. 
Winkling them out of hiding — debugging our heuristic reasoning machin-
ery — is a time-consuming process that must compete with all other cogni-
tive activities for its appropriate share of  “ machine cycles, ” time and energy 
in the brain devoted to it. 
 This category of relatively hidden or tacit assumptions contrasts with 
the deliberately articulated, noticed, accounted-for assumptions of serious 
problem-solving, whose contributions to current mental spaces are more 
or less manifest. The construction of mental spaces is one of those activities 
that spans the large space between clearly voluntary or deliberate actions 
on the one hand and unconscious reactions on the other. For the most 
part, the incessant generation of mental spaces in the course of our daily 
lives appears to us to be effortless and automatic and, indeed, involuntary. 
 “ We ” delegate this task to the unconscious triage mechanism that carries 
on without further supervision, admonition, or notice by  “ us. ” For instance, 
JITSA constructs frame-like structures on the ﬂ y, with all their accumulated 
baggage, and these temporary data structures contribute efﬁ ciently to our 
sense of what is happening, and, more importantly, our sense of what is 
 about to happen. But we can also go into problem-solving mode and 
attempt to marshal our construction activities. Sometimes we introduce 
some item of information into a mental space in this deliberate and 
 uncommitted fashion in order to see what it leads to, and discover that 
it leads to a contradiction; on such occasions we may feel surprise, 
and even pleasure, but not mirthful surprise. We can see the difference 
in slow motion when a bad joke-teller explicitly informs his audience of 
the key presumption before telling the story. It is only the information 
that gets  introduced covertly — without drawing attention to itself on arrival —
 into the mental space whose discovery elicits mirth; typically making 
a presumption too overtly, too explicitly, will draw attention to the 
possible mistake, thus helping us to approach it with caution and then 
avoiding it. 
 In the time-course of comprehension, an element that was covertly 
entered into a mental space by the JITSA process may, if unchallenged, 
immediately become an overt element of the space. Although the 
heuristic (Schooler and Hertwig 2005),  “ take the best ” (Gigerenzer and Goldstein 1996), or 
 “ imitate the majority ” (Boyd and Richerson 2005) — to solve problems or make important 
decisions. See Gigerenzer 2008 for an overview.

Humor and Mirth 
119
coactivation of  ﬁ sh and  tank covertly and automatically bring to mind a 
ﬁ sh-tank, shortly thereafter we have a fairly overt ﬁ sh-tank in our mind. 
This change of status in blatancy, rather than canceling the opportunity 
for mirth, is the guarantor of it — for a covertly entered element to become 
an unquestioned overt element, we must make an epistemic commitment 
to it; such a commitment is always made if no other elements from JITSA 
successfully challenge the epistemic status of the element in question. 
 When we distinguish conscious from unconscious or covert cognitive 
processes, we don ’ t at all mean that the latter are not being  “ watched ”  by 
some central executive, the ego or self. We mean only that they are occur-
ring in a functionally local and hence resource-stingy manner, sending as 
few waves through the whole system as is consistent with activating them 
at all. And when we compare different elements that are active — in a 
mental space, for instance — and note that some are covert or tacit (but still 
active), we do not mean that all the others are fully articulated in thoughts 
(though some of them, at any time, surely are); we mean only that they 
are more global, more resource-hungry, more inﬂ uential (Dennett [1996, 
2005; Dennett and Akins 2008] calls this  “ fame in the brain ” ), and hence 
capable of laying down more lasting and ramifying effects ( “ memories ” 
in short). 
 Such surreptitious entry into a current mental space is thus a necessary 
condition for a humor-inducing bug, but it is not sufﬁ cient. Mirth requires 
this stealth, but it also requires eventual comprehension — not necessarily 
in the sense of comprehending everything (cf. nonsensical non-sequitur 
humor and irresolvable visual illusions — see pp. 114 – 115) but only in the 
sense that you comprehend the error that had been made. To  “ get the joke ” 
you have to know what ’ s going on, at least to some degree. As Dolitsky 
(1992, p. 35) observes,  “ The humorous effect comes from the listener ’ s 
realization and acceptance that s/he has been led down the garden path. 
. . . In humour, listeners are lured into accepting presuppositions that are 
later disclosed as unfounded. ” So far, so good; this is an insightful observa-
tion about the phenomenology of humor. But why does the process of 
discovery unfold as it does? Why should our brains provide a playground 
for this variety of pleasure, and why should it be so much fun? Our answer 
identiﬁ es a  problem , which creates a  need , and this need is met most inge-
niously and thriftily by a  solution that exploits the available resources in 
the brain. 
 The problem is that the accumulation of  “ world knowledge ” is an 
opportunistic process that includes plenty of unnoticed inclusions — that 
is, items that are not consciously considered and accepted. We all know 

120 
Chapter 8
that giraffes in the wild do not wear galoshes, but we ’ ve never considered 
the matter until now, for instance. Our store of world knowledge is only 
intermittently accompanied by metaknowledge about these contents. The 
result is that its weaknesses are essentially  “ invisible ”   until they are teased 
to the surface during the construction of a mental space. What works 99 percent 
of the time may fail on occasion, with disastrous results — unless it is 
brought to the surface in a ﬁ ctional setting, or in a real-world setting that 
happens to be a forgiving environment. 
 The need, then, is for a timely and reliable system to protect us from 
the risks entailed by our own cleverness. Discerning and locating these 
mistakes would have the immediate payoff of allowing current reasoning 
to progress without an error (before we act on such errors), but would also 
provide a legacy for the future, keeping a fallacious conclusion from 
becoming registered as verity in long-term memory. A mechanism for 
consistency checking is indispensable for a system that depends crucially 
on data-intensive knowledge structures that are built by processes that 
have been designed to take chances under time pressure. Undersupervised 
and of variable reliability, their contributions need to be subjected to 
frequent  “ reality checks ” if the organism that relies on them is to maintain 
its sanity. 
 The solution is the activity of building mental spaces, one of the bril-
liant innovations of human cognition. Attending to the ﬂ otsam and jetsam 
that thereby ﬂ oat to the surface is a practical necessity for the maintenance 
of epistemic integrity — and this is a task that competes with the pressing 
demands of the occasion, so in order to compete successfully, its deliver-
ances must be independently  rewarding —  and the reward is mirth. This 
janitorial work cannot be accomplished by unconscious background pro-
cesses simply because the weaknesses in question only exhibit themselves 
in speciﬁ c, resource-hungry contexts — in mental spaces that bring them 
into direct conﬂ ict with other currently active contents. The mental spaces 
we construct are, in effect, test beds for elements in our world knowledge, 
where we get to observe how these elements perform in a variety of set-
tings. The reward provides the motivation for what otherwise would be a 
low-frequency chore. 
 Our brains are for  “ producing future ” (as the poet Val é ry once put it) 
both swiftly and reliably, and it is the trade-off between speed and integrity 
that creates the risks that are patrolled by these bug-seeking mechanisms. 
The creation of mental spaces permits the relatively safe off-line testing of 
hypothetical extensions of our lightning-fast anticipation-generators and 

Humor and Mirth 
121
this activity has to compete with other activities for time and resources in 
the brain. Unconscious debugging is simply not possible. Debugging 
requires activating speciﬁ c contents and  keeping them activated against all 
competition for enough time to explore their implications and presupposi-
tions, a process that of necessity involves monopolizing, however brieﬂ y, 
large cortical resources.  2 
 The picture that emerges is a time-pressured, involuntary heuristic 
search for valid expectations, which generates mental spaces in which 
elements are constantly being tested. According to this model, then, basic 
humor occurs when 
 1.   an  active element in a  mental space that has 
 2.   covertly entered that space (for one reason or another), and is 
 3.  taken to be true (i.e.,  epistemically committed ) within that space, 
 4.   is diagnosed to be false in that space — simply in the sense that it is the 
loser in an epistemic reconciliation process; 
 5.  and (trivially) the discovery is not accompanied by any (strong) negative 
emotional valence.  3  
 More simply put: Humor happens when an  assumption is  epistemically 
committed to in a mental space and then discovered to have been a  mistake . 
These ﬁ ve conditions are the necessary and sufﬁ cient setup for the pleasur-
able experience of humor. Notice that these conditions are not the kinds 
of conditions that can be applied directly to a stimulus such as a joke. They 
are conditions regarding mental behaviors — behaviors that can sometimes, 
but not always, be well predicted by a joke or other stimulus. This model 
of humor, then, avoids the projection error categorically. 
2.   At ﬁ rst glance, it seems possible to imagine a computational architecture for an artiﬁ cial 
intelligence in which debugging of this sort could go on automatically and intermittently  “ in 
the background, ” the way Google Desktop updates its indexes whenever higher-priority tasks 
are idle. Such an artiﬁ cial intelligence — if it is indeed possible — would have no need for the 
system of rewards that boosts our debugging processes into action, and hence would be consti-
tutionally ill equipped for appreciating humor. It might be capable of understanding the phe-
nomenon of human humor, in the same way it could understand the phenomena of thirst or 
hunger or lust, and it might even use that understanding to create humor, and exploit it in 
devising its interactions with us. But aside from scientiﬁ c curiosity, it could have no appetite 
for humor. We return to this topic in more detail in chapter 13.
3.   Discovering an  immediately harmful mistake is of course the occasion for strongly negatively 
valenced emotion, and this will almost always wipe out humor. Only  currently innocuous errors 
can be enjoyed as sources of humor — if they are your own errors. The errors of others are another 
thing altogether, as we will explain.

122 
Chapter 8
 Let ’ s review what we ’ ve done so far. We have sketched the phenomenon 
of creating mental spaces, during the incremental comprehension of events 
and sentences, and described a particular sort of incongruity resolution 
(inspired by the sketches of Schopenhauer, Kant, Minsky, and Coulson) 
that captures the way humor comprehension ﬁ ts into the mental space 
model. Evolutionary theory gives us a powerful hint about why this kind 
of comprehension is important, and recent theories of emotion explain 
how we are motivated to engage in it. This gives us a basic explanation of 
what  primitive humor is and why it operates as it does. Before we go on to 
show how cultural magniﬁ cation has created additional cognitive tools 
that make higher-order humor possible, we need to give our sketchy model 
more detail and answer a host of questions. 
 B.   Mirth among the Epistemic Emotions: The Microdynamics 
 Right now I ’ m having amnesia and d é ja v ù  at the same time. 
 — Steven Wright 
 The epistemic emotions all share a similar ineffable quality of being mental 
feelings — but mirth and discovery are particularly similar, in being the two 
most familiar  positively valenced members of this class of emotions. In addi-
tion, these two often arrive (especially in well-tailored jokes) with such rapid 
coincidence as to  almost evade differentiation. We are certainly not the ﬁ rst 
to notice the relationship between humor and discovery. Earlier authors 
found a deep connection there as well. For instance, Terrence Deacon: 
 Consider the intensity with which contemporary humans pursue mysteries, sci-
entiﬁ c discoveries, puzzles, and humor, and the elation that a solution provides. 
The apocryphal story of Archimedes running naked through the street yelling 
 “ Eureka! ”  captures this experience well. The positive emotions associated with 
such insights implicate more than just a cognitive act. The reinforcement that is 
intrinsic to achieve such a recoding of the familiar may be an important part of 
the adaptation that biases our thinking to pursue this result. A call that may 
primarily have been selected for its role as a symptom of  “ recoding ” potential 
aggressive actions as friendly social play seems to have been  “ captured ”  by the 
similar recoding process implicit in humor and discovery. In both conditions, 
insight, surprise, and removal of uncertainty are critical components. (Deacon 
1997, p. 421) 
 Also, Arthur Koestler: 
 The dual manifestation of emotions at the moment of discovery is reﬂ ected on a 
minor and trivial scale in our reactions to a clever joke. The pleasant after-glow 

Humor and Mirth 
123
of admiration and intellectual satisfaction, gradually fading, reﬂ ects the cathartic 
reaction; while the self-congratulatory impulse — a faint echo of the Eureka cry —
 supplies added voltage to the original charge detonated as laughter: that  “ sudden 
glory ”  (as Hobbes has it)  “ arising out of our own eminency. ”  (Koestler 1964, p. 90) 
 And again: 
 Primitive jokes arouse crude, aggressive, or sexual emotions by means of a 
minimum of ingenuity. But even the coarse laughter in which these emotions are 
exploded often contains an additional element of admiration for the cleverness 
of the joke — and also of satisfaction with one ’ s own cleverness in seeing the joke. 
Let us call this additional element of admiration plus self-congratulation the 
intellectual gratiﬁ cation offered by the joke. (Ibid., p. 88) 
 If we are to distinguish mirth from other pleasurable emotions, espe-
cially the joy of discovery, we need to look closely at the details of the 
cognitive events that can make the difference between a Eureka! moment, 
a rib-tickler, and a lead balloon. What could it be that generates the insight 
in one instance, mirth in another, and merely the microsatisfaction of 
comprehension (mixed, perhaps, with annoyance) in the third? Introspec-
tion — or  “ pure ”  phenomenology — draws a blank, yielding nothing but the 
vacuously circular explanation: Well, if the timing is  right the episode is 
really  funny  (or  revelatory )!  4   The notorious ineffability of the  “ qualia ” of 
consciousness confronts us. What is the difference between the sound of 
an oboe and the sound of a clarinet? One sounds . . . like an oboe, and 
the other like a clarinet! We need to look backstage to ﬁ nd answers to such 
questions (Dennett 1991, 1996c). 
 The  basic pleasure of discovery is probably shared widely in the animal 
kingdom. Bison, one can plausibly suppose, are pleased to ﬁ nd new —
 heretofore unanticipated — patches of edible grass, birds are pleased to 
discover a new bird-feeder or source of good nest materials, and so forth. 
We human beings can also enjoy a more  advanced sort of discovery —
 insight — when elements we have been puzzling over suddenly fall into 
place, like the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. It is not clear that any other species 
has such puzzling experiences. The differently  “ ﬂ avored ” pleasure of mirth 
gets its particular zest, we propose, from the speciﬁ c conditions of our 
deﬁ nition, above (p. 121), which the special cognitive architecture of 
humans also makes possible. 
 Different ﬂ avors of rewards allow a learning mechanism to distinguish 
their different sources. Each reward is tuned to a different state of the world 
4.   We explain timing and subtlety in terms of the microdynamics  of delivery in a later section.

124 
Chapter 8
and trains behaviors that achieve that state:  “ Sweet ” makes us eat sweet 
things, and  “ salty ”  makes us eat salty things. Both are behaviors we need 
to perform, and if they weren ’ t distinct — if both were simply  “ tasty ” — then 
we would be prone to making mistakes such as eating only salty things 
and thus missing out on biologically necessary sugars. On the other hand, 
if sweet and salty were both needs we had but they always came together 
in the world (e.g., all fruits contained both sugar and salt in the same 
relative proportions), we would only need one reward to obtain both 
needs — two separate rewards for these things would be truly indistinguish-
able in consciousness as they would always co-occur. So, there is a one-to-
one mapping between the qualia  5   of a reward and the distinctive triggering 
circumstance that identify it — once such a mapping exists an agent is then 
free to discover a variety of ways to obtain that circumstance and achieve 
the reward with no fear of being drastically misled (into avoiding sugar in 
favor of salt, for example). This fact tells us why discovery and mirth feel 
different: They are tied to distinct and discriminable cognitive circum-
stances. We already gave the precise conditions for mirth — the discovery 
of an overcommitment to a covertly entered belief.  6 What are the condi-
tions for insight? How do they differ? And how are they the same? 
 Despite ﬁ rst appearances, insight is not the solution of a contradiction 
and reduction of confusion, though it can lead to that. Neither is it identi-
cal with the discovery of a false belief in humor, though it can lead to that 
too. Insight is simply the emotion that we feel whenever semantic contents 
ﬁ t together in the mind to produce a novel conceptualization. It is the joy 
of ﬁ guring anything out. Before the cohesion occurred, one might have 
been facing a contradiction that caused intense puzzling (Q: How could a 
cowboy ride into town on Monday, stay two days, and ride out on 
Monday?  7 ), or one might have had a  question , but not a contradiction (The 
man who makes it does not need it. The man who buys it does not use it. 
The man who uses it doesn ’ t know that he is. What is it?  8 ), or one might 
have been just  playing with some object (even abstract objects) and discover 
5.   We are, resignedly, using the term  qualia to refer to subjective properties of conscious experi-
ence despite the fact that philosophers — whose  “ technical ” term it is — have burdened it with 
much misbegotten conceptual and ideological baggage (see Dennett 1988, 1991, 2005), which 
is not being endorsed by us.
6.   We also discuss some conjectural ideas about the microstructure of the qualia of mirth more 
in chapter 11.
7.   His horse is named Monday.
8.   A cofﬁ n.

Humor and Mirth 
125
a new piece of information, a new rule that excites the mind. As a child 
you may have discovered some natural law, such as that if you spin a hard-
boiled egg quickly enough it stands up on its own. You weren ’ t puzzling 
over anything at all, and you probably don ’ t even have a theory of how 
or why this law holds, but the new piece of information still may have 
sparked a ﬂ ash of insight. 
 It just so happens that many situations, especially many well-
constructed jokes, can engender both insight and mirth at almost the same 
time. An insight can be the necessary trigger to allow us to discover a 
mistaken belief. But it doesn ’ t have to be — often we can just be shown that 
the belief is mistaken. This frequent co-occurrence is the reason for Koes-
tler ’ s and Deacon ’ s observations. The contrast between mirth and  Aha! is 
quite sharp in many instances, but the boundary is porous between humor 
and such problem-solving artifacts as puzzles and riddles. After all, many 
jokes  are riddles in form, and many puzzles exploit the denial of rather 
well-hidden assumptions in their solution, and when they do, solving 
them — or giving up and being told the solution — is often accompanied by 
laughter. 
 But why do we alone enjoy mirth and insight to such a great degree? 
The rudiments of the system would probably have been found in most or 
all hominid lineages, since there are suggestive analogues in the apes, and 
possibly in other mammals.  9   It is when our ancestors added innovations 
to the basic  cognitive architecture we share with chimps and other apes that 
a new emotional phenomenon came into existence, a close cousin 
of the pleasure of discovery that, as Koestler notes, frequently occurs 
alongside it. 
 It has recently been shown that, contrary to a longstanding assumption 
in much of experimental neuroscience, there is a variety of striking differ-
ences between human neuroanatomy and chimpanzee neuroanatomy 
(Kaas and Preuss 2007; Gazzaniga 2008). We do not doubt that these dif-
ferences were driven, evolutionarily, by behavioral innovations — and 
remember: thinking is a species of inner behavior! — but nobody has yet 
devised any very speciﬁ c hypotheses about how and when this happened, 
so we will postpone consideration of how much of the difference between 
us 
and 
chimpanzees 
is 
hardware 
(neuroanatomically 
discernible 
differences in the  “ hard wiring ” ) and how much is software (acquired 
9.   See work by Panksepp and Burgdorf (1999, 2003) for data suggesting the existence of rat 
 “ laughter, ”  though not necessarily humor.

126 
Chapter 8
dispositions to use the hardware we were born with in novel ways). As 
in computer technology, software innovation typically drives hardware 
innovation; and, to put our hypothesis metaphorically, we are born with 
Chevrolet brains on which we must now run Maserati software, and some-
thing has to give!  10  
 The behavioral innovations in our species were ﬁ rst, the kind of reﬂ ec-
tive self-consciousness that begins to notice not just changes in the exter-
nal world but changes in one ’ s responses to the external world and one ’ s 
responses to those responses and so on, recursively, and second, of course, 
language. These yield the capacity to construct — “ without even trying ” —
 multiple counterfactual and hypothetical mental spaces. (In the evolution 
of language and self-consciousness, with its penchant for constructing 
mental spaces, which came ﬁ rst? As so often, this chicken-and-egg question 
should be replaced with subtler questions that acknowledge that coevolu-
tion is the norm, with proto-phenomena providing the basis for further 
boot-strapping, and with neither phenomenon miraculously bursting full-
blown onto the scene like Venus being born from the sea foam. The role 
of language in enabling mental space construction — and vice versa — is an 
important topic already being explored in detail by others — e.g., Faucon-
nier 1985; Fauconnier and Turner 2002; Coulson 2001. Sufﬁ ce it to say on 
this occasion that we humans differ from chimpanzees in having two 
capacities: language and reﬂ ective self-consciousness. The chimpanzee ’ s 
thinking is governed by JITSA just as ours is, and this helps them anticipate 
the world around them, but they don ’ t, apparently, make the recursive 
step that becomes a great leap.  11   Similarly, a chimpanzee may self-medicate 
10.   The Baldwin effect (for an introduction, see, e.g., Dennett 1991, 1995, 2003) is the 
coevolutionary mechanism in which learned behaviors (which of course cannot be taken up 
directly into the germ line) can nevertheless change the competitive environment enough to 
create selection pressure favoring any genetic innovations that enhance the ability to learn the 
new behavior, even turning it, in the long run, into a genetically transmitted  “ instinct ” — a 
nonmiraculous way that natural selection can move innovations from software into the 
hardware.
11.   “ Well, it seemed like a good idea at the time! ” In many jokes and stories, this phrase 
has come to epitomize the rueful apology of a dunce, a sign of stupidity, but in fact we 
should appreciate it as the pillar of wisdom that it is. Any being who can truly say (and 
mean),  “ Well, it seemed like a good idea at the time! ” is standing on the threshold of brilliance. 
We human beings can not only think, but  remember our previous thinking , and reﬂ ect on it — 
on how it seemed, on why it was tempting in the ﬁ rst place, and then on what went 
wrong. We know of no evidence to suggest that any other species on the planet can think this 
thought.

Humor and Mirth 
127
with herbs it discovers in its environment, but it can ’ t become a doctor 
or shaman, even for itself.) These human cognitive capacities give rise 
to a heightened sensitivity to — and use for — the pleasures of discovery 
and mirth. 
 C.   Rewards for a Dirty Job Well Done 
 I got into a ﬁ ght with a really big guy and he said  “ I ’ m going to mop the ﬂ oor 
with your face. ” I said  “ You ’ ll be sorry ” and he said  “ Oh yeah? Why? ” I said  “ Well, 
you won ’ t be able to get into the corners very well. ” 
 — Emo Phillips 
 We have at last reached our full deﬁ nition of the basic humor mechanism, 
and explained why, and how, it came to exist. To review, the very impor-
tant business of our epistemic emotions is to produce anticipation, as 
swiftly and accurately as possible, and to maintain data-integrity in our 
personal systems of knowledge representation, a task made more difﬁ cult 
by the very proﬂ igacy and ingenuity of our anticipation-generation 
machinery. This custodial task is an expensive, resource-hungry task that 
would not have a sufﬁ ciently high priority in our waking life if it weren ’ t 
for the reward system wired in by natural selection. This reward system, a 
descendant or by-product of our reward-for-discovery system, is enhanced 
by the happy circumstance that our species has invented the involuntary 
habit of constructing  mental spaces that can expose (by activating in tem-
poral juxtaposition) conﬂ icting candidates for permanent residence in our 
knowledge bases. Assumptions  covertly entered into our mental spaces carry 
with them an automatic pleasure-ampliﬁ er that kicks in when our ongoing 
quest for anticipation discovers conﬂ icts in those assumptions. This reward, 
which (probably) only human beings experience, has then become an 
autonomous target, attracting efforts to design ever more potent and effec-
tive stimuli to obtain the reward. Humor, then, is an integral part of the 
evolved processes for maintaining data-integrity in our world-knowledge 
representations.  12  
 This conclusion may well seem to be an anticlimax, a disappoint-
ment. We dig down into the core of the humor machine and ﬁ nd a 
12.   For an earlier version of the hypothesis that mirth is a reward for maintaining epistemic 
data-integrity, see Hurley 2006; and for a more recent converging view, see Clarke in press.

128 
Chapter 8
highly utilitarian clerical task being executed, and the only reason it is a 
humor machine is that it happens to exploit reward systems that have 
been opportunistically tweaked, ﬁ rst by natural selection and then by 
cultural evolution. But reﬂ ect: The same is true, oddly enough, about 
sexual reproduction. The task is the safe delivery of a male gamete into 
proximity with an ovum so that fertilization can occur. In some spe-
cies — ﬁ sh, for instance — the parents may not even touch each other, and 
in many others they never meet, but just broadcast their gametes into 
the environment,  “ hoping for the best. ” That such a mundane, mechan-
ical task could come to support the elaborate systems of sexual attraction 
and competition found in us — and in other mammals, birds, and even 
insects, for instance — can seem like a bizarre extravagance. If it weren ’ t 
for the reward systems, however, why on earth would we ever procreate? 
It ’ s a dirty job but somebody ’ s got to do it! One might even venture the 
maxim: The more arduous and even dangerous the job, the more 
intense the reward system must be to ensure its completion. Maintain-
ing the security system on our conscious thought is costly, but worth it. 
So the rewards have to be commensurate. 
 This evolutionary and mechanistic perspective on humor carries with 
it an important message: There is no doubt that the intrinsic  dynamics of 
the mechanism play a crucial role in the generation of humorous experi-
ence; if the experiences come in too slow, or too obvious, or too difﬁ cult 
or too . . . mirth will not arise, or very little mirth will arise. Here is 
where the arts and humanities must join forces with neuroscience or 
forever wallow in the mysteries and circularities of pure phenomenology. 
Only neuroscience could explain the effects of laughing gas (nitrous 
oxide), the Penﬁ eld ﬁ ndings regarding brain stimulation (see above, 
p. 25), and the well-known but still unaccounted-for effects of alcohol 
and drugs on humor perception. Anyone who has watched, unmoved, 
the guffawing of drunks immensely titillated by banal remarks, or the 
giddy paroxysms of contagious laughter spreading through a room full 
of pot smokers, appreciates that just as there are people with underdevel-
oped senses of humor, there are also people who, when intoxicated, 
overendow their experiences with hilarity, and ﬁ nd wit in the most 
obvious comments. Surely a large part of the explanation of these phe-
nomena will be in terms of the chemical mismodulation of normal 
neural responses. 
 At this point, we expect that half of our readers are thinking:  “ Well get 
on with it, then, and gives us the neuroscientiﬁ c details of how it works! ” 

Humor and Mirth 
129
while the other half are thinking:  “ Oh no, spare us the neuroscientiﬁ c 
details! ”  The humor theorists in the arts and humanities suspect, with 
some justice, that most of the neuroscientiﬁ c details that emerge,  13 
whatever they are, will seldom be in terms that can be tied in any 
recognizable or  “ appropriate ”  way to the social and contentful aspects of 
humor. Relative to such traditional topics of analysis it will be just a  brute 
fact that, given the biological machinery we have,  these are the dynamic 
features that matter, these are the differences between successful and 
unsuccessful jokes, and so on. That will be doubly disappointing, they 
think, since  their questions about humor — just what  is it about the content, 
from an introspectively accessible perspective, that makes this and that so 
funny? — will be not only left unanswered, but forcibly replaced with ques-
tions and answers that are simply beside the point. This is not so. Huron ’ s 
pioneering work on music shows how  explanatory correlations between 
 “ qualia ”  and neural machinery can be devised and tested. But we are not 
quite ready to be as explicit in our humor theory as Huron is in his work 
on music. 
 We must risk disappointing everyone by splitting the difference, for the 
time being, and providing only a sketch of how such a uniﬁ cation might 
run for humor. Although we are encouraged by recent proposals and dis-
coveries on these topics, and have our favorites, it would be premature for 
us to take sides in the ongoing controversies. Our intended contribution 
is a clariﬁ cation of the functional specs of the computational architecture, 
not its technical implementation. This postpones the sort of dramatically 
testable predictions any theory must eventually generate if it is to be taken 
seriously, but we think it is more prudent to keep our theory alive for 
further reﬁ nement and improvement than to risk its demise from a failure 
13.   Quite a number of researchers have already begun to probe the neuroscientiﬁ c correlates of 
humor (e.g., Mobbs et al. 2003; Mobbs et al. 2005; Moran et al. 2004; Samson, Zysset, and Huber 
2008, 2009; Shammi and Stuss 1999; Watson, Matthews, and Allman 2007; Wild et al. 2006; for 
reviews, see Uekermann, Daum and Channon 2007 or Wild et al. 2003), but what they have 
found so far is only that reward centers, language and semantics regions, and error-processing 
networks are all involved. None of this is very surprising and, though interesting, the work has 
not yet shed much light on the clerical nature of debugging in humor. Samson et al. (2008) do 
conclude that various logical mechanisms appear to utilize different networks in the brain, and 
this is very much in line with our expectation that there is no single humor-network — no  cen-
tralized funny bone — in the brain. Hopefully our work will give neuroscientists new directions 
in which to look; and in chapter 10 we make some suggestions regarding the difﬁ culties they 
will face in ﬁ nding neural correlates of commitment.

130 
Chapter 8
due to reliance on an overspeciﬁ c instantiation.  14 Still, we can say quite a 
lot indirectly about the specs for this machinery by looking at the patterns 
that earlier theorists have highlighted, inspired by the exploratory suc-
cesses and failures of would-be comedians. Comedians are in the position 
of people who know quite a lot about how to drive race cars, how hard 
they can be pushed under which conditions, but haven ’ t any clear idea of 
what is under the hood. Earlier theorists, studying the productions of 
comedians and trying to parse out what works and what doesn ’ t, have not 
gone into the specs at all, noting only that somehow minds reliably dis-
tinguish and react to various patterns in the material fed to them. Never-
theless, they have acquired many telling facts about the proﬁ les of response 
of the machinery they drive with such expertise, and we are building on 
their discoveries. 
 D.   “ Getting It ” : Basic Humor in Slow Motion 
 The correct explanation of a joke not only does not sound funny, but it does not 
sound like a correct explanation. 
 — Eastman (1936) 
 Eastman is right. When we describe an instance of humor and explain just 
how the mechanism for epistemic integrity has operated in some particular 
case, the mirth and delight vanish. One cannot help wondering if in expos-
ing the steps of the process we have somehow inadvertently discarded 
whatever it was that made the joke hilarious.  “ Certainly it couldn ’ t be 
 that — that ’ s not funny! ” But consider: It is also true that a recording of 
ordinary speech, slowed down by a factor of ten, becomes incomprehen-
sible groaning. How could that  possibly be a witty remark? Showing how 
our theory explains the process by which a number of jokes provoke mirth, 
and how minimal variations in them would fail to provoke mirth, will not 
itself be amusing; but this is the only way to demonstrate that the theory 
is uniﬁ ed and powerful enough to account for a wide range of humor. In 
later sections, we will examine more complicated data, but here, we start 
with basic humor. 
14.   In the same spirit, Fauconnier posits his mental spaces and describes the sort of operations 
that can and cannot occur in them without saying much of anything about how to implement 
them in a brain. This places our work in the same tradition as Minsky (2006), Hofstadter (2007), 
and Humphrey (2006); see Dennett 2007b,c, for reviews of these efforts, and Dennett 1991, for 
another instance of this strategy.

Humor and Mirth 
131
 Basic humor is rather simple-minded humor (it couldn ’ t be any other 
way). It happens in the ﬁ rst-person perspective, and this strictly limits the 
kinds of contents that it may operate on. Basic humor happens when you 
get a jolt of mirth because a belief that you, yourself, are committed to —
 without realizing it — becomes invalidated. Much of basic humor is 
nonverbal, and some may not even be elevated to consciousness. The 
ﬁ rst-person status of basic humor makes it the kind of event that doesn ’ t 
need social communication — these are private thoughts that you have all 
the time, yet seldom laugh out loud about and typically don ’ t even con-
template converting to language to share because no one else is having 
quite the same ﬁ rst-person experience with the same idiosyncratic JITSA 
values. It is also the kind of humor that we expect to exist in infants, apes, 
and perhaps other animals too. The following examples should spark some 
recognition in you or at least remind you of some other instances of ﬁ rst 
person humor in your life. 
 A.   Recall moments when you have been looking frantically for the sun-
glasses that are on top of your head or the keys that are in your pocket. 
The eventual breakthrough in these episodes can be circumstances for 
mirth. 
 B.   Have you ever hollered to someone in the other room only to discover 
they must have left the house a few minutes before? Or continued to talk 
to someone who had already hung up the other end of the phone line? 
You might feel a little ridiculous when you ﬁ gure out there ’ s no one there. 
 C.   Imagine standing in an elevator, the door has closed, and you are dis-
tractedly typing a text message on your phone. Suddenly (when the door 
opens and someone gets in, or you just feel like you ’ ve been in the elevator 
quite a while), you realize you ’ ve forgotten to press any button for a ﬂ oor 
and the elevator hasn ’ t moved at all. You ought to feel mirth for having 
assumed that you were already on your way.  Silly me . . . 
 Sometimes dissecting these cases can be tricky. First, let ’ s see why these 
can be funny, and how we can vary the circumstances to drain the humor 
from them. With regard to (A), if you ’ ve lost your glasses, and looked all 
over the house for them, even two or three times in some likely places, 
you will soon commit to the belief that they are not in the house (since 
you ’ ve looked in all possible places) and you will move on to wonder or 
even commit to the belief that you left them at, say, the grocery store 
where you last remember thinking about them. Or, you may commit to 
the belief that they are just gone forever and you don ’ t know where you 
lost them. Then, when you ﬁ nd them on your head you realize that the 

132 
Chapter 8
misstep of not looking in one of the  most common places you put them 
led you to overcommit to the belief that they are gone. In example (B), 
you presumed that the person was there in the other room to hear what 
you hollered. Without entertaining the possibility that they might have 
gone out, you guessed they were there — and you committed to that guess. 
We can remove the possibility of this mistake being amusing by adding a 
condition that in one way or another drew your attention to the possibility 
that this had happened. You hear a door slam and go on talking, for 
instance, or there is a noticeable click on the phone in the middle of your 
utterance. The event becomes annoying, maybe, but not amusing. In 
example (C), the covert assumption needs to be that you were already 
moving toward your destination ﬂ oor. Notice that if you didn ’ t presume 
this — if you were just standing there thoughtlessly — and you discovered 
you weren ’ t moving, your response would be more like lackluster recogni-
tion — “ oh ” — than any kind of amusement. 
 These examples are mildly mirthful, but here ’ s an example of basic 
humor that is a bit stronger: 
 D.   Imagine discovering that you were waiting for the instant replay . . . at 
a live game. 
 That twinge of ridiculousness that you feel when you ’ ve made a mental 
blunder like this is the core of basic humor. There is no epistemically strong 
basis for the belief that an instant replay would occur. One of the funniest 
moments in Peter Sellars ’ s last ﬁ lm,  Being There , is when he, in the character 
of the dim-witted and sheltered Chauncey Gardner, is confronted by some 
threatening hoodlums and, ﬁ nding his current experience highly unpleas-
ant, attempts to  “ change the channel ” by pressing on a remote control 
box he has absentmindedly carried with him. To his dismay this does not 
make the hoodlums disappear. The next example, which happens once in 
a while to those who spend too much time using computers, is similar: 
 E.   After knocking over a drink at the desk, you might ﬁ nd yourself clicking 
on the edit menu to ﬁ nd the  “ undo ”  command. 
 The analogical transfer made here, from the computer interface domain to 
the real world, sets up a false belief. You might realize with a laugh,  “ I 
really thought, for a moment, that that would work! ” 
 A sort of real-world inversion of the Peter Sellars effect emerges in an 
interesting result obtained by Ravaja et al. (2008). In experiments measur-
ing psychophysiological responses (using facial electromyography) to 
 “ ﬁ rst-person shooter ” video-game events, they found an increase in 

Humor and Mirth 
133
 orbicularis oculi activity (the tell-tale sign of genuine, Duchenne laughter  15 ) 
as well as increased arousal (as measured by skin conductance) when a 
player ’ s own character was wounded or killed as contrasted with the event 
of killing or wounding an enemy. The authors found this counterintuitive 
and suggested that the apparent positive emotion of losing may be related 
to transient relief (from the stress of the game) or, owing to recognition of 
the ﬁ ction of the game, a positive appraisal of the challenge of the game. 
On the other hand, we think the positive emotion may just be related to 
the discovery of an overly committed ﬁ rst-person belief. Although Ravaja 
et al. only reported averaged measures, we would expect between-subject 
differences as well as event-by-event differences within their data, but we 
suspect some of their subjects are humorously surprised when, thinking 
they were in control of their situation, they suddenly got shot. 
 These examples are all  “ jokes ”  without tellers — endogenously created 
funny moments when we may laugh out loud, even in private; occasions 
in which an individual delights in debugging a personal mental space by 
identifying and repairing an error; instances of proto-humor or quasi-
humor from which we can derive hints, because of their similarities to 
ﬂ orid humor, about the underlying mechanisms and their purposes. 
 This ﬁ rst-person phenomenon is the fundamental source of humor, on 
our model. It is the genus for all the species of humor that are  apparent 
exceptions to the rule that there can be no humor without human or 
anthropomorphized subjects (see Question 11 of our Twenty Questions, 
p. 59 above). They are not exceptions simply because the human subject 
 in the joke is the human subject  getting the joke! The (ﬁ rst) person both 
makes the mistake and discovers it. Laughing  at others is a more sophisti-
cated development of the funny bone, and will be discussed later. 
 Self-made mistakes can be communicated to others — or more precisely, 
provoked in others, in jokes that involve linguistic misinterpretations, 
either  lexical word meaning misinterpretation (puns),  grammatical misin-
terpretation (e.g., garden-path sentences), or  pragmatic or contextual 
misinterpretation. 
 The clich é   “ no pun intended ” nicely draws attention to the fact that 
puns can be generated quite independently of any authorial intentions, 
15.   We should note that the  orbicularis oculi is also active during  wincing (Ashraf et al. 2009; 
Harris and Alvarado 2005; Kunz, Prkachin, and Lautenbacher 2009; Prkachin 1992), which 
might also be a resultant expression of being shot in a video game. However, in future experi-
ments this might easily be controlled for via facial action coding (FAC) (Ekman and Friesen 
1978) of event-related video data, which could separate winces from Duchenne smiles based on 
their nonshared attributes.

134 
Chapter 8
typically depending on syntactic or semantic rather than situational or 
pragmatic features of comprehension for their humor.  16 Puns are a notori-
ously weak form of humor. Occasionally we ﬁ nd a shockingly good one, 
but it is usually shockingly good because it is a pun and the expectation 
is that puns are weak. It is just this weakness, however, that makes them 
a good place for an initial analysis of basic humor; the bells and whistles —
 the adornments and embellishments of more attractive humor — are 
typically left out of them. It is a minimal kind of humor. 
 (25)  The butcher backed up into the meat grinder and got a little 
behind in his work. 
 (26)  A hole has been found in the nudist camp wall. The police are 
looking into it. 
 (27)  Did you hear about the fellow whose whole left side was cut off? 
He ’ s all right now. 
 In each one of the above puns, the reader commits a semantic misin-
terpretation which is then rethought. In all three, either interpretation 
could have come ﬁ rst and then been reevaluated by the second, because 
the text doesn ’ t  really say one thing or the other — it says both. Whereas 
in many jokes or unidirectional puns (such as the four puns on p. 45, in 
chap. 4) an earlier belief is actually  “ falsiﬁ ed ” given the full information 
of the joke, here neither interpretation is quite  “ wrong ”  (in fact the two 
interpretations may settle into an attractor state in which they are both 
semantically active); it is the premature commitment to one or the other 
that is wrong — such a commitment we come to realize, eventually, is 
unwarranted. (And notice that any of these already pretty lame puns can 
be ruined by drawing attention to the ambiguity at the outset, e.g.,  “ The 
butcher patted his behind, and then backed. . . . ” ) Elevating to notice an 
assumption that would otherwise enter the current mental space covertly 
ruins the prospects of mirth for a pun as for any other form of humor. We 
can see this in some deliberately constructed  failed puns. These are weak 
because they telegraph their punch lines to some degree: 
16.   Inveterate punsters, however, engage in deeply intentional, indeed almost obsessive, reﬂ ec-
tive examination of the words they are either hearing or saying, prospecting for possible 
punning opportunities. The linguist Pim Levelt, a virtuoso punster, acknowledges that he auto-
matically monitors most speech for such windfalls, discarding unsaid the vast majority of the 
candidates he unearths. The psychologist Richard Gregory did the same. The difference between 
a brilliant punster and a groan-inducing punster is mostly a matter of how high the threshold 
is set for public utterance.

Humor and Mirth 
135
 (28)  As I have no checkbook, the Left Bank is where I kept all my 
money. 
 (29)  Dr. Jones was very inexperienced, so we all hoped that his 
medical practice would make perfect. 
 These are lame because they don ’ t typically succeed in  catching the audi-
ence with a committed (and covertly entered) belief:  
 (30)  “ I like your dog. ”  
 “ Not really, you ’ re more like a cow, I ’ d say. ” 
 (31)  Sign on the wall in a bar: IN CASE OF BEER LIFT BOTTLE 
 A pun that is past its use-by date is this sign, on the bumper of a truck: 
 (32)  CAUTION: HAIR BREAKS 
 (In the early days of air brakes on trucks, the sign CAUTION: AIR BRAKES 
was ubiquitous; motorists were overfamiliar with it, making its recognition 
an ideal microhabit to exploit in a pun.) 
 And, ﬁ nally, the following puns are not amusing — to one who hears them 
as speech acts directed to oneself — because they are instances of would-be 
ﬁ rst-person humor with strongly negatively valenced d é nouements: 
 (33)  Your cancer is improving remarkably; it is now able to resist all 
known treatments. 
 (34)  The prisoner is free to go . . . to the bathroom before execution. 
 Similar to puns are these funny advertisements: 
 (35)  For sale: antique desk suitable for lady with thick legs and large 
drawers. 
 (36)  Dinner Special — Steak $7.65; Lasagna or Meatloaf $6.50; 
Children $4.00. 
 (37)  Dog for sale: Eats anything and is fond of children. 
 (38)  Used cars: Why go elsewhere to be cheated? Come here ﬁ rst! 
 Here there is a misinterpretation of meaning; but in these cases, it is not 
a word-sense misidentiﬁ cation, but a broader semantic misinterpretation 
often brought about by syntactic ambiguity or imprecise or inappropriate 
punctuation. When you make one interpretation of the line, you ’ ve taken 
a risk, and when you discover another interpretation is possible, you can 
see that you may have committed too soon to the ﬁ rst comprehension 
model. Garden-path sentences are other examples. Many kinds of syntactic 
ambiguities can bring about humor, for instance a dangling pronoun: 

136 
Chapter 8
 (39)  “ I ’ ll hold the nail, and when I nod my head you hit it with the 
hammer, ok? ” 
 Hit what, the nail or your head? Without knowing what  “ it ”  refers to there 
are two interpretations of the sentence — one of which comes ﬁ rst and the 
other of which may then cause a revision.  17   One who hears this sentence 
may extract humor from several sources: ﬁ rst, the interpretive ambiguity, 
but also (since imaginative anticipation never stops churning) an image of 
the speaker ’ s surprise if he were actually hit in the head by a hammer, and, 
further, his embarrassed recognition that his command was ambiguous. 
Such unspoken implications are a rich source of additional humor, both 
ﬁ rst person and third person. In particularly elegant cases of expressive 
economy, the punch line is omitted, allowing the audience to carry on to 
the discovery unaided by the jokester. 
 (40)  Some people are afraid of heights. Not me, I ’ m afraid of widths. 
(Steven Wright) 
 This joke plays more subtly with semantics. Wright, with breathtaking 
efﬁ ciency, draws our attention to an unnoticed asymmetry in our 
directional concepts; the three dimensions of height, length, and 
width are all  “ the same ” and interchangeable, aren ’ t they? No. Gravity 
makes a big difference.  18 (Now aren ’ t you happy that we went to all 
17.   In the early days of natural language processing by computer, researchers were amazed to 
discover how many sentences were actually, ofﬁ cially, ambiguous. Computers proved to be 
comically good at ﬁ nding unintended, unimagined, but grammatically licensed parsings of 
apparently innocent and univocal sentences. This highlighted, for the ﬁ rst time, just how much 
unconscious computational work a normal speaker has to engage in to carry on a normal con-
versation. All that unconscious inference provides a hotbed for humor.
18.   Geoffrey Hinton has devised an elegant puzzle that further enlightens us about the asym-
metry: Throw a large batch of toothpicks randomly into the air and freeze them (photograph 
them, perhaps) in an instant, catching them pointing in  all directions. Will there be approxi-
mately as many  horizontal as  vertical toothpicks (choosing whatever tolerance you like for 
strict horizontality and verticality? Or will there be more horizontal than vertical, or vice 
versa? Amazingly, the answer is:  many more horizontal, because there is an inﬁ nity of ways 
for a toothpick to be horizontal — facing N, S, E, W, NE, . . . — but only one way of being vertical. 
Now throw a large batch of  plates (or CDs) in the air; the answer is reversed. This is a delicious 
insight, but probably too complex to be compressed into a one-liner, even by Steven Wright. 
But perhaps not; George Carlin has observed that baseball is the only sport that looks backward 
in a mirror.

Humor and Mirth 
137
the trouble to explain the joke to you? Part of the expository difﬁ culty 
of writing about humor is that authors either risk insulting the readers 
by overexplaining, or risk failing to persuade by underexplaining. 
You can ’ t reach everybody with one policy.) Let ’ s dismantle another 
simple joke:  
 (41)  Question:  How do you get a philosopher off your porch? 
 Answer:  Pay for the pizza. 
 Jung (2003), who also offers a kind of false-belief theory (see chapter 9 for 
a discussion), suggests that  “ a belief of the reader (e.g., that there is a 
professor-like philosopher on the porch), is falsiﬁ ed by the reader, as he 
realizes the philosopher is a pizza deliverer ” (p. 222). It is the audience of 
this joke who comes to the committed assumption that a thinker is sitting 
on their porch swing, contemplating metaphysics. That (ﬁ rst-person) belief 
is annihilated when the insulting answer is laid down and is the source of 
the humor. Ridiculing philosophers creates an additional delight; it is not 
the cause of the mirth, but it nonetheless adds to the joy. But let us reiter-
ate that not all humor has such further delights. When it occurs, it supple-
ments enjoyment of humor, but does not create  mirthful enjoyment, the 
latter only being caused by the epistemic conditions. (We say more on this 
in chapter 11.) 
 Another pragmatic assumption is made by the audience in hearing this 
Irish joke:  
 (42)  An Englishman walks into a pub in Ireland with a small green 
toad on his head.  “ Well now, ” says the bartender,  “ that ’ s quite amazin ’ . 
And where did you get it? ”  
 A tiny voice answers,  “ well, it all started as a wart on me arse . . . ” 
 Until the frog responds, the audience has jumped to the conclusion that 
the bartender is talking to the English fellow. As in the previous joke, the 
mirth is supplemented by the joy of insulting an outgroup member; but 
the mirth itself is only caused by discovering one ’ s own improper commit-
ment to knowing the recipient of the bartender ’ s inquiry. (The moral is: If 
you want to insult somebody, you could just say awful things about them, 
and that wouldn ’ t be funny. Or you can ﬁ nd some comic hook — any of 
the mechanisms that generate humor — to hang your derision on, and, if 
you do it well, get a hearty laugh.) 
 (43)  Two mufﬁ ns are in the oven. The ﬁ rst one says,  “ Boy is it hot in 
here! ”  and the second one responds,  “ Wow, a talking mufﬁ n! ” 

138 
Chapter 8
 The logical mechanism here makes humor of the fact that we 
suspend disbelief when we create a ﬁ ctional mental space. By the end 
of the second sentence, the listener has built a mental space of two 
mufﬁ ns talking about being in an oven, and then one of the mufﬁ ns in 
that space points out that it is kind of ridiculous to have such a mental 
space. The mufﬁ n ’ s words draw our attention suddenly to the fact that 
we ’ re OK with — that we have been tricked into committing to — the idea 
of a talking mufﬁ n. 
 (44)  A priest, a rabbi and a nun walk into a bar, and the bartender asks 
them,  “ What is this, a joke? ” 
 This one has quite a similar mechanism as the previous one. In realizing 
it ’ s a joke, we suspend disbelief and accept that it ’ s expectable for a priest, 
a rabbi, and a nun to walk into a bar together. We accept, in this ﬁ ctional 
world, that this is how things are. Then the punch line steps outside the 
joke, and asks the audience,  “ What are you doing? You can ’ t believe that —
 that doesn ’ t usually happen in the real world! ” Here is another way to play 
with our suspension of disbelief: 
 (45)  A forlorn man is about to throw himself off a bridge into 
the river when an old hag dressed in black approaches.  “ Hang on, 
there, honey! Why would you want to kill yourself? ” He replies:  “ My 
wife has left me, I found out today I have inoperable cancer, and my 
embezzlement is about to be discovered when the auditor arrives 
tomorrow. ”   “ Not to worry! I ’ m a witch, and I can cast a few spells 
and make everything right. If you will just make love to me tonight, 
I will restore the funds, put your cancer into remission, and bring 
your loving wife back to your arms! ” It sounds like a good deal, so 
the man climbs down, takes her to a cheap hotel, and does the deed. 
The old hag gets dressed, and as she exits through the door, she turns 
and says.  “ Say, sonny, aren ’ t you pretty old to be believing in 
witches? ” 
 There are other varieties of strictly ﬁ rst-person humor, including musical 
humor and visual humor such as caricature, paradoxical pictures, and even 
 “ physical humor ” that involves violations of the audience ’ s expectations 
independently of any speciﬁ cally third-person interpretation (e.g., in a 
trick movie shot, a tower of blocks falls with a crash, and then the blocks 
 “ bounce ”  back into place — by reversing the ﬁ lm). These will be analyzed 
in some detail in chapter 11. 

Humor and Mirth 
139
 E.   Interfering Emotions 
 A husband and wife were sitting watching a TV program about psychology 
explaining the phenomenon of mixed emotions. The husband turned to his wife 
and said,  “ Honey that ’ s a bunch of crap. I bet you can ’ t tell me anything that will 
make me both happy and sad at the same time. ” She replied,  “ Out of all your 
friends, you have the biggest penis. ” 
 Humor is tragedy plus time. 
 — Mark Twain 
 Oddly enough, while mirth is a joy, contents that are funny are, much of 
the time, negatively valenced. After all, an experience of ﬁ rst-person mirth 
means our model of the world has let us down, and whenever our beliefs 
fail us there is a heightened likelihood that some disaster will befall us. 
Once again, comedy and tragedy have long been seen as two sides of the 
same coin, and this is why. Taking a third-person perspective on this kind 
of tragedy in humor is also what ties comedy so closely to  Schadenfreude —
 the joy in other people ’ s losses — and what makes the idea of superiority 
in humor so enticing to some theorists. 
 We sometimes say a joke is made  “ at his  expense. ” Since it didn ’ t cost 
the butt any money, why is the word  “ expense ” licensed in that common 
phrase? Some prizes are worth more than money, such as  “ social capital, ” 
the sort of standing that money can ’ t buy but that bankrolls our every 
social interaction. Typically, when a joke is at somebody ’ s (social) expense, 
they feel it immediately, and the cost is reckoned in emotional pain of one 
sort or another (such as embarrassment or humiliation), though this is not 
necessary. (Contrary to superiority theory, the  intent to  “ put down ” the 
butt of the joke is also not a necessary condition. It can just happen to be 
the case that, for the event in question to be expressed humorously at all, 
the butt of the joke needs to lose face at the same time. It also quite often 
happens that there is no  “ author ”  of the joke at all, and thus no intention 
to put someone down. An old man discovers himself doing a typically 
dumb old-man-type thing, and laughs heartily, looking forward to telling 
his friends what he did. When he does, he is not putting down his fellow 
oldsters.) 
 The butt of a joke may sometimes laugh the most, and in such cases we 
can be quite sure the laughter is  designed to minimize the social cost, to 
extract some kind of victory from the loss, by siding with the critics or at 

140 
Chapter 8
least disarming them with a buoyant attitude that expresses conﬁ dence. 
Note that the laughing butt need not realize that this is why he is laugh-
ing, and the laughter may even be genuine, Duchenne laughter; the 
 “ designer ”  of this proclivity may be natural selection or unconscious con-
ditioning. At the same time, we can appreciate that the amusement 
expressed is not unalloyed with displeasure (cf. public roasts). Whereas 
similarly valenced emotions usually enhance each other, oppositely 
valenced emotions appear to compete and inhibit one another (e.g., 
Solomon and Corbit 1974; Fredrickson and Levenson 1998; Fredrickson 
et al. 2000). If a negative passion is monopolizing the system, then positive 
passions are momentarily blocked from access. If the butt ’ s embarrassment 
is strong enough, then he cannot feel mirth, nor can one who feels 
empathy for the butt, and any laughter manifested will be non-Duchenne 
laughter. 
 Theorists working on the role of the passions in behavior often speak 
of a  “ currency of reward, ” supposedly a globally recognized resource for 
brokering the competition between the passions. Though  “ currency ”  is an 
imperfect metaphor (who gets paid? what do they want to buy with their 
money? and can they trade it for any other goods?), the idea of competi-
tion between the passions is astute — at any moment our behavior can only 
be directed by a few goals at a time, and our constant intrapersonal con-
ﬂ icts bear witness to this. (Should I eat the cheesecake or stay committed 
to my diet?) Mirth, as a passion in its own right that is part of that moti-
vational system, competes in the marketplace of reward just as every 
emotion does. 
 The common retrospective remark,  “ Well, it ’ s funny now, but at 
the time . . . ” reminds us that one ’ s perspective on a situation can 
modulate the detection of humor. In fact, we are, or can be, expert self-
manipulators of our perspectives, seeking and ﬁ nding the humorous way 
of recasting our memories, for instance, in order to salve our emotional 
injuries (see Greenspan 2000 for thoughts on similar emotional 
strategies). 
 Our personal techniques of perspective-shifting have been mirrored and 
ampliﬁ ed in the narrative arts. The ﬁ lmmaker and ﬁ lmwriter Jon Boorstin 
has identiﬁ ed three principal perspectives that have been discovered by 
Hollywood writers for the telling of stories through ﬁ lm — he calls them 
the  voyeur ’ s eye , the  vicarious eye , and the  visceral eye . Each of these perspec-
tives in ﬁ lmmaking, we think, is drawn from a natural perspective of the 
mind when viewing the world; and each has its effect on the perception 
of humor (cf. Ritchie 2006). 

Humor and Mirth 
141
 The voyeuristic perspective is the disengaged rational third-person point 
of view. From here no emotion is felt that could interfere with humor: 
 The voyeur ’ s eye is the mind ’ s eye, not the heart ’ s, the dispassionate observer, 
watching out of a kind of generic human curiosity. It is not only skeptical, it is 
easily bored. . . . I ’ m not talking about plumbing depths of character or living 
through the thrills of a lifetime but something simpler: watching events steadily 
unfold in rational, explainable sequence, an engrossing story that never violates 
our sense of logic. This is the armature on which a Hollywood movie hangs. 
(Boorstin 1990, p. 13) 
 This is the perspective taken when you watch  The Three Stooges or  Mr. Bean 
on television. You have no empathy for these characters — they are not your 
friends, and you do not feel their embarrassments, fears, or losses. This 
emotional disconnection is exactly why you can laugh at their antics and 
experiences — their mistakes do not matter to you. 
 (46)  Tragedy is when I cut my ﬁ nger. Comedy is when you walk into 
an open sewer and die. (Mel Brooks) 
 The vicarious perspective, on the other hand, is the third-person perspec-
tive in which you do have empathies and sympathies with the subject of 
the event. Boorstin says,  “ The vicarious eye puts our heart in the actor ’ s 
body: we feel what the actor feels, but we judge it for ourselves. . . . there 
is more at stake in the vicarious transaction than the voyeuristic one. We 
have invested part of ourselves ” (Boorstin 1990, p. 67). When a friend or 
loved one or a protagonist in a story with whom you identify makes a 
tremendously embarrassing blunder, the crowd may laugh, but far from 
joining the cruel audience, you only want to usher your loved one off the 
stage into protection. Imagine a good friend taking a public stumble: The 
situation may evoke humor for some onlookers, but your empathic posi-
tion puts you in the shoes of your friend, and you are overwhelmed with 
compassion, not mirth. When an antagonist in a televised skit slips on a 
banana peel, you are compelled to laugh, but when it is your own child, 
humor is the least prominent feeling. If the harm is not too big, this can 
sometimes be overcome and you feel compassion and mirth at the same 
time ( “ Oh, honey! Look what you did! ” ). This, Bergson says, requires  “ a 
momentary anaesthesia of the heart. ”  19  
19.   There is a category of puns that we call  groaners. Why do we groan instead of laughing? 
Well, sometimes we do both in a blended expression that might be described as a staccato sigh. 
The groan, on our view, is simply a response to the disappointment felt at the punster ’ s weak 

142 
Chapter 8
 Boorstin ’ s visceral perspective is the only ﬁ rst-person point of view, and 
it is much closer to the vicarious than it is to the voyeur ’ s perspective: One 
can never (save through dissociative drugs and rare neuropathology) have 
a lack of emotional involvement with one ’ s self:  “ The point here is not to 
feel what the character feels but to feel your own emotions, to have the 
experience yourself, directly ” (Boorstin 1990, p. 110). 
 When experiencing an event in person you are bound up in the effects 
of the situation, and evaluative emotions are very likely to result. It is only 
when you can divorce yourself from negative emotions in a situation that 
you can whole-heartedly laugh (Duchenne-style) at yourself — at your own 
mistake — in that situation. The most common method for such detach-
ment is through recollection: We laugh at ourselves in the situation only 
when we later recall it. That ’ s why  “ it ’ s funny now, but it wasn ’ t funny at 
the time. ” What was it at the time? More often than not, it was embar-
rassing, humiliating, concerning, unnecessarily costly (in time or another 
resource), terrifying, or tragic.  20   But, now, in reminiscing, the reality of the 
situation is gone; it is no longer the visceral perspective that you are taking 
but, instead, a third-person voyeur ’ s perspective, even on an event that 
was part of your own life. 
 (47)  An Australian man won the 26th Annual Empire State Building 
Run-up Tuesday taking just 9 and a half minutes to run up the 86 ﬂ oors 
to the observation deck. Nobody was more surprised than the handyman 
caught masturbating on the 73rd ﬂ oor stairwell. (Jimmy Fallon,  Saturday 
Night Live , February 8, 2003, as cited in Jung 2003). 
 While the empathetic asymmetry of these three perspectives accounts 
for some of the difference between ﬁ rst- and third-person humor, much 
more of the difference is accounted for by cognitive asymmetry, discussed 
in the next chapter. 
 
 
 
 
level of creativity or disappointment with their use of some disagreeable content in the creation 
of the pun. Such disappointment can be simultaneous with the mirth — it may not have been 
tasteful or particularly creative, but it did lead us down a brief garden path. There may also 
simply be no mirth, in which case there is just a groan or perhaps a groan mixed with non-
Duchenne laughter.
20.   Occasionally mirth may even be derailed by an overwhelmingly more powerful  positive 
emotion — if the recognition of the mistake you made brings to light a truth that is of extreme 
importance, your delight at that may overrun your humor.

 9  
  Higher-Order Humor 
 A.   The Intentional Stance 
 A man tells his doctor that his wife hasn ’ t had sex with him for six months. The 
doctor asks the man to send his wife in so he can talk to her. So the wife comes 
into the doctor ’ s ofﬁ ce and the doc asks her why she doesn ’ t want to have sex 
with her husband anymore. 
 The wife tells him,  “ For the past six months, every morning I take a cab to 
work. I don ’ t have any money so the cab driver asks me,  ‘ So are you going to pay 
today or what? ’  so I take a  ‘ or what. ’  When I get to work I ’ m late so the boss asks 
me,  ‘ So are we going to write this down in the book or what? ’  so I take a  ‘ or what. ’  
Back home again I take the cab and again I don ’ t have any money so the cab 
driver asks me again,  ‘ So are you going to pay this time or what? ’  so again I take 
a  ‘ or what. ’  So you see doc when I get home I ’ m all tired out, and I don ’ t want 
it anymore. ” 
 The doctor thinks for a second and then turns to the wife and says,  “ So are 
we going to tell your husband or what? ” 
 After the birth of ﬁ rst-person humor, the most populous and important 
kingdom to evolve in the tree of humor is the wide variety of specimens 
that invoke the  intentional stance (Dennett 1971, 1987), the tactic of attrib-
uting beliefs, desires, and other mental states and actions to  other minds —
 the minds of other people, but also animals, computers, magic lamps, 
talking choochoo trains and the like. This kingdom so dominates our 
standard vision of humor that for some theorists, the varieties that lie 
outside it get ignored altogether, or are deemed not really humor at all. 
This is reminiscent of the obliviousness to bacterial life — the original form 
of life, after all — by many natural historians and biologists until quite 
recent times. As recently as 1942 the prominent biologist Julian Huxley 
could opine that bacteria had no genes!  1   Living things that are visible to 

144 
Chapter 9
the naked eye are no doubt more interesting, at least to the lay person, 
than mere bacteria, and jokes that involve other people and their minds 
are no doubt more interesting to most consumers of humor than puns; 
but it is important to recognize these species as offspring, dependent on 
basic humor for their very existence. 
 Adoption of the intentional stance gives us robust predictive power over 
otherwise unfathomably complex entities. When we confront phenomena 
that cannot readily be understood in terms of their conformity to physical 
law or simple regularity (predicting from the physical stance) or by making 
assumptions about their design (adopting the design stance), the inten-
tional stance is an option that can provide dramatic predictive leverage, 
by hypothesizing (or imagining) the beliefs and desires of these entities 
considered as rational agents, thereby allowing us to predict their behavior. 
The intentional stance is also known in the literature of psychology as 
 “ theory of mind, ” a term that is misleading, but usually harmlessly so. (It 
is misleading since it invites us to see the intentional stance as invoking 
myriads of theorems or generalizations inductively gleaned from experi-
ence, a cognitively sophisticated activity that need not be imputed to those 
who are adept at this normal kind of mind-reading via the interpretation 
of behavior. It doesn ’ t take much of a  “ theory ”  to deduce that the dog 
whining at the door wants to go outside to relieve itself and believes that 
by whining it is alerting a cooperative door-opener to this fact.) 
 Using the intentional stance is how we manage our social lives, by 
modeling what other people believe. We assume other minds use processes 
similar to our own, and we automatically attempt to build a model of 
the knowledge that they embody. Doing so in a separate mental space 
allows us to keep that model distinct from our own knowledge. So, at any 
time, we may have a number of active mental spaces, corresponding not 
just to our model of our own perceptual world, but also to recursive models 
of other people ’ s models of the world, and their models of our model of 
the world.  2 The doctor, in the joke above, could only have thought to say 
1.   In  Evolution: The Modern Synthesis :  “ They have no genes in the sense of accurately quantized 
portions of hereditary substances; and therefore they have no need for accurate division of the 
genetic system which is accomplished by mitosis ” (Huxley 1942, p. 131).
2.   The recursive nature does not open us up to the need for possibly inﬁ nite mental spaces to 
be created. There is certainly a (fairly shallow) depth limit to the recursion. You can discover 
this for yourself by constructing longer and longer sentences of the form  “ I thought that you 
thought that I thought that you . . . ” until the point (which occurs after only a few layers)

Higher-Order Humor 
145
 “ so are we going to tell your husband, or what? ” if he ’ d had a well-
structured recursive model of both the husband ’ s and wife ’ s beliefs 
and their beliefs about each other ’ s beliefs. None of us could survive 
the modern social world without using the intentional stance to make 
predictions. 
 So, how does this apply to humor? The use of the intentional stance to 
see situations from more than one perspective allows us to have more than 
one mental space relevant to each situation. The more mental spaces we 
create, the more places there are for humor to happen. We may ﬁ nd things 
funny either if they are invalidated mental spaces in our own knowledge 
representations or if we recognize that they are invalidated mental spaces 
for another entity ’ s knowledge representation. This model supports the 
amusement we feel when we deceive someone in play, for instance, a 
particularly primitive form of deliberate humor; examples would be hiding 
around a corner to scare a person, or moving something and watching 
them look for it. Some foreshadowings of this primitive form of humor 
can be discerned in the play behavior of chimpanzees, but it is not easy 
to distinguish observation from anthropomorphic overinterpretation here. 
Behaviors that we would unhesitatingly interpret as higher-order inten-
tional stance explorations if observed in human children, and ﬁ nd con-
ﬁ rmed in their verbal responses to questions, may get demoted to less 
elaborate forms of interaction in the case of chimpanzees. The literature 
on higher-order intentional states in chimpanzees and other primates 
has more controversy and dashed hopes than conﬁ rmation. And, though 
there recently have been some partial reassurances for chimpanzee inten-
tionality (e.g., Call and Tomasello 2008), it is still notable that many of 
the pratfalls taken by caged chimps — episodes that precipitate intense 
laughter from human onlookers — don ’ t appear to provoke any marked 
interest whatsoever in their conspeciﬁ cs (Daniel Povinelli, personal 
communication, 2010). 
at which the sentence ’ s actual meaning is incomprehensible without resort to the sort of analysis 
that requires paper and pencil. The bafﬂ ement induced by such sentences is not an accurate 
measure of our prowess, however, since it is to some degree an artifact of the effort to render 
our basic understanding  explicit . Watching a subtle comedy of manners, we may break into 
effortless laughter, and we wouldn ’ t laugh if we didn ’ t tacitly appreciate that, for instance, she 
didn ’ t expect him to realize that her familiarity with the facts betrayed her intention to discover 
the secret behind his reticence regarding his whereabouts on the aforesaid evening! But it might 
take us quite an effort to explain all this to an outsider.

146 
Chapter 9
 We can ﬁ nd anticipatory humor in that knowing another person has 
an incongruity, and will soon resolve it. We are caused to laugh when an 
arrogant or pompous person slips on a banana peel because we see that 
his models of both physical and social reality were just corrected (harshly) 
by a new perception. We create a mental space in this case, which we may 
call the person ’ s personal perspective, in which his excessive overconﬁ -
dence (which we perceive as pompousness) may be central and an expecta-
tion of having control over the physical world is also active. The fall 
provides simultaneous information to the man that his erstwhile sense of 
dignity is false as well as his understanding of the immediate physical 
world. These data together destroy a larger set of expectations in the 
mental space than either would have alone — making it funnier than if 
either one or the other was presented on its own. And notice how the 
humor would wax or wane as we alter these elements in his perspective. 
If he is manifestly forlorn or self-deprecating, or walking fearfully and 
vigilantly, his tumble will not evoke mirth.  3 Charlie Chaplin recognized 
that with the right timing and emphasis we might be made to laugh even 
harder at a ﬁ lm in which the pompous person does  not slip on the banana 
peel when we had been expecting him to do so — an instance of metahu-
mor in which it is a mistaken anticipation in our own mental space that 
makes us laugh. 
 It starts with the guy walking, cuts to the peel, cuts to a wide shot of the guy 
approaching the peel, back to the peel, and then, when his foot is about to hit 
the peel, he steps over it — only to fall in an open manhole. (Bloom 2010, p. 197) 
 A gullible,  “ clueless ”  person gliding through the world can be hilarious 
without any mishaps befalling them if we anticipators have all our expecta-
tions about  their soon-to-be-dashed expectations elegantly dashed. The 
classic and most extreme example of this is the nearsighted Mr. Magoo, 
3.   Ramachandran and Blakeslee (1998) give an explanation of this example under the  “ false 
alarm ”  theory (a derivative of I-R theory) indicating that we laugh because we want to indicate 
that while it looks at ﬁ rst like something bad has occurred, it ’ s actually OK (in the case that the 
man is not hurt). They say that if we knew the man were hurt, we would not laugh because the 
false alarm is actually a real alarm and we are concerned. We think that the absence of laughter 
in the case when he is hurt has a different explanation. The humor remains, but if the man is 
hurt, we have conﬂ icting emotions, and the sympathy or empathy in us overwhelms the humor. 
This explains the occasional instance when something like this happens and we ﬁ nd ourselves 
having to say  “ I shouldn ’ t be laughing, but . . . ” . In this case it is the humor that overwhelms the 
sympathy. See more on conﬂ icting emotions in the next section.

Higher-Order Humor 
147
where the ongoing joke is that Magoo is radically misinformed about his 
surroundings but manages, by preposterous series of coincidences, to avoid 
calamity. It is no accident that Magoo has the habit of muttering, talking 
out loud to himself as he blunders through life; since we adopt the inten-
tional stance, as always, we would never attribute to him these wildly false 
beliefs if we hadn ’ t heard them from his own lips, since his nonverbal 
behavior ﬁ ts the environmental facts quite felicitously. A similar comic 
character, with a broader array of comic styles than Mr. Magoo, is Rowan 
Atkinson ’ s character Mr. Bean. 
 The evolution of third-person humor out of basic, ﬁ rst-person 
humor creates a new emotional dimension for mirth. It is here — and 
only here — that the superiority theory ﬁ nds its application, for instance. 
As we have seen, anticipation-generation is a risky business, and the 
discovery and repair of our slips is the task for which we are rewarded in 
basic humor. Each episode adds a smidgen to our self-knowledge, so we 
are only too aware of our own proclivities to err in these ways. This 
creates a mild anxiety or insecurity, which third-person humor evolved 
to alleviate: Others, we see, are in the same boat, just as vulnerable to 
betrayal by covert entry inferences as we are,  but we are better at it than 
they are! The involuntary habit of comparing oneself to others, sizing 
up the competition, is a deeply engrained disposition that we share 
with animals as distant on the phylogenetic tree as ﬁ sh, and the outcome 
of any such comparison is a valenced emotion, somewhere on the scale 
between anxiety or fear —  uh-oh, time to retreat! —  through the reassuring —
 I ’ m OK; you ’ re OK  — to the triumphant — sucker! The self-congratulatory 
ﬂ avor of all third-person humor is due to the addition of the positive 
emotional valence generated by comparing self to other and coming out 
ahead. And the greater the disparity, on at least two dimensions, the greater 
the pleasure: not just on the idiocy scale — how stupid can you be? — but 
also on the scale of the severity or intensity of the consequences — now 
look what you ’ ve done! When consequences are negligible, the humor is 
faint to nonexistent. Here we see a huge difference between ﬁ rst-person 
humor and third-person humor: A dire immediate consequence always 
squelches ﬁ rst-person humor entirely, but can enhance third-person 
humor. 
 Mental spaces spawn mental spaces which spawn further mental spaces. 
Though not all of these spaces are related to each other, they all reside in 
a context of background knowledge and perception from the world. 
Because of this semihierarchical structure, our own knowledge can dash a 

148 
Chapter 9
character ’ s beliefs  without the character being aware of it. That is, global 
information that the audience knows or learns or somehow activates may 
be applied to any mental spaces — even those used to model others ’  beliefs. 
In this way, something the audience knows, but that a character does not 
know, can still invalidate something that the character believes. Here ’ s a 
simple example of this kind of humor in a joke: 
 (48)  She ’ s so blonde she spent an hour looking at a can of orange juice 
because it said  “ concentrate. ”  
 We set up a mental space that mimics the reality for the character in the 
narrative. The space contains her beliefs and inferences, including her 
conclusion that she should be concentrating on the can. Our own recol-
lection that juice cans say  “ concentrate ”  not as a command but as a 
description of contents is the premise that invalidates the space and engen-
ders the humor (note that if the audience didn ’ t know this they couldn ’ t 
ﬁ nd the joke funny). She need never get this information — and, indeed, 
does not — but we ’ re already laughing. Our own knowledge, not our expec-
tation of her knowledge, invalidates the belief in the mental space we 
constructed to contain her thoughts. This kind of asymmetry is explored 
in more detail in the next section. 
 B.   The Difference between the First Person and the Third Person 
 I don ’ t have a girlfriend. But I do know a woman who ’ d be mad at me for saying 
that. 
 — Mitch Hedberg 
 Perspective matters. The model we gave of humor in chapters 7 and 8 was 
egocentric but  heterophenomenological (Dennett 1991). It focused on the 
reasoning processes of comprehension inside the mind of a subject  from 
the subject ’ s ﬁ rst-person perspective , the kinds of thoughts one could have 
and the kinds of mistakes one could make from that perspective, and to 
do so it had to assume, as a primary source of data, subjects ’  ﬁ rst-person 
access to the contents of their own conscious minds, which is  “ direct ” and 
voluminous, however problematic. 
 While the intentional stance allows us to conceive of things that others 
believe, we must realize that such conceptions are simulative, not com-
pletely faithful representations of the contents of another mind. We do 
our best to represent the thoughts of our fellow humans, but without 
access to their experiential histories we can only approximate their beliefs 

Higher-Order Humor 
149
based on our own historical knowledge and a number of heuristics. Under-
standing the cognitive basis of our model helps us understand how this 
asymmetry plays out in a divergence between these kinds of humor. In the 
ﬁ rst person, recall, humor requires a leap in an active mental space that 
leads to a committed false belief, which is then detected. In the simulated 
third person, these requirements all still exist, but they are, perforce, 
relaxed. The belief must  appear to be active, committed, and false, and we 
must  guess that it was heuristic-inferentially derived. Since we can ’ t know 
whether the belief actually exists in the other person ’ s mind, nor do we 
have access to the knowledge context of their semantic construction pro-
cesses, we can never fully ascertain whether there was a faulty heuristic 
leap. We can only assume there was and deduce that the belief is not true 
within the context of our own knowledge. 
 Let ’ s see a bit of the internal workings of a third-person joke to show 
how these differ from the earlier examples: 
 (49)  An Aggie saw a classiﬁ ed ad for a cheap Caribbean cruise. He 
signed up and got on the boat, noticing that most of the other 
passengers were Aggies as well. As soon as the boat left the dock, the 
passengers were turned into prisoners and made to row. They were 
chained to the oars, and whipped by the master. The Aggie said  “ This 
guy seems unnecessarily cruel, ” and another Aggie replied,  “ He ’ s bad but 
he ’ s ten times nicer than the one we had last time. ” 
 Notice that the humor is not in the facts of the punch line — that the 
Aggie thinks the whip-master is ten times nicer this time. It lies in a further 
thought that the text doesn ’ t make explicit — a chain of reasoning leading 
to a belief, which we attribute to the responding Aggie. In particular, when 
the punch line refers to the previous experience we realize that after one 
bad experience, the Aggie either somehow assumed it wouldn ’ t happen 
a second time or thinks that this is what a cruise is supposed to be like. 
Either seems like an unreasonable thing to assume, but no other possible 
reason comes to the audience ’ s mind for his going a second time — so 
we simultaneously attribute one of these beliefs to him and realize it 
is false. (And note in passing that if we vary the joke to diminish the 
severity of the consequences, it loses most of its mirth: Suppose our 
Aggie discovers merely that the waiter in the dining room is shockingly 
imperious and rude to the passengers. Almost no humor would remain in 
the second Aggie ’ s response.) Compare this with ﬁ rst-person humor in 
which the belief that is false is not attributed but discovered in one ’ s 
own mind: 

150 
Chapter 9
 (50)  I want to die peacefully in my sleep like my father, not screaming 
in terror like his passengers. (Bob Monkhouse, as cited in Carr and 
Greaves 2006, p. 265) 
 Here, like the examples in the previous chapter, we ourselves are carefully 
led to the presumption that the grandfather is in his bed dying of old age, 
before the scene suddenly becomes one of a highway accident. With the 
difference in perspectival mechanisms in mind, let ’ s have a look at some 
situations where only perspective makes for humor differences. 
 We may laugh at someone for what appears to be a slip of reasoning 
only to learn from her that we underestimated the situation. What we 
found humorous, she found rational. We may, in fact, laugh again when 
we discover that the actual fault was in our own mental space. These are 
cases where the asymmetry of access plays a decisive role in creating the 
humor. Such an episode, amusing to the participants, may then be further 
recounted, as a joke: 
 Jane and Joe have pulled over to the side of a country road with a ﬂ at 
tire in her car. Joe glances at the spare tire as he grabs the tire iron and 
jack from the trunk. They get the popped tire off the car, and Jane says, 
 “ Come on, let ’ s go! ” as she starts rolling it down the road. Joe laughs 
and says,  “ Hey, where are you going? We have a spare! ” to which Jane 
responds,  “ No we don ’ t. That one ’ s ﬂ at too! ”  
 In this rather mundane little story, Joe laughed at Jane because when she 
started rolling the tire down the road, he attributed to her the belief that 
there was no spare. In fact that was the belief that she had, yet it was not 
funny from her perspective because it was true. Why did Joe laugh? 
Because,  in his intentional model , the Jane character had mistakenly 
reasoned that they needed to go to a shop. 
 In general, third-person humor may happen  “ in the wild ” (in contrast 
to being contrived in a composed joke) more often than ﬁ rst-person humor 
because the process of  “ ﬁ nding ” a false belief is easier in the third person: 
We may simply  assume a belief in the other person whether they believed 
it or not.  4 The same humor won ’ t happen in the purely ﬁ rst-person case 
because of our own more intimate access to what we are actually thinking. 
4.   You might expect the fact that there are more third persons (billions) out there than selves 
(1) would contribute to why there is more third-person than ﬁ rst-person humor. We suspect 
this is not the reason — though there are more perspectives to be taken, and we do commonly 
take them, the majority of our thoughts are from our own perspective.

Higher-Order Humor 
151
In third-person cases, again, it is the inherent risk of adopting the 
intentional stance and  projecting beliefs that creates the scope for amusing 
errors to arise. 
 For instance, if you are carefully wading across a river and suddenly slip 
and fall, you probably won ’ t ﬁ nd it funny. But if I am wading across the 
same river, you have no knowledge of just how careful I was being when 
I slip and fall. So, even if I was being  more cautious than you, if you don ’ t 
assume that caution (because you cannot detect it), you may still laugh at 
me, attributing my fall to overzealousness or overconﬁ dence in which I 
hubristically assumed the task was easier than it proved to be. 
 In both ﬁ rst- and third-person humor, a simplifying assumption pro-
vides a false belief which we then discover, but there are many ways in 
which the perspectival asymmetry can manifest. There are cases of  biper-
sonal humor in which an agent in the situation and the humor compre-
hender are led down simultaneous garden paths. In these cases, the 
third-person humor takes the same form as the ﬁ rst-person humor, but 
only because it stands alongside the ﬁ rst-person humor. In the following 
story we comprehenders are in the same position as the deceptive little 
girl ’ s mother:  
 (51)  A little girl asked her mother for a dollar to give to an old lady in 
the park. Her mother was touched by the child ’ s kindness and gave her 
the money. 
 “ There you are, my dear, ” said the mother.  “ But, tell me, isn ’ t the 
lady able to work anymore? ” 
 “ Oh yes, ” came the reply.  “ She sells candy. ” 
 Bipersonal humor is to be distinguished from  dual-perspective (or multi-
perspective, multipersonal) humor in which the two or more perspectives 
fail on different beliefs, albeit at the same time. For example:  
 (52)  Taking his seat in his chamber, the judge faced the opposing 
lawyers.  “ I have been presented by both of you with a bribe, ” the 
judge began. Both lawyers squirmed uncomfortably.  “ You, Attorney 
Leoni, gave me $15,000. And you, Attorney Campos, gave me 
$10,000. ” 
 The judge reached in his pocket and pulled out a check, which he 
handed to Leoni.  “ Now, then, I ’ m returning $5,000, and we are going to 
decide this case solely on its merits. ” 
 Once again trying our readers ’  patience, let us take the trouble to 
explain the joke. The ﬁ rst-person belief set up at ﬁ rst is that the judge is 

152 
Chapter 9
reprimanding the lawyers for engaging in bribery at all. From the way he 
begins the conversation and the way the lawyers squirm, we expect the 
judge to be morally immune to this corruption. This belief is proven 
unwarranted, however, when the judge states the punch line. At the same 
time, both of the lawyers ’  beliefs that their payments to the judge would 
garner them some advantage in the case are destroyed by the judge ’ s 
equalization of the situation. 
 Another effect of this asymmetry is that it allows us to turn the base 
metal of our own misfortunes or near-misses into the gold of humor, in 
 practical jokes . When we endure some rather uncomical mishap, the experi-
ence may inspire us to realize that a reprise of the incident, with somebody 
else as the victim, might be pretty amusing to watch. Although we may 
not have had a mistaken commitment ourselves, we can try to arrange for 
the same event to happen entertainingly to someone else; our newfound 
knowledge will help us attribute to them a false inferential belief, with 
potentially delicious — to us — results. A prankster who discovers that there 
is wet paint on a handrail may not ﬁ nd his own painted hand humorous, 
but removing the wet-paint signs, he might happily anticipate his victims 
making the same mistake. When a child playing chase slips in a patch of 
mud, she may, with sly intention, then lead her chaser across the same 
path in the next round, laughing this time because her own knowledge 
allows the attribution of a false commitment, even if the false commitment 
did not really happen (if the chaser exercised exemplary epistemic caution 
about traction and ground conditions but slipped nevertheless).  5 
 One more example of asymmetrical humor worth mentioning is the 
curious delight people take in watching serious mishaps. Week after week, 
the television program  America ’ s Funniest Home Videos shows a parade of 
people getting hit in the crotch by errant baseballs, golf balls, and other 
ﬂ ying objects, kicking mules, and — most excruciating of all — by their own 
bicycle crossbars as they crash after attempting some lunatic stunt. Ouch! 
We wince and guffaw at the same time. Why? Why are these painful 
vignettes — and dozens of others showing people felled by collapsing 
furniture and buildings — amusing? Is it Schadenfreude, plain and simple? 
5.   In Jacques Tati ’ s masterpiece,  Mister Hulot ’ s Holiday , some boys hiding at the top of a bluff 
overlooking the town watch pedestrians walking along the sidewalk. Every now and then one 
of them whistles sharply, and the pedestrians look around, involuntarily and automatically 
seeking to locate the whistler. What ’ s going on? Eventually, on about the fourth try, a whistle 
succeeds in luring a man to look up — and crash headlong into the lamppost. Bong! Victory for 
the boy whose whistle was so perfectly timed.

Higher-Order Humor 
153
No, it is more interesting than that, even though the violence we laugh at 
can be appalling. One example that comes to mind is a video of a toddler 
who wanders into a break-dancing circle and gets kicked in the head by a 
dancer who never saw the child. Another example is a video in which a 
man walks out of a pizza restaurant, begins to cross the street and gets hit 
by a speeding car that apparently kills him. (The pizza man video is a safety 
advertisement, achieved by special effects — we fervently hope — but it cer-
tainly looks realistic and that ’ s what counts here.) Getting hit by a car or 
a dancer is deﬁ nitely not funny in the ﬁ rst person. And while we ’ d all  like 
to say that it ’ s not even funny in the third person, the phenomenon of 
many people laughing at these videos is undeniable. We would argue that 
these laughers are not necessarily cruel or sadistic people, but that they 
laugh because they attribute mistaken assumptions to the participants 
portrayed — and note that the dancer who kicks the child is as much a 
victim as the child, for she must confront the guilt of what she has done, 
thanks to her too-casual assumption that the dance ﬂ oor was cleared for 
action. We can dial down the humor potential by adjusting these variables: 
If the child is not a toddler but a crawling baby, too young to have  any 
sense of caution, or if the man is pushed into the path of the speeding car, 
the humor disappears. Perhaps the Boorstinian voyeuristic perspective is 
in play here, so that empathy is close to zero, but the winces and groans 
that accompany the laughter suggest otherwise. Part of the framing that 
contributes to the potential for laughter when watching  America ’ s Funniest 
Home Videos is the very fact that what we are watching is a home video. 
This implies that the people in the scene are almost always self-consciously 
performing — even  showing off , especially in the failed stunt videos — and 
hence are ripe candidates for the attribution of foolhardy assumptions. 
 In third-person humor, we make an attribution of an overcommitted 
belief in another ’ s mind. Having made such an attribution in the past 
doesn ’ t stop us from making it again when we see the character behave 
the same way. That is, in repeating the joke, we can reexperience the 
humor. This differs from ﬁ rst-person humor in which we  may learn from 
our own mistakes and predict them to avoid making them again. Notice 
that bipersonal or multiperspective humor can have both effects during a 
repeat hearing — the ﬁ rst-person humor may be drained by prediction, 
while the third-person attribution still occurs — and in these cases the joke 
is still funny, but not quite  as funny as the ﬁ rst time we heard it. In general, 
this consequence of our model offers a ﬁ ne explanation of why puns (typi-
cally ﬁ rst person) are not very funny on repeat occurrences and why  Monty 

154 
Chapter 9
Python and the Holy Grail , watched twelve times in a weekend, can still be 
(almost) as funny the last time as it was the ﬁ rst. 
 Finally, the perspectival asymmetry leaves us with a new question: If 
ﬁ rst-person humor encourages the maintenance of epistemic integrity, 
what beneﬁ t, if any, does third-person humor confer? One answer may 
be that it does not confer any beneﬁ t at all. It could be an evolutionary 
spandrel, an accidental by-product of the fact that both ﬁ rst-person 
humor and the intentional stance are useful traits in their own rights, 
which, in combination, happen to produce third-person humor. But 
even if this is the original source of third-person humor, it might still be 
opportunistically exapted for various purposes, and there are several 
good candidates. The ﬁ rst, and most obvious, is that third-person humor 
appreciation evolved to enhance cultural transmission of valuable infor-
mation. At the minimum, helping your compatriots discover mistakes in 
their mental models can be used as currency in a kind of reciprocal 
altruism (Trivers 1971). That is, by doing so you may be able to count 
on them doing the same for you in the future, creating an implicit cog-
nitive collusion that forms a kind of distributed or extended cognition 
(Hutchins 1995a; Clark and Chalmers 1998) in which we literally help 
each other to think. Not to mention that pointing out your colleagues ’  
mental missteps before they behave on them may also save the whole 
party, including yourself, from possible injurious consequences. Think of 
the classic  “ wait don ’ t! ”  situation in which you see a friend about to 
light a cigarette at the gas station, swiftly imagine the consequence and 
interrupt him. Such an automatic and involuntary expectation can be 
humorous . . . and lifesaving. 
 A more extended version of this is the transmission of myths and tales 
for pedagogy. Stories, whether sad, shocking, funny, or just bland, and 
whether truth or ﬁ ction, convey much valuable information to use in 
enlarging and updating our world knowledge, our JITSA dispositions. Even 
before Aesop composed or compiled his fables, people appreciated that an 
unforgettable tale, with a  “ moral, ”  is an excellent vehicle for passing on 
acquired wisdom (Dennett 1996a). The reason we so seldom paint our-
selves into the corner or saw off the limb we are sitting on is because we 
have (often) heard tales of these mishaps, and their traces lie dormant but 
easily awakened in our long-term memory. A treasury of tales is salted away 
in long-term memory, in neural structures hungry for action ( “ Me, me! I 
want to  ‘ happen ’  now! ” yells the Boy who Cried Wolf, in competition with 
Complacent Frog in the pot of slowly heating water, and the Grasshopper 
and the Ant and a host of others). These are valuable prosthetic devices, 

Higher-Order Humor 
155
worthy (and more realistic and natural) versions of Minsky ’ s frames and 
Schank ’ s scripts.  6   A tale that provokes mirth — or fright, or some other 
strong emotion — is more unforgettable than a bland tale, and hence a 
more robust transmission vehicle. If a disposition to share stories has 
evolved, it is most likely by cultural evolution, not genetic evolution, 
though there might be Baldwin effects that somehow focused or otherwise 
enhanced our neural machinery for sending, receiving, composing, and 
comprehending narratives, as well as whetting our appetite for them. 
 C.   Anthropomorphism and Anthropocentrism 
 The chicken and the egg are lying in bed and the chicken is smiling and smoking 
a cigarette and the egg is upset. The egg mutters to herself,  “ Well, I guess we 
answered THAT question. . . . ” 
 
 Man is the only animal that chews its ice cubes. 
 — Oring (2003) 
 We have already mentioned Bergson ’ s observation that more important 
than the fact that only people ﬁ nd things funny is the fact that the only 
things found to be funny are people. He gave the following example:  “ You 
may laugh at a hat, but what you are making fun of, in this case, is not 
the piece of felt or straw, but the shape that men have given it, the human 
caprice whose mold it has assumed ” (Bergson 1911, p. 3). What, then, 
about the human is funny? 
 As our model tells us, what is central to all instances of humor is the 
discovery of a locally inconsistent commitment in a mental space, and this 
phenomenon occurs only in minds like ours, so far as we know. There must 
be an intentional agent whose perspective is required for the humor to 
exist. An informal review of the jokes we know discovers no exceptions, 
and we challenge the reader to supply amusing counterexamples. Jokes or 
witticisms that do not contain either familiar intelligent entities — people 
or Martians or anthropomorphized agents (such as a talking egg or chicken), 
always involve the direct perception of the obliteration of a mental space 
created within the audience ’ s frame of reference. Try to compose a joke 
involving two oysters and see that there is absolutely nowhere to go unless 
you can get the oysters talking to each other, or trying to deceive each 
6.   In Schank ’ s later work,  Tell Me a Story: A New Look at Real and Artiﬁ cial Intelligence (1991), he 
develops the idea that the principal role of stories is as constant reminders of the lessons of 
experience, one ’ s own and others ’ .

156 
Chapter 9
other nonverbally, or otherwise acting like two tiny people dressed up in 
hard shells. With inanimate entities it is even more obvious:  “ Did you hear 
the one about the daisy growing next to a rock, when a cloud ﬂ oated by. 
. . . ” Now what? 
 This fruitless exercise suggests strongly that any joke about any subject 
must necessarily anthropomorphize: There can only be a ridiculous rock, 
a hilarious daisy, or a preposterous cloud if these objects are imaginatively 
endowed with human characteristics such as vanity or laziness and some 
capacity to perceive their circumstances — or else perhaps if they belong to 
somebody (Mount Olympus, home of the gods, portrayed as a molehill, 
for instance). Thus  “ impersonal ”  humor — such as puns and other word-
play — is actually  ﬁ rst -personal humor: The audience ’ s own mind is the 
arena in which the mental-space error is encountered. It is we ourselves 
whose anticipations, whose jumps to conclusions, are subsequently falsi-
ﬁ ed. So in ﬁ rst-person (impersonal) humor, in which the audience is also 
tacitly the subject, the subject must  “ get it ” for humor to occur. Not so 
when audience and subject are distinct. 
 Now we have a basic model that reveals the underlying structure of all 
humor. And we have shown how this structure can serve as the launching 
platform for the human capacity to create additional mental spaces allow-
ing for models of ﬁ ctions as well as models of intentional agents ’  minds. 
These extensions to our cognitive capabilities create, in both cases, a much 
broader range of circumstances for us to ﬁ nd humorous. These higher-
order varieties of humorous stimuli are the forms that attract most of the 
attention in the modern humor environment, probably because as we 
adults grow more sophisticated, we become too habituated to the more 
primitive forms of humor — childish humor — to take pleasure in them.  7 
There are also forms of humor that don ’ t readily fall under the descriptions 
we ’ ve given so far, and we will deal with them in due course. The variety 
of humorous contents mirrors the variety of thought, and the model is 
open-ended in one sense: As new topics or new modes (habits, techniques) 
of thought arise, they may extend both the domain and the processes of 
humor construction and appreciation. Some of these potential mecha-
nisms are explored in the next chapter by way of example, though it would 
be misguided to try to classify them all exhaustively. We know that our 
7.   One can see a similar arms race, and subsequent habituation curve, in pornography. What 
will arouse the relatively innocent pubescent teenager will be too bland by far for the jaundiced 
tastes of the aging Lothario, whose persistent seeking after ever spicier fare supports whole 
industries producing exotic erotica.

Higher-Order Humor 
157
creative minds, especially those of our comedians (and our children, who 
are always restless pioneers), are constantly trying to ﬁ nd novel ways of 
provoking the sense of humor in each other. Just as with genres of music, 
it is possible that entirely new types of humor may be invented at any 
time. While humans will use whatever cognitive tools they can get their 
hands on to engineer situations that will make each other laugh, those 
engineered situations are always sophisticated logical mechanisms that 
somehow cause a concealed false belief to become apparent. 
 D.   Intentional Stance Jokes 
 I can analyze any joke you bring me, if you will leave it overnight — for the task 
requires reﬂ ection — and give you in the morning the chemical formula upon 
which it is composed. 
 — Eastman (1936) 
 Eastman was bold, but at the same time he was careful when he said that 
a single joke may take all night to reﬂ ect upon. The fact that gifted  “ intui-
tive ” comedians create jokes apparently effortlessly, even on the ﬂ y in witty 
ripostes, conceals the fact that many conditions must be met, many con-
straints satisﬁ ed. The sometimes tedious processes of deconstructing a joke, 
and providing an inventory of its working parts, is not simply the inverse 
of the process of constructing the joke in the ﬁ rst place, so it would be a 
mistake to imagine that comedians diligently follow some recipe involving 
these ingredients when creating humor, just as it would be a mistake to 
imagine that jazz musicians compose their solos by deliberately invoking 
the structures and patterns that retrospective analysis reveals. We see some 
traces of an analytic mode of construction in the deliberate  editing of jokes, 
making them more streamlined, punching up the punchline by changing 
the word order, adding a beat here, a sly misdirecting digression there; but 
this is, in effect,  “ postproduction ”  reﬁ nement — arrangement, not composi-
tion, to continue the musical parallel. Depending on whether the humor 
is from the ﬁ rst- or third-person point of view, or both, an analysis must 
assure: 
 •  that long-term memory beliefs are distinguished from working-memory 
beliefs; 
 •  that, even if something is a working-memory belief, it still is active, or 
has been reactivated before the moment of d é nouement; 
 •  that the belief was not simply the result of misperception, misremember-
ing, or just plain forgetting, but rather the result of a faulty heuristic leap; 

158 
Chapter 9
 •  that there is an epistemic commitment to the belief, which is not simply 
assumed to be probable; 
 •  that this is all done within the framework of the intentional stance — that 
is, that the analyses are all done from the audience ’ s point of view as well 
as from the points of view of the audience ’ s recursively  8 constructed 
intentional-stance models of other agents. These analyses may also need 
to account for varying expectations or estimations by agents of other 
agents ’  degree of epistemic caution. And, 
 •  ﬁ nally (remembering that we don ’ t all ﬁ nd the same things funny), that 
we have an accurate inventory of the shared world knowledge that must 
be available to activate the assumptions that generate the covert errors, 
both by the audience and by any agents depicted in the episode. 
 It sounds complicated, but remember: A joke has a very demanding job: 
it must enter the brain and gently trigger just the right activations, in the 
right order, with the right timing, and the right relative emphasis, and it 
must ﬁ nd in that brain all and  only  9   the content resources it needs to do 
its job. As you ’ ll see in the next chapter, these factors play a much more 
detailed role in the analysis of nonjoke humor (and episodes of nonhumor 
that seem at ﬁ rst to meet the conditions). Jokes are, comparatively, rather 
easy to analyze. Though they are just a small subset of humorous stimuli 
and events, they make for compact, relatively  “ portable ” objects of analy-
sis. A joke is a carefully engineered humor-elicitation package, but credit 
for the R & D may not be assignable to any intelligent designer; it may have 
evolved by differential replication of variations on a story, with only the 
most unforgettable and enjoyable variants being reliably transmitted. 
 Ecologists have discovered that many instinctual behaviors in animals 
are elicited by particular salient stimuli they are hard-wired to respond to. 
8.   Yes, recursive. For the simplest example of recursive intentional-stance humor (that is, 
second-order intentional-stance humor), imagine: An audience member may see that one char-
acter in a story or joke has a fully rational viewpoint, but they may also see that another char-
acter ’ s perception of that ﬁ rst character ’ s viewpoint contains humor because of having been 
informed, in some way, that the second character thinks the ﬁ rst character has a mistaken belief. 
The complexity is only limited by the span of attention and size of working memory of the 
audience.
9.   Just as  not enough world knowledge can render an audience immune to humor, so  too much 
knowledge can also destroy humor. In the most obvious case, reminding a person of a key item 
prematurely — telegraphing the punch line — is a killer, and some too-clever, too-knowledgeable 
audiences may not need reminding; they may be way ahead of the would-be comedian; he 
won ’ t kill, he will die.

Higher-Order Humor 
159
Gull chicks, when they see the bright orange spot on their parent ’ s beak, 
peck at it, and this initiates regurgitation in the parent and eating by the 
chick. Niko Tinbergen famously showed that the chicks would peck even 
more vigorously at exaggerated orange spots, brighter and larger than any 
in nature (Tinbergen 1951, 1953). He experimented with other species and 
found that they often responded more vigorously, and preferentially, to 
 supernormal stimuli than to the real thing. Inspired by Tinbergen ’ s work, 
various theorists have suggested that some human artifacts — paintings and 
sculptures, and pornography, but also music and even aspects of religion 
(Boyer 2001) — have been devised as supernormal stimuli that (over) 
stimulate our instinctual systems, producing more intense reactions than 
they were designed (by natural selection) to deliver. We think this is often 
a plausible conjecture, and jokes are prime examples of super-normal 
stimuli that take advantage of our natural propensity for humor-detection 
in much the same way that perfumes, makeup, artiﬁ cial sweeteners, music, 
and art give us exaggerated experiences with respect to the natural world.  10 
Thanks to their reﬁ ned designs, they tend to have the power to induce in 
us a far stronger and richer sense of the ludicrous than everyday  “ found ” 
stimuli, however humorous. Few events in real life are so funny, on their 
own, as to be unimprovable into still funnier episodes with a few ﬁ ctional 
touches. 
 Now, in order to demonstrate our theory in action, we have to break 
one of the golden rules of comedy: Never explain a joke! But such is the 
price of explanation: A theory of humor that didn ’ t  reduce the joke-getting 
process to a relatively stupid, mechanical, cognitive process would be a 
theory that still appealed at some point to an unexplained  “ sense of 
humor ” — and that would be no explanation at all. So, with due warning 
that each joke will be followed by a dogged description of the mechanisms 
on which it depends, we are almost ready to get into the  “ data. ”  (The scare 
quotes are because we must take the word  “ data ” loosely here. All, or 
almost all, previous theorists have taken jokes as a primary data source for 
measuring the success of their theory. So, for fair comparison, we must do 
some of the same, and we think that doing so can be very convincing. 
Still, jokes and humorous situations are not the only kind of data to use 
for a theory of humor elicitation, and we will discuss the problems with 
them in more detail and then provide some alternatives in the next 
chapter.) 
10.   Alexander Chislenko (1998) may have been the ﬁ rst to describe jokes in terms of super-
normal stimuli.

160 
Chapter 9
 We can streamline our task somewhat by taking advantage of some quite 
regular patterns, molecular structures, you might say, composable from our 
atomic elements, just listed. These are the heuristics of folk psychology, 
highly reliable but fallible shortcuts of the intentional stance. For instance, 
a  secret is not just something the agent A  knows (or believes) and agent B 
does not; A must  know (or believe) that B does not  know it, and moreover 
must  believe that it is somewhat in A ’ s power to maintain that state of 
 ignorance in B. (If A knows that B ’ s pants are on ﬁ re, and B doesn ’ t [yet], 
and A knows that B doesn ’ t [yet], this is not much of a secret — but there 
is still a brief window of opportunity for A to do something with his 
ﬂ eeting asymmetry of knowledge. But if A is not sure — committed to 
the belief — that B is still ignorant of this, A will not be motivated to 
attempt some actions, which would likely be futile if A were wrong.)  
 (53)  “ Hey, did you know you have a banana in your ear? ” 
 “ Speak up! I have a banana in my ear! ”  
 You can see how an  atomic analysis of even simple situations like this could 
get quite tedious without the molecular level of description and explana-
tion to speed things along. For instance, there is all the difference in the 
world between  telling somebody something you believe and saying some-
thing to somebody that  betrays the fact that you believe it. In the former 
case, you  intend your audience to  recognize your  intention to cause them to 
 believe what you  express by your words (Grice 1957, 1969, but see, e.g., 
Sperber and Wilson 1986 and Millikan 2004 for important reﬁ nements). 
In the latter case you may have no idea what you have inadvertently con-
veyed by your utterance; you may indeed  assume that your  secret (which 
we won ’ t bother to spell out again) is safe when it isn ’ t: You don ’ t  realize 
that he now  knows and  knows that you don ’ t know he knows that you have 
divulged what you  know and think he still doesn ’ t know — but he does! All 
sorts of opportunities are created by such complexities, and it is entirely 
possible, of course, that you deliberately  pretended to betray a belief you 
didn ’ t hold, and so on. Consider the complexities of this story, adapted 
from Close (2007) :  
 (54)  A man wakes up from his terrible hangover, and ﬁ nds his wife has 
prepared a beautiful breakfast in bed for him. What has he done to 
deserve this? He came home stinking drunk, vomiting all over 
everything, after a night on the town. He was too far gone even to get 
himself into bed, and his angry wife had to half-carry him to the 
bedroom. When she tried to pull the puke-drenched clothes off his 

Higher-Order Humor 
161
almost inert form, he yelled out  “ Stop, bitch! Get your hands off me! I ’ m 
a married man! ”  
 A stroke of genius! — or , was he as out of it as he seemed, and just plumb 
lucky? We ’ ll never know, and it ’ s funny either way, but notice that the 
ploy, deliberate or not, could not have worked if his wife didn ’ t believe he 
was too drunk to recognize her, but not so drunk as not to realize it was 
a woman who was undressing him. Apparently she never even considered 
the hypothesis that he ’ s played this trick on her — she is  committed to taking 
it at face value. His speech act, an imperative, said one thing; what she 
derived from it was something else, and the  last thing he would want is 
for her to suss out his intention in saying it! What she derives depends on 
committed assumptions she makes, covertly and automatically generated 
from both her current perception and her world knowledge — about what 
happens in bars when there are loose women around, about the perceptual 
limitations of drunkenness, about marriage vows. Change any of the 
details regarding this, and the story falls apart, humorless. 
 This story makes essential use of the  commitment indicator (via action): 
Actions speak louder than words. This is the most important heuristic tool 
helping to indicate where humor in a third-person situation occurs. It 
explains why Mr. Magoo ’ s soliloquys are obligatory; if we couldn ’ t  overhear 
his mutterings — he ’ s not talking to us or to anyone else — we ’ d be unable 
to fathom the depths of his false beliefs. The intentional stance is a tool 
within our own thought processes subject to its own epistemic failings. 
Epistemic commitment in others is often difﬁ cult to assess via the inten-
tional stance, and attribution errors are the pivotal sources of much humor, 
even when there is  apparent conﬁ rmation. (Maybe his wife is on to his little 
trick and has poisoned his soft-boiled egg!) For the most part, we do a good 
job, and among the most reliable tools we use to guess with high likelihood 
that there was an epistemic commitment is seeing how the agent acts. 
Because of the costly repercussions of mistaken acts in the world — the 
problem that anticipation machinery evolved to solve — an action taken by 
a person, unless seen to be taken with caution and vigilance, is usually an 
indication of a set of committed beliefs (and desires). A person ﬁ rmly 
kicking a ball manifests a commitment to its being ﬁ lled with air, rather 
than lead. In contrast, a person who carefully and slowly feels their way 
through a dark room shows no commitment to the presence or absence of 
obstacles they might run into, and each little accidental bump discovered 
along the way cannot be a source of humor — unless the person is so famil-
iar with the room that they might say  “ D ’ oh! I  knew that corner was there! ” 

162 
Chapter 9
 The very tight evidential relationship between action and commitment 
is relaxed only in cases where epistemic caution is not obvious to the 
observer. When the actor is uncommitted to a belief but nonetheless 
acting on it, the commitment indicator will typically yield a false positive. 
For instance, when the actor decides (seldom self-consciously!) that the 
cost of further information-gathering is higher than the cost of the prob-
able loss if one is proved wrong — the observer, ignorant of this private 
fact, may falsely attribute commitment based on how the actor acts. The 
actor isn ’ t throwing caution to the wind, perhaps, but, not being sure, and 
not caring much, acting anyway. A comeuppance here is not humorous  to 
the agent but can be to the observer who has made the false positive 
attribution. 
 Another heavily used heuristic in humor is the  deception indicator . In 
some cases we, the knowing audience, are explicitly shown the process by 
which the butt of the humor is induced into contaminating his mental 
space. In other words, we are shown, in slow motion, as it were, the very 
entry into the mental space that is the source of humor in the ﬁ rst place. 
In other cases, such as joke (62) below, we are equally deceived along with 
a character, and we later learn how we were deceived. 
 Deception humor at its simplest is being tricked by a friend into behav-
ing in some mildly nonconstructive way — the old pull-out-the-chair trick, 
for instance. Hilarious in childhood and not very funny thereafter. More 
subtle and admirable practical jokes exploit more subtle commitments on 
the part of the butt. A man is annoying his neighbor by bragging about 
the fuel-economy of his new car.  “ Forty miles per gallon!  Forty miles per 
gallon! ”  The neighbor retaliates: Every night he sneaks over and pours a 
few extra gallons of gas into the new car ’ s tank.  “ Fifty miles per gallon! 
Now I ’ m getting  ﬁ fty! ” Then later,  “ Sixty! Can you believe it, I ’ m getting 
 sixty miles per gallon! ” Then the neighbor abruptly stops. The bragging 
stops, and the man starts making anxious phone calls to the perplexed car 
dealer. The covert assumption on which the joke depends is that nobody 
would secretly donate fuel to somebody else ’ s car, a pretty good assumption 
under normal circumstances. 
 Another practical joke with a similar structure: A somewhat foppish 
businessman shows up in the ofﬁ ce one day sporting a preposterously 
ostentatious homburg hat (this was perpetrated back in the 1950s, when 
men wore fedoras), which he displays to all and places lovingly on the 
shelf in the communal closet. After a few days of this, it gets tiresome, so 
the secretaries, during their lunch hour, pool their resources and buy a 
duplicate hat in the same expensive shop, one size too large and substitute 

Higher-Order Humor 
163
it on the shelf. The man goes home with his prize hat resting down on his 
ears. The next day he returns, hat looking just ﬁ ne on his head. During 
the morning the secretaries investigate and ﬁ nd a carefully folded lining 
of newspaper inside the hat. They ﬁ t this newspaper carefully inside the 
original hat and replace it on the shelf. The man goes home with his hat 
perched precariously on his head . . . And so it goes, with the foppish man 
increasingly worried about the periodic swelling and shrinking of his head. 
Like the other practical joke, this one depends on the default assumption 
that people will not go to considerable expense to play a joke, but also on 
the entirely reasonable assumption that hats don ’ t change their size spon-
taneously. (One presumes that the size-labels had to be doctored or removed 
to protect the assumption that there is just one hat involved.) Some nar-
rative deception jokes are just practical jokes recounted or otherwise 
depicted — as in the long-running and often hilarious television program 
 Candid Camera — but most deception jokes invoke the deception indicator 
in other ways, as we shall see. 
 The  compression tool takes advantage of widely shared general knowl-
edge. The exploitation of stereotypes in jokes and witticisms has a deserv-
edly negative reputation, not so much for the politically incorrect content 
typically exhibited (some of the funniest humor is outrageously prejudiced 
and all but unspeakable), as for the crudeness of the logical mechanisms 
that they employ. A stereotype functions as a data-compression device that 
instantly references a huge library of exaggerated or oversimpliﬁ ed infor-
mation. Just mentioning the stereotyped class is a blatant invitation to the 
audience to create a mental space that is bound to have contaminating 
errors in it — as almost everyone already knows — so the best use of stereo-
types in humor involves metaeffects, and meta-metaeffects, in which the 
audience, already braced for a lame attempt to extract mirth from a tired 
old clich é , is ambushed by one reversal or another. (It is worth noting just 
how extensive the genus of metahumor is; so populous are the humor 
lineages in our ken that we are well endowed with expectations that arise 
from our (fallible) recognition of humor types.  
 (55)  There was a young lady named Tuck, 
 Who had the most terrible luck: 
 She went out in a punt, 
 And fell over the front, 
 And was bit on the leg by a duck. 
 There is obviously nothing funny about this little story, unless you were 
expecting something else. 

164 
Chapter 9
 Similarly, there is a large class of jokes that exploit variations on cultur-
ally embedded stories. Shared stories are excellent data-compression 
devices. (Recall the discussion of the role of remembered stories in alleviat-
ing the frame problem, in chapter 8.) They serve almost literally to  “ get 
everyone on the same page, ” and this creates opportunities for exploita-
tion. The more of a story you can tell with few words, the more efﬁ cient 
your joke or witticism will be. Stand-up comedy avails itself of this immense 
compression. Comedians often relate a short story about their lives that is 
analogous to something in your own, and you are thus induced to bring 
in a large amount of compressed inference to complete the picture that 
they brieﬂ y sketched, making it easier for them to apply a  pointer mecha-
nism and demonstrate the humor in the situation. A line such as  “ Only in 
America do sick people have to walk to the back of the drugstore to get 
their prescriptions while healthy people can buy cigarettes at the front ” 
points to something we  “ all ”  know but never saw the humor in before —
 and it would be utterly ineffective in another culture. One of the most 
efﬁ cient pointers is the pained exclamation. For instance, when Homer 
Simpson says  “ D ’ oh! ”  we laugh. A wordless gesture or facial expression, by 
a good comic actor (for instance, a double-take performed in slow motion) 
can accomplish a similar communicative effect. 
 (56)  A couple of New Jersey hunters are out in the woods when one of 
them falls to the ground. He doesn ’ t seem to be breathing, his eyes are 
rolled back in his head. The other guy whips out his cell phone and calls 
the emergency services. He gasps to the operator:  “ My friend is dead! 
What can I do? ” The operator, in a calm soothing voice says:  “ Just take 
it easy. I can help. First, let ’ s make sure he ’ s dead. ” There is a silence, 
then a shot is heard. The guy ’ s voice comes back on the line. He says: 
 “ OK, now what? ” 
 The LaughLab was an Internet-based social experiment run in 2000 and 
2001 by UK researcher Richard Wiseman. The experiment was meant to 
discover general statistics about appreciation of jokes in various (Internet-
connected) cultures. The world ’ s funniest joke according to his survey was 
the one above. An incomplete inventory of the  “ working parts ” of this 
joke includes the following: At the outset we don ’ t  know how  committed 
the hunter is to the  belief that his friend is dead, though that is what he 
 says . The operator shares our uncertainty, and  wants (for good reason) to 
resolve it; she  wants to help (it ’ s her job, for one thing), and taking a time-
pressured stab (in a more leisurely conversation she would no doubt choose 

Higher-Order Humor 
165
her words more carefully), she adopts the well-worn  “ supportive ”  second-
person-plural diction — the nursely  “ we ”  of  “ how are we feeling today? ” —
 and makes a  “ helpful ”  suggestion, utterly ignoring the possibility of 
ambiguity in her words. That covert ambiguity leads the hunter to mistake 
the meaning of the operator ’ s advice (just the way a dumb computer 
might) and  commits him to a  belief that he should act in a certain way, a 
commitment he probably wouldn ’ t make if he didn ’ t  believe he was talking 
to somebody with expertise and authority who  wanted to give him the best 
possible advice. He is distraught — and stupid, of course — but would he as 
mindlessly  obey the same command if he  believed he was talking on the 
phone to one of his other hunting buddies? We know he  commits because 
of the drastic thing he does, which we infer from the elegantly compressed 
conclusion of the story. The shot being heard is somewhat ambiguous, 
though we begin to think we know what happened, a guess that is con-
ﬁ rmed when he says  “ OK, now what? ” (Notice that much of the humor 
would be drained from the story if all this were explained, instead of left 
to the reader ’ s imagination. Here the basic mirth is enhanced by the pride 
of lightning-fast problem-solving, the appreciation of how much smarter 
we are than those dunces — for the operator is certainly complicit in the 
homicide.  11 ) And needless to say, the characters are facing far too serious 
a situation to laugh, but for the reader or hearer it is a ﬁ ction, and thus 
emotions of pity, horror, or despair do not interfere with our humor.  
 (57)  One Sunday morning, the priest noticed Little Johnny was staring 
up at the large plaque that hung in the foyer of the church. It was 
covered with names, and small American ﬂ ags were mounted on either 
side of it. The seven-year-old had been staring at the plaque for some 
time, so the priest walked up, stood beside the boy, and said quietly, 
 “ Good morning, Little Johnny. ” 
 “ Good morning, Father, ” replied the boy, still focused on the plaque. 
 “ Father Scott, what is this? ” Little Johnny asked.  “ Well, son, it ’ s a 
memorial to all the young men and women who died in the service. ” 
Soberly, they stood together, staring at the large plaque. Little Johnny ’ s 
voice was barely audible when he asked,  “ Which service, the 9:45 or the 
11:15? ” 
11.   It is also possible, we have learned, for somebody to experience ﬁ rst-person humor directly; 
one who did told us that he didn ’ t notice the ambiguity in the operator ’ s advice until he learned 
of the shot, whereupon his own committed expectation to the hunter feeling for a pulse was 
dashed.

166 
Chapter 9
 Johnny ’ s question at the end of the joke should set off an analyst ’ s com-
mitment indicator. His use of language is a speech act, and betrays (but 
does not express) his commitment to the belief that  “ service ”  here means 
church service rather than military service. Had Johnny been on a tennis 
court or in a restaurant, he would no doubt have made a different  commit-
ment about the meaning on that occasion of this multiply ambiguous term. 
Probably he doesn ’ t yet  know the intended meaning of the term — he ’ s only 
seven — and in any event it doesn ’ t  occur to the priest that Johnny might 
not  know this meaning. We in the audience infer all this and more, utiliz-
ing our knowledge of churches and priests and little boys, and having 
already constructed a mental space for Johnny ’ s beliefs, we have no difﬁ -
culty diagnosing Johnny ’ s mistake. We may go on, anticipation-generators 
that we are, and imagine the priest explaining the mistake to Johnny, but 
that is not a necessary part of the joke, the way such implied sequels 
often are. 
 (58)  If you step onto a plane and recognize a friend of yours named 
Jack don ’ t yell out  “ Hi, Jack! ” 
 This is not just a simple pun, since it is higher-order humor, making use 
of the intentional stance. Interestingly, the necessary perspective is not of 
any explicitly introduced character in the joke. The root of the humor is 
the point of view of other passengers, ﬂ ight attendants, pilots — the default 
population of your airport  “ script. ”  We automatically assume that you and 
Jack are not the only people within earshot. If Jack ﬁ nds humor in your 
call, it is only because he, unlike you, already recognizes the ambiguity in 
it and, then, in his own use of the intentional stance (like ours in under-
standing the joke), anticipates the problems it can pose. We involuntarily 
imagine the passengers constructing mental spaces in which they incor-
rectly believe the word  “ Hijack! ”  to have been uttered. When they see you 
waving at your friend, they may realize their mistake and collapse those 
mental spaces in deference to the one where they ﬁ gure out your friend is 
named Jack, but it is not necessary that those (imaginary) passengers com-
prehend the actual situation; we need only imagine their construction of 
this mental space and then use our own world knowledge to provide the 
necessary information to invalidate it (as we did in the previous joke about 
Little Johnny). But that is not enough; until you go on to create a further 
mental space containing something like air marshals and their mental 
spaces, and (hence) their likely committed actions, and the dire effects of 
this on the mental space of Jack ’ s friend, and so forth, the intensity of the 
consequences of the advice offered in the speech act which  is expressed in 

Higher-Order Humor 
167
the joke would be missing. To see this, compare (58) with this unfunny 
variation: 
 (59)  If you step into a bar and recognize a friend of yours named Ball, 
don ’ t yell out  “ Hi, Ball! ”  
 Or even lamer: 
 (60)  If you are in the dairy section of the supermarket and see a friend 
of yours named Gert, don ’ t yell out  “ Yo, Gert! ” 
 The role of unmentioned but irresistibly imagined consequences is even 
stronger in the following (true) story: 
 (61)  Great Britain is a land of pet-owners who often take their pets 
very seriously. Dennett was once the house guest of a distinguished —
 indeed knighted — professor who greeted him at breakfast with  “ Good 
morning, Dan. Did you sleep well? I wonder if you would like to see 
some photographs of our daughter ’ s prize-winning pussy! ” 
 This is not just an inadvertent pun, of course. The humor lies in our imme-
diate and irresistible re-creation in our own minds of much of the emo-
tional roller-coaster that beset Dennett in that brief moment: Did I hear 
Sir Cecil correctly? Could he  possibly mean what he seems to be saying? 
They have  contests like that here in England? His  daughter? At  breakfast? 
And then the recognition that British English and American English must 
have some subtle usage differences, conﬁ rmed by the photos of a rare and 
beautiful Siamese cat. Sudden relief — and let it be known that Dennett 
somehow managed to stiﬂ e the urge to guffaw that shook his body (which 
is yet another humor-enhancing element of the implied scenario: Was 
Dennett going to be trapped into revealing what a smutty-minded chap 
he was?). Notice, by the way, the narrative problem encountered by anyone 
telling this story. This is not, strictly speaking, a joke, but rather an anec-
dote, and it could more naturally be told in conversation without the 
preamble sentence about pets, ending with an explicit account of the very 
next thing that happened: the showing of the cat pictures. Still funny, but 
awkward in its timing. It is better to take a page from the joke-engineer ’ s 
book and provide a hint in the early going. The hint should be as delicate 
and remote as possible.  “ Great Britain is a land of cat-fanciers who often 
take them very seriously ” riskily sets the covert entry threshold a little 
higher, and  “ The British do love their doggies and pussycats ” almost gives 
the game away. And note that the details count for a lot. This is a distin-
guished professor talking, not a Hollywood producer or a bartender or a 

168 
Chapter 9
sailor, and the fact that it takes place in Great Britain plays an important 
role in permitting us  expect a somewhat higher level of decorum (compres-
sion by stereotype) in a British gentleman, and then to  tumble to the correct 
interpretation and not just consider it as a tentative surmise.  
 (62)  A man and a woman who have never met before ﬁ nd themselves 
in the same sleeping carriage of a train. After the initial embarrassment 
they both go to sleep, the woman on the top bunk, the man on the 
lower. 
 In the middle of the night the woman leans over, wakes the man 
and says,  “ I ’ m sorry to bother you, but I ’ m awfully cold and I was 
wondering if you could possibly get me another blanket. ” 
 The man leans out and, with a glint in his eye, says,  “ I ’ ve got a 
better idea . . . just for tonight, let ’ s pretend we ’ re married. ” 
 The woman thinks for a moment.  “ Why not, ” she giggles. 
 “ Great, ”  he replies,  “ Get your own damn blanket! ” 
 This is a classically deceptive bipersonal joke. The man ’ s speech act,  “ just 
for tonight, let ’ s pretend we ’ re married, ” provokes the inference that he 
means they should sleep in the same bunk to stay warm. When she giggles 
 “ Why not, ” we see that the woman interpreted it the same way we did, 
and by her speech act we feel conﬁ dent that she has committed to this 
interpretation of his sentence — and in fact we too may have been tricked 
into committing to it. His ﬁ nal statement reveals the deception, as we 
discover that the belief we shared with the woman in the story was based 
on a faulty assumption. 
 Another example of bipersonal humor is the following:  
 (63)  “ Do you mind telling me why you ran away from the operating 
room? ”  the hospital administrator asked the patient. 
 “ Because the nurse said,  ‘ Don ’ t be afraid! An appendectomy is quite 
simple. ’  ” 
 “ So . . . ” 
 “ So? ”  exclaimed the man,  “ She was talking to the surgeon! ” 
 The administrator is really just a prop, a straight man, to enable the con-
versation to unfold. We and the administrator make the same mistake, but 
it is our mistake that creates the humor: We infer — without noticing — from 
the content of the patient ’ s speech act, that the nurse was talking to the 
patient. (We tacitly go back and insert  “ to me ” after  “ the nurse said, ” but 
only because of the content that follows. Had the patient said that the 
nurse said  “ Isn ’ t that mayonnaise on your scalpel? ” a different insertion, 

Higher-Order Humor 
169
 “ to the surgeon, ” would have been tacitly and automatically made, and a 
different inference train would have been set in motion.) When our error 
is revealed, the puzzling situation is resolved, but only because we all share 
world knowledge about surgeons, their training, and their legendary  sang-
froid . The patient had good reason to run. (Exercise for the reader: Vary 
the participants and the circumstances and see how the humor 
evaporates.)  
 (64)  A young ventriloquist is touring the clubs, and one night he ’ s 
doing a show in a club in a small town in Arkansas. With his dummy 
on his knee, he ’ s going through his usual dumb blonde jokes when a 
blonde woman in the fourth row stands on her chair and starts 
shouting:  “ I ’ ve heard enough of your stupid blonde jokes. What makes 
you think you can stereotype women that way? What does the color of 
a person ’ s hair have to do with her worth as a human being? It ’ s guys 
like you who keep women like me from being respected at work and in 
the community and from reaching our full potential as a person, 
because you and your kind continue to perpetuate discrimination 
against, not only blondes, but women in general . . . and all in the 
name of humor! ” 
 The young ventriloquist is embarrassed and begins to apologize, when 
the blonde yells,  “ You stay out of this, mister! I ’ m talking to that little 
jerk on your knee! ” 
 This is another example of dual-perspective humor with a nice reversal 
thrown in. The setup creates a mental space in which there is a member 
of a stereotypically unintelligent party ( compression ) who seems to have 
something valuable to say (our covert stereotype assumption is shattered 
or challenged). In our mental space representing the blonde ’ s own model 
of the world we infer from her initial speech act ( commitment indicator ) that 
she intends to berate the ventriloquist. Her punch line collapses both of 
our covert assumptions at once: our recently acquired belief that she was 
above the stereotype, and our mistaken belief about what is in her model 
of the ventriloquist and his dummy.  
 (65)  A member of the United States Senate, known for his hot temper 
and acid tongue, exploded one day in mid-session and shouted,  “ Half of 
this Senate is made up of dunces! ”  
 All the other Senators demanded that the angry member withdraw his 
statement, or be removed from the chamber. 
 After a long pause, the angry member acquiesced.  “ OK, ”  he said,  “ I 
withdraw what I said. Half of this Senate are  not dunces! ” 

170 
Chapter 9
 The backbone of this joke is the simple logical observation that negation 
cannot always be expressed with the same surface word forms. Although 
the negation of  “ Tom is tall ” is  “ Tom is not tall, ” the negation of  “ Half the 
eggs are fresh ” is not  “ Half the eggs are not fresh. ” Our senator has 
exploited this fact, appearing at ﬁ rst to deny what he earlier said. We 
appreciate that he thus doesn ’ t deliver what he promises. The joke would 
be funnier if a molliﬁ ed senator then said  “ That ’ s more like it! Apology 
accepted! ”  betraying by this act that he still doesn ’ t get it, and that the 
senator ’ s estimate is probably accurate. It does not matter whether the ﬁ rst 
senator believes what he says, but only what his audience takes him to 
have asserted. Absent a commitment (as in the variation suggested) the 
joke is funny but just barely so, an example of ﬁ rst-person humor (like a 
pun) that gets a bit of extra zing by the derogation of a species people love 
to derogate: politicians. The variation, by catching us underestimating the 
duncehood (we don ’ t expect the senators to fall for this transparent move), 
gives us a better moment of mirthful surprise, and demonstrating — not 
merely insinuating — senatorial stupidity. 
 A similar joke, on the borderline between ﬁ rst-person and third-person 
humor, is this one reported by Koestler (1964):  
 (66)  P1:  “ Tell me comrade, what is capitalism? ” 
 P2:  “ The exploitation of man by man. ” 
 P1:  “ And what is communism? ” 
 P2:  “ The reverse. ”  
 Only the word  “ comrade ”  gives us the third-person setting, inviting us to 
infer that the questioner is some sort of communist authority ﬁ gure, and 
making the response slyly subversive.  
 (67)  A senior citizen is driving on the highway. His wife calls him on 
his cell phone and in a worried voice says,  “ Herman, be careful! I just 
heard on the radio that there was a madman driving the wrong way on 
Route 280! ” 
 Herman says,  “ Not just one, there are hundreds! ” 
 The role of the wife is negligible in this joke, and indeed a variant version 
has an Irishman in a rental car on a US freeway listening to the car radio 
and hearing the broadcaster break in with the bulletin that a madman is 
driving the wrong way. Since the narration  doesn ’ t say that the driver is 
going the wrong way, we make the default assumption that he ’ s on the 
right side of the road; this is the covert insertion that creates the opportu-
nity for humor. In a setting where transatlantic driving habits have been 

Higher-Order Humor 
171
under discussion, the joke will lose most or all of its humor by telegraphing 
the punch line. But in either case, the lion ’ s share of the humor comes 
from our recognition that this fellow, senior citizen or Irishman, is obtuse 
in his complacency. His commitment is apt to have dire consequences, 
and he is nevertheless oblivious. Similar incaution in a less dangerous 
setting would not be as funny.  
 (68)  Once there was a little boy in church. He had to go to the 
bathroom so he told his mother,  “ Mommy, I have to piss. ” 
 The mother said,  “ Son, don ’ t say  ‘ piss ’ in church. Next time you have 
to piss, say,  ‘ whisper ’  because it is more polite. ” 
 The next Sunday, the little boy was sitting next to his father this 
time, and once again, he had to go to the bathroom. 
 He told his father,  “ Daddy, I have to whisper. ” 
 The father said,  “ OK. Here, whisper in my ear. ” 
 The only interesting feature of this juvenile bathroom humor is that the 
humorous event occurs only in our imagination, not in the narrative, in 
a mental space that is temporally posterior to the events in the narrative. 
The listener must extrapolate an anticipation of what the boy would next 
attempt to do. Were this drastic event to occur, we realize that many 
mental models would have committed beliefs invalidated: the father ’ s 
reasonable belief that his son needs to whisper something (thanks to the 
 commitment tool at work in the father); the boy ’ s expectation that doing 
what Dad says is (as always) a good policy, even if you don ’ t understand 
why; and the mother ’ s broken expectation, along with that of the other 
churchgoers, that such events will not occur anywhere, and certainly not 
in church. We wouldn ’ t expect any of the three principals in the story to 
ﬁ nd the outcome humorous at ﬁ rst, though other members of the church 
may be able to laugh — if they, like us, are using Boorstin ’ s  “ voyeur ’ s eye. ” 
 Earlier I-R theories, especially semantic script theories, might assign the 
humor in this joke to the opposition between the behavior of urination 
and being in church, and perhaps additionally between urination on 
somebody versus not (and, on that, superiority theory would agree). Our 
model suggests that these factors are merely content that surrounds the 
discovery of a faulty belief, though such contents add spice to the mix and 
may thus increase the pleasure of the joke through misattribution and 
transfer of arousal, as we ’ ll describe in the next chapter. 
 (69)  One time Dennett and the Stanford AI pioneer John McCarthy 
were at an academic conference, and shortly after the speaker began his 

172 
Chapter 9
talk somebody from the back of the room called out  “ Louder! ” The 
speaker duly obliged and continued his talk in a more robust voice, and 
a few seconds later McCarthy yelled  “ Funnier! ” 
 Timing is crucial in this case: The disruption causes by the ﬁ rst yeller has 
to settle down, so that everyone is  “ back to normal, ” but not too much 
time must pass since they have to have the echo of the ﬁ rst yell  “ in the 
back of their minds ” to recognize, instantly, the utterly unexpected sequel 
as a reasonable enlargement of the set of interests an audience has when 
it commits its attention to a speaker. The faulty tacit assumption was that 
the speaker had  “ ﬁ xed ” the situation and no more improvements were in 
the ofﬁ ng.  
 (70)  An Asian man walked into the currency exchange in New York 
with 2,000 Japanese yen and walked out with $72. 
 The following week, he walked in with 2,000 yen, and was handed 
$66. He asked the teller why he got less money than the previous week. 
 The teller said,  “ Fluctuations. ”  
 The Asian man stormed out, and just before slamming the door, 
turned around and shouted,  “ Fluc you Amelicans, too! ” 
 This joke nicely illustrates how our spurious automatic ﬁ lling-in during 
spreading activation can contribute to a falsehood in a mental space (see 
p. 103). At  “ stormed out ” and  “ slamming the door, ” the joke causes the 
audience to ﬁ ll in a reason for the man ’ s anger; we attribute it to the now-
unfavorable exchange rate for yen and perhaps his lack of expectation that 
these things ﬂ uctuate. Our ﬁ lled-in reason is false, however; spreading 
activation and default pragmatic assumptions have led us astray. The man ’ s 
real reason for anger turns out, at the punch line, to be his mishearing of 
the teller ’ s response. This is a multipersonal/dual-perspective (not biper-
sonal, as the beliefs in the two perspectives are different) joke because we 
recognize both that his reason for anger (in our ﬁ rst-person model) is not 
what we had committed to, and that he himself thinks he has been 
insulted, though we know he hasn ’ t. This latter point, the man ’ s own 
mistaken belief, comes to light through his speech act, which indicates his 
commitment via his action.  
 (71)  A young Catholic priest is walking through town when he is 
accosted by a prostitute.  “ How about a quickie for twenty dollars? ” 
she asks. 
 The priest, puzzled, shakes her off and continues on his way, only to 
be stopped by another prostitute.  “ Twenty dollars for a quickie, ” she 
offers. Again, he breaks free and goes on up the street. 

Higher-Order Humor 
173
 Later, as he is nearing his home in the country, he meets a nun. 
 “ Pardon me, sister, ” he asks,  “ but what ’ s a quickie? ” 
 “ Twenty dollars, ” she says,  “ same as it is in town. ” 
 This joke is used by Wyer and Collins (1992) to exemplify their model. In 
their explanation of it, there is a semantic shift in the meaning of  “ what ’ s 
a quickie? ” which could mean either  ‘ what is the price of a quickie? ’  or 
 ‘ what is the meaning of  ‘ a quickie ’ ? ’  and a second shift from the nun being 
a nun to being a prostitute. They use this analysis to support the diminish-
ment and nonreplacement requirements, which we have already argued 
are insufﬁ cient (see chapter 4). Using our model, our analysis is similar to 
their standard I-R analysis, but goes a bit deeper into the mechanisms 
involved: The joke is funny because beliefs occurring in three mental 
spaces are collapsed simultaneously. First, at the punch line we realize that 
the nun believed the priest was asking for a price — we know that ’ s not true 
given the setup and we invalidate her committed (via speech act) belief. 
Second, we know from the setup that the priest truly expects the nun will 
give a description, not a price: The priest ’ s expectation is broken by the 
punch line. These two broken expectations are a classic mark of misunder-
standing humor in which two people each expect each other to understand 
the same things — causing each to have mistaken expectations in their 
models of the world. Third, our own mental space is populated by a default 
nun, who is, by stereotype, nonsexual, or at least outwardly so. The punch 
line explodes this belief with a quick jab. (The joke would be crippled by 
a longer conversation between priest and nun.) These three simultaneously 
invalidated mental spaces make this joke a strong case of humor (for any 
listener whose world knowledge silently generates all three). 
 (72)  The young man and his date are sitting at a table in a Las 
Vegas casino lounge, and the young man notices that Frank Sinatra is 
sitting at the corner table with some friends. When his date goes to the 
ladies room, he dashes over to Sinatra ’ s table and says,  “ Excuse me, Mr. 
Sinatra, I apologize for intruding on your evening, but my girlfriend, 
who just went to the ladies room, is the biggest Sinatra fan ever, and if 
you were to come over to our table when she gets back and say 
something like  ‘ Hi, Johnny! Who ’ s the beautiful chick? You ’ ve been 
holding out on us! ’  it would mean the world to her, and I ’ d be forever 
in your debt. ” Sinatra shrugs, and the young man goes back to the table. 
After his girlfriend returns, Sinatra approaches the table and says  “ Hi, 
Johnny — who ’ s the beautiful chick, you ’ ve . . . ” but the young man 
interrupts:  “ Frankie, Frankie — where ’ s your manners? Can ’ t you see I ’ m 
 occupied? ” 

174 
Chapter 9
 This is an exemplary trickster joke, where we admire the hero ’ s virtuoso 
exploitation of the intentional stance. The deference with which Johnny 
approaches Sinatra ’ s table (enhanced by our world knowledge of how 
celebrities are treated by their fans) sets us up for Johnny ’ s completely 
unanticipated act, but that is just the surface layer. We have a mental 
space of the mind of Sinatra, the star, being moved by the appeal of the 
callow young fellow to an act of amused generosity, inspired, perhaps, 
by the fellow ’ s pluck, and perhaps even more by being invited to join 
in an innocent deception of a young lady. This might be fun! And vanity, 
a sense of noblesse oblige, may enter as well. Sinatra is a big enough 
guy to help out the little guy. And we have a mental space for Johnny ’ s 
mind that, we soon discover, seriously underestimates his deviousness. 
This is particularly potent because the very structure of the joke, obviously 
a trickster joke, invites the listener to anticipate a clever move, to 
expect the unexpected, and to try to ﬁ gure it out before the punch line. 
Presumably this joke will lose its moxie as the reputation of Sinatra as a 
mob-connected tough guy recedes into the history books, but even without 
that world knowledge, the audacity of the young man is evident. And if 
we can ’ t help imagining the beating that Johnny is probably going to get 
in the back alley for all his efforts, we may, on reﬂ ection, decide that 
Sinatra might appreciate Johnny as a kindred spirit and congratulate him 
instead.  
 (73)  Two mathematicians were having dinner in a restaurant, arguing 
about the average mathematical knowledge of the American public. One 
mathematician claimed that this average was woefully inadequate, the 
other maintained that it was surprisingly high. 
 “ I ’ ll tell you what, ” said the cynic,  “ ask that waitress a simple math 
question. If she gets it right, I ’ ll pick up dinner. If not, you do. ” He then 
excused himself to visit the men ’ s room, and the other called the 
waitress over. 
 “ When my friend comes back, ” he told her,  “ I ’ m going to ask you a 
question, and I want you to respond  ‘ one-third  x cubed. ’  There ’ s twenty 
bucks in it for you. ” She agreed. 
 The cynic returned from the bathroom and called the waitress over. 
 “ The food was wonderful, thank you, ” and the other mathematician 
started:  “ Incidentally, do you know what the integral of  x squared is? ” 
 The waitress looked pensive; almost pained. She looked around the 
room, at her feet, made gurgling noises, and ﬁ nally said,  “ Um, one-third 
 x cubed? ” 

Higher-Order Humor 
175
 So the cynic paid the check. The waitress wheeled around, walked a 
few paces away, looked back at the two men, and muttered under her 
breath,  “ . . . plus a constant. ”  
 As most of our readers can no doubt attest, the deliciousness of this in-
group joke can actually be appreciated by someone with no calculus back-
ground. At ﬁ rst the story seems to be just like its predecessor, the recounting 
of a practical joke. (Many other jokes have a similar structure, complete 
with the convenient trip to the rest room to enable the setup.) The beauty 
of the punch line lies in the fact that, contrary to our stereotype as well 
as that of the mathematicians, the waitress knows more than we ever 
imagined; it is she who has been concealing her knowledge, for she knows 
a more precise answer than either mathematician had in mind. It is inter-
esting that her actually quite obscure addendum is so readily identiﬁ ed, 
even by nonmathematicians, for what it is. We who have forgotten what-
ever calculus we ever learned effortlessly infer from the situation that what 
she has said is the truth! When we suddenly adjust our mental space, a 
curious thing happens: Even if we don ’ t at all understand what she said, 
we label it  “ true mathematics ” in our mental space and infer that she is 
one smart cookie. The pleasure is heightened, of course, by our recognition 
that the mathematicians are none the wiser;  we know, and they don ’ t, that 
they have hugely underestimated her, thanks to their stereotypes. This is 
a knockout feminist joke, exploiting our stereotypes while exposing them —
 the opposite, in this regard, of the blonde-and-ventriloquist joke — but no 
funnier for being politically correct. 
 (74)  Ad in a newspaper:  “ Illiterate? Write today for free help. ” 
 This supposedly real ad derives its drollness from the reader realizing that 
the advertiser is  committed (via action) to the self-contradictory belief that 
illiterate people might ﬁ nd and read the ad. 
 (75)  Recall the joke from the beginning of this chapter in which the 
doctor asks the woman,  “ So are we going to tell your husband, or 
what? ” 
 Though comprehension of this joke is thickly laden with the intentional 
stance, the main humor is actually from the ﬁ rst person. We, the audience, 
assume the doctor ’ s role to be that of the good guy who should be solving 
the marital troubles of this couple. Then the punch line explodes that tacit 
assumption, showing him to have become just a continuation of the 
problem. The mistake was ours. But, there are elements of third-person 

176 
Chapter 9
humor too: We see the poor husband ’ s default belief that the doctor would 
help him dashed — so the fact that it was the husband who sent his wife 
to the doctor contributes to the humor. Also, as the woman tells her story, 
the falsity in the husband ’ s belief that she has just become cold to him 
emerges, giving us mild twinges of humor along the way. Then there is 
Bergson ’ s point about mechanicity: We are amused at this woman ’ s some-
what ridiculous and repetitive behavior of trading sex for such little favors 
as a cab ride or the freedom to come in late to work. There are multiple 
sources of enjoyment in this joke, as in many: The ﬁ nal punch line is 
strengthened by the wit of the doctor — he ’ s rather clever to ﬁ nd this self-
serving solution. And the enjoyment of the entire thing is heightened by 
the arousal of the sexual theme. These kinds of pleasurable content aug-
mentations are the subject of the last section in the next chapter. 
 We have now completed a ﬁ rst-pass application of our model to a broad 
range of jokes. Like Eastman, we claim that our theory can explain  “ any 
joke you bring us. ” We also acknowledge that, while jokes are a good start-
ing point to help us get our footing in the subject matter, they are actually 
the easiest variety of humor to explain. Other kinds of humor need to be 
explained too, and, just as important for our theory, we must show why 
various ordinary serious and sober events are not humorous, in spite of 
seeming, at ﬁ rst, to meet our conditions for humor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 10    Objections Considered 
 Man is the only animal that laughs, or needs to. 
 — Mark Twain 
 We hope our readers are beginning to be persuaded by our model, but they 
should not be impressed yet; they should instead be ransacking their 
imaginations for counterexamples, either funny items that don ’ t ﬁ t the 
model or unfunny items that do. Both types must be canvassed before we 
can rest any conﬁ dence in our model. It is important that an empirical 
theory — which we aspire to present — should be refutable, but not too  easily 
refutable! By looking at a variety of apparent counterexamples to the 
model, we can illuminate and reﬁ ne its articulation, and sharpen the chal-
lenge for those who think they can ﬁ nd a fatal ﬂ aw in our account. In the 
next two chapters we will  “ turn all the knobs ” of our model, reviewing —
 and defending against — every kind of purported counterexample we have 
been able to ﬁ nd, to see how it behaves with altered parameters and condi-
tions. As you will see, there are relatively few knobs to turn, so almost all 
of the cases we will examine will turn on the notions of whether a belief 
is  active and  committed , though once in a while, an apparent counterex-
ample turns on whether the belief is actually false or whether it is attained 
by a heuristic leap. First, however, we must explore a digression on methods 
of falsiﬁ ability. 
 A.   Falsiﬁ ability  
 Two men are making breakfast. As one is buttering the toast, he says,  “ Did you 
ever notice that if you drop a piece of toast, it always lands butter-side down? ” 
 The second guy says,  “ No, I bet it just seems that way because it ’ s so unpleas-
ant to clean up the mess when it lands butter-side down. I bet it lands butter-side 
up just as often. ” 

178 
Chapter 10
 The ﬁ rst guy says,  “ Oh yeah? Watch this. ” He drops the toast to the ﬂ oor where 
it lands butter-side up. 
 The second guy says,  “ See? I told you. ” 
 The ﬁ rst guy says,  “ Oh, I see what happened. I buttered the wrong side! ” 
 — Cathcart and Klein (2007) 
 The process of twiddling the knobs on a humorous event — “ Now it ’ s funny 
. . . now it ’ s not ”  — is one way to test our model, as you will see when we 
consider a number of variations on examples in the coming sections. These 
analyses, together with our analyses of jokes in the previous chapter, allow 
us to catalog both hits and correct rejections, and to show that, in a rather 
extensive array of examples, we have not yet stumbled upon any clear false 
positives or false negatives. While such a result is compelling, the astute 
reader will have noticed that our analysis requires the intervention of 
 interpretation . For any theory of mirth elicitation to explain a joke, an 
attributive interpretation of the intentional states evoked by the joke is 
necessary to bridge the theoretical gap between objects in the world and 
their semantic impact on the mind. An analyst has no choice but to suggest 
that an audience has, for instance, activated, to degree A, belief B, with 
commitment level C, and then disproved and debugged it by event E. Such 
an interpretation introduces one more complicating level of indirection 
and possibility of analytical error than we would have if  jokes were the 
object of study, rather than humor and mirth. Our results, then, have to 
be taken with the proper caution that, ultimately, if no more objective 
method can be found, at least we should look for converging evidence or 
methods for assuring intersubjective agreement. 
 The most promising alternative — one that has a chance, at least eventu-
ally, of actually probing for the relevant entities and events in the mind 
and brain — may be a neuroscientiﬁ c approach. Be that as it may, what 
should a neuroscientist look for? What kind of dependent variables can be 
used, and what are the independent measures that we should look at? 
 The dependent variable may be easier to locate. As Duchenne pointed 
out, laughter is not well-enough correlated with mirth to be a reliable 
indicator. The only alternative is to use mirth itself. But how can we 
measure it? In time, we might ﬁ nd that it is correlated with some very 
speciﬁ c temporal ﬁ ngerprint of activity in mesolimbic structures, but until 
then, as is the case with colors, ﬂ avors, and other qualia, felt mirth can 
only be determined by self-report of amused subjects or coding of 
Duchenne laughter, which is hard to fake. These kinds of measures, taken 

Objections Considered 
179
across subjects, can be a reliable method (called  “ heterophenomenology ” 
by Dennett 1991) for producing objective measures (or at least statistically 
signiﬁ cant intersubjective measures) of subjective phenomena, as long as, 
in the case of self-report, subjects are introspecting purely for the qualita-
tive aspects of an experience, rather than (folk-)theoretical causes for those 
sensations. When the object of interest is a subjective quality, like mirth, 
then we have few alternatives — even the mesolimbic ﬁ ngerprint that we 
just hypothesized as a possible neuroscientiﬁ c eventuality could only be 
established by ﬁ rstly correlating patterns of activity with such measures of 
mirth. Any later use of such a ﬁ ngerprint as a gauge would ultimately rely 
on the validity of those initial self-reports or Duchenne laughter. 
 While perhaps sometimes difﬁ cult to work with, and somewhat meth-
odologically restrictive, the dependent variable can at least be found. The 
independent variable may be a bit more complicated. Our theory posits 
that the elicitors of mirth are the commitment of an active belief; the 
discovery that that commitment was made in error, covertly, by a heuristic 
leap; and the lack of interference from other overpowering emotions. 
Though no doubt there is a neural difference between those active states 
of working memory that contain committed beliefs and those states of 
belief that are activated but uncommitted, nobody can say today how such 
a difference would present itself in a brain scan. As theory in cognitive 
neuroscience matures, such features may become detectable in the near 
future, and if the correlation we postulate is not found to hold, our model 
is wrong. 
 Characterizing our model in terms of JITSA belief activation and com-
mitment as well as the emotional response of mirth brings us closer to 
knowing what kinds of events to look for in the brain when subjects expe-
rience mirth. We won ’ t attempt (prematurely) to provide a precise inde-
pendent criterion now for commitment of belief or these other conditions. 
But in the meantime the importance of these conditions can be seen by 
varying the inputs — revising jokes and experiences — and noting that  com-
mitment is a good provisional term for the crucial internal response: When 
it is missing, no mirth results. For centuries people knew that  conception 
was the triggering cause of pregnancy, and knew that not all intercourse 
led to conception, without having any good physiological account of just 
what internal event conception was, but they knew  what to look for ; and 
today we have an essentially complete theory of conception, which would 
not exist if people hadn ’ t ﬁ rst isolated the target condition, conception, 
to inquire about. 

180 
Chapter 10
 Until the proper neuroscientiﬁ c tools can be developed, there are several 
other methods that may be used to test our theory. Of course, the ﬁ rst 
method is to review humorous circumstances and look for counterexam-
ples, as we do here. Suppose, however, a rival model were offered that 
appeared to do just as well as ours on all the examples considered. How 
could we arbitrate between them? First, look at our twenty questions about 
the phenomenology of humor. If the model can answer these questions 
more cleanly and convincingly than ours, it should be provisionally 
accepted until falsiﬁ ed. Such a theory would correctly explain — better 
than ours — not just which things are humorous, and which are not, but 
also why they are and how they have various social and behavioral effects 
on us. 
 Our theory, with its sketch of the underlying mechanism of humor 
perception, also makes a number of speciﬁ c behavioral predictions unavail-
able to earlier theories. Just to name a few: We predict differential levels 
of intensity in mirth-elicitation during repeated exposure to ﬁ rst-person 
versus third-person humor (see pp. 153 – 154); we also predict that 
intentional-stance-dependent humor  1   (perhaps, like the Jake Cress sculp-
ture on p. 237) should not be as readily or as often appreciated by those 
without a well-developed theory of mind, including young children and 
severely autistic persons. Similarly, children who are just learning the dif-
ference between ﬁ rst-order and higher-order interpretations of the word 
 “ why ”  should be the ones who ﬁ nd the staple chicken-crossing-the-road 
joke funny. Our theory predicts that children before this point won ’ t ﬁ nd 
it funny while children who are sophisticated enough to have the ambi-
guity — who realize that there is a proximate why and a distal why to 
goals — are led down the garden path: They are enticed to wonder for what 
(distal) goal the chicken is crossing, before learning that the joking ques-
tioner was asking for the proximal goal. Adults, as we all know, have 
learned heuristics over their lifetimes of experience with this kind of ambi-
guity (of the word  “ why, ” for instance) which tend to keep them from 
committing to these garden paths and help them recognize that there may 
be multiple things possibly being asked. 
 Many experiments in cognitive psychology exploit interference effects: 
Give subjects one task while distracting them with another, for instance. 
Other experiments look for enhancement effects, such as masked priming 
1.   Notice that much humor  uses the intentional stance, but only a certain subclass is highly 
 dependent on it. Part of this distinction is made clear by avoiding multipersonal humor.

Objections Considered 
181
(see, e.g., the description in Dennett 2005, pp. 39 – 40). So what could an 
experimenter do to modulate the key variables in our model: activity-in-a-
space, commitment, covert entry, and no interfering emotion? We ’ ve given 
examples of variations of all of these, but we haven ’ t shoehorned the discus-
sion into the form of  “ rigorous ”  experiments, for good reasons. First, con-
trolling for differences in background knowledge and taste would be 
laborious. We would need to give subjects lengthy questionnaires about 
their general knowledge and interests, and then tailor the stimulus set (the 
jokes) to ﬁ t a number of different proﬁ les. We would test the prediction that 
particular subject pools with the same proﬁ le would tend to ﬁ nd the same 
set of jokes funny, and unfunny. But we would still risk being swamped by 
an untold number of unrecognized (and irrelevant) variables in the condi-
tions. Recall that even the funniest comedians turn on only a sizable frac-
tion of their own fans on any one joke. Another problem: How do you 
screen for prior familiarity with (good) jokes?  “ Stop me if you ’ ve heard this 
one ”  cannot, alas, play a rigorous role in a controlled experiment. More-
over, can watching videotapes of (good) joke-tellers (while in a scanner, or 
while having some secondary task to perform, or . . .) really be natural 
enough to yield good data?  2 Probably many subjects will glaze over. Without 
a good way of measuring mirth directly (yet), we ’ re stuck with self-report, 
augmented by facial expressions and laughter, which can be videotaped and 
scored by  “ blind ”  observers (who don ’ t get to see the stimulus that pro-
voked the reaction they are scoring). So-called  catch trials could help cali-
brate the thresholds: Mix a few deliberately constructed nonjokes (like the 
infamous joke with the utterly meaningless punch line  “ no soap radio ” 3 ). 
That could help establish a baseline for using facial behavior and laughing 
as a dependent variable of some reliability, along with self-report. Then we 
could start testing. Take a set of (good) jokes. For each one, create a priming 
context that should  “ ruin ”  the joke — by making the covert leap too overt, 
for instance, or canceling the default obviousness that would entice the leap 
in the ﬁ rst place. Then compose control priming contexts for each of them, 
so that each joke is delivered to half the subjects with a ruining prime and 
the other half of the subjects get a neutral prime. Prediction: There is a 
detectable decrease in amusement for the ruining prime cases. 
2.   Many experiments in psychology and cognitive neuroscience are rightly criticized for not 
being  “ ecologically valid ” — for putting subjects in extremely artiﬁ cial circumstances that are 
(almost) bound to distort their performance in signiﬁ cant ways (Neisser 1976; Brewer 2000).
3.   See  < http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/No_soap_radio > .

182 
Chapter 10
 Quite a few other speciﬁ c predictions emerge from our theory, and we 
hope that scientists begin to pull out for testing those that dovetail with 
their own interests.  4 Behavioral experiments based on these predictions 
may have new methodological avenues opened to them by our theory as 
well. We expect the results of such attempts at refutation will help reﬁ ne 
our model over time. 
 With this digression aside, we can now get into the counterexamples. 
 B.   Epistemic Undecidability 
 The settler was lying in a bloody heap next to his burning Conestoga wagon, an 
arrow protruding from his chest. A cavalry ofﬁ cer rode up and called to him:  “ Does 
it hurt? ”  “ Only when I laugh. ” 5 
 Our ﬁ rst set of potential counterexamples consists of things that are 
found to be funny in the second sense that we discussed in chapter 
3 — funny-huh. They may appear to ﬁ t the model, but on closer inspection, 
we ﬁ nd that they do not. Funny-huh events all seem to have an incongru-
ity between a sensory pattern that is anticipated and another that is 
experienced — that is to say, they are events or states of the world that 
are found in some way to be different from what one expected. In 
considering all these examples, you need to adhere strictly to a ﬁ rst-person 
point of view: would  you ﬁ nd these events amusing if they happened 
 to you? 
 A.   You come home and ﬁ nd the lights on. You expected they would be off 
because you remember leaving them so, and no one else has keys to your 
house . . . You may think,  “ That ’ s funny , I could swear I turned them off 
this morning. ” 
 B.   You may get an unusual feeling inside your body that you can only 
describe as a  funny feeling ; perhaps a phantom pain, or the sensation —
 called  paresthesia  — of the thousand tingling needles of a foot fallen asleep 
4.   If you are such a researcher, feel free to ask us to collaborate on reﬁ ning the articulation of 
hypotheses, methods, and protocols. We will be eager to help.
5.   This archetypal joke has many variations, involving a World War II pilot lying in the 
wreckage of his plane, or a Vietnam veteran scarred by napalm, or maybe — who knows? — 
a wounded Gaul responding to Julius Caesar. Its punch line has been used as the title of 
several novels, plays, ﬁ lms, songs, and a British situation comedy. Apparently the 
anomalous juxtaposition of pain and mirth appeals to people of all times and places, ages 
and tastes.

Objections Considered 
183
due to pinching the neurovascular bundle. It is also common for someone 
who gets drunk for the ﬁ rst time or someone who is having a stroke to say 
 “ I  feel funny . ” This announcement refers to the unusual way their conscious 
experience feels: not as typical. 
 C.   You are driving your car, and you hear an unfamiliar noise. You ask 
your children to quiet down so you can listen to the engine, and when 
they ask why, you say  “ because the car  sounds funny . ” 
 D.   You are about to drink three-week-old milk (that you may have thought 
was fresh), and upon snifﬁ ng it say to yourself, or someone else,  “ This 
 smells funny . ”  
 The incongruity in these examples is clear: In each case the thing that 
is funny is something that differs from your ordinary expectation — and in 
fact each could be said to have a perception that threatens a conception, 
as Schopenhauer put it. You probably expect the lights to still be off, your 
foot to feel normal, milk to smell fresh, and the engine to turn with a 
smooth regular rhythm. Let ’ s call these beliefs  challenged expectations . The 
incongruities here are not simply in the stimulus; they are incongruities 
between a belief and perception. 
 It is no mere coincidence, we claim, that our language has a word with 
two such contrasting senses. Our examples (A) through (D) of things that 
are funny-huh are all on the edge of being funny-ha-ha. We have to answer 
two questions about these examples. The ﬁ rst thing we want to know is: 
What is the same about all four of these examples that makes them 
 Figure 10.1 
 Mother Goose  &  Grimm,  ©  2008 Grimmy Inc. King Features Syndicate, Inc. 
Reprinted with permission from Susan White-King Features.  

184 
Chapter 10
funny-huh? And the second is: What differentiates them from funny-ha-
ha — why don ’ t we laugh at things that are funny-huh? 
 The answer to the ﬁ rst question is that funny-huh is a form of confusion 
about something that matters.  6   The factor that makes these four events in 
some way the same as each other (all instances of funny-huh), yet not 
humorous, is that they all provide an epistemic incompatibility in which 
neither belief has the power to dislodge the other. That ’ s what confusion 
is — an unresolved epistemic  concern . Yes, a perception threatens a concep-
tion, but you cannot resolve it on the spot by invalidating one of the 
beliefs. And with no invalidated belief there can be no humor. 
 There are different ways this can happen, but all of them come down 
to epistemic undecidability. In the ﬁ rst case, beliefs with equal epistemic 
capacity go head to head. When neither can trump the other, the situation 
is potently undecidable and both beliefs, though conﬂ icting, may remain 
living side by side. You may go to your grave carrying both beliefs from 
some potently undecidable contradictions with you, along with a sense 
of confusion that will invariably arise if such beliefs are ever recalled 
into working memory again. An example of potent undecidability would 
be this:  
 You are looking for your keys. You carefully look on the bare kitchen 
table. They are certainly not there. Then, after searching the rest of the 
house for awhile, you ﬁ nd them . . . on the kitchen table. It is potently 
undecidable whether they were on the table earlier or not. You can ’ t tell, 
and you probably never will. The belief that they weren ’ t there earlier 
since you didn ’ t see them there and the belief that they must have been 
there since that ’ s where you found them are both unwavering. You can ’ t 
disprove either. You may suspect that someone has tricked you or that 
your earlier search was seriously imperfect, that you looked right at them 
but somehow didn ’ t see them (this can happen), but you won ’ t know. 
You will think:  “ that ’ s funny! I just looked here earlier . . . ” and then the 
matter will quickly be left behind because the keys are in hand, and you 
are ready to go out. If you are still bothered — as you may well be — it is 
6.   If it was about something that didn ’ t matter, the brain wouldn ’ t bother dealing with it at all; 
as you look out the window at the winter woods, the hundreds or thousands of tree branches 
make an indecipherable tangle against the sky, but this confusion doesn ’ t register until, for some 
reason, it matters — or seems to matter. William James ’ s  “ blooming, buzzing confusion ” in the 
infant ’ s mind is soon sorted out into the confusions that matter — and bother — and the confu-
sions that are happily neglected.

Objections Considered 
185
because of your capacity to extrapolate, to generalize to an ominous but 
tentative conclusion: Either I am going mad or somebody is playing tricks 
on me. 
 Case A above is an example of potent undecidability. Here you may be 
so certain that you left the lights off that the solid data that they are now 
on still cannot cause you to revise your previous belief. You can have strong 
grounds for this certainty, or not. Suppose you don ’ t: When you left home 
you didn ’ t much think about the status of the lights — you were distracted; 
in this case, when you discover them on upon coming back, you would 
be unconcerned and conclude, correctly, that you weren ’ t paying atten-
tion, and rather than think  “ that ’ s funny ” you would just accept it. Suppose 
you do: You remember that you assured that they were off in a rather direct 
way — by looking at them. Looking at the lights off is not a case in which 
a false inferential belief comes to be. Perception of this sort is hardly infer-
ential at all; it is certainly not a risky heuristic leap. They were off when 
you looked at them! In this case, since both beliefs are properly committed, 
you have a potent undecidability, and neither belief is going to be revised —
 the most likely thing in this circumstance is to realize or at least expect 
that something serious changed (e.g., someone entered your house) and 
this is no cause for humor. 
 In our other three cases, one belief has an uncertainty to it that causes 
an asymmetric undecidability. We ’ ll call them  weakly undecidable , to indi-
cate that while the more uncertain belief does not have the power to 
dislodge the belief that it conﬂ icts with, it cannot itself be removed because 
its status  as uncertain already reﬂ ects the full assessment of all other beliefs 
upon it — it hasn ’ t been deemed wrong, just uncertain. 
 Let ’ s look at the examples more closely: You certainly believe that you 
smell an odor, hear a noise, and feel a feeling. Call these  unchallenged per-
ceptual beliefs : These are active sensory data just recently (within the  “ spe-
cious present ” ) detected. But now look at their  implications — inferential 
beliefs driven by these sensations — that take part in a conﬂ ict. In these 
examples, none of these inferential beliefs — the  challengers of the original 
expectations — is committed. You are not sure if this smell is a sign of bad 
milk (otherwise you would have said it smells bad instead of funny), you 
are not sure what the funny feeling in your body is or what it means 
(because it is novel. If you are sure of it, you ’ ll no longer say it ’ s funny, 
you ’ ll say what you feel:  “ I feel drunk ” ;  “ I feel like my foot has fallen 
asleep ” ), and neither are you sure what the sound that you suspect  might 
come from the engine is caused by (you haven ’ t yet stopped the car, you ’ ve 

186 
Chapter 10
only asked the kids to be quiet so you can listen closer). The uncommitted 
status of these new inferential beliefs (i.e., that the milk  might be bad, there 
 may be something wrong with my foot, and the engine  may be making an 
unusual noise — the challengers themselves) means that none of them has 
the epistemic capacity to dislodge any other committed or uncommitted 
belief that it might conﬂ ict with. 
 So, in all three cases, there is an asymmetric or weak undecidability: 
The more solid beliefs in the set of challenged assumptions (i.e., the beliefs 
that your foot should feel normal, the milk would smell fresh, and the 
engine should be ﬁ ne) cannot be dislodged by the new perceptually derived 
beliefs, the challengers, because of the uncertainty in the latter. At the same 
time, the hunches — or hypotheses — that make up the challengers are also 
unyielding, as they are based on the solid sensory information provided 
by the unchallenged perceptual beliefs. So, there is certainly a conﬂ ict, but 
only one that causes funny-huh. The answer to our second question — what 
differentiates funny-huh from funny-ha-ha? — is that, in humor, the unde-
cidability is resolved by a committed belief being deposed and in funny-
huh the undecidability is unresolved. (We will also raise some skepticism 
below about the  active status of challenged expectations with regard to 
humor, though it is not important for funny-huh because there is no 
unseating of any beliefs in those cases.) 
 Of course, neither kind of undecidability is permanent. With new infor-
mation, the commitment status of either conﬂ icting belief can change and 
break an undecidable circumstance. A hunch can be conﬁ rmed, a hypoth-
esis disconﬁ rmed, and a presumption can even be overwhelmed — convert-
ing an undecidable case into a humorous case. However, with no new 
information (either we don ’ t seek it or we just don ’ t get it) undecidabilities 
may last indeﬁ nitely. 
 One may ask, then, shouldn ’ t we be able to edit these funny-huh stories, 
without changing the central conﬂ ict, to make them funny? Yes, but only 
if the necessary edits are pragmatically possible. In our strongly undecid-
able case, you would have to make one of the beliefs be an inferential 
assumption yet still epistemically committed. That is, you ’ d have to weaken 
it. This is possible. Suppose, for instance, the lights — unbeknownst to 
you — are on a timer that automatically shuts them down at 9:00  AM and 
turns them on again at 5:30  PM , and suppose you have always returned 
before 5:00  PM and had to turn on the lights (preempting the timer). Today, 
you happened to turn off the lights just at the instant that the timer turned 
off the lights, and arrived home a little later than usual, in time to ﬁ nd 
the lights already turned on. Discovering the timer solves the mystery 

Objections Considered 
187
( whew! ), and depending on the timing of your discovery of this solution, 
it could indeed be a provoker of mirth. In the evening, you may say to 
yourself,  “ the lights are on now, but I  deﬁ nitely ﬂ ipped the switch this 
morning. ”  That ’ s all true, but deﬁ nitely ﬂ ipping the switch is not incon-
trovertible grounds for believing you deﬁ nitely turned the lights off. That 
can be the false inferential belief, discovery of which can lead to humor. 
 In the weakly undecidable cases, we would ﬁ rst have to strengthen the 
weak premise — that is, give more epistemic commitment to the uncertain 
challenger belief in order to empower it to have a meaningful conﬂ ict. If 
we don ’ t strengthen it, neither can it oust the challenged assumptions 
humorously, nor will it have the committed status it needs if it is itself the 
belief that is to be ousted humorously. We ’ d also have to ensure, of course, 
that the rest of our formula for humor holds: that one of the beliefs was 
active and inferential and committed, yet false. The three cases before us 
are not promising candidates for such revision, for boring reasons. Con-
sider the case of the funny-tasting milk. Suppose we strengthen the premise 
by saying you don ’ t just sniff but take a sip and ﬁ nd the milk tastes as bad 
as it smells. Now you no longer wonder if the milk is bad — but we ’ ve gone 
too far: When we assure that the belief about the status of the milk is not 
in doubt, we no longer have a  spurious epistemic commitment to this more 
powerful version of the challenger. So we might overcorrect in the other 
direction by introducing some sleight-of-hand that persuades you (the 
victim of a practical joke) that the milk in  this glass is not the milk you 
sniffed and tasted, but  “ good ”  milk instead, and you conﬁ dently gulp 
it — ha-ha! Not very funny, and especially not very funny to you, but at 
least recognizable as a practical joke, in which you committed to an expec-
tation that was then suddenly falsiﬁ ed. Remember, not only does the belief 
need to have been invalid, but you need to have come to believe it actively 
(you have to have spent a thought on this topic) and with commitment 
(without recalling that milk freshness is usually an uncertainty, which 
would turn off commitment), but heuristically, by a guess. Note how much 
easier it is for a third person to laugh at you drinking soured milk; the 
conditions are relaxed when the intentional stance is invoked. 
 C.   Apparent Counterexamples 
 A man at the airline check-in counter tells the representative,  “ I ’ d like this bag to 
go to Berlin, this one to California, and this one to London. ” The rep says,  “ I ’ m 
sorry sir. We can ’ t do that. ” The man replied,  “ Nonsense. That is what you did 
last time I ﬂ ew with you. ”   

188 
Chapter 10
 “ In a riddle whose answer is chess, what is the only prohibited word? ” 
 “ The word chess . ” 
 — Jorge Luis Borges (1944) 
 There are situations that may seem to meet all our requirements for 
creating a humorous climax, but in fact are not at all funny — not even 
funny-huh. Some of these hinge on types of mistakes in thought that differ 
in subtle ways from the type that leads to ﬁ rst-person humor. Some of the 
most obvious candidates are instances of  forgetting . Here are two examples, 
drawn from life, which may look, at ﬁ rst blush, as if they fulﬁ ll the require-
ments of our model: Dan shows up for lunch in the cafeteria, as usual, 
forgetting that he had promised to play tennis with his friend Paul at lunch 
hour. He ﬁ nds a few of his friends and joins them for a congenial lunch, 
but then, twenty minutes later, Paul walks in, in tennis gear and looking 
peeved. Dan didn ’ t laugh, of course. This was not funny at the time, even 
if it can be fashioned into a good self-deprecating story later. But didn ’ t 
Dan just discover a ﬂ aw in his mental space, a surreptitiously incorporated 
simplifying assumption that has just been shown to contradict something 
else therein? 
 To see why this wasn ’ t funny we need to look at the spectrum of 
possibilities: 
 1.   Dan has so completely forgotten his tennis date that he looks at Paul 
and asks  “ Why are you in your tennis gear? ” and when Paul explains, Dan 
doubts Paul ’ s word. He really doesn ’ t remember any such promise. This 
reveals that Dan has an appallingly bad memory, but this isn ’ t funny to 
Dan. This could be funny to  somebody else present, along the lines of 
the joke: 
 a.   Doctor: I have some bad news: You have AIDS and Alzheimer ’ s 
disease. 
 b.   Well, at least I don ’ t have AIDS. 
 Does Dan have a false active committed belief in this case? It ’ s hard to say. 
Should we say that anybody who is going about his business without any 
nagging concerns  believes (actively) that all is well with the world? Does a 
good model of everyday self-control include a not-quite-noticeable peri-
odic check to make sure everything is in order? If so, then any case of a 
false-positive  “ All ’ s well ” that lets one get on with life is an active false 
belief, however evanescent. And if — if — Dan had just had such a compla-
cent thought, Paul ’ s arrival could be funny  to him (setting aside his chagrin). 
Individual differences in sensitivity to such gaffes would permit some 

Objections Considered 
189
people to laugh while others, in the same predicament, would be 
mortiﬁ ed. 
 2.   Dan has  almost completely forgotten his tennis date. When Paul 
explains, Dan ruefully acknowledges that now he does recall having made 
the date. The revelation is too slow and laborious to permit humor. 
 3.   Dan tumbles immediately to what has gone wrong, and is ﬁ lled with 
dismay and embarrassment, which overpower (at the moment) any 
mirth that might result. (This violates our nonnegative valence condition.) 
We can suppose John, who heard Paul and Dan make the date the 
day before, and instantly recognizes what has happened, breaks out 
laughing. He, like Dan, had not noticed any conﬂ ict in Dan ’ s casual 
presence at lunch until Paul showed up, whereupon he discovers that he 
and Dan have made the same mistake; to him, as an onlooker, it is funny. 
John experiences classic third-person humor, while Dan is too dismayed 
to feel any mirth. 
 4.  Just before Paul showed up, Dan commented to all on how nice it was 
to have lunch with friends, with no nagging obligations. In this case the 
contradiction is perhaps too blatant, too obvious, a real-world case of 
telegraphing the punch line. When Paul shows up and the situation 
becomes clear, nobody is amused. This is just a bad screwup. (Compare: 
Jones, the operator of the nuclear reactor, says, carefully and explicitly,  “ I 
now push button A ” and reaches over and, looking intently at the buttons, 
pushes button B by mistake. This would probably be more terrifying — to 
Jones as well as to observers — than amusing. We don ’ t know whether he 
has made a slip of the tongue or a slip of the ﬁ nger, but he has made too 
obvious a mistake for it to be funny — though we can certainly imagine 
expanding this event into a hilarious episode in a comedy.) 
 5.   Dan has just said  “ I ’ m playing tennis with Paul tomorrow ” and he has 
his dates wrong. Today is Wednesday not Tuesday. Here Dan ’ s false belief 
is  too active — he ’ s bafﬂ ed by Paul ’ s presence, and though he may soon 
unravel the error and see it, retrospectively, as amusing, at the moment it 
is just perplexing, a case of funny-huh. 
 6.   Another variation: Paul is playing a practical joke on Dan: the tennis 
date  is tomorrow, but Paul, knowing Dan ’ s absentmindedness, thinks —
 correctly — that he can provoke a sinking feeling in Dan by showing up 
today. Humor is the eventual result, even for Dan, but it takes some reﬂ ec-
tion for Dan. What is amusing to Dan is the mistake he made initially 
when he saw Paul and jumped to the conclusion that his absentminded-
ness had struck again. 

190 
Chapter 10
 Our second example concerns Lindsay, who was planning to stop 
at the ATM before going to the supermarket, but it slipped her mind, and 
when she arrived at the checkout, she discovered she had no money 
in her wallet. Annoying or embarrassing, not funny. It is not sad, as it 
would be if Lindsay was so poor she couldn ’ t afford groceries; her predica-
ment is just the result of a trivial foible. But it is not funny — especially not 
to her. 
 In instances of forgetting one has mistakenly structured one ’ s mental 
space, but this mistake is one of  under activation, not misactivation. Like 
the activation of all the meanings of a word when you hear it (Swinney 
1979), there may be traces of activation of a misbelief to the effect that 
she has gone to the ATM (because she meant to, because that was part of 
her plan), but any such traces are not strong enough to trip over in an 
instance of humor. Once again, we can bring this out by looking at 
variations: 
 The simplest adjustment that could turn the event into something 
amusing to Lindsay would be if she discovers her lapse just before entering 
the checkout lane. She abandons her full cart in the aisle, dashes outside 
to the ATM, and returns to the checkout, perhaps chuckling to herself at 
her own absentmindedness. But here it makes a difference how she discov-
ers her mistake. We ’ ll look at two of many possible variations: 
 a.   A friend she encounters in the supermarket happens to ask her:  “ Do you 
know where an ATM is? ” and when she hears this, it reminds her that she 
forgot to go. Not funny. 
 b.   She sees an expensive frying pan that she covets and wonders if she has 
enough in the bank to purchase it, and starts to hunt in her purse for the 
transaction receipt from the ATM machine to look at the balance, when it 
hits her — D ’ oh! — that she forgot to go. In this case, her search exposes her 
momentary active commitment to a false belief. Potentially funny, to her, 
a case of straightforward ﬁ rst-person humor. 
 There is another possibility, a case of private, but  third-person , humor: She 
is looking at her own foolishness from the outside, just as she would look 
at somebody else ’ s similar lapse. Because she has saved herself the embar-
rassment and inconvenience of holding up the checkout line, there is no 
strong negatively valenced emotion to  interfere with her ability to do this, 
and hence, on reﬂ ection, to ﬁ nd mirth in her error — though she may still 
not be amused, if she is, for instance, either more than normally self-
conscious about her reputation as a scatterbrain, or is currently anxious 
about other matters. 

Objections Considered 
191
 Perhaps the most important conclusion to draw from the examination 
of these two cases is that mere forgetting, on its own, is not the sort of 
mistake that generates humor. But having forgotten something can often 
lay the foundation for other mistakes that are sources of humor. 
 The use of hypotheticals and counterfactuals in problem solving yields 
another kind of counterexample we need to rebut. In cases of deliberate 
problem-solving, planning, and reasoning, we often create temporary 
mental spaces that contain an inconsistency. When we recognize the 
inconsistency and repair it one way or another, the accompanying emotion 
may be satisfaction but not mirth. When we are working deliberately 
(however informally), we may  intentionally insert an uncertain — uncom-
mitted — premise, using hypothetical reasoning to see where it leads:  “ what 
if . . . ? ” We are already tracking the inclusion of this premise, so if it is a 
bug, it is not a hidden bug; we use it, but we haven ’ t made an epistemic 
commitment to it. If, on the other hand, a knotty problem resists all such 
solution until we discover a tacit assumption that we never realized we 
were making, the discovery is apt to be met with laughter. We will discuss 
such problems and their pleasures in the next chapter. 
 When Hurley presented this theory at a colloquium at the Santa Fe 
Institute in 2010, David Krakauer asked why making some varieties of 
mistake — such as a losing move at chess or a tactical error in football — is 
not funny. As with the discussion of problem solving we just gave, these 
kinds of errors exemplify the epistemic commitment feature of our model. 
A chess player — or a football player — goes into each move with the same 
caution as someone solving a problem. Like the insertion of an uncertain 
premise into a chain of reasoning, a chess move is the insertion of  a guess 
into a process of search in board-space, and the player is well aware of the 
uncertainty involved in such a guess. Kirsh and Maglio (1994) distin-
guished between epistemic and pragmatic actions: Hitting a wall with a 
hammer in order to make a hole is a pragmatic action used to accomplish 
a goal; but, hitting it to look for a stud is an epistemic action used to gain 
information. The distinction is a graded, but useful, one that aligns with 
our notion of degrees of epistemic caution. In the most pragmatic of 
actions, no caution is exercised and we act boldly, but further along the 
continuum we ﬁ nd highly cautious,  epistemic actions. A chess move or a 
football play lies somewhere in the middle. In being required to do  some-
thing (by the rules of the game), plays in both are pragmatic, but because 
of the nature of complex games with opponents, a player usually moves 
with epistemic caution — expecting to gain feedback from the world. 
Without having made a commitment to the  “ correctness ”  of a move, when 

192 
Chapter 10
it turns out to be a mistake, a player won ’ t ﬁ nd humor. There are, of course, 
some situations, in the endgame of chess, where the combinatorics of pos-
sible board-space is greatly reduced and when a player may become cocky 
or overconﬁ dent. In these cases, sometimes a move may actually reﬂ ect an 
overcommitment, in which case a defeat could engender a humor that is 
simultaneous with the disappointment of loss. In these circumstances — as 
we gently turn one knob on our model — the typically nonfunny situation 
of losing at chess can be made to be funny precisely by returning the 
missing ingredient of epistemic commitment back into the situation. 
 What about ﬁ ctions not used in problem solving? People tell each other 
stories for entertainment all the time, but fantasy worlds or illustrative 
narratives aren ’ t real. It seems that one of the following should be the case: 
 1.   every ﬁ ction should have at least a touch of humor because, although 
we entertain them seriously, reality should, at least occasionally if not 
continually, disconﬁ rm the illusion; or 
 2.   ﬁ ctions cannot have funny moments in them because, if we realize they 
are ﬁ ction, then we don ’ t ever commit to the events within as being true, 
so no epistemic commitment can be broken. 
 As you know, neither proposition is true. Fictional dramas are far from 
humorous, and yet the lion ’ s share of jokes is composed of ﬁ ctions. Why 
doesn ’ t either hold? The ﬁ rst one is not true because, in hearing a ﬁ ction, 
we enjoy it for its storytelling value, but we never commit to it as being 
reality and subsequently discover that it is not (except perhaps in cases 
where we are being lied to — another important case, which we will examine 
shortly). We know, all along, that it is not real. 
 This strengthens the challenge of the second proposition, then. If we 
are uncommitted to the events in ﬁ ctions because of our recognition of 
their ﬁ ctional status, then how can there be any humor at all in those 
events? The answer has two parts. First, set aside all the ﬁ ctions with only 
third-person humor, since they invoke  “ false ”  beliefs in agents in the nar-
ratives (false relative to the ﬁ ctional world implied in the narrative). That 
leaves the cases in which the audience of a humorous ﬁ ction is committed 
to a falsehood of some sort. Remember, from chapter 7, our claim that 
ﬁ ctional worlds are excellent devices for rooting out contradictions (in 
science as well as in  “ everyday life ” ); but this is always a matter of  local 
contradiction, within the ﬁ ctional world, and it leaks out into our store of 
real-world knowledge only to the extent necessary to make sense of the 
ﬁ ctional world. (It is true in the world of Sherlock Holmes that he was born 
of human parents and wore underwear — even though Conan Doyle never 

Objections Considered 
193
explicitly asserts or implies these propositions — but not true that he had 
an iPhone or even a hot air balloon — even though Conan Doyle never 
denies these propositions either explicitly or by implication — and it is 
indeterminate [neither true nor false in the ﬁ ctional world] that he had a 
large mole on his left shoulder blade or was a distant cousin of Oliver 
Wendell Holmes.)  7   Use of the terms  “ false belief ” or  “ falsiﬁ ed belief ” is not 
to be taken as relative to some ideal objective truth but rather as shorthand 
for the claim of local inconsistency with what is taken as true in activated 
contents. In other words, when entertaining a ﬁ ction, we commit to 
assumptions as true-in-the-ﬁ ction, and this is commitment enough to lay 
the groundwork for humor, as in the joke about believing in witches. The 
humor in ﬁ ctions is the humor of a logic internal to the story, constructed 
from the elements of the story and from nearby spreading activation. In 
that space, disbelief can be suspended in isolation from our knowledge 
about reality, unless of course attention is drawn to this fact explicitly. This 
is the case in much metahumor, such as the mufﬁ n joke, or this one: 
 So this guy dies, right? . . . and he goes up to Heaven . . . and, when 
he ’ s at the pearly gates, he . . . oh, wait, never mind, I forgot — he just 
rots in the ground. 
 Then, what about fabrications we don ’ t recognize as ﬁ ctions — what 
about lies? Whenever someone has constructed a story that we take to be 
about reality, we are committing to a ﬁ rst-person belief, are we not? Bald 
lies aren ’ t funny, whether the surprise outcome is positive or negative, 
simply because there is no covert entry of a conclusion jumped to. I tell 
you I didn ’ t get you anything for your birthday and you discover I was 
ﬁ bbing: There it is, nicely wrapped, on the breakfast table. A pleasant sur-
prise, but not funny. If instead I somehow subtly  “ betray ”  the prospect 
that I ’ ve forgotten your birthday (for instance, by whispering into a dead 
phone so that you overhear me,  “ I feel rotten! I forgot what day it is ” ) so 
that you conclude, with a sinking heart, that there will be no present, and 
then you discover it on the table, this is different, and potentially a funny 
practical joke. Not so funny if you then open the nicely wrapped box and 
ﬁ nd it empty — that is negative affect dumping cold water on the joke. If 
you then ﬁ nd a gift certiﬁ cate under the tissue paper in the bottom of the 
box, it ’ s funny again. Such a series of reversals would work better on some 
people than others, of course; if you ’ ve been tricked in the past by the old 
7.   The semantics of ﬁ ction is an interesting and delicate topic in philosophy of language. See, 
e.g., Lewis 1978, Currie 1986, Byrne 1993, and Levinstein 2007.

194 
Chapter 10
gift-certiﬁ cate-in-the-bottom stunt, you won ’ t make the commitment 
necessary to be amused by the result. 
 In a footnote in chapter 4 we promised to return to Alexander Bain ’ s 
(1875) counterexamples of nonhumorous incongruities, which he used to 
defend superiority theory over incongruity theory. On older versions of 
the incongruity theory, he is right; but, on our account, Bain ’ s examples 
all make the  projection error (see chapter 3) — that is, they each assume that 
the humor is in the stimulus rather than in the dynamics of the mind 
during the contextualized processing of these stimuli. 
 All of Bain ’ s examples, while unfunny on a basic interpretation, have 
the capacity to be humorous with slight alterations to the situation —
 notably to the contents of the perceiver ’ s mind. 
 For instance, under what we assume to be Bain ’ s interpretation 
of  “ an instrument out of tune, ” a person has, without expectation, just 
picked up a guitar or sat down at a piano and begun to play, and found 
that most of the strings were out of tune. Typically, when a musician picks 
up a guitar, or sits down at a new piano (either not their own, or one they 
haven ’ t touched in a long while), they are  wary ; they wonder how 
it sounds, how well tuned it is. This lack of epistemic commitment is 
what keeps them from ﬁ nding humor in an instrument out of tune. 
However, small variations to these expectations can make for mirthful 
circumstances: 
 a.   Imagine the person had just played the instrument half an hour before, 
and their expectation upon returning to it was (reasonably) that it was still 
in tune. Within just a few notes, a mirthful confusion may occur. 
 b.   Imagine the third horn in the  “ Eroica ”  Symphony arriving ignomini-
ously out of tune. The audience — whose expectations have been built up 
by the setting of the concert hall and their knowledge of the symphony —
 may ﬁ nd themselves thrust into ﬁ ts of laughter. Comedic musicians 
(notably, Peter Schickele) have pressed this idea further by creating songs 
with just this type of effect in them. 
 Either such variation, while allowing an out-of-tune instrument to be a 
source of humor, does so not by simply being an incongruity (inherent 
out-of-tune-ness) but by using the fact that an instrument is out of tune 
to break a committed active belief (the  expectation that it will be in tune) 
in the mind. 
 We have four more counterexamples, from early discussions of the 
model, which we ’ d like to share along with our discussion of them. The 
ﬁ rst is a riddle: 

Objections Considered 
195
 (R1)  A man and his son are in a car accident. The man dies and his 
son is taken to the hospital.  “ I can ’ t operate on this boy, ” the surgeon 
says,  “ He is my son. ”  
 What ’ s going on in this story? 
 Naturally, the answer to this widespread riddle is that the surgeon is the 
boy ’ s mother. The riddle, in this form, is not funny (at least we think it ’ s 
not) but it appears to cause a mistake in reasoning: the prejudiced assump-
tion that a surgeon is a man, before the realization that it is the mother. 
In fact, its status as a riddle seems to  depend on the audience making this 
mistake. Why is such a faulty belief not funny? 
 The subtlety here is that, although the mistake  seems as if it is there to 
be made, we don ’ t actually make it. Ever. When the surgeon says  “ I can ’ t 
operate on this boy, ” confusion begins in the mind. We wonder why not, 
 “ Is he inoperable? Is the surgeon ’ s shift over? . . . ” then the surgeon quickly 
continues,  “ He is my son. ” And we know just why the surgeon cannot 
operate. But, note, we did not wrongly take the surgeon to be the father 
here. Let ’ s dissect the cases: 
 If we take her to be the mother immediately, there is no problem. That 
much is obvious. On the other hand, if we try to take it to be the father 
(a likely attempt because surgeons are stereotypically men — or at least were 
so decades ago when this little riddle started circulating), we must realize 
that we do not  commit to such a belief — there is already information clearly 
in mind that the father is dead which immediately conﬂ icts with this. No 
mistaken commitment is made. Here ’ s what we suggest happens instead. 
Before the line,  “ he is my son, ” we may have a  noncommitted , though more 
likely than not (i.e., greater than 50% likely), belief that the surgeon is 
male. We haven ’ t made a mistake — although we have a prejudice, we didn ’ t 
allow it to convince us completely. But, when we learn that the boy is the 
surgeon ’ s son, we cannot commit to it being the father, given the strict 
contradiction with the father ’ s death. We are just hit with the conﬂ ict that 
either causes confusion or directs us to determining the correct answer, or 
usually both, in that order. 
 In order to convert this riddle into something more like a joke, one 
needs to alter the information in order to encourage the listener more 
toward a commitment of that — or some — belief. For some listeners, another 
common rendering of the riddle may do just that. 
 (R2)  A boy is in a terrible bicycle accident. His father picks him up, 
calls 911, and rides in the ambulance to the hospital with him. He 
helps wheel the gurney into the emergency room, whereupon the 

196 
Chapter 10
surgeon looks at the boy and says,  “ I can ’ t operate on this boy. He is 
my son. ” 
 Versions like this, where the father is both alive and meets the surgeon, 
deepen and signiﬁ cantly reshape the listener ’ s confusion. For one thing, 
we are made to believe that the surgeon is not the father (because they 
seem to interact with each other, though this is not explicit). For another, 
neither does the surgeon seem to be the mother — not just because of the 
surgeon-as-male prejudice, though. We also realize that if she knew the 
father (as a boy ’ s mother surely must, no?) then her sentences would not 
imply that they are strangers (the father would already know that  “ he is 
her son ” and would not need to be told so). These two changes make a 
world of difference in the activation in the mind. 
 In (R1), any inkling that it might be the mother, once sparked, can ﬁ nd 
no contradiction, while any thought that it might be the father is instantly 
contradicted by the knowledge of the father ’ s death. Thus, the answer 
presents itself, at least eventually when one overcomes the surgeon-as-
male prejudice, and no overcommitment is made in the meantime. On 
the other hand, in (R2), entertaining the surgeon-as-mother hypothesis is 
usually turned back by the original gender-prejudice and the pragmatic 
circumstances of the interaction —  “ No — she and the father didn ’ t recog-
nize each other ” 8  — and entertaining the surgeon-as-father hypothesis does 
not result in the strong contradiction we see in (R1); only a bit of confu-
sion, due to weaker epistemic undecidability, occurs — “ how can the 
surgeon also be the father? ” The next stage of thought is where one  might 
make the mistake that could lead to humor. It happens  if one commits 
more certainly to the belief that the surgeon is not the mother, and that 
he is probably the father, and that one must now ﬁ nd a way to resolve the 
father coming in to the ER and being the surgeon. Likely, in such an 
attempt at resolution, one entertains the idea that the father comes in as 
father, but being recognized by his colleagues takes on the role of surgeon 
and speaks from that role. It seems awkward, however, and because of the 
uncertainty one may not be willing to speak it out as an answer, but we 
think,  “ surely it must be  something along these lines? ” Upon hearing the 
8.   Of course, different minds may go different ways. Some, when dealing with the fact that the 
parents didn ’ t recognize each other, may start to ask and wonder about ways that they might 
have had a child without knowing each other — in vitro fertilization and gamete donation may 
come to mind, though they may not capture much interest. Our theory would predict (though 
it is admittedly difﬁ cult to test) that those who think this way do not commit to the father 
hypothesis and won ’ t ﬁ nd it funny.

Objections Considered 
197
answer that it is the mother and realizing that they excised that path of 
logic too soon, such an epistemically liberal person should feel ﬁ rst-
person humor. Other more epistemically conservative listeners may be 
more cautious, not committing to a search for the father playing two roles 
and thus not being concerned when they hear that it is the mother. And, 
of course, those witty few who are not misled at all, who search more 
thoroughly in the space of surgeon-as-mother, will likely ﬁ nd the answer 
and for that reason ﬁ nd no humor at all. 
 The subjective interpretations we ’ ve made in these claims are subject to 
falsiﬁ cation. First, by counterexample, our account could be shown to be 
faulty or incomplete if somebody can produce a (funny) joke that depends 
on the gender stereotype mistake with no grounds for judging that it 
depended on a greater epistemic commitment. Second, a carefully designed 
verbalization paradigm might make it possible to investigate our claims 
here, on a variety of similar riddle structures, by indicating which beliefs 
subjects are entertaining before arriving at mirthful, confused, or insightful 
conclusions. If participants say, as they muse,  “ well it ’ s deﬁ nitely not the 
mother, ”  and then explore the surgeon-as-father hypothesis, we predict 
more laughter and self-reported mirth than if they say  “ it ’ s probably not 
the mother ” and decide to search that space later. 
 The next counterexample was provided by a reviewer of an early draft 
who asked us to sharpen our model based on examples like this one: 
 “ When walking down a staircase, I slip and almost fall: fortunately, I catch 
myself — and then I laugh. I don ’ t see how  ‘ almost falling ’  is a contradic-
tion. ”  The early draft, we admit, was not clear enough to let this reviewer 
understand our answer to his example. But, also, this is a tricky example 
worth reviewing, which shows that one must be careful when applying 
the theory: 
 First off, the reviewer is right: Simply thinking  “ I almost fell ” is certainly 
not a contradiction. It is a fully coherent thought and a valid one — it may 
be active and committed, but it doesn ’ t consist of a false belief. That ’ s why 
the humor doesn ’ t lie in that thought. 
 Then where does it reside? The example was simple: I almost fell, and 
then I caught myself. While a description of a situation contains a series 
of concepts that refer to, or imply, possible beliefs in the situation, events 
translated into language are always a vast underspeciﬁ cation of reality, and 
some of the relevant issues are not made obvious from the surface form. 
The humor here occurs in a thought that the example did not explicitly 
describe: It is the moment that you almost fall that makes you come to a 

198 
Chapter 10
false belief. In particular, you become pretty certain that you are going to 
fall and get hurt, and you prepare yourself for the impact. And then you 
don ’ t hit the ground, like in a trust fall (see p. 221) where the person who 
catches you is yourself. Therein lays the false belief, which you committed 
to, though apparently (as reality showed you) unnecessarily. 
 The same reviewer gave one more counterexample that we ’ d like to 
share, which brings up the interesting point of belief asymmetry:  “ If I 
suspect my wife is cheating on me, then the realization that I have misin-
terpreted the evidence (and that she is not cheating) may be cause for 
laughter. But if I believe my wife not to be cheating, and infer that she is, 
in fact, cheating on me — this is not cause for laughter. ” 
 We agree with both assessments about whether we would laugh or not. 
At ﬁ rst it seems that the cases are simply mirror images of each other, yet 
one is funny and the other not. The reviewer ’ s contrast is not, however, 
as straightforward and symmetrical as it ﬁ rst appears, and fails as a coun-
terexample on two counts, activity of belief and negative affect. One might 
at ﬁ rst think that this is a simple matter: The nonnegative affect condition 
explains why one is potentially funny and the other isn ’ t. But this masks 
a deeper issue — and also jumps to a conclusion that has exceptions. In 
general, no doubt, learning that your spouse hasn ’ t been faithful to you is 
a cause for anger, gloom, sadness, and other negative emotions, but if, for 
instance, you have been contemplating divorce for other reasons, such a 
discovery might be a positive joy. (Have you heard about the  “ Divorce 
Barbie ”  doll? It comes with all of Ken ’ s stuff.) The nonnegative affect con-
dition certainly has a role to play in such cases. For instance, a practical 
joke whose consequences are deeply harmful is no joke at all, especially to 
the victim. We may admire the cleverness of the trickster who defrauds 
the little old lady, but any laughter his ploy occasions is caused by wonder 
at the ingenuity, not amusement (see chapter 12 on the difference between 
wit and humor). But there is also an unnoted asymmetry, in almost all 
imaginable circumstances, between believing (suspecting) your spouse is 
unfaithful and believing — notice we wouldn ’ t say  “ suspecting ” — your 
spouse is faithful. The former is bound to be a (more)  active belief. 
 Activity is a precondition for surprise. Gravity is expected to hold every-
where, stones are expected to be hard, snow is expected to be cold, dogs 
are expected to be mammals, and birds are expected to ﬂ y. These and 
countless others are the default beliefs that we all somehow register or store 
dormant in long-term memory. They are activated routinely and  “ instan-
taneously ”  by our ongoing perceptual experience. If somebody throws a 
foam-rubber brick at your head, you expect the worst because you know 

Objections Considered 
199
that bricks are heavy and hard and believe the looming projectile is a brick. 
You don ’ t have to think the thoughts  “ out loud ” in your head for them 
to be activated. Your ducking and cringing betray your active beliefs in this 
instance. Are the same beliefs about bricks  active when you just walk by a 
pile of bricks and recognize them as bricks? No, although they might be 
activated  as soon as you contemplate needing a projectile to throw, or a 
doorstop. Similarly, when you recognize your wife as the person in the 
kitchen, you don ’ t  activate the long-term default belief that she is faithful, 
unless, for one reason or another, it comes up. (Magicians know that if 
they are wielding a fake brick, they have to be very careful not to betray 
their belief — their knowledge — that it is fake, a belief which is active for 
them in a way that their belief that the egg on the table is  not fake is not 
active.) 
 So in the case in which one believes one ’ s wife not to be cheating, and 
then suddenly acquires the contrary belief, the discovery is what activates 
one ’ s prior belief, so the order is wrong for humor. You weren ’ t actively 
believing — even in the minimal sense of believing the incoming brick to 
be hard — that your wife was not cheating on you until your dormant belief 
was shattered. This is like learning that that looming thing was a brick 
after it hits you. 
 To show that the asymmetry in  activity by itself can account for the 
difference between an amusing discovery and one that is perhaps surpris-
ing but not amusing, consider the following variation: If I suspect that the 
mailman has been riding a bicycle to deliver mail, then my realization that 
I have misinterpreted the evidence — the bicycle you saw him parking on 
the sidewalk was not his, but a child ’ s that he had just retrieved from the 
street — may be cause for laughter. But if I don ’ t believe the mailman rides 
a bicycle to deliver the mail, and discover that he is in fact riding a bicy-
cle — this is not cause for laughter. 
 Dennett presented an early version of our model at a conference on 
music, language, and the mind at Tufts University in July of 2008, which 
led to a useful challenge. In the discussion, Marc Hauser observed:  “ Let ’ s 
say I come here expecting you to talk about consciousness. Lo and behold, 
you ’ re talking about humor. That ’ s a violation, there ’ s a debugging. I have 
no idea why this happened. But not funny. So it seems to me, I ’ ve got all 
the ingredients [of your model] there but not funny. ” Isn ’ t this a clear 
counterexample, and if not, why not? Dennett did not think of a good 
response at the time, but reﬂ ection has clariﬁ ed the situation. 
 Hauser ’ s mental space includes an expectation that is not fulﬁ lled, as 
he discovers. Why isn ’ t this at all amusing to him? We must ask how he 

200 
Chapter 10
came to his misexpectation. He didn ’ t say, so let ’ s look at the possibilities. 
Suppose he just had a hunch, even a fairly conﬁ dent hunch, that Dennett 
would be speaking about consciousness, one of his main research interests. 
A hunch isn ’ t enough; it isn ’ t a  committed belief, even if Hauser would be 
prepared to bet on it. Contrast this with expectations that in all likelihood 
Hauser would be committed to, assumptions included in the mental space 
with no noticeable evaluation or mental effort at all, such as the expecta-
tion that Dennett would be wearing (men ’ s) clothes, and speaking in 
English. Or that the talk would not be given by somebody else named Dan 
Dennett. It is not that a violation of any of these would  have to provoke 
mirth on our model, but just that it  might well , if the timing of the revela-
tion was right, and there were no interfering effects. In contrast, it is hard 
to imagine framing the (sudden? dawning?) realization that Dennett wasn ’ t 
speaking about consciousness so that it would provoke mirth. The line 
between a presumption — paradigmatically, a hastily included item thrown 
into the mental space by the unsupervised triage system — and a hunch (or 
a surmise, or a guess, or a conclusion ventured) is not a sharp one, and it 
is easy enough to see that some humor might in fact be provoked by rec-
ognition of error in one of the latter cases, when everything else was just 
right, but not  striking humor, not the potent brew. The polarity is between 
what might be called  headlong commitments and  wary commitments, and 
if we understand the polarity we can postpone or ﬁ nesse entirely the need 
for a criterion, a threshold that is the necessary and sufﬁ cient condition 
for a mirth-inviting presumption. Here we can see the domain of humor 
interpenetrating with the domain of riddles and puzzles, the solutions to 
which may on occasion provoke not just admiration and delight but mirth. 
Recall the riddle about the surgeon and the car accident victim. 
 Then there is the covert entry condition. Did Hauser reﬂ ect to himself, 
on his short trip to Tufts from Harvard Square, that he was soon going to 
hear Dennett ’ s latest line on consciousness? If so, then this ruins any 
prospect for humor since the false expectation is overtly introduced into 
his mental space. It would be like the following (ruined) joke: 
 (76)  Before you criticize someone, you should (as we say 
metaphorically) walk a mile in their shoes. That way, when you criticize 
them, you ’ ve got a mile head start, and they ’ re barefoot. 
 To which the response is: Oh, so you ’ ve suddenly switched from meta-
phorical to literal; I wasn ’ t expecting that. Not funny. 
 Epistemic caution and commitment and the epistemic status of 
various sources of information are all rather subtle matters, as is the 

Objections Considered 
201
working-memory status of any belief. Since there is room for penumbral 
cases, a good counterexample to our theory would be one in which the 
belief or beliefs involved are (i) active, (ii) heuristically created, (iii) com-
mitted, and (iv) contradicted — and yet the discovery does not yield mirth. 
Or, of course, something truly funny that doesn ’ t ﬁ t this scheme in one 
way or another. We will discuss the nuances of a number of dimensions 
of the penumbra in detail in the next chapter. 
 D.   A Brief Glance at Others ’  Models  
 What did the 0 say to the 8? 
 “ Nice belt. ” 
 We have commented, from time to time, on the family resemblance that 
our theory holds with earlier incongruity resolution models of humor. The 
similarities are pretty clear, but we will acknowledge them explicitly in 
order to highlight our innovations. We quickly review some models which 
should be familiar from chapter 4, and then look in more detail at a couple 
of incongruity-resolution models that are the closest kin to our epistemo-
logical theory. 
 The surface similarity between our model and incongruity resolution 
derives from the dependence of both on logical mechanism. Unlike supe-
riority theory, release theory, mechanical theory, play theory, and other 
evolutionary theories, incongruity resolution paved the way for our work 
by noticing that nonsense and logic were  somehow central notions. But, as 
it turns out, it is neither incongruity nor resolution that causes humor. 
Instead, these devices are simply mechanisms that  commonly assist in the 
discovery of a mistaken commitment. Discovering an incongruity creates 
a contradiction. The ensuing confusion causes covert-behavioral review of 
the situation, and that review is  one particularly effective way that we might 
stumble upon a mistaken commitment. And, if it happens this way, then 
it appears as if we have a resolved incongruity causing humor; but it is 
only the discovery of the mistaken commitment that caused the humor. 
We can be sure of this because other kinds of resolved incongruity don ’ t 
cause humor (e.g., thinking the lights were off, ﬁ nding them on, and then 
discovering you ’ ve been burglarized), and, further, unresolved incongrui-
ties can in fact be humorous. 
 A magician holds up a piece of rope, with a long loop dangling out 
the bottom of his hand, and  three  (!) ends poking up out of the top of 
his ﬁ st. He says to the crowd,  “ How can a rope have three ends? ” A 

202 
Chapter 10
rhetorical question with which we all implicitly agree. It ’ s not possible, 
and so we assume the fourth end of a second rope  must be hidden inside 
his closed ﬁ st. With the other hand, he then slowly pulls the loop of rope 
down until the three ends disappear into his hand, and then continues 
pulling until two ends pop loose and hang down toward the ﬂ oor, at 
which point he opens the hand that originally held the three ends — and 
it is empty. 
 This kind of trick is often met not just with awe, but with laughter. You 
might say there is an incongruity between the two ends and the three ends, 
but there certainly is no resolution. On our theory, the laughers committed 
to there being two ropes in the magician ’ s hand and then were shown that 
there were not. They don ’ t actually know quite what happened, but they 
certainly know that their presumption of there being two ropes there was 
mistaken. This is just one example of hundreds of magician ’ s illusions that 
create these kinds of beliefs in us and, without resolving the incongruity, 
can still create mirth. 
 Notice, too, that there was an earlier incongruity in this situation: the 
incongruity between three ends and one loop in the rope. It was this 
incongruity that caused us  to make a mistaken commitment by leading us 
to choose an option from a false dichotomy — this is another mechanism 
by which an incongruity can lead to humor, but it is very different from 
the incongruity that causes us  to discover a mistaken commitment. As you 
can see, the only thing that is consistently present is precisely the mistaken 
commitment. 
 It is easy to see how Schopenhauer ’ s and Kant ’ s versions of the incon-
gruity-resolution theory of humor are subsumed and strengthened by our 
model. Since these earlier models made no attempt at all to supply a cogni-
tive or neural mechanism for humor, even sketchily, they had no way of 
 “ running in slow motion, ” taking apart the processes to see what steps had 
to be involved. Our proposed mechanism gives us a new perspective on 
more recent models. In Suls ’ s (1972) conception of the theory, the incon-
gruity is between the setup and the punch line. In our terms, both a setup 
and a jab or a punch contribute information that, along with existing 
knowledge, allows the incremental construction of a mental space in 
which various beliefs and metabeliefs are committed to with varying epis-
temic intensities. Somewhere along the way, further logical inference deter-
mines that a mistake has been made in inferences used to integrate the 
setup and the punch line within the mental space. Although resolution 
commonly occurs, it is not the resolution of the incongruity but rather the 
identiﬁ cation of (not just the presence of) the mistake that we ﬁ nd funny. 

Objections Considered 
203
Suls ’ s model is accurate for a certain class of textual jokes in which the 
setup provides the information for an overcommitted belief which is later 
found to be inconsistent as a result of information provided by the punch 
(or by inferences drawn from that information); however, this case does 
not hold for all instances of humor, as evidenced by a competing model 
from around the same time: Shultz ’ s (1976) model, which exploits the 
mechanism of a different class of jokes. In these jokes the hearer conceives 
of two ambiguous meanings in the setup, only one of which is consistent 
with the punch line. In our terms, the  “ ﬁ rst ” interpretation contributes to 
the construction of a mental space — again, including existing knowledge 
and inferential conclusions. But the mistake — the miscommitment — is 
already made before one hears the punch line. It is the punch line, in fact, 
that helps one recognize that some false assumption of inference was made 
while building the model. 
 The Wyer and Collins (1992) extensions to Suls ’ s model require incon-
gruity between the setup and the punch line to be resolved with two 
caveats: First, resolution must happen in such a way that the original 
interpretation still makes sense without the added information that caused 
the reinterpretation (this they call  non - replacement ), and second, the resolu-
tion must occur such that the new interpretation is diminished in impor-
tance compared with the initial interpretation. They give an example of a 
situation that they say cannot easily be explained by incongruity resolu-
tion alone without this condition. The example is from a study done by 
Nerhardt (1976) in which blindfolded subjects were asked to estimate the 
relative weights of objects placed in each hand. After a few similar weights, 
the experimenters gave subjects objects that differed substantially from the 
ﬁ rst few. The result: usually smiling or laughter. Wyer and Collins suggest 
that the subjects receiving the deviant weights infer that the experiment 
is not a serious study of weight judgment at all — they decide that the situ-
ation is less important than they had originally interpreted and the rein-
terpretation causes amusement due to the diminishment. We doubt that 
this is the only thought one could have had in that situation. One might 
wonder, for instance, whether the experimenters were trying to prime the 
participants with the initially similar weights to see if their judgment was 
affected by a distant cognitive anchor — such a musing would be incompat-
ible with deciding that the experiment is not a serious study of weight 
judgment, but laughter might still occur. We offer a different explanation: 
The subjects in the experiment simply expect a weight similar to the ﬁ rst 
few by extrapolation (a kind of automatic abductive inference) from the 
early experiences. When the deviant weight is handed to them, they have 

204 
Chapter 10
their active inferential expectation broken. The humor is caused by this 
only, although thoughts about why the experimenter chose to arrange the 
weights in that order might well follow on afterward. We do not see a need 
for a diminishment requirement. 
 Wyer and Collins ’ s requirement of non-replacement is an interesting 
anticipation of an aspect of our model: Their requirement says that in 
humor the ﬁ rst interpretation, before there is incongruity, remains coher-
ent in the absence of the punch line, which shows the second interpreta-
tion to be correct. We think this observation is also why the traditional I-R 
model focused not on mistakes, but on interpretations. In our model, this 
corresponds to the notion that when one discovers an improper belief 
commitment, many times the reasoning that led to that commitment is 
solid (in that it still consists of facts and  most likely assumptions) in the 
absence of information provided that supports a second more consistent 
comprehension model. The humor is, as we ’ ve said a number of times, in 
the detection of the improper belief, not in the comparison of the new 
interpretation.  9 
 Though Minsky (1984) claims that  “ it is probably futile to ask precisely 
what humor is ” and compares the subject to Wittgenstein ’ s (1953) dilemma 
of deﬁ ning a  “ game, ”  he also gives a couple of notions which he asserts 
contribute signiﬁ cantly to an approximate deﬁ nition. The ﬁ rst of these is 
frame shifting, which we ’ ve discussed already, and the second is his idea 
of  “ cognitive censors. ” We will look at both of these, in that order, to see 
how they compare with our theory. The humor described by Minsky as 
arising from frame shifting is also a subclass of the humor treated in the 
model we have described here (although, as spelled out earlier, we are 
skeptical about the nature of frames in general). Frame shifting is a logical 
mechanism — not the only one — which in certain circumstances will reli-
ably collapse an inferential belief that was taken to be true. Not all frame 
shifting is humorous; Coulson (2001) convincingly describes frame shift-
ing as operative in almost all thought, and not all humor is attributable 
to frame shifts. For example, the weight-estimation experiment of 
9.   Wyer and Collins also discuss a principle of  cognitive elaboration , which they claim occurs 
in the comprehension of an incongruity resolution. This seems trivial to us in that cognitive 
elaboration occurs in the comprehension of any situation, humorous or otherwise. The 
incessant spreading of activation in JITSA implies that we are cognitively elaborating at 
every moment, and while it is in some way required for mirth and certainly contributes to both 
the formation of and elimination of mistaken commitments, it is not a deﬁ ning factor of 
mirth-elicitation.

Objections Considered 
205
Nerhardt discussed above shows a kind of humor in which there may not 
be a frame shift. Although the participants laughed, it is hard to say that 
the data involved in the humor utilized frames at all, much less that one 
replaced another that was false. Is there a frame for the (likely novel, to 
the participants) experience of being handed similarly hefty weights 
while blindfolded? Is there another frame for being handed weights of very 
different heft while blindfolded? We think, instead, that it was simply an 
inferential belief — an expectation — that was at the core of the humor 
experience for those participants. The frame (if it could be called such) 
for this experience did not change at the moment of humor; only one 
expectation did. 
 While his mechanics of comprehension differ from ours signiﬁ cantly, 
Minsky ’ s broader proposal for humor does mirror our idea of humor as a 
cognitive cleanup mechanism. His concept of  “ cognitive censors ” points 
to humor as a kind of machinery for preventing mistakes. The types of 
mistakes are different (his,  “ inappropriate comparisons ” ; ours, just beliefs, 
though they derive from logic), and the imagined mechanisms are strik-
ingly different: his, a  “ heuristic control of logic, ” a metalogic implemented 
as an array of millions of learned logical censors applied through series of 
tests for preconditions in order to  “ suppress unproductive mental states ” ; 
ours, simply the detection of an improper commitment. Despite the dif-
ferences, we consider the Minsky model to be probably our closest kin 
because of its theme of cognitive cleansing. But, let ’ s make the difference  10 
a little clearer: The concept of  “ cognitive censors ” says that we discover 
millions of preventative rules of logic over our lives, which describe 
thoughts and inferences that we have experienced and learned about and 
should try to avoid having again. On this view, humor happens when such 
rules are broken — when we do have such  “ prohibited ” thoughts, we are 
delighted. There is a focus in this theory on  “ ineffective or destructive 
thought processes, ” but we don ’ t see humor as being related to the learning 
about or detection of such structured fallacies. This is a very subtle point: 
Though humor  is related to mistakes that happen in  belief caused by 
 assumptions in  inference , these mistakes are not signs of  improper reasoning , 
and they are not subject to censorial early detection and prevention. On 
10.   There are quite a few other dissimilarities — for instance, Minsky assumed his theory worked 
not alone but in conjunction with Freud ’ s taboo-censors to provide for all humor. For Minsky, 
humor always includes a pinch of childlike spice: the delight in being  naughty and getting away 
with it. While we agree that this aspect enhances much humor, we claim that it is not a crucial 
ingredient.

206 
Chapter 10
our view, humor shows us that a resulting belief that we arrived at in 
comprehension happened to be wrong, not that the reasoning we used to 
get there is systematically wrong. In fact, the reasoning we used to get 
there usually (though, perhaps, not always) is in some way  correct reason-
ing. Though inherently risky, the heuristic inferential thought that we 
normally use is, statistically, more likely to be right than not. It provides 
correct beliefs most of the time, through assumptions that are usually valid 
and inferences that usually work. Two goldﬁ sh in their tank  should usually 
be interpreted as being in a ﬁ sh tank. Detecting the mistake this time, in 
the pun, does not mean that next time you should be more careful — you 
should still assume next time that  “ their tank, ” when paired with  “ ﬁ sh, ” 
means a ﬁ sh tank. Taking these risks is an unavoidable consequence of 
using the tool that all of our successful reasoning crucially depends on; we 
have, in fact, no other choice.  11   Such risk taking does make for mistakes, 
yet correctly taken risks are not the kinds of mistakes that we can learn to 
avoid — not something we could develop a rule-list of cognitive censors to 
protect us from. No tool, humor or otherwise, can teach us how to make 
probabilistic assumptions without ever failing. Rather,  we have to learn to 
live with the failings of our minds, and to detect their consequences after they 
occur. Humor is a backup system that discovers some (though not all) of 
those occasional — but inevitable — times when depending on such a risky 
system just happens to fail. 
 A tempting oversimpliﬁ cation of our epistemological theory of humor 
is that it is about falsiﬁ ed beliefs. Some other recent theories have also 
focused on beliefs (e.g., LaFollette and Shanks 1993)  12 and even on falsiﬁ ed 
beliefs (e.g., Jung 2003). Any model along these lines is, like ours, also a 
variant of the incongruity resolution family — and in fact such models are 
typically retellings of Schopenhauer ’ s incongruity between a conception 
and a perception. Sometimes, presumably in recognition that Schopen-
hauer ’ s model is an underspeciﬁ cation, theorists propose additional con-
straints such as those recommended by Wyer and Collins (see above, 
11.   The alternative — the ideal of deductive certainty in a nonideal world — threatens us with 
either inﬁ nite processing or the failure to have any thought at all.
12.   LaFollette and Shanks, although right in the casual speculation at the end of their paper 
that humor theory will eventually inform epistemology and philosophy of mind, are, we think, 
far off base in their description of humor — for them, a high-speed oscillation or  “ ﬂ ickering ” of 
the mind between two sets of beliefs while maintaining the proper  “ psychic distance ” from the 
stimuli, which  “ provides a space within which to ﬂ icker ” (1993, p. 333). We think it is clear 
how our model differs from this.

Objections Considered 
207
p. 203) or those put forward by Jung (2003). Jung ’ s  “ inner eye theory of 
humor ”  will be the last family member with which we compare the 
epistemological theory. 
 For Jung, humor is caused by a falsiﬁ ed belief (FB), with the additional 
constraints of  “ empathy ”  (E) and something he calls  “ sympathetic instant 
utility ”  (SIU). These three constraints are each  “ a necessary condition and 
. . . the three criteria are jointly sufﬁ cient to explain all laughter ” (Jung 
2003, pp. 220 – 221). Jung exploits a couple of good intuitions (falsiﬁ ed 
belief and the intentional stance) that are reﬂ ected in our work as well, 
but he has overlooked some others, and those he has noticed have not 
been put together in quite the right way. Since Jung ’ s theory is only a 
theory of the  “ trigger mechanism ” of humor, we will compare only that 
portion of our theory with his. 
 By  empathy we take Jung to mean the ability to take the intentional 
stance:  “ To laugh at a joke requires understanding the desires or the beliefs 
of the joke-teller and those of the characters in the joke ” (Jung 2003, 
p. 219). He uses the term  “ theory of mind ” (which we criticize above, 
p. 144), cites the mirror-neuron literature (Gallese et al. 1996; Rizzolatti 
et al. 1996), and often claims that  “ a laugher understands the mental states 
held by ” agents in the joke. Of course he is right that theory of mind or 
the intentional stance is always used when perceiving any humor situation 
in which there are other agents, but he has no analysis of the ways in 
which using the intentional stance provides for the perception of a false 
belief, the ways in which ﬁ rst-person humor does  not require the inten-
tional stance, and the epistemological differences between ﬁ rst- and third-
person knowledge of mental states that explain the relaxed conditions for 
third-person humor. 
 Jung uses  “ sympathetic instant utility ” to mark whether we are pleased 
with the outcome of a situation for people. In his words,  “ In a simple 
generalization, when good things happen to those the laugher likes and 
bad things happen to those whom she dislikes, the state is satisfactory to 
her and her SIU is positive while when bad things happen to people she 
likes and good things happen to people she dislikes, the state is dissatis-
factory to her and her SIU is negative ” (2003, pp. 219 – 220). This bears an 
interesting resemblance to our use of Boorstin ’ s perspectives (see chapter 
8), which can sometimes modulate humor, but on our theory, the deliver-
ances of the different Boorstinian eyes are only occasional modiﬁ ers of 
humor, not part of the trigger mechanism at all. This can be readily seen 
in ﬁ rst-person humor in which there is no one to empathize or sympathize 
with (aside from one ’ s own fallible self) and no one to receive  “ instant 

208 
Chapter 10
utility. ” For instance, consider simple puns whose humor turns only on 
misinterpretations, such as this one: 
 (77)  A cardboard belt would be a waist of paper. 
 Both Jung ’ s account and ours feature falsiﬁ ed beliefs, but Jung ’ s is under-
speciﬁ ed, simply claiming that there is always a falsiﬁ ed belief. As we ’ ve 
explained, many falsiﬁ ed beliefs do not provide humor (even if they are 
accompanied by empathy and sympathetic instant utility). For instance, 
imagine you are at the airport waiting for your daughter ’ s arrival, and you 
get a call from her saying she ’ s been bumped from her oversold ﬂ ight; you 
will have to wait another two hours for her to arrive on the next ﬂ ight. 
You settle down to read your novel, making the best of an annoying situ-
ation. A few minutes later she calls back to say another passenger relin-
quished a seat to her on the original ﬂ ight. You ’ re relieved, but not amused, 
even though your belief about waiting two more hours is falsiﬁ ed, you get 
sympathetic instant utility, and you  “ understand the mental states held 
by ” everyone involved.  13   To identify the trigger mechanism for humor, one 
must specify what kinds of beliefs there are, what kinds of fallacies can 
occur in beliefs, and which kind of fallacy in which kind of belief can lead 
to humor. Also missing from Jung ’ s theory is any mechanism for falsifying 
beliefs that would help to differentiate between the triggers for ﬁ rst- and 
third-person humor. So we see Jung ’ s theory as somewhat close in spirit to 
the cognitive trigger part of our model, based on similar intuitions, but 
incomplete in some regards and mistaken in others. 
 There is one other theorist who deserves special mention. Graeme 
Ritchie has been looking at and writing about humor theories for a number 
of years (e.g., Ritchie 1999, 2006), and has been the only writer 
(we ’ ve found) who accepts incongruity resolution theories but also openly 
notes their incompleteness. Let ’ s hold our theory up to Ritchie ’ s salutary 
caution. 
 E.   Graeme Ritchie ’ s Five Questions  
 “ Life is like a bridge. ” 
 “ In what way? ” 
 “ How should I know? ” 
 — Minsky (1984) 
13.   This example is not funny, on our model, because the falsiﬁ ed belief was not introduced 
covertly. It was a case of misinformation. It was an active belief that was committed to, but the 
commitment was not due to a leap to a conclusion.

Objections Considered 
209
 Occasionally, theorists in a ﬁ eld ﬁ nd themselves spiraling around some 
very deep intuition about their subject, without being able to see or 
say exactly how that intuition is related to their phenomenon. In 
 “ Developing the Incongruity Resolution Theory ” Graeme Ritchie (1999) 
makes the point that I-R theorists have long had an intuition of just 
this sort. He analyzes the models of both Suls and Shultz as applied to 
textual and narrative (mostly joke) humor stimuli, and poses — but does 
not answer — ﬁ ve questions which together compose the core questions: 
 “ What kind of incongruity is funny? ” or  “ What is it about incongruity 
that is funny? ” He suggests that answering these questions would 
be a major step forward for humor theory, and we agree. Here are 
our answers: 
 (Q1)  What makes one potential interpretation more obvious than 
another? 
 In classical incongruity resolution theory, one interpretation is ini-
tially taken to be the case, and another supplants it later. Ritchie wants 
to know why each is chosen when it is. The interpretation replacement 
structure of I-R is a subclass of the model given in this book. The ﬁ rst 
interpretation, under our model, is caused by an inferential assumption 
based on the hearer ’ s world knowledge and the joke ’ s setup. Clues in the 
setup of a joke may lead one interpretation to seem to be the more 
likely given the context, and so the assumption is  “ automatically ”  (i.e., 
covertly) made. It is the most likely comprehension structure given the 
partial data. Note that  even when one is in joke-swapping mode , and hence 
 expecting just this kind of error to be induced, one cannot help but make 
the faulty inference, if the joke teller is talented. To reuse the goldﬁ sh 
pun yet again, when we are told  “ Two goldﬁ sh were in their tank, ” the 
use of  “ tank ”  with reference to  “ ﬁ sh ” most frequently refers to a ﬁ sh 
tank; thus, given no disambiguating information, we choose the statisti-
cally likely meaning (in the context of the word  “ ﬁ sh ” ) for the ambigu-
ous word  “ tank ” (in other cases, it may just be a primed meaning, 
instead of a probable meaning, that is activated). When we realize that 
this belief was false, it is often because a new interpretation that can 
describe all the available data without contradiction and in a way that is 
consistent with existing knowledge has supplanted the old one. In jokes, 
this is usually handed to us by the joke ’ s designer (either a creative 
person or memetic evolution or both) who has discovered just what 
information will make the new interpretation more consistent.  Obvious-
ness is the property shared by whatever inferences are generated by the 

210 
Chapter 10
unconscious triage mechanisms that mediate the time-pressured heuris-
tic search that is constantly generating our expectations. 
 (Q2)  How difﬁ cult to assimilate must a piece of text be in order to 
stimulate a search for another interpretation? How can this search be 
guided by the portion of text that caused the reassessment? 
 First, not all humor comes from a reassessment of a portion of text. We 
can laugh at the Three Stooges knocking each other down, a form of humor 
that requires no reassessment whatsoever. We will rephrase Ritchie ’ s ques-
tion, in light of our model, as  “ what causes us to recognize that a model 
in a mental space is insufﬁ cient? ” Consistency-checking in mental spaces 
is not just frequent; it is an involuntary component of the process of gen-
erating mental spaces in the ﬁ rst place, so generating a mental space is  ipso 
facto doing something approximating an exhaustive search for contradic-
tions. In many cases of humor, a more wholly consistent evaluation of the 
available data will show us that the initial construction of the space is 
faulty (if it fails to include some data that the new evaluation does include), 
but in other cases we may not have a more consistent evaluation; we will 
simply be shown that the mental space is faulty by contradiction within 
itself. 
 (Q3)  What does it mean for two interpretations to differ in an amusing 
way (as opposed to merely not being the same)? 
 This question was formulated based on intuitions of previous incongru-
ity resolution theories that do not apply to our model — notably, that the 
humor is in the stimulus. The amusement is the sense of discovering the 
false committed active belief. It is often, but not always, two interpreta-
tions of something that bring this to light. In fact, the two interpretations 
are  always  “ merely not the same, ” as Ritchie says. It is not that they  “ differ 
in an amusing way ” ; it is  the way the difference is discovered that is amusing. 
The humor lies in what their difference points out about the mistake the 
audience has made. 
 (Q4)  What factors make an interpretation inherently more amusing? 
 Nothing intrinsic to any one interpretation makes it more amusing, any 
more than something intrinsic to an ink trail makes it an authentic 
Abraham Lincoln signature. What makes it authentic is that he, Lincoln, 
made it. What makes an interpretation amusing is that the audience made 
it in the course of discovering a mistake. It is the discovery of a mistake 
in a mental space that pleases us, and the pleasure takes the form of mirth 

Objections Considered 
211
when the mistake arose from a surreptitiously introduced inference. (This 
suggests that in the limit,  any sentence could in principle serve as a funny 
punch line to some joke, setting aside issues of ponderousness of setup, 
attention span of listeners, and the like.  14 ) 
 (Q5)  What combinations of these factors combine to produce humor? 
 Ritchie suggests that his last three questions may boil down to the same 
thing, but that if this is so, it needs to be established. He is right. Again, 
like the previous two questions, humor is produced not by interpretations, 
but by what (in some cases) a difference in interpretations points out. In 
other cases, though, other factors may lead us to the mistake. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.   It is said that Dorothy Parker was once asked,  “ Can you make a joke about horticulture? ” 
Without missing a beat, or so the story goes, she replied,  “ You can lead a whore to culture, but 
you can ’ t make her think. ” 


 11    The Penumbra: Nonjokes, Bad Jokes, and Near-Humor 
 Q:  What ’ s wrong with lawyer jokes? 
 A:  Lawyers don ’ t think they ’ re funny and other people don ’ t think they ’ re jokes. 
 Humor, whatever it is, is a product of evolution, both genetic and cultural, 
so there will very likely be some quasi-humorous or pseudo-humorous 
phenomena that bear deep similarities to prototypical humor — and in fact 
are ancestors, descendants, or components of the genuine article. It is 
always a mistake to think that the aim of such a search is a perfect set of 
 necessary and sufﬁ cient conditions that deﬁ ne the  essence of all humor and 
admit of no undecidable penumbral cases. Biologists can ’ t deﬁ ne  mammal 
with that kind of imagined Socratic precision — where, in the transition 
from reptiles through therapsids to true mammals do we  “ draw the line ” ? —
 and humor will probably exhibit the same sort of systematic family resem-
blances with no nonarbitrary boundaries. However, by looking more 
closely at four of the dimensions of variance that delimit some of these 
boundaries, we can try to sharpen the edges a little more.  
 First, of course, are the individual differences — the knowledge-relativity 
of humor. Not everyone ﬁ nds the same things funny, or, at least, people 
ﬁ nd them funny to differing degrees, or at different times while taking 
different perspectives (recall the perspectival asymmetry between ﬁ rst- and 
third-person humor). A lawyer may not see the humor in the joke above, 
for instance. In chapter 3 we showed that humor is knowledge-relative, 
but we didn ’ t say why this should be so. Humor is knowledge-relative 
because the core of the matter is the validity of working-memory belief 
constructs, which vary between individuals. Second, even within an indi-
vidual, humor ranges in degree. Some jokes are just funnier — to you — than 
others are. The conditions for humor, which we ﬁ rst laid out in chapter 7, 
need to be augmented to explain this gradient. We provide two answers 
below. Third, there are boundary cases which folks ﬁ nd funny, yet for 
which they have difﬁ culty saying, even casually and nontheoretically, 

214 
Chapter 11
what ’ s funny about them (though there almost certainly are other cases 
yet to be explored, our theory explains all the ones we ’ ve looked at, and 
we will show how shortly). And fourth, humor often overlaps with related 
phenomena. Jokes are memes evolved for enjoyment. There are many 
kinds of memes that have been selected for their enjoyment value only, 
but it is not important (to their cultural ﬁ tness) just which kinds of enjoy-
ment they evoke. Those that evoke the most enjoyment — of any kind — are 
the most likely to be transmitted, provided that they are structured in 
memorable (if possible,  unforgettable ) ways. In becoming enjoyment pack-
ages, memes have not always been selected for which joys they cause; any 
joy that will get it passed on will do. And so we have the various close kin 
of humor: riddles, puzzles, witty rhymes, and clever aphorisms. 
 There are no reasons why a single meme shouldn ’ t take advantage of 
more than one of the cognitive pleasures that help them copy themselves 
into the future, so we ﬁ nd much overlap in these categories of humor-kin. 
Most  jokes these days, in fact, have their humor inextricably bound together 
with pleasures of other kinds — simply because this is possible, and makes 
it a more potent item. Some of these related pleasures are very similar to 
mirth, such as other epistemic emotions: joy in insight, the  Aha! of dis-
covery or problem solving, and the appreciation of wit. Others are related 
simply by common association, such as Schadenfreude and recognition of 
superiority, and, of course, sexual titillation.  1  
 A.   Knowledge-Relativity 
 A sax player dies and goes to the pearly gates. St. Peter says  “ sorry, too much 
partying, you have to go to the other place. ” The elevator doors open and he goes 
into a huge bar. All the greatest are on stage on a break. Satchmo. Count Basie, 
Miles Davis. He goes over to Charlie Parker and says,  “ Hey this can ’ t be Hell; all 
the best are playing here. ” Charlie says,  “ Hey man, Karen Carpenter is on drums! ” 
 We each have idiosyncratic beliefs, shaped both by culture and by our 
personal histories. And, for any particular belief, each person ’ s instantia-
tion of it will be shaped slightly differently, with a range of aspects accented 
1.   Dirty jokes are the chocolate candies of humor, you might say. It is remarkable that hot, 
unsweetened chocolate was drunk like black coffee for several millennia before somebody 
thought to sweeten it by mixing some sugar with the cocoa powder. The equally bright idea of 
mixing basic humor with the multidimensional pleasures of (the merest contemplation of) sex 
came much earlier in the history of human self-stimulation.

The Penumbra 
215
in diverse ways and having distinct likelihoods of priming in the same 
circumstances. In addition, we each have idiosyncratic propensities to 
epistemic caution when activating beliefs in various domains. These indi-
vidualities cause us to construct our mental spaces idiosyncratically and 
thus give us each distinct susceptibilities to mirth during any given event. 
There are central tendencies, stimuli that can evoke mirth in a broad cross-
section of a culture, but there are also outliers like the very in-group jazz 
joke above. Most of the jokes in this book should be accessible to our 
contemporaries, but below are some examples that probably are not. These 
come from Bubb ’ s (1920)  The Jests of Hierocles and Philagrius , which con-
tains sundry jokes many of which are still comprehensible, from a number 
of sources dating from as far back as the ﬁ fth century  AD and likely told in 
oral tradition for centuries before. 
 (78)  A pedant ordered a silversmith to make a lamp, and when the 
latter enquired how large he should make it, he replied,  “ Large enough 
for eight men. ” 
 (79)  A pedant was tying on some new sandals. When they squeaked he 
paused and said,  “ Do not squeak or you will injure your two legs. ” 
 These two jokes, likely, once turned on some kind of homonymy (in 
the original Greek) or cultural information that today ’ s casual reader 
(including the authors) do not have available. Likewise, we are all familiar 
with  “ inside ”  jokes which we either cannot easily or do not want to explain 
to an outsider, or for which we have been the outsider who was not privy 
to the implicit beliefs that the joke requires. There are some jokes, too, 
which we might get because we know  of the beliefs necessary, even if those 
beliefs aren ’ t our own.  
 (80)  How do you know you ’ re at a bulimic bachelor party? 
 When the cake jumps out of the girl! 
 Many of us have heard of the idea of a bachelor party where a hired 
dancer jumps out of a (very large) cake. But for those of us who have never 
witnessed this (and the authors presume that ’ s most of us, these days) the 
likelihood of activating this belief when hearing the setup of the joke is 
near zero, though we can usually access it when it is forcibly primed by 
the punch line. 
 This is another good example of a joke on its way to extinction. As fewer 
people automatically activate the girl jumping out of the cake when they 
hear of the bachelor party, the audience for this joke will shrink. And, of 
course, it is no use explaining what bachelor parties used to include. 

216 
Chapter 11
 It is hopeless for analysts to try to ﬁ nd the false belief in a joke they did 
not understand (such as in jokes 78 and 79 above). No amount of textual 
deconstruction or stimulus analysis will reveal the boundaries of humor, 
since, as our deﬁ nition shows, humor is that which causes a false belief to 
be detected  in a mind , and this not only allows for knowledge-relativity, it 
predicts it, and explains why the category boundary is fuzzy. 
 Although we have used jokes and other examples to describe our model 
and to show how it works at a high level of abstraction, at some point the 
analysis of humor will have to move beyond these individually variable 
objects and look for its proper object of study as a neurochemical process 
in the brain. In the meantime, the analysis of humorous events can con-
tinue on the same foundation that comedians and other designers and 
purveyors of humor have always relied on — the assumption that any more 
or less uniﬁ ed population, any gathered audience, as a result of having had 
similar experiences in the world, will share enough beliefs (and covert 
structures of association between them) to generate much the same pro-
cesses of JITSA when targeted with well-aimed setups. 
 B.   Scale of Intensity 
 When I was growing up we had a petting zoo and, well, we had two sections, a 
petting zoo and heavy-petting zoo, for people who really liked animals a lot. 
 — Ellen DeGeneres 
 We all know the difference between a good joke and a bad joke even if we 
each have our own unique sorting mechanisms for this distinction. The 
bachelor party joke is a bad joke, in our opinion. Just as there are degrees 
of sadness, different ﬂ avors of pain, and both mind-blowing orgasms and 
so-so orgasms, so too are there different grades of mirth. The level elicited 
in a circumstance is driven, we suspect, by at least two factors. The ﬁ rst is 
(something along the lines of) the  amount of false belief invalidated on the 
occasion. If, for instance, the misinterpretation of a single word (e.g., 
 “ tank ”  in the goldﬁ sh pun) is the hinge, mirth will be low. If, on the other 
hand, a sly bit of trickery leads to major misdirection, when the d é noue-
ment comes the mirth should be much greater. A different measure of 
 “ quantity ”  of belief also contributes: We already mentioned bipersonal 
humor, which occurs simultaneously from the ﬁ rst-person and third-
person perspective, but two persons — the audience plus a character in the 
story — is not the limit. In fact, the more the merrier. For each character 
whose belief is dislodged alongside the laugher ’ s own, the mirth should be 

The Penumbra 
217
increased commensurately. We gave examples of this in chapter 9 (section 
D). Here ’ s another: 
 (81)  After a heavy night of drinking at the local bar, a drunk stumbles 
into a Catholic church and slowly makes his way into the confessional 
booth. There, the priest patiently awaits the man to begin his 
confession. After a few minutes of silence, the priest politely taps on the 
window . . . nothing. The priest taps again and this time clears his 
throat a bit . . . still nothing. At this point the priest begins to lose his 
patience and bangs on the window. Finally the drunk yells out:  “ Ain ’ t 
no use knocking, there ain ’ t no paper over here either! ” 
 In this joke, the drunk ’ s belief that he is in a toilet, and the priest ’ s expec-
tation that there is a confessor in the confessional are broken simultane-
ously with the audience ’ s belief, which is in line with the priest ’ s. Three 
mistaken beliefs crashing in unison make the mirth stronger than any one 
belief on its own. 
 The second factor in distinguishing the level of humor is that of the 
 additives , spicy sources of other positive emotions that are provoked during 
otherwise mild humor. It has long been known that emotional arousal can 
be achieved by a wide variety of interventions, and the emotions experi-
enced can be strongly inﬂ uenced by the cognitive state of the subject at 
the time (Schachter and Singer 1962). Moreover, as has more recently been 
shown, arousal can be transferred from one emotional modality to another. 
In a famous experiment, the anxiety induced by walking on a bridge over 
a chasm was reinterpreted as physical attraction to the experimenter 
(Dutton and Aron 1974), and subsequent experiments have not only rep-
licated that effect but demonstrated its presence even when the subjects 
are informed in advance (Foster et al. 1998). Cantor, Bryant and Zillmann 
(1974) and Zillmann (1983b) applied this ﬁ nding directly to humor, 
showing that any arousing experience, whether it be a positive or negative 
emotional episode,  2 can increase the reported intensity of subsequent 
mirth, so long as enough time has passed that the arousal can be misat-
tributed, and not so long that it has entirely dissipated. 
 We conjecture that the most effectively transmitted joke-memes have 
exploited just such a transfer effect by combining the basic mechanism of 
humor perception with such hot-button topics as sex, violence, death, 
2.   Other ﬁ ndings by Zillmann (Zillmann, Katcher, and Milavsky 1972) indicate that even the 
arousal of physical exertion (such as that caused by running on a treadmill) can be transferred 
to psychological effects.

218 
Chapter 11
excrement, and racial perception, creating emotional priming that height-
ens one ’ s susceptibility to mirth. The result is a more potent cocktail of 
types of arousal, enhancing the effect of humor in much the way chocolate 
or coffee enhances the effect of sugar. 
 This is a straightforward effect of what is known in artiﬁ cial intelligence 
as the credit-assignment problem: It is not a simple cognitive task to dis-
tinguish which part of a complex set of events leading to a reward or 
punishment is the proper cause. The next two jokes don ’ t exhibit the 
potent cocktail of multiple emotions but do vividly illustrate the credit 
assignment problem:  
 (82)  A 6-year-old and a 4-year-old are upstairs in their bedroom.  “ You 
know what? ” says the 6-year-old.  “ I think it ’ s about time we started 
cussing. ”  The 4-year-old nods his head in approval. The 6-year-old 
continues,  “ When we go downstairs for breakfast, I ’ m gonna say 
something with  ‘ hell ’  and you say something with  ‘ ass, ’  okay? ” The 
4-year-old agrees with enthusiasm. 
 When their mother walks into the kitchen and asks the 6-year-old 
what he wants for breakfast, he replies,  “ Aw, hell, Ma, I guess I ’ ll have 
some Cheerios. ”  Whack!  He ﬂ ies out of his chair, tumbles across the 
kitchen ﬂ oor, gets up, and runs upstairs crying his eyes out, with his 
mother in hot pursuit, slapping his rear with every step. She locks him 
in his room and shouts,  “ And you ’ ll stay there until I let you out! ” 
 She then comes back downstairs, looks at the 4-year-old, and asks 
with a stern voice,  “ And what do  you want for breakfast, young man? ” 
 “ I don ’ t know, Mom, ” he blurts out,  “ but you can bet your ass it 
won ’ t be Cheerios! ”  
 
 (83)  A pedant was looking for his book for many days but could not 
ﬁ nd it. By chance, as he was eating lettuces and turned a certain corner 
he saw the book lying there. Later meeting a friend who was lamenting 
the loss of his girdle, he said,  “ Do not worry but buy some lettuces and 
eat them at the corner, when you turn it and go a little ways you will 
ﬁ nd it. ” (Bubb 1920) 
 The brain has two crude solutions available to help with the credit-
assignment problem, and it seems to use both. The ﬁ rst is Hebbian:  3 
3.   Named for Donald Hebb (1949), whose learning rule is often expressed as if it governed 
dendritic connections between neurons — “ what ﬁ res together wires together ” — but which has 
come to be much more widely applied in models of learning.

The Penumbra 
219
Reward everything  “ in sight ” but don ’ t look too widely, and then leave 
it up to statistical regularities over time to sort out proper accreditation 
for patterns of events. The second solution involves metacognition: 
If a causal  “ hypothesis ”  (right or wrong) can be temporally associated 
with an emotion and this association is (rightly or wrongly) rewarded 
with that emotion or also with the  Aha! emotion of discovery or insight, 
this labels the thought that preceded the emotion as credit-worthy. 
Unlike the ﬁ rst solution, the second solution can also be used to accredit 
memory after the fact — either in imagination or in attentive repetition of 
the event. 
 We will classify some of the related phenomena, the close kin to 
humor, shortly, but ﬁ rst we want to point out how misattributions 
involving some of these related phenomena can have an effect on the 
intensity of mirth. Experiences of insight, Schadenfreude, and the like 
each cause some level of positive emotion. Likewise, many of the socially 
proscribed or taboo contents of a joke can be arousing in their own 
right. If a thought triggers not just humor, but also some of these other 
emotions at the same time, then the total arousal level will be higher, 
yet the brain does not have the resources to determine which blanket 
reward is caused by which effect of the stimulus. When we feel the 
humor, and are asked to report on how funny a joke may be, we may 
mistake the cumulative effect of all the positive emotions aroused for 
the magnitude of a single factor: humor. Sometimes, if we are conscious 
of it, when a joke makes us laugh only a little, we may note that it  “ was 
a really good joke ” nonetheless. This explicit distinguishing of comedy 
from other sources of pleasure is especially apparent sometimes when 
we ’ ve heard a good joke before. Once one has lost one ’ s virginity for a 
joke, the pleasures of connoisseurship and nostalgia can replace the 
more intense pleasure of the ﬁ rst hearing.  4 
 To recap, humor varies on a scale of intensity. There are two factors 
that contribute to this scale: the amount of false belief, and the level of 
concomitant, yet misattributed, emotions. In the limit, as both of these 
variables approach zero, an event drops out of the humor category. 
4.   Clark (1970) gives an account of humor as incongruity plus another  “ amusement. ”  By such 
an account, mirth per se does not actually exist, but rather is the intersection between cognitive 
detection of incongruity and some kind of enjoyment. We believe in mirth; it is not just an 
appearance created out of various other kinds of pleasure in particular cognitive contexts, but 
we do think it is intricately augmented by them.

220 
Chapter 11
 C.   Boundary Cases 
 You tickle my fancy — and I ’ ll tickle yours!  
 
 You ’ ve outdone yourself — as usual. 
 — Raymond Smullyan 
 It should be clear that while the model we are building owes a lot to 
incongruity-resolution models of humor, it purports to account for types 
of amusement that escape the narrower focus of the earlier attempts, and 
grounds humor in an explanatory framework that, for the ﬁ rst time, really 
can explain why there should be such a phenomenon as humor in the ﬁ rst 
place. Do any other species have a sense of humor? It is obvious that  ﬂ orid 
humor and laughter is one of the distinctive marks of just one species, 
 Homo sapiens , but since risky future-generation is a task for any brain, we 
might expect to see a variety of related phenomena in other species. We 
do ﬁ nd play behavior in the young of many mammals, and its role in 
rehearsing and honing their anticipatory skills has long been asserted, 
plausibly, but with scant prospect of ﬁ nding detailed conﬁ rmation. Nothing 
that resembles shared amusement (at the pratfalls of group members, or 
in response to antics, for instance) has been reported, so whatever it is that 
generates our hunger for comedy seems to be lacking in even our closest 
relatives. In human beings we do ﬁ nd several phenomena that typically 
elicit laughter but do not in any obvious way involve incongruity resolu-
tion: playing peek-a-boo, trust falls, roller-coaster rides, and tickling. 
 Well before an infant can get a verbal joke she may exhibit a delight 
almost amounting to an addiction for the simple game of peek-a-boo, in 
which an adult or other child brieﬂ y hides behind an occluder, and then 
is suddenly revealed — “ Peek-a-boo! ”  — to peals of laughter. Why should 
infants enjoy this pastime so much? This is, one might speculate, a 
glimpse of the ﬁ rst stirrings of the anticipation machinery that will soon 
swing into high gear and carry the child through life on waves of accurate 
predictions. What better way of jump-starting the system than by exploit-
ing the child ’ s innate curiosity and using the visual experience of occlu-
sion and object permanence as a rehearsal, especially when the object is a 
smiling face? Anthropologists and developmental psychologists have 
found peek-a-boo and variations thereof around the world (G ö nc ü , Mistry, 
and Mosier 2000), but in some cultures, visual and vocal interactions 
between mother and child are much more limited than in others (Gratier 
2003), and peek-a-boo may be entirely absent from the normal child ’ s 
experience in these settings. It would be interesting to learn if there are 

The Penumbra 
221
measurable differences in the maturation of anticipation-generation in 
these children. 
 A trust fall is an exercise in which you allow yourself to fall backward 
(often with your eyes closed) and trust that a partner will catch you. You 
usually start to panic partway down, and then when your partner does 
catch you, you may laugh with relief. It is not the relief that causes the 
laughter, though, it is the overgrown commitment to the belief that your 
partner has failed. Repeated exposure to trust falls obtunds the laughter 
because the expectation that you will  not be caught is no longer generated 
in the active mental space. Similarly, the moment at the top of the ﬁ rst 
peak on the roller coaster, when your body ’ s anticipation-generators 
predict a frightening plunge, triggers a neural alarm that sets off a ﬂ ood of 
adrenaline, but soon, if you are not too frightened, you may burst out 
laughing with relief. The belief that you were going to die is, thankfully, 
disproven.  5 
 At ﬁ rst glance, tickling might seem to be a problem case for our model. 
What is cognitive or computational about tickling? A number of its attri-
butes render tickling unique among sources of humor, making it is as much 
a difﬁ culty for our account as it is for  any account of humor elicitation. 
For one thing, there is the fact that mirth can be evoked consistently over 
an extended period of time, instead of as a momentary episode as in most 
cases of humor. No simple belief-correction — no mere recognition that 
something is false — can stop the mirth in tickling and in fact, unlike any 
joke ever told, the longer it continues the funnier it seems to get. For 
another thing, it doesn ’ t seem that high-level reasoning is involved. What-
ever thoughts and beliefs take part in tickling are very low-level, very tacit, 
very automatic. If the mistaken belief in tickling were an obvious, con-
sciously accessible and verbalizable one, then the issue would not be so 
enigmatic! For a third thing, tickling is aversive — it is the only kind of 
mirthful circumstance that we actively try to avoid. As has often been 
noted, you can ’ t tickle yourself,  6 and Blakemore, Wolpert, and Frith (2000) 
5.   We ’ ve certainly oversimpliﬁ ed the very complex sets of thoughts that happen over an entire 
two-minute roller-coaster ride. There are surely several different false physical commitments 
that one may come to as one ’ s body is tossed about faster than one can predict. Analyzing them 
all is an exercise left to the reader.
6.   To be precise, you can ’ t give yourself  gargalesis — the laughter-inducing kind of tickling we 
usually think of as related to humor. But, you can self-induce  knismesis , which is the kind of 
uncomfortable tickling sensation felt when an insect crawls on your skin or even when you 
drag a feather lightly across your skin (Hall and Allin 1897).

222 
Chapter 11
review recent studies that strongly support the hypothesis that the  “ forward 
model ”  made by the motor system when one attempts to tickle oneself is 
in effect too good at generating anticipations of the effects. Like the inept 
joke-teller who  “ telegraphs the punch line, ” the forward model of the 
would-be self-tickler prevents any conﬂ ict from arising, and hence sweeps 
away any grounds for mirth. Most tellingly, Blakemore et al. demonstrate 
that interfering with the predictive ﬁ delity of the forward models made by 
subjects enables self-tickling. Note, though, that the failure to anticipate 
the precise locations and pressures of ﬁ nger touches in a tickle cannot be 
the sole reason for humor. These are not the kinds of things we should be 
able to predict. If it were the cause of the mirthfulness in tickle, then simi-
larly difﬁ cult-to-predict, other-created stimuli (such as  clapping in an unex-
pected pattern on your belly, or, in another modality, perhaps just ﬁ nding 
someone humming a tune you haven ’ t heard before) should, but as we all 
know do not, create the same kind of tickled response in us. Also, tickling 
is location speciﬁ c, so an unanticipated series of touches, pokes, scratches, 
and squeezes to the forearm typically does not result in tickling, though 
the same treatment on the soles of the feet usually does. Lack of prediction 
is a necessary but not a sufﬁ cient condition for tickling. Blakemore et al. ’ s 
ﬁ ndings don ’ t explain why we are tickled; nevertheless, a successful account 
of tickling should explain their ﬁ ndings along with the other anomalous 
features of this tactile form of humor. 
 An insightful suggestion by Ramachandran and Blakeslee (1998) explains 
tickling as a form of humor under a version of traditional incongruity 
theory. Their idea is that the incongruity is between the sense of being 
attacked and that of being touched by a friend or lover. Most incongruity 
explanations, and ours is no exception, are capable of being adapted to 
Ramachandran and Blakeslee ’ s model, but, as you ’ ll see, we need to take 
care with how we go about servicing such an adaptation. Of course, as you 
well know by now, we are not satisﬁ ed with a simple incongruity in the 
stimulus; our tale will need to explain the dynamic effects of such an 
incongruity in the mind. In this case, we might say that we have a belief 
that rises to momentary commitment (one belief or the other — “ I ’ m being 
attacked ”  or  “ I ’ m being caressed ” — either one might sufﬁ ce to begin with). 
But as soon as we are committed to the belief that we are either under 
attack by our friend or intimately engaged, the opposing sense can come 
into epistemic conﬂ ict with that belief, and, in fact, the humor can be 
continuously evoked by dislodging each of these beliefs over and over 
again in alternation. Although such rapid alternation could explain the 
constancy of mirth in tickling and it may at ﬁ rst seem parsimonious with 

The Penumbra 
223
our account, we are somewhat concerned about this explanation. Should 
we be fooled so easily? And then fooled again and again each moment 
later? Why wouldn ’ t we, in our experience with having been tickled before, 
approach either or both of those beliefs with epistemic caution, not 
committing to either one strongly enough to ﬁ nd oneself fooled? And why 
do we not notice a conscious alternation in belief? In contrast, we actually 
seem to feel a simultaneity between the humorousness and the aversive-
ness of tickle with neither feeling pausing to allow space for the other 
(Harris and Alvarado [2005] also give facial-action-coding evidence of this 
basic phenomenological observation). 
 The realization that you are not being attacked by your friend — the 
recognition that this is instead a  tickle  — would render the  “ I am being 
attacked ”  belief false and would  perhaps be humorous once  if you had really 
committed to your friend attacking you instead of tickling you. We don ’ t 
think that ’ s likely. Nevertheless, even if it happened, after resolving it once 
you would not be able to come to that belief again — not in this tickle 
episode, and not likely ever again. If this kind of high-level belief was what 
was active in tickling, the ﬁ rst tickling would, perhaps, be hilarious, but 
like a ﬁ rst-person joke you ’ ve heard before, continued or subsequent tick-
ling would be ruined. Since we know that isn ’ t true, we need to look deeper. 
 Although the alternation hypothesis didn ’ t seem to hold, the Ramach-
andran and Blakeslee model is based on good insights about the phenom-
enology of tickling. Our next (and ﬁ nal) suggestion is a different adaption 
of their model that is consistent both with our theory of humor elicitation 
and with the idiosyncratic distinguishing facts about tickling that we ’ ve 
just reviewed. 
 As we said, similarly difﬁ cult-to-predict touch is not funny. And 
difﬁ cult-to-predict sensation in other modalities is not funny either. There 
is something very speciﬁ c about the modality of touch in tickling, but it 
is not entirely the result of prediction. Tickling is a very precise  kind of 
touch. We all know how to tickle someone  and how to touch them without 
tickling them. In particular, tickling is a form of aversive touch. The fact 
that we typically ask  “ why does tickling make us laugh (when it ’ s not very 
funny)? ”  rather than  “ why do we try to avoid being tickled (if it ’ s so 
funny)? ”  indicates that our default view is that the feeling of tickling is 
aversive, and that something further about the belief structure in that 
experience is what we cannot help but ﬁ nd funny. 
 We think dissociating the humor and the aversion can help illuminate 
the relevant beliefs that create each component separately. Notice that if 
you are tickled by someone but you don ’ t know (and don ’ t suspect!) that it 

224 
Chapter 11
is a person, you feel no mirth or anything like it. What we suggest makes 
the difference is  the recognition of intentional human touch . Try this thought 
experiment: Imagine yourself alone in an unfurnished, unlit room with a 
number of small holes in the corners of the walls and along the ﬂ oor. 
You ’ ve locked the door, and you lie down on the ﬂ oor. Suppose that, after 
some time, you suddenly feel the exact tactile sensation of being tickled, 
perhaps on your side, perhaps on the bottom of your foot or perhaps in the 
pit of your arm. If you are certain that no one else is there and still think 
this is funny, we think you ’ re crazy — it ’ s horrifying! Notice, too, that the 
clear recognition of human touch could easily make this situation humor-
ous. If someone else was there, and you could tell that they ’ d reached over 
and touched you, you would know it rather instantly as a tactile joke. 
 The very particular kind of touch we call tickling — the rather localized 
sensation of multiple points of contact moving with a semiregular yet 
unpredictable organic rhythm — is a tactile pattern that, before humans 
invented tickling, was commonly caused only by small animals or large 
insects crawling on your skin (this kind of occurrence was not uncommon 
prior to the very recent invention of rather well-sealed homes).  7 Consider 
also the tickling-like sensation of a small insect walking among the hairs 
on your skin (which humans sometimes replicate with a feather touch to 
the back of the neck, for instance). People also say this tickles, though it 
is usually less intense. The lever-like behavior of these hairs allows them 
to amplify small movements on the surface of your skin, providing strong 
enough signals to activate internal sensors at the base of the hairs — those 
sensors, using the hairs as triggers, are, in a rough manner of speaking, 
insect detectors. It is signiﬁ cant to notice that not every touch of those 
hairs (e.g., brushing against a wall, wearing clothes) can create this sensa-
tion. It requires a very particular pattern to elicit that feeling — a pattern 
that is reliably created by insects, though also occasionally created by 
droplets of sweat or other means. Likewise, the neurological detection 
mechanism that makes the patterns of strong tickling aversive can be called 
(again, very roughly speaking) rodent detectors. Or scorpion detectors. Or 
wild-boar-planning-to-eat-your-belly-while-you-sleep detectors. 
 Obviously, there is a very good reason why this kind of touch should be 
neurally coded (whether through learning or innate structuring) as aver-
sive. Once we feel this kind of touch (whether or not there is an insect or 
7.   Gregory (1924) offers a similar hypothesis, but rather than insects or rodents, he says it is 
exposure in hand-to-hand combat that was the threat that this feeling warns us against. Black 
(1984) ﬁ nds that the most ticklish parts of our bodies also have the strongest protective reﬂ exes.

The Penumbra 
225
rodent actually there) the immediate reaction of brushing at that area indi-
cates a belief. What is the belief? As we noted before, it isn ’ t easily verbaliz-
able. It certainly isn ’ t as precise as  “ there is a rat scratching the sole of my 
foot. ” You aren ’ t committed to there being a rat there every time you are 
tickled. We think Ramachandran and Blakeslee ’ s idea,  “ I am under attack, ” 
is closer to the right answer. Perhaps something general like  “ there is some-
thing nasty and alive on my skin ” gets at the right kind of description. This 
is a tacit, unarticulated kind of belief, founded much more directly in our 
sensory nervous system than higher-level beliefs (about mathematics, for 
instance). It is not pure sensation (the pure sensation is the touch itself), 
but  logical inference may not be involved either. The belief that there is 
something nasty there is created closer to the level of perception. Such 
built-in dispositions of lower-level perception, in being prerational process-
ing, are very susceptible to illusions that can commit us to beliefs. We take 
up the general issue of illusions in more detail later in this section. 
 When tickling hijacks our basic rodent-sensors, we are fooled into 
making a heuristic leap to the belief that there is something nasty there 
that we need to get rid of. This is the active covertly entered committed 
belief that is not true. Because the illusion is so powerful, and because a 
tickler can reactivate it by just moving their hands again, we commit to 
this belief over and over, and each time it is invalidated by the clear 
recognition that we are simply being tickled. 
 In short, tickling is a cognitive bug — an aspect of our phenomenology 
that serves no purpose of its own but rather is a by-product of humor and 
some built-in structures of our defensive neurophysiology, each of which 
is good for something on its own. This is not to say that we haven ’ t learned 
to use tickling for a purpose — the enjoyment it creates has often been cited 
as a tool for social bonding, and there ’ s no reason why such a mirthful 
accident couldn ’ t be commandeered by willful agents (us) intending to 
take advantage of such natural predispositions. 
 So, does this reframing of Ramachandran and Blakeslee ’ s original sug-
gestion now answer to all the questions of the unusual status of tickling? 
Let us review. First, we think it explains the fact that everyone ﬁ nds the 
 “ reason why tickling is funny ” to be ineffable. The belief construction is 
 perceptual — it is still a constructed belief, but its construction is done at a 
level lower than conscious reasoning. This also explains why we can ’ t 
avoid the humor in tickling by recognizing a false high-level inference. 
High-level beliefs have only post hoc epistemic power over perceptual 
beliefs; they cannot stop the formation of perceptual beliefs, they can only 
question their status after they exist. When you look at the picture that 
has no woman in it (in ﬁ g. 11.1), you cannot stop yourself from seeing a 

226 
Chapter 11
 Figure 11.1 
 Sunrise in the Nature Reserve , reprinted with permission from Sandro Del Prete. 

The Penumbra 
227
woman there even if you are told ahead that she is not there. The only 
power the high-level belief has is in telling you that it ’ s not really true, 
after you ’ ve already seen her.  
 This relative impotence of higher-level beliefs may also explain the 
persistence of humor in tickling, both in the consistent extended nature 
of each bout, and in the repeatability of this ﬁ rst-person form of humor. 
You can ’ t stop yourself from coming to the same false belief over and over 
as your tickler continues to move their hand. Each move makes it a differ-
ent stimulus, retriggers a new sensation, slightly to the left . . . now above 
. . . then below . . . each of which while similar to the ﬁ rst is not the same. 
Powerless to defend yourself against the misinterpretation, you are, again 
and again, forced into a false belief — an aversive false belief at that — that 
you know is false even before it forms.  8 
 As for why you can ’ t tickle yourself, our view accepts Blakemore et al. ’ s 
explanation. Others can tickle us because their carefully designed move-
ments replicate a truly aversive stimulus in our ecological/evolutionary 
history.  9 We can ’ t tickle ourselves because, unless you remove predictabil-
ity, our self-prediction doesn ’ t allow us to be fooled by our own attempts. 
Contrary to ﬁ rst appearances, though, this isn ’ t what makes tickling funny; 
it ’ s what makes it aversive! This also explains why other unpredictable 
touch or unpredictable nontactile stimuli are not ticklish or humorous —
 there is no built-in rodentoceptor-like system in these other modalities, so 
we are not driven to the illusory belief that something is wrong. Lastly, 
this brings us to our explanation of the aversive nature of tickling: It is 
simply an artifact of the original nature of the stimulus which is illusorily 
evoked by the tickling. In addition to this answer, we might speculate 
8.   In the jargon of cognitive science, we label such low-level beliefs as  cognitively impenetrable . 
Even when you know better, at a higher level, they continue to exert their inﬂ uence.
9.   Recently, subjects who thought they were being tickled by a  machine (though they were only 
being deceived) were found to produce as much smiling, laughing, and squirming as when they 
thought they were being tickled by a human (Harris and Christenfeld 1999). This arguably 
stands in opposition to social theories of tickling, but is consistent with our view, as it is not 
actually the human but rather the  known that can dislodge our rodentoceptor-based beliefs. An 
interesting further experiment to test part of our conjecture would be to observe subjects for a 
laughter response when they are tickled by a human, the tickling-machine, or an actual rodent 
or tarantula through a hole but are uninformed about what is touching them. We would expect 
no laughter in any of these cases.

228 
Chapter 11
further that the arousal from the mirth, the aversive touch, and the either 
intimate or brutal contact with your tickler will all fuel each other, inten-
sifying the emotional impact of the event in a kind of a feedback process.  10 
 The hypothesis we have just offered extends the Darwin – Hecker hypoth-
esis by providing a speciﬁ c mechanism by which comedy and tickling both 
impart mirth. We offer no evidence yet, other than our arguments above; 
however, the hypothesis is testable. 
 Harris and Christenfeld (1997) recently found evidence that they think 
argues against the Darwin – Hecker hypothesis. Although they found a cor-
relation between susceptibility to tickling and comedy, they also found 
that experience of either tickling or comedy does not  “ warm up ” a subject 
for the other experience. According to Harris and Christenfeld (1997; see 
also Harris 1999), if similar mental states are held, then cross-modal 
 “ warming up ” would be predicted. There are only two systems that are 
currently well-documented forms of  “ warming up ” in the human brain. 
The ﬁ rst is priming related to spreading activation — this consists of con-
tents, typically concepts and perhaps subconceptual content activating 
related concepts and features. The second is transfer of arousal. Certainly, 
the underlying content in Harris and Christenfeld ’ s experiment (physical 
touch and video of comedic social interaction) has no conceptual similar-
ity, so neither the low-level perceptual nor high-level conceptualization of 
10.   As we ’ ve mentioned, a tickler can continuously attack a victim and when this is done 
the tickled person is often driven into hysterics by the emotional cocktail it produces. But 
there is another kind of mirthful hysteria, worth mention, that we are all familiar with too. 
Recall times when you knew you shouldn ’ t laugh but just couldn ’ t help it; times when you 
tried to stiﬂ e it but just couldn ’ t contain the overwhelming mirth! Various kinds of feedback 
are the cause of this emotional buildup. For instance, there is feedback from the recursive 
intentional stance modeling of your laugh-stiﬂ ing compatriots and of their modeling of you —
 each fueling each other as furtive glances let everyone know that we ’ re all on the same 
internal page. Sometimes it goes further than this, though. The fact that you are laughing at 
something can be funny, itself, because of context. If it ’ s funny that you ﬁ nd something funny 
(when you aren ’ t supposed to), then it will be funny that you ﬁ nd it funny that you ﬁ nd some-
thing funny, and so on, thus creating these positive feedback loops of uncontrollable hilarity 
that occasionally overcome a junior high classroom. Such feedback loops, or other related cycli-
cally dynamical situations, may be what cause laughing epidemics such as the astonishing 
months-long event in 1962 in Tanganyika (as reported in Provine 2000). Also, the outtakes of 
situation comedies often feature episodes where one actor muffs a line and then the whole cast 
is reduced to giggles for an extended period of time, as take after take dissolves into uncontrol-
lable laughter. Someone seeing only the later rounds of this recursion would fail to see anything 
funny.

The Penumbra 
229
(a)
(b)
 Figure 11.2 
these stimuli should have a priming effect on the other. If what they share 
is only the discovery of an overcommitted false belief, note that this dis-
covery is  process , rather than content, and it is uncertain whether such a 
base process might have any kind of priming effect. Perhaps, then, what 
warms an individual up for comedy is simply their arousal state. Further 
experimentation may shed some light on the prospect, but, to determine 
a transfer of arousal effect between comedy and tickling will require careful 
dissociation of timing and valence effects, since comedy consists primarily 
of mirth, whereas tickling has a highly aversive component.  
 The drawings of  “ impossible objects ” such as the devil ’ s tuning fork (ﬁ g. 
11.2a), the Penrose triangle (ﬁ g. 11.2b), and the artwork of M. C. Escher 
constitute an interesting class of almost-humorous visual stimuli, pointed 
out to us by Donald Saari. Consider how they do seem to meet our ﬁ ve 

230 
Chapter 11
conditions. When you ﬁ rst look at the Penrose triangle, for instance, you 
automatically assume that this is a two-dimensional rendering of a normal 
three-dimensional object. That assumption is (1) an active element that is 
(2) covertly entered and (3)  “ taken to be true, ” but then discovered to be 
(4) false in your current mental space, and of course however surprising 
this is, it is (5) not accompanied by any strong negative emotion. So why 
don ’ t we laugh? Well, people often do laugh the ﬁ rst time they ﬁ nd them-
selves fooled by such an image, and, as usual, context can make a big 
difference. It is one thing to encounter the devil ’ s tuning fork in a book 
called  Visual Illusions and another in a book called  Easy Woodworking Proj-
ects . They may also ﬁ nd it confusing at the same time, though that confu-
sion comes from the irreconcilability of the contradictory elements, while 
the humor comes from the fact that this very irreconcilability dislodges 
the premature belief that this was a visually stable and consistent object. 
(Notice that this explanation goes quite against the standard incongruity-
resolution interpretation, which would likely assess the humor as a result, 
somehow, of the incongruent elements of the stimulus itself.)  
 Rather than  unstable , like the Penrose triangle or the devil ’ s tuning fork, 
another class of visual illusions, including the Necker cube (ﬁ g. 11.3a) or 
the well-known duck-rabbit (ﬁ g. 11.3b), are what we can call  bistable . In 
these images, instead of having your assumption of its possible reality 
broken, you have one stable interpretation of the image broken by another. 
These might also be humorous, but typically less so, even on a ﬁ rst viewing, 
because the second stable interpretation does not actually invalidate the 
ﬁ rst. You won ’ t have necessarily made a mistake to believe that you are 
looking at a duck. What may be at risk would only be a covert but com-
mitted belief that there is only one way to perceive this object.  11 So, when 
it is humorous, the recognition is not  “ oh, it ’ s not a duck! ” but rather  “ oh, 
there ’ s another way to see it! ”  
 Our original concern still stands, however: Typically these images do 
not make us laugh. Why not? The occasional humor in these objects is a 
fortune of virginity, soon lost with experience. In short, these are jokes 
that are too predictable, jokes for which we telegraph the punch line to 
ourselves before it can hit us. We approach things in this category with 
11.   Another way to possibly increase the humor would be to press a viewer into committing to 
a belief that can be shortly invalidated:  “ What do you see? ”  “ A duck. ”  “ You see a duck, right? —
 there ’ s no rabbit in that picture? ”  “ No, no rabbit. A duck. . . . ” When the rabbit is now appre-
hended, it may be funnier than if the viewer only believed that there was only one way to see 
this picture.

The Penumbra 
231
 Figure 11.3 
 Reprinted with permission from Wrights Media. 
(a)
(b)
epistemic caution after having seen them before, not committing to what 
we know won ’ t be true. Everyone knows there are two interpretations to 
the Necker cube, and seeing one of them does not commit us to no longer 
believing the other one exists; likewise, seeing the duck does not preclude 
us from believing we can see the rabbit. 
 There are too many classes of visual illusion to discuss, but we will look 
at one more complicated case that has important relevance to our model. 
We already mentioned this kind of illusion in our discussion of tickling 
earlier — these are illusions for which you are committed to a belief at a 

232 
Chapter 11
very low level: The almonds really aren ’ t moving (ﬁ g. 11.4a), but it ’ s hard 
not to believe they are, and the chess pieces are the same shade of gray in 
both images (ﬁ g. 11.4b)!  
 These are visual effects over which you have no conscious control. So, 
while we know they can be funny on a ﬁ rst viewing (as we entertain false 
inferences that static pictures don ’ t move, for instance), we should ask 
ourselves why they don ’ t constantly evoke unbearable mirth the way tick-
ling does. Sure, an actually steady picture isn ’ t moving to new positions 
again and again, but nonetheless when you look away and look back, you 
are struck anew with a convincing belief that the almonds are moving; but 
you don ’ t ﬁ nd it funny again each time, like you do with tickling. 
 On the continuum from sensation, through perception, and then tacit 
automatic inference, ﬁ nally to conscious logical inference, we think the 
mistaken assumption in tickling lies somewhere between perception and 
tacit automatic inference. The motion of the almonds, on the other hand, 
 Figure 11.4 
 (a) Reprinted with permission from Akiyoshi KITAOKA. (b) Reprinted by permission 
from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature (Image segmentation and lightness percep-
tion), copyright Barton L. Anderson, Jonathan Winawer (2005). 

The Penumbra 
233
Figure 11.4
(continued)

234 
Chapter 11
is much closer to sensation — you don ’ t question that you see them moving 
(if it works for you — some viewers claim not to see any apparent motion). 
 Thus, while tickling can commit you to a false belief, you can also dis-
lodge that false belief with other rather direct and in fact less inferential 
measurement — looking and feeling that area to determine that there 
indeed is no rat, scorpion, or snake there. The commitment to motion in 
the almonds, being so extremely low level, is unquestioned. When faced 
with the knowledge that images on paper don ’ t move, the data from the 
visual sense have greater epistemic strength. Yes, they  are moving. The 
same reason explains why we don ’ t ﬁ nd motion picture video (the illusion 
of motion due to a rapid succession of still images) to be funny. This is all 
predicted rather nicely from our (still rough) epistemic reconciliation chart 
on page 116. 
 Visual illusions, tickling, peek-a-boo, and trust falls are all ﬁ rst-person 
forms of physical humor. Nonverbal humor — various kinds of physical 
humor being the major subcategory — requires no language and ranges 
from the antics of Laurel and Hardy or the Three Stooges through the 
subtle silent miming of Jacques Tati or Rowan Atkinson, to visual puns and 
paradoxes such as ﬁ gure 11.8 below, and the false belief in these kinds of 
humor often depends, directly or indirectly, on an appreciation of agents ’  
purposes. In slapstick, when someone runs into a brick wall or a carpenter 
swings a ladder into the face of an assistant, this is obvious enough; the 
audience recognizes the faulty model or models of those purposeful agents. 
The carpenter story is particularly funny if, say, Larry turns around with a 
long ladder over his shoulder, Moe sees it coming but expects it will hit 
Curly ﬁ rst, and then Curly ducks such that Moe gets hit in the face.  12 Moe ’ s 
improper commitment to his own safety is probably the most important 
mistaken inference made there, and we debug it in our simulated third-
person mental space. 
 Not all physical humor depends on a mistaken model in the actor; 
sometimes the actor exposes a mistaken or impoverished model in the 
audience, as when Jack Lemmon, cooking supper in his bachelor kitchen 
12.   This is a good example of how our model differs from superiority theory. The superiority 
theorist is happy to see Moe get hit in the face. They will argue along the lines that we don ’ t 
like Moe, we think him a stooge, and we feel better than him when we see him get knocked 
down. However, if we change the circumstance just a little, Moe needn ’ t get hit, and the humor 
remains: Curly ducks and then Moe with a shocked expression . . . also ducks, just in time. In 
this case, Moe has still overcommited to Curly shielding him and this committed belief was 
disproven — his shocked expression shows us that.

The Penumbra 
235
for Shirley MacLaine in  The Apartment , suddenly (and bafﬂ ingly) grabs his 
tennis racquet — and then uses it to strain the spaghetti over the sink. 
(MacLaine doesn ’ t have to witness this deed, let alone be puzzled — as we 
are — by it, though a reaction from her can boost the humor.) In ﬁ gure 
11.5b the designer has tried to trick us into believing the chair has a pur-
poseful goal that we are observing; when we realize that ’ s not true, we 
laugh.  
 At ﬁ rst glance, it seems that physical humor need not involve any 
human agent involved in a mistaken assumption, but this is an illusion, 
which we can bring out by looking at a minimal case. We watch a movie 
of a volcano, on some desolate moon (not an animal or agent in sight), 
growing, growing, bulging, rumbling, shaking, and then . . .  sploot, plop! 
A drop-sized spurt of lava pops out of the gaping summit and lands igno-
miniously on the slope. We laugh. What an anticlimax! Indeed, the humor 
in this presentation lies in the fact that it exploits the Gricean maxim: Be 
relevant (Grice 1957). Any presentation is a communicative act that we 
expect to repay our attention. An utterly pointless sequence is surprising 
just in its pointlessness, and when we see the buildup of the volcano, we 
anticipate something rather spectacular to reward our attention. As usual 
in humor, when no other agent is in sight, we ourselves are the agent who 
has fallen for the mistaken assumption. Another Gricean joke, though in 
this case verbal, is the following bit of non sequitur, which rests both on 
the maxim of relevance and the maxim of quantity:  
 (84)  Tom:  Why is a teacup like an antelope? 
 Dick:  I have no idea. 
 Tom:  Neither do I. I can ’ t imagine why anyone would think so! 
 This is like the riddle about what was green and had seventeen legs, 
back in chapter 7. Here, the listener, following Grice ’ s advice, expects there 
to be a point to the question. Breaking these and other Gricean maxims 
can often create a humorous situation — witness: calling  “ Bingo ” after just 
three numbers have been drawn from the cage and then recanting with a 
slyly guilty smile (the maxim of quality [truth]). The beliefs that we are 
implicitly, yet actively, committed to in Gricean humor are not about the 
content, but rather about the medium of communication. Hofstadter (Hof-
stadter and the FARG 1995, p. 46) suggests as a kind of joke the idea of a 
jigsaw puzzle where some (or all) of the pieces don ’ t ﬁ t together. If funny, 
this is analogous to a Gricean joke — the puzzling participant has overcom-
mitted to a belief that the manufacturer has abided by the standard of 
creating solvable puzzles. 

236 
Chapter 11
 Figure 11.5 
 (a)  “ Bent Hammer. ” Reprinted by permission of Malcolm Fowler. (b)  Oops — A sculp-
ture by Jake Cress. Reprinted by permission of Jacob Cress. 
 Riddles form a broad category that ﬁ rmly crosses the boundary between 
humor and problem solving, with exemplars at both extremes: one-liner 
jokes in the form of riddles, and utterly unfunny puzzlers that may need 
paper and pencil and much head-scratching to solve, as well as every 
shade in between. The ﬂ avors of delight upon ﬁ guring out, or being told, 
the answer are similarly arrayed in a spectrum. We will concentrate on 
funny riddles. The deﬁ ning format of the riddle is asking a  “ simple ”  ques-
tion; all riddles are dramatically brief, the better to grab and hold the 
attention of the listener. A question  “ automatically ”  pushes the listener 

The Penumbra 
237
Figure 11.5
(continued)

238 
Chapter 11
into answering mode, initiating a search through world knowledge by 
JITSA spreading out from the key terms in the question. This reﬂ ex 
response commits the listener, covertly, to the task of ﬁ nding an answer. 
And in a good joke-riddle this is typically a mistake, a cognitive  over com-
mitment: the  “ solution ”  would almost never be found by a diligent and 
imaginative search since (1) it is so distant in search space from the start-
ing point, and (2) it is — probably — not the only good solution, and (3) 
there is no possibility of gradient ascent (clues to show your search is 
getting closer to the summit). You ’ re playing a game you cannot hope 
to win, since riddles are probably composed backward: Funny answers 
are thought up ﬁ rst, and then impossibly remote questions contrived 
for them.  
 (85)  What is the main reason Santa is so jolly? 
 He knows where all the bad girls live.  
 (86)  What is the difference between a Harley and a Hoover? 
 The position of the dirt bag. 
 Riddles are held in low esteem by many adults, not only because they 
are the ur-humor of childhood, where the answers are typically the sim-
plest of puns, all too easily guessed by adults, but also because the riddle 
format is almost a cheat: It achieves its primary purpose of getting the 
audience to create and furnish the desired mental spaces with such a crude 
and hackneyed cognitive tool: the question. The best riddles enhance the 
pleasure by not just relying on a pun in the answer (e.g., the two meanings 
of  “ bad girl ” and  “ dirt bag ” ) but by adding a dollop of sex or Schadenfreude 
or outgroup derision. Puns are not the only source of humor in the 
answers:  
 (87)  Why does O. J. Simpson want to move to Alabama? 
 Everyone has the same DNA. 
 You would never guess  “ the ” answer, and this riddle manages to hit a triple: 
sex, Schadenfreude, and two ﬂ avors of outgroup derision, thanks to its sly 
exploitation of a widely shared stereotype of a celebrity. 
 Another interesting subvariety of physical humor is humor in music, 
which can invoke exaggeration, parody, and even the violence of slapstick. 
Think of Haydn ’ s Surprise Symphony (Jackendoff [1994, p. 171] and Huron 
[2006], for instance, ﬁ nd other witty passages in Haydn). Humor in music 
is a particularly clear example of violated expectations, but not all surprise 
in music is humorous. Indeed, Huron (2006) argues persuasively that most 
if not all excellence in music involves the artful alternation of fulﬁ lled 

The Penumbra 
239
expectations and unexpected (not entirely predictable) variations. Humor 
arises here, we maintain, when one is lulled into an  overcommitment of 
expectation, so that the unexpected element is clearly outside the envelope 
of acceptable but still somewhat unpredictable variation. In this it is close 
kin to the humor in caricature and parody. 
 How does the humor in caricatures get explained on our theory? They 
apparently involve no timing, no withheld information, no narrative at 
all, and yet they can provoke a smile or even a belly laugh. But look more 
closely, and in slow motion. Our brains never stop trying to produce future, 
generating expectations about everything, involuntarily using all the 
resources available. Recognition of faces, and even the identiﬁ cation of 
objects, depends to some degree on a (still ill-understood) process of coding 
by  “ departures from the norm. ” This can be seen clearly in the pioneering 
work of linguist Susan Brennan (1982), who created a simple computer 
program that could automatically turn out quite good caricatures from 
simple full-face (and realistic) line drawings of real people ’ s faces. The 
program compared the candidate face to the anonymous, androgynous 
average or mean face, utterly unmemorable and bland. It did this by iden-
tifying key points in the face — tip of nose, distance between eyes, height 
of forehead, width of mouth, and other less easily described but signiﬁ cant 
features — and measuring their distance and direction from the correspond-
ing points on the vanilla face. This deﬁ ned vectors where the real face 
departed from the mean face, which could then be drawn in caricature by 
multiplying all or some of these vectors to create 5 percent caricatures and 
10 percent caricatures, and so forth. More subtle and sophisticated graphics 
programs (e.g., Mo, Lewis, and Neumann 2004) for morphing photographs 
of faces, exaggerating their departures from the bland average, have since 
been developed, and the best of these produce results that are both 
 “ instantly ”  recognizable and amusing. A 5 percent caricature is not only 
barely distinguishable from a faithful likeness; it is more easily and quickly 
identiﬁ ed by those who know the person than the faithful likeness is 
(Mauro and Kubovy 1992). Larger exaggerations are quite reliably amusing, 
and huge departures are typically seen as grotesque but still recognizable. 
The output of these programs is not as witty and incisive as the work of 
the best artists, but it does suggest that they are working more subtly 
at the same task. The best caricatures also make further points, not merely 
exaggerating distinctive features but implying further commentary on the 
target. The well-known caricature of Charles Darwin epitomizes the art, 
exploiting an exaggerated distortion of Darwin ’ s theory in addition to his 
facial features, showing how at least the added value in a caricature can 

240 
Chapter 11
depend on relatively ephemeral world knowledge in the same way a 
narrative joke usually does.  
 Why does the stimulation of the identiﬁ cation system trigger mirth? 
According to our model, it is because however swift the process is, it takes 
time, and as soon as the initial processing triggers a tentative identiﬁ cation, 
this creates expectations about what the next micro-step will reveal, and 
when these are violated, this is a standard case of covert assumptions being 
undone by subsequent developments. There is a rapid interplay between 
recognition, which creates expectations, which are violated, which creates 
corrections, which lead to reconﬁ rmation of identiﬁ cation, which creates 
new expectations, and so forth. You ’ ve outdone yourself as usual. This 
temporal process is more obvious in the case of comedians who  “ do 
impressions, ”  contorting their faces and adjusting their voices to create 
four-dimensional caricatures of celebrities. The initial identiﬁ cation is both 
supported and challenged by the details that follow, creating a succession 
of conﬂ icts that require continual adjustment. Why, though, do caricatures 
and comedic impressions depend on exaggeration instead of diminution? 
Why wouldn ’ t  un caricatures, sliding back toward the mean, be just as 
funny? They too would involve violations of expectations. Yes, but they 
would also subvert the presumption of identiﬁ cation upon which carica-
ture depends. ( “ For a moment, it looked a bit like Nixon, but the impres-
sion evaporated. ” )  13  
 It may well seem improbable that an experience as momentary and 
 “ uniﬁ ed ” as looking at and recognizing a caricature could involve viola-
tions of what might be called micro-expectations, but remember that 
Huron (2006) argues persuasively that central features of the phenomenol-
ogy of listening to music have just such an explanation. All of the micro-
emotional responses to these expectations can occur within a few hundred 
milliseconds, and some of the effects are so evanescent that they are con-
sciously undetectable (see, e.g., Huron 2006, p. 36). Unconscious emo-
tional responses? Is that not a contradiction in terms? No. No more than 
splittable atoms. The term  atom actually means indivisible or unsplittable 
13.   This case also usefully illustrates the difference between presumption and conviction; you 
don ’ t ever  believe you are looking at Nixon (any more than you  believe that three nuns walked 
into a bar with a moose . . .), but the presumption that this is Nixon is uncritically and unre-
servedly in force within the mental space where the humor happens. See also Ramachandran 
and Rogers-Ramachandran 2006, where they compare caricature to the  peak shift phenomenon 
in which animals respond more intensely to stimuli that exaggerate the feature of difference on 
which they have been trained.

The Penumbra 
241
 Figure 11.6 

242 
Chapter 11
in the Greek in which it was ﬁ rst coined, but it turns out the paradigmatic 
atoms — of oxygen, nitrogen, . . . uranium, and plutonium — are composite 
after all. Instead of giving up the word — in the atomic age — physicists 
decided to jettison its original meaning. A similar theoretical advance in 
psychology and neuroscience can ﬁ nd plenty of conceptual elbow room 
for unconscious emotional responses, if they are clearly the same sort of 
phenomenon as the more familiar, indeed obtrusive, emotional responses, 
and owe their imperceptibility to their being subthreshold in intensity or 
duration or both. These  nearly conscious ingredients of experience can play 
important dynamic roles in heightening the (conscious) sense of surprise, 
or pleasure, or dissonance, or weirdness — or humor. 
 Stretching the boundaries further, we ﬁ nd some kinds of humor that 
are a bit more difﬁ cult to explain on our theory, but the harder to explain, 
the more satisfying these cases are when they fall into place within the 
theory. At the edges of the category of the humorous are phenomena that 
some would simply exclude, but we want our theory to be as inclusive as 
possible. Children laugh at deformity and the grotesque. Adults, too, laugh 
at untold categories of oddity. Carroll (1999, p. 154) gives an illustration: 
 “ Juxtaposing a tall, thin clown and a short, fat one may invite comic 
laughter, but it is hard to see how such laughter can be traced back to a 
contradiction. ” 
 The humor in Carroll ’ s example cannot necessarily be attributed to 
agency in the clowns or even their status  as clowns. If we buy a box of 
apples and open it at home, it may be slightly funny (if at all) to ﬁ nd one 
extremely small apple among the bunch; but it may be funnier to ﬁ nd one 
extraordinarily large one and one astonishingly small one. Did the large 
one absorb the mass of the smaller? What is it about this kind of unlikely 
combination that can make us laugh? 
 There are intrinsic statistics to our knowledge. When something is 
unlikely, we don ’ t calculate the statistics — we simply know (or, rather, feel) 
that it is unlikely. The statistics have been precalculated for us, in our 
experience with the world such that our knowledge reﬂ ects the likelihood 
of events, and when these likelihoods are contradicted we are surprised. 
But, careful: It is not the contradiction with a static likelihood that causes 
humor here. Recall, humor must happen in a dynamic — active — belief 
structure. We do not actively contemplate  not seeing a short, fat and a tall, 
thin clown together. We just suddenly see them both. One possibility is 
that seeing something very unlikely — something that sets off our novelty 
detectors — causes us to actively think about its likelihood, whereupon we 
build a mental space that contains the thought that  “ this shouldn ’ t exist. ” 

The Penumbra 
243
That post hoc mental space is then falsiﬁ ed by the double take — reviewing 
the sensory facts that this does in fact exist  “ right in front of your eyes. ” 
 We explore another possibility: In seeing something so unlikely, we 
often think that someone is playing a joke on us. But, who? In the case of 
the clowns it may be them, or the show ’ s designer. But, not if it is a short, 
fat man and a tall, thin woman walking, as a couple, down the street 
together; and not in the case of the unusual apples. We learn, early in life, 
that the most likely answer to why things that should not happen ran-
domly do nonetheless occur is that someone willfully arranged for their 
occurrence. Barring knowledge of any other possible cause, imputing 
agency is, in fact, also the most  likely assumption. Of course, making such 
ad hoc folk theories blindly is a mistake — there are many unlikely things 
that, though a person can ’ t easily explain them, do have reasonable, non-
intentional natural causes. Figure 11.7a is one of Andy Goldsworthy ’ s 
sculptures made of many gathered and sorted natural stones, and ﬁ gure 
11.7b shows one of nature ’ s own rock sculptures, made by cycles of freez-
ing and thawing in the Arctic.  
 Seeing human (or superhuman) agency in natural arrangements is a 
very compelling and very pervasive mistake.  14 One possible source of 
humor in unlikely occurrences is in making this attribution, and then 
realizing that a false belief lies therein — recognizing that we have no good 
basis for assuming the odd couple ’ s joint image was designed for the sake 
of statistical surprise or for assuming someone chose to put these two 
apples in our box. 
 But, we can look further too. There may not actually be another mind, 
but when we have imputed willful design on the scene and imagined that 
some demon or god (or person) has methodically put the situation together 
since chance alone couldn ’ t have done the job, the implicit presence of 
another mind in our mental space opens up numerous possibilities for false 
beliefs. The humor may be in your recognition of the imagined agent ’ s 
(nonexistent) trick on yourself or it may be from that ﬁ ctional agent ’ s 
perspective, but it could be even more complicated. Remember, the pres-
ence of one mind makes for basic humor, but the presence of two minds 
allows for far more complexity. Think of the giddiness you feel when you 
just anticipate someone falling for a trick you ’ ve arranged. Then move it 
up a level, and imagine sharing the feeling of someone else in that posi-
tion — you might watch a situation in which Jim has arranged a trick on 
Dwight. Now turn it back on itself and make it self-referential — imagine 
14.   It is in fact the same mistake made by those who don ’ t believe in evolution.

244 
Chapter 11
 Figure 11.7 
 (a) Reprinted by permission of Andy Goldsworthy. (b) Reprinted by permission of 
M. Kessler, B. Murray, and B. Hallet. 
Jim arranging a trick on you. Even if you don ’ t fall for it, you can imagine 
yourself falling for it. You might say to Jim,  “ That would have been a good 
one, ”  while bemusedly pondering who else you both might play the same 
trick on. You needn ’ t have actually had a false belief to imagine your 
counterfactual self having had a false belief from the third person. Some 
of the best humor doesn ’ t consist of a told story, but just someone saying 
something that encourages us to impute a wildly false belief to the speaker. 
Such a belief imagined can be the source of the humor without ever being 
expressed. 
 We can imagine other theoretically possible exploitations of the humor 
mechanisms that have not yet been regularly instantiated in our experi-

The Penumbra 
245
Figure 11.7
(continued)

246 
Chapter 11
ence or in the work of comedians. Recall the possibility that Lindsay, who 
forgot to go to the ATM, may experience private third-person humor —
 laughing at herself retrospectively, a case of humor-upon-reﬂ ection rather 
than humor-in-the-moment. This need not be lengthy reﬂ ection but could 
occur only milliseconds after the event. The more reﬂ ective one is, the 
more raw material for humor one generates, and it may well be that com-
municative geniuses will soon invent novel means of conveying such 
private sources of mirth to wider audiences. The opportunities for humor 
are as boundless as the opportunities for thought — and for taking cognitive 
pratfalls as you think. It may be that a closer inspection of many instances 
of ﬁ rst-person humor will reveal that they are more astutely classiﬁ ed as 
reﬂ exive third-person-humor with oneself as butt — even though they are, 
to casual introspection, indistinguishable from paradigm cases of ﬁ rst-
person humor. The use of the intentional stance exponentially increases 
the complexity of thinkable thoughts. As a result, mental spaces constitute 
a fertile ecology for a plenitude of niches for diverse mechanisms of inten-
tional traits such as humor, and we should not be surprised to ﬁ nd some 
of the extremophiles in this landscape behaving in heretofore unimagined 
ways, consistent with our theory. 
 D.   Wit and Other Related Phenomena 
 I always like to know everything about my new friends, and nothing about my 
old ones. 
 — Oscar Wilde 
 We ’ ve discussed examples that are well within the bounds of humor, and 
other examples (such as proto-humor, Gricean humor, and the humor in 
oddity) that are scarcely within the category of humor, but there are also 
important phenomena which lie just outside these bounds and are easily 
confused with them. As we have already noted, the mixture of pleasures 
induced by most artful concoctions of humor are not easily teased apart, 
and Schadenfreude, the related joy of triumph, the thrill of breaking 
taboos, and the pleasure of lustful thinking (our list is not exhaustive) are 
not mirth, but all may loiter with — and seem to increase — mirth at various 
times. The appreciation of wit, or the display of sheer cleverness, is such 
a close relative to mirth that it may seem indistinguishable, but we can 
help you see the difference by using the same method favored by wine 
experts teaching neophytes how to identify wines: Let them sample the 
ingredients separately and in close temporal juxtaposition before inviting 

The Penumbra 
247
them to appreciate anew the pleasures of the combination. Some of Oscar 
Wilde ’ s famous observations are indeed funny, sometimes funny enough 
to provoke laughing out loud in a solitary reader. But others, just as 
sublime, are more thought-provoking than laugh-provoking, and an 
appreciative sigh or eyebrow raising is the more likely response. That is a 
response to wit in the absence of humor. Here is a brief list, starting with 
pure wit, dabbling in comic reversals, and ending with a pun: 
 (88)  If you want to tell people the truth, make them laugh, otherwise 
they ’ ll kill you. 
 (89)  One should always play fairly when one has the winning cards. 
 (90)  The only thing worse than being talked about is not being talked 
about. 
 (91)  I am not young enough to know everything. 
 (92)  Work is the curse of the drinking classes. 
 (93)  I can resist anything but temptation. 
 (94)  Morality, like art, means drawing a line someplace. 
 Visual puns, such as those shown in ﬁ gure 11.8, are not really puns. 
They aren ’ t funny — we think you will agree — they are just a little bit clever. 
Both creating them and solving them make us feel good, but it ’ s not humor 
that we ’ re feeling (no false belief is disconﬁ rmed); it is wit.  
 Many jokes and most witticisms are both clever  and funny, which is 
why these two species of emotion are often conﬂ ated. Together, there is 
increased arousal (recall our earlier discussion of transfer and misattribu-
tion), which may be felt by the comprehender as increased humor. Here, 
in our opinion, is a clever joke: 
 (95)  A trucker driving along on the freeway sees a sign that reads  “ Low 
Bridge Ahead. ” Before he knows it, the bridge is right in front of 
him — he tries to brake, but his rig gets stuck right under the bridge. Cars 
are backed up for miles. Finally, a highway patrolman arrives. The cop 
gets out of his cruiser, walks over to the truck driver, and says with a 
smug look,  “ Got stuck, huh? ” The truck driver replies,  “ No. I was 
delivering this bridge and ran out of gas. ”  
 The humor and the wit here are not separable — they both arise from the 
trucker ’ s reply. To see this, subtract features one by one and see what 
happens. The cop need not be smug and need not ask if the driver got 
stuck. Suppose instead the cop walks up cautiously, asks  “ what happened?, ” 

248 
Chapter 11
 Figure 11.8 
a)
b)
c)
d)
and gets the same response. Still funny. Or imagine that the cop walks up, 
and capably takes control, calling a towing company, the highway bridge 
department, etc., to arrange for a resolution of the problem, but during 
this process, the trucker simply offers his creative story:  “ Who would ’ ve 
guessed I ’ d run out of gas delivering this bridge right here? ” It ’ s still funny, 
if perhaps a little less so. Instead of being the butt, the cop himself could 
even laugh. As is often the case, the cleverness and the humor are both in 
one place; singlehandedly, the trucker ’ s comment sets up a false reality 
that is nearly consistent with the plainly visible facts and then induces us 
(or the cop) to build the actual reality disconﬁ rming the false one. The way 
the trucker does so is very creative. As if that wasn ’ t enough, the implica-
tion of the cop ’ s smugness makes the comment an insult to him too, 
adding another kind of joy — disparagement of an outgroup member —
 which just makes the joke better.  

The Penumbra 
249
 Examples of wit and humor together abound. Here is another drawn 
from Bubb ’ s  The Jests of Hierocles and Philagrius : 
 (96)  A shrewd fellow having stolen a young pig was ﬂ eeing. When he 
was overtaken, he placed the pig on the ground and giving it a thwack, 
said,  “ Root there, and not in my possessions. ” (Bubb 1920) 
 It is obvious why wit and humor are so similar: They both require careful 
thought and are directed toward proper event comprehension. Cleverness 
is, after all, also the exploitation of some subtleties of knowledge, carefully 
employing the directives of insight and other epistemic emotions. 
 In many cultures, perhaps in all, there are tales of a folk hero, typically 
a young man, who lives by his wits (these have traditionally all been male, 
but modern writers have redressed the balance somewhat with Mary 
Poppins and Pippi Longstocking), thwarting all the villains, deﬂ ating the 
pompous, confounding the arrogant, and generally providing the youth in 
that culture with a wealth of inspiring stories of clever self-reliance and 
one-upmanship. Examples are Till Eulenspiegel stories in Germany, Jack 
tales in Appalachia ( “ Jack and the Bean Stalk ” is just one of hundreds, 
including versions of many other folk tales with different title characters), 
Br ’ er Rabbit in the South, and, with a slightly different edge, Nasrudin 
Hodja in the Middle East. Nasrudin is not a young man, but he has a sub-
versive side that appeals to youth everywhere. Some of these stories are 
downright funny, but many are more tales of cleverness overcoming evil —
 thrilling, but not laugh-inducing. Trickster jokes are their cousins, deﬁ -
nitely funny, but leaning also on the appreciation by the audience of the 
ingenuity of the protagonist. This is, in effect, the other great source of 
pleasure to be had in third-person humor: Either you take delight in your 
own superiority over the characters, or you admire — and hope to emu-
late — the cleverness of the hero, who sees better ways — better than you can 
see — to induce the emblematic errors of humor in those he encounters. 
 Solving riddles is one of the tasks such heroes excel at. Here is an 
example. Once you solve it, you may be amused at the tacit assumptions 
in your thinking that made it difﬁ cult to solve. 
 (R3)  There are three lightbulbs up in an attic and three unlabeled light 
switches inside the front door, controlling those lights, up two ﬂ ights of 
stairs. You can switch the switches any way you like before heading 
upstairs to see the results, but you can make only one trip to the attic. 
Now, how do you match up which switch goes with which bulb? 
(Assume you are alone and there is no way of sending information 
between attic and basement.) 

250 
Chapter 11
 The fact that humor depends, as we have shown, upon a false belief 
makes it often an ideal tool to use when pointing out others ’  false beliefs. 
As Bertrand Russell once said, 
 People often make the mistake of thinking that  “ humorous ”  and  “ serious ”  are 
antonyms. They are wrong.  “ Humorous ”  and  “ solemn ”  are antonyms. I am never 
more serious than when I am being humorous. 
 The laugh that may accompany ﬁ nding the solution to the puzzle is 
possibly the result of three separate emotional reactions: a smidgen of 
humor from the recognition of your own mistaken assumption, the per-
sonal joy of triumph over a challenge, and even some of the superiority 
theorist ’ s favorite additive, the pleasure that comes from a winning move 
in a competition. As Gore Vidal once put it, in a ﬁ ne example of his own 
wit,  “ It is not enough to succeed. Others must fail. ” Not really funny, but 
you may ﬁ nd yourself chuckling. 
 E.   Huron on the Manipulation of Expectations 
 A girl went out on a date with a trumpet player, and when she came back her 
roommate asked,  “ Well, how was it? Did his embouchure make him a great 
kisser? ”   “ Nah, ” the ﬁ rst girl replied.  “ That dry, tight, tiny little pucker; it was no 
fun at all. ” The next night she went out with a tuba player, and when she came 
back her roommate asked,  “ Well, how was his kissing? ”  “ Ugh! ”  the ﬁ rst girl 
exclaimed.  “ Those huge, rubbery, blubbery, slobbering slabs of meat; oh, it was 
just gross! ” The next night she went out with a French horn player, and when 
she came back her roommate asked,  “ Well, how was his kissing? ”  “ Well, ”  the ﬁ rst 
girl replied,  “ his kissing was just so-so; but I loved the way he held me! ” 
 Can you make people fall to the ground in a quivering faint just by 
manipulating their expectations? Yes, as Marjoe Gortner (1972) shows in 
his documentary,  Marjoe , about the tricks of the trade of revival preach-
ers. First, you use music and highly emotional rhythmic preaching to 
create a general mood of near delirium; then comes the laying on of 
hands, which has a demanding temporal recipe: You exhort the person —
 it works best on women, it seems, but men can also be enraptured — to 
lift up her hands to the Lord Jesus and look up to Heaven; then you 
quite explicitly ﬁ ll her mind with expectations (for instance,  “ I believe 
He ’ s going to touch you right now ” ), and then you  suddenly and ﬁ rmly 
put your hand on her forehead while calling out  “ in the name of 
Jesus! ” — a surprising shock even though she was expecting  something 
special. With any luck she will collapse (into the waiting arms of the 

The Penumbra 
251
preacher ’ s assistants, who gently place her on the ﬂ oor and put a 
modesty cloth over her twitching legs, taken from the handy stack of 
such cloths set out in advance). It doesn ’ t always work, of course; at any 
revival meeting only a few of the saved will have been brought to  just 
the right pitch of emotional anticipation, and in many cases the timing of 
the hands may be a few milliseconds off the optimal value, which no 
doubt varies from person to person. But it works well enough to be a 
standard part of the stagecraft. 
 What is this curious susceptibility  for ? Not for anything, probably; it is 
just a seldom-encountered glitch in the cobbled-together system of human 
emotions, a weak spot that somebody once discovered by accident. The 
trick has been passed on, by imitation or explicit instruction, to genera-
tions of preachers, who each try to make it their own, tuning it to their 
particular styles, trying to improve the hit-rate. It presumably exploits the 
partial independence, and different time courses, of two kinds of expecta-
tion, one vividly conscious (Jesus is — maybe — going to touch me) and the 
other unconscious or subliminal (the  preacher is about to put his hand on 
my forehead). The earlier-than-expected arrival of the stimulus triggers an 
emotional ﬁ restorm that temporarily incapacitates the person. Some people 
may acquire a taste for such rhapsodies and (unconsciously) tune them-
selves up for the preacher ’ s hand, becoming ever more sensitive, more 
readily aroused by the touch. This is an extreme — and relatively primi-
tive — instance of what is a much more general phenomenon, if David 
Huron (2006) is right. 
 Huron claims that the joy of music, the tension, the relief, the awe, 
and the surprise, can be accounted for as the predictable results of 
techniques of  expectation - management that have been reﬁ ned over the 
centuries by musicians. His title says it well:  Sweet Anticipation: Music and 
the Psychology of Expectation . Like us, he sees the brain as an anticipation 
machine, and emotions as  “ motivational ampliﬁ ers ” that  “ encourage 
organisms to pursue behaviors that are normally adaptive, and to 
avoid behaviors that are normally maladaptive ” (Huron 2006, p. 4). The 
system isn ’ t perfect, and  “ nature ’ s tendency to overreact provides a 
golden opportunity for musicians ” (p. 6). All of the arts, he suggests, 
involve  “ manipulation of expectations ” (p. 356), and in the case of music, 
he offers a remarkably detailed set of hypotheses, supported by experimen-
tal evidence, about just how this manipulation occurs and what neuro-
physiological dispositions it taps. A heavily compressed summary of his 
 “ ITPRA ” model will give you the ﬂ avor (but the details left out are 
fascinating).  

252 
Chapter 11
 There are, he says, at least ﬁ ve distinct emotional  responses that, together, 
modulate all our expectations over very brief time intervals: Imagination, 
Tension, Prediction, Reaction, and Appraisal. Imagination is just the urge 
to anticipate and has an indeﬁ nitely long duration. As a speciﬁ c antici-
pated event of interest looms, a preparatory Tension, orienting the person 
to deal with it, arises; then as soon as the event happens (or doesn ’ t) a  yes! 
or  no! response records whether one ’ s Prediction was right, followed by 
 “ quick and dirty ” Reaction evaluating whether this is a  good or bad thing, 
followed in turn by a more measured Appraisal of the outcome. All this 
can happen in less than a second. One of Huron ’ s innovations, as men-
tioned before, is his characterization of  “ micro-emotions ” (p. 25) that 
occur too swiftly and subliminally to be consciously isolatable in experi-
ence, while playing a decisive role in the  qualia of the experience.  15 Booth 
 Figure 11.9 
 Schematic diagram of the time-course of the  “ ITPRA ” theory of expectation. Feeling 
states are ﬁ rst activated by imagining different outcomes (I). As an anticipated event 
approaches, physiological arousal typically increases, often leading to a feeling of 
increasing tension (T). Once the event has happened, some feelings are immediately 
evoked related to whether one ’ s predictions were borne out (P). In addition, a fast 
reactive response is activated based on a very cursory and conservative assessment 
of the situation (R). Finally, feeling states are evoked that represent a less hasty 
appraisal of the outcome (A). (From David Huron,  Sweet Anticipation: Music and the 
Psychology of Expectation , The MIT Press,  © MIT 2006, ﬁ gure 1.1.) 
15.   Huron is cognizant of the philosophical traditions that infect the concept of qualia with 
dubious ideology (Dennett 1991 and elsewhere), but he plunges in undeterred and demonstrates 
that far from being ineffable and atomic to analysis, many of the qualia of scale tones ( do, re, 
mi, fa, sol . . . ) fall into clear groupings (determined by open-ended interviews of ten musicians 
and two nonmusicians) and that these groupings can be accounted for:  “ scale tones acquire 
distinctive  qualia as an artifact of learned statistical relationships ” (Huron 2006, p. 174).

The Penumbra 
253
(1969) offers quite the same idea, four decades earlier — we describe his use 
of the notion of microemotions in the comprehension of literature, on 
pages 280 – 282. The most interesting — for our purposes — of these micro-
emotions exhibit what Huron calls contrastive valence: 
 Pleasure is increased when a positive response follows a negative response. While 
surprise is biologically bad, surprise nevertheless plays a pivotal role in human 
emotional experience. Surprise acts as an emotional ampliﬁ er, and we sometimes 
intentionally use this ampliﬁ er to boost positive emotions. (p. 39) 
 Think of this  “ limbic contrast ” as Huron ’ s backstage trampoline, a typically 
unseen downer that makes the subsequent upper all the more delightful. 
The negative component can happen too swiftly and evanescently to be 
directly introspectible, but its presence can be extrapolated from the effects 
achieved when slight variations in the triggering stimuli are presented. And 
why should this enhancement effect occur? Because, Huron suggests, the 
initial negative reaction prepares for the worst with an anticipatory endor-
phin release, but no pain follows (since it ’ s a false alarm), so the body gets 
a little surplus endogenous opiate for nothing (p. 23)! Huron notes that 
Kant  “ characterized laughter as arising from  ‘ the sudden transformation of 
a strained expectation into nothing. ’  The key here is the contrast between 
the fast  reaction response and the slower  appraisal response ” (p. 29). The 
parallels with our model of humor are obvious.  16 
 So if you ﬁ nd that you want to say you are  “ addicted ” to music — or 
humor — that may be more literal than metaphorical. It has been known 
for many years that long-distance runners often develop symptoms that 
look like addiction, in their craving for the  “ runners ’  high ” that ensues 
after miles of painful running, and is caused by the body ’ s massive release 
of endorphins — endogenous morphines. On Huron ’ s view of music, and it 
may carry over to humor, these are safer, quicker, less painful ways to get 
a much smaller, but still delightful, dose of nature ’ s painkiller without 
suffering any pain for it to neutralize. 
16.   We learned of Huron ’ s work at the Tufts University conference on Music Language and the 
Mind (July 11, 2008) at which Dennett presented a sketch of our model, and learned, in the 
discussion, that it bore a striking similarity to Huron ’ s model of music. Huron makes it clear in 
his own discussion of humor (not just humor in music) that much of what he says about music 
should carry over to humor. We disagree with some elements of Huron ’ s treatment of humor, 
as noted in passing here, but since Huron is working on his own theory of humor (personal 
communication, 2008), we will refrain from detailed discussion of our differences in advance 
of publication of his settled views.

254 
Chapter 11
 So, while wit, Schadenfreude, and enjoyable contents can increase mirth 
through addition of positive valence, Huron ’ s limbic trampoline may 
increase it by  contrast with negative valence . The source of the negative 
valence that we are thinking of could be a number of things. A well-
developed joke may often impose just a moment ’ s confusion upon the 
listener before the resolution of that confusion points out where the mis-
taken commitment had been made. Other situations may induce con-
cern — say, a ﬁ le you ’ ve been working on isn ’ t in the folder you expected 
it in, and then you recall you recently moved it. If the situation ends up 
being humorous, if you momentarily commit to believing you ’ ve lost your 
work before recalling that you saved it elsewhere, the moment ’ s concern 
about possibly losing the ﬁ le should act as a trampoline for the enjoyment 
of the mirth when you realize the ﬁ le is safe. These cases are interesting 
context-based modiﬁ ers of the microdynamics of humor, but the most 
common downer that precedes the reward of mirth is simply the disap-
pointment that there ’ s been a mistake in comprehension. The mere fact 
that anything has gone wrong at all, the recognition that there was an 
improperly committed belief in a working memory space, may supply a 
micro-emotional twinge of distress. This is the downer of mirth. If this 
conjecture is right, the qualia of mirth will be intimately tied to Huron ’ s 
trampoline. 
 In problem solving, the assumptions active in the relevant mental space 
are (mostly) overtly entered and registered, in effect. You know you ’ re 
making these assumptions, at least  “ for the sake of argument, ” so you are 
perplexed, perhaps, by the conﬂ ict you have discovered, but not surprised 
that there is a conﬂ ict. Recognition of a conﬂ ict may have been what put 
you into problem-solving mode. If you resolve the conﬂ ict,  Eureka! You 
experience the joy of discovery, and will come back another day to solve 
another problem. Humor, in contrast, may sneak up on you. Humor poses 
a problem that you don ’ t know you have until you ’ ve solved it — or rather, 
 almost until you ’ ve solved it. There is that evanescent moment when the 
recognition of the mistaken commitment ﬂ ashes (with negative valence) 
before the relief and reward of mirth ﬂ oods in, enhanced by the 
contrast. 
 Just as the  qualia that distinguish the musical tonic ( do ) from the 
 “ leading tone ” ( ti) are generated by an interplay of anticipatory emotional 
ﬂ ood and ebb, so (on our conjecture) the  qualia of mirth turn out to be 
generated as by-products of the normal operation of your epistemic emo-
tions. We conjecture that the mirth reward system is not simply the dis-

The Penumbra 
255
covery reward system with different temporal dynamics, though that is 
possibly its ancestral version; the mirth system may have evolved into a 
distinct and parallel reward system, duplicating much of the machinery 
with variations, much the way our innate capacities to feel the pain of 
intense heat and the pain of sharp objects have come to occupy distinct 
circuits — with different  “ qualia ”  experienced. No sooner did these new 
by-products become salient and appreciated by our reﬂ ective ancestors 
than they began to be enhanced, harnessed, exapted to purposes for which 
they proved to be well ﬁ tted. The primitive mirth response, born of an 
accidental juxtaposition of timing differences in the modulation of the 
mind by emotions, became a target of exploitation by a different kind of 
artist, not a musician but a composer of funny things, a comedian. Many 
of the most salient features of (modern, nonprimitive) humor are all but 
invisible when we look at the mechanism they exploit, but without that 
mechanism, there would be no humor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 12    But Why Do We Laugh? 
 A.   Laughter as Communication 
 A professor gave his class an assignment for over the weekend, and said the only 
acceptable excuses for not handing it in on Monday would be if you were sick or 
a close relative died. 
 One student raised a hand and asked  “ What about sexual exhaustion? ” 
 The professor patiently waited for the other students ’  supportive laughter 
to subside and then replied,  “ Maybe you should consider using the other 
hand! ” 
 Bergson (1911) claims that any other emotion will nullify humor, but this 
is too strong. Humor might be an unwelcome interruption to someone 
engulfed in the glories of listening to a Beethoven string quartet or in the 
afterglow of great sex, but if the remark was funny, one would probably 
laugh in spite of oneself (or so we are inclined to think). Emotions interfere 
with one another when they have an opposite valence, but even here, they 
don ’ t simply antagonize each other, and a state of negative affect can actu-
ally pave the way for a heightened appreciation of humor, as when anxiety 
or anger is turned to amusement by a well-aimed witticism. A negative 
emotion may not actually interfere with humor itself, but rather just the 
pleasure that accompanies it or the laughter used to express it. In the limit, 
it is possible, we think, to recognize and even evaluate a bit of humor 
without taking any pleasure in it. For instance, a professional gag-writer 
in the midst of a harrowing tooth extraction could note an unwittingly 
comical turn of phrase uttered by the dentist and make a mental note to 
try to work that line into a routine, all without cracking a smile, let alone 
laughing. 
 The question remains, though: In normal circumstances, why do we 
laugh out loud when things are funny? The answer might be that this is 
just a stubborn by-product of the way we are wired, serving no function 

258 
Chapter 12
at all, but since there are clear costs to having such a built-in disposition, 
one should wonder why evolution hadn ’ t uncovered a path to weeding 
it out. Could it be paying for itself in some subtle way? Recall Frank ’ s 
(1988) suggestion that some emotions motivate us into beneﬁ cial com-
mitments we might not choose rationally. Part of his point is that the 
involuntary  expression of emotions also provides beneﬁ ts unavailable via 
deliberate behavior. Blushing, for instance, by exposing the secret inten-
tions of somebody contemplating indulging in a taboo behavior, can 
enforce a certain level of socially induced mind control. One who learns 
that one ’ s poker face can be betrayed by a blush may be motivated thereby 
to avoid that awkward prospect by avoiding  even thinking about such 
behaviors. One who succeeds in this policy of private self-control can 
then be more  “ open ”  in public, gaining trust from the community (and 
thus continued membership therein), which in the long run provides a 
greater beneﬁ t than the immediate rewards of cheating. The recognized 
risks of blushing (from embarrassment and guilt) could have been great 
enough to drive considerable efforts of self-mastery, since the cost of 
detected cheating, in early social groups, may have been death or at least 
ostracism.  1 
 In sum, we are forced by both the physiological sensations of our emo-
tions  and their involuntary outward expressions into more beneﬁ cial 
courses of action (from the gene ’ s eye point of view), even when they do 
not look more beneﬁ cial to our superﬁ cial rationality. However, we must 
not overlook the fact that, like every evolved trait, the emotions have costs 
in addition to beneﬁ ts. The traits that exist today have been selected for 
because, on the whole, the beneﬁ ts outweighed the costs in our ancestral 
lineage even if the costs have been heavy in particular instances. Take anger 
and its concomitant expression, for example. On Frank ’ s account, anger 
expression evolved as a way to notify conspeciﬁ cs that the person who is 
angered is not one to be cheated; the emotion arises when one feels that 
a resource has been unfairly taken, and it triggers behaviors, often violent 
ones, that can both deter others and possibly terrify the current cheater 
into making amends. The witnesses of anger come to realize that the costs 
of cheating may be higher than they expected given the dangerous behav-
ior of the angered person. That said, we also all know that we sometimes 
1.   This is just one example of the way a  “ handicap ”  can prove, over evolutionary time, to be a 
 “ crutch, ”  by forcing organisms to adopt an otherwise too expensive tactic. For a thoughtful 
reevaluation and revision of Frank ’ s account of emotions as signals, see Ross and Dumouchel 
2004a,b, and Frank 2004.

But Why Do We Laugh? 
259
regret what we do when angry.  2   Being quick to anger — and being  known 
to be quick to anger — can dissuade others from cheating you, but in some 
circumstances the emotion can also cause you to lose more than you gain. 
Each of the emotions that has been coded for by natural selection, includ-
ing the epistemic emotions, motivates behaviors that are — or were — on the 
whole, useful, but which may in certain circumstances diminish the ﬁ tness 
of the organism. 
 In the light of Frank ’ s account of the emotions, consider the fact that 
laughter is normally involuntary. Is there a hidden beneﬁ t to laughing that 
we would not — or could not — choose rationally? The fact that it is invol-
untary makes laughter a curious variety of  communication , since informa-
tion we broadcast by involuntary behavior (trembling when afraid, 
shivering when cold, stumbling when drunk, etc.) is rightly viewed in 
general as not so much communication as unintended self-betrayal. 
Curious, but not unique. Smiling, for instance, has been shown to be not 
just a sign of happiness, but rather a communication of happiness — it 
happens robustly only when we are facing someone able to receive the 
signal (Fridlund 1991, 1994; Kraut and Johnston 1979; Fernandez-Dols and 
Ruiz-Belda 1995; Provine 2000). The same sensitivity to the presence of an 
audience — or even an implied or imagined audience (Fridlund 1991) — is 
exhibited in laughter. Fridlund suggests this  “ implicit sociality ” is the main 
reason that solitary laughing occurs. What is not so clear is what this 
communication — this normally involuntary communication — is for. What 
beneﬁ t could accrue to us from communicating our having made (and 
recognized) a mistake in judgment? Even though an agent who has felt 
humor has recovered from her mistake, nonetheless it seems like an expo-
sure of inﬁ rmity to admit that there was a mistake in the ﬁ rst place. Why 
broadcast to the world,  “ I made a mistake in reasoning! ” ? Why not just 
keep it private? 
 Communication occurs when a signal made by an agent reliably inﬂ u-
ences the behavior of those receiving the signal to the inclusive beneﬁ t of 
the genes of the agent creating the signal (Wilson 1975; Dawkins 1982, 
1989). The optimal strategy for a communication system appears to be one 
2.   Anger in particular is one emotion that we suspect has reduced utility in our modern culture. 
These days the social, economic, and public legal system manage arbitration of unfairness for 
us. We no longer need to bare our teeth as often as we may once have. That is, of course, not 
to say that there is no use for anger anymore. See Gibbard 1990 for a good discussion of the 
optimal  “ tuning ”  of emotions in a modern society.

260 
Chapter 12
where you communicate what you know will be received (Oliphant and 
Batali 1997). When a bird sings, a person hearing it may pay attention and 
be stimulated thereby to whistle a tune. Or a hunter might shoot at the 
bird. Neither is a case of communication since the bird does not transmit 
information to the people that causes them to behave reliably in a certain 
way that is beneﬁ cial to that bird ’ s genes ’  likelihood of replication. When 
a conspeciﬁ c approaches because of the song, in contrast, this is commu-
nication — this is behavior that is reliably evoked by the expenditure of 
energy to create that signal  and there is a beneﬁ t to the communicator 
from the behavior of the second agent that  “ pays for ” the expenditure. A 
young bird ’ s scream may reliably beckon its mother for protection or a 
mature bird ’ s song may reliably beckon a potential mate. Interspeciﬁ c com-
munication is not impossible, of course: When a rattlesnake warns a 
mammal not to approach, or when a honeyguide bird leads hunters to a 
beehive, these behaviors meet the conditions for communication. The 
evolution of communication as a behavior is not without its perplexities. 
E. O. Wilson (1975, p. 176) observes that  “ communication is neither the 
signal by itself, nor the response, it is instead the relationship between the 
two. ” But Maynard Smith points out (1997, p. 208) the paradox of this: 
 “ It ’ s no good making a signal unless it is understood, and a signal will not 
be understood the ﬁ rst time it is made. ” For a discussion and resolution of 
this and related concerns, see Hauser 1997. 
 What behavior would conspeciﬁ cs perform if given the information that 
you have detected a mistaken model? As we just noted, it is not likely that 
the function of laughter is to alert them to an inﬁ rmity in your own mental 
capacity. Informing them of this would probably cause them to infer that 
they have elevated opportunities to cheat you out of your food or dupe 
you into cuckoldry. A more realistic answer to the question is suggested 
by the play theories of laughter. 
 Play is an enjoyable behavior, and this enjoyment is likely to be the 
emotional motivation for us to pursue playlike types of behavior regardless 
of the fact that such behavior may increase both our risk of being caught 
unawares by a predator and our risk of hurting ourselves from playing too 
hard. The fact that we (and quite a number of other animals) are motivated 
to play suggests that there must be some other beneﬁ t that outweighs this 
risk. There is a growing consensus among researchers that the purpose of 
play behavior is to sharpen the mind ’ s physical, cognitive, and emotional 
skills (Fagen 1993; Byers and Walker 1995; Spinka, Newberry, and Bekoff 
2001; Einon and Potegal 1991; Potegal and Einon 1989). It is a form of 
practice — practice in using the body you have for the basic purposes that 

But Why Do We Laugh? 
261
it was designed for. Practice in mental skills is a way for both positive 
and negative instances to be introduced to a cognitive system so that 
the system can build or reﬁ ne hypotheses, or make them more readily 
accessible. We accept this explanation of the prevalence of play as a 
critical component of the developmental processes that yield mature 
competences. 
 Social play — which can hone the same skills as other play, as well as 
social skills — has been shown in research to facilitate nonaggressive com-
petitiveness. The suggestion made by play theories is that laughter is a tool 
to facilitate nonaggressive play (Van Hooff 1972; Provine 2000; Gervais 
and Wilson 2005). Most of the evidence comes from primate studies. When 
tickled and chased, apes and especially chimps produce a  “ play face ” that 
is often complemented by a type of vocal panting (Darwin [1872] 1965; 
Provine 2000). This panting, which appears to be the phylogenetic precur-
sor to laughing, has been shown to facilitate the maintenance of a playlike 
state between conspeciﬁ cs (Flack, Jeannotte, and de Waal 2004; Matsusaka 
2004; Gervais and Wilson 2005) and has been found to be more relevant 
than the play-face itself for chimps ’  recognition of each others ’  playful 
intentions (Parr 2004; Gervais and Wilson 2005). This recognition would 
allow both parties to continue to hone their skills together without unnec-
essary and risky aggressive escalation. The play theorists conclude that 
laughter was originally a signal of nonaggression, and Gervais and Wilson 
(2005) go on to venture that (human) humor later evolved out of this use 
of laughter. 
 We would like to offer a slightly different proposal based in part on 
Ramachandran and Blakeslee ’ s (1998) explanation of tickling as described 
earlier. Recall their suggestion that tickling is a swift and involuntary alter-
nation between perceptions of attack and friendly touch. As this happens 
in a ﬁ rst-person, present-moment, sensory mental space based on reality, 
the experience does not require the cognitive tools that are necessary to 
elaborate either theory of mind or ﬁ ctional mental spaces. Tickling should 
be an effective type of (proto-)humor in species without theory of mind 
as well as in young humans who have not yet fully developed their theory 
of mind. We suspect that the panting and play faces seen in chimpanzees 
were thus already in place in our ancestors when they began to develop 
the more elaborated forms of humor, made possible by the recursive growth 
of higher-order intentional-stance thinking. 
 This does not yet answer the question of why apes and humans (and, 
perhaps even rats [!], though we should be careful with our attribution — see 
Panksepp and Burgdorf 1999, 2003) emit laughter when tickled or 

262 
Chapter 12
chasing/being chased during play. Ramachandran and Blakeslee answer 
that laughter descended from a  “ false alarm ” signal. Many species that live 
in groups have alarm calls that are used to warn the members of one ’ s 
group of impending dangers. Thus vervet monkeys have distinct and iden-
tiﬁ able eagle alarms, snake alarms, and leopard alarms, for instance, and 
many birds have predator alarms of varying speciﬁ city (Cheney and Sey-
farth 1990), and, in fact, some of these alarm calls may emerge without 
cultural exposure (Hammerschmidt, Freudenstein, and J ü rgens 2001; see 
also Seyfarth and Cheney 1997). The behavioral response to these alarm 
calls ranges from  “ orientation responses ” and heightened vigilance to 
headlong ﬂ ight. Some species, including chimpanzees, also have a  “ never 
mind, the coast is clear ” signal that cancels a  false alarm. For instance, a 
group of apes or early hominids that panics from the expectation that a 
rustling in the grass is due to a stalking lion can be relieved of their worry 
by the vocalization of one who determines that there is actually no threat 
there. According to Ramachandran ’ s theory, just such a signal is the evo-
lutionary ancestor of laughter, which also appears able to emerge without 
cultural exposure (Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1989) and which appears to have similari-
ties in both form and usage patterns with alarm calls (Deacon 1989; Preus-
choft and van Hooff 1997; Provine 1996, 2000). Its original use was to 
notify a group of relatives that they needn ’ t be anxious about some topic 
of current concern; its meaning has been broadened so that now it com-
municates detection of a resolution to an incongruity. This is an interesting 
possibility. It accounts independently for the pleasure felt in laughter 
(which may be separate, on this account, from the pleasure felt in perceiv-
ing humor) and for the contagion of laughter, since spreading the  “ false 
alarm ”  signal is a useful habit. We suggest another possible explanation 
for the contagion of laughter below. 
 Perhaps the false-alarm theory of laughter and the play theorists ’  expla-
nation, which says that laughter is a ritualized form of panting used as a 
signal of nonaggression during play, can be welded together. The play 
theory gives a very clear explanation of how the staccato form of the 
laughter sound developed (Provine 2000). But if tickling is a kind of humor, 
as Ramachandran suggests (and we agree), then the question arises why 
laughter would be the response to this kind of humor and few others. The 
answer may be that humor in our predecessors has been — and in chimps 
still is — coextensive (or nearly so) with play behaviors. Perhaps the under-
lying meaning it conveys not only to other play participants but also to 
concerned onlookers (mothers in particular) is  “ Don ’ t worry! This isn ’ t 
dangerous aggression. ” Chimps ’  play behaviors, aside from tickling, are 

But Why Do We Laugh? 
263
pretty much restricted to chasing (playing tag, in effect) and wrestling, and 
chimps laugh primarily when they are about to be caught or attacked or 
just after they have been caught or attacked during these competitive 
exercises. These are exactly the moments when a mental space of 
safety and control becomes eradicated by the reality of being captured. 
In playing tag, for instance, we try to outwit each other — we try to 
expect what another will do, model their model, anticipate their moves, 
and catch them. This typically involves deception on the part of the 
one being chased and prediction on the part of the chaser. I may build 
a model of the circumstance, then predict that if I bob this way, and 
weave that way, I can get away from you (or I can catch you). This game 
of tag, or hide and seek, is a  “ toy model ” of the primordial contest of 
predator vs. prey, or the competition between rivals for mating oppor-
tunities, and as such, it is a contest of  “ producing future ” by using a 
rudimentary application of the intentional stance. Playing tag is chess for 
chimps. Either the chaser ’ s model or the chasee ’ s model will get invalidated 
by every occurrence of capture or of slyly slipping away. An animal in that 
situation may laugh at his own faulty model, or perhaps with a bit of 
theory of mind, at that of his opponent. If tickling and chasing are the 
primary manifestations of humorous circumstance, and laughing associ-
ated with these had an early beneﬁ t in the reduction of aggression, or 
reduction of anxiety about the prospect of aggression, then laughing at all 
forms of humor may just be a vestige of this early behavior. (On the other 
hand, though it may have evolved to reduce aggression, we discuss in 
the next section how the modern version of laughter rather than being 
vestigial may have been co-opted to encourage other kinds of behaviors in 
conspeciﬁ cs). 
 The literature on the evolution of alarm calls has been marked by con-
troversy, but current models suggest that there is no need for a group-
selectionist explanation. (See, e.g., Dawkins 1989, pp. 168 – 170; Zahavi 
1996; Bergstrom and Lachmann 2001.) The same reasoning supports the 
claim that the behavior of canceling one ’ s own alarm call, or sending a 
 “ relax, the coast is clear ” signal when one ’ s group of conspeciﬁ cs is aroused 
to an alert state by some anomaly, would in many circumstances be ﬁ tness 
enhancing to those who had this instinctual behavior in their repertoire. 
The extension of the application of such a signal to cover play behaviors 
is a small step, since those behaviors are potentially misread as deadly 
serious. As play behaviors became more sophisticated, and occasions for 
genuine alarm receded, the vestigial instinctual calls survived as reliable 
and contagious  “ feel good ” signals. 

264 
Chapter 12
 B.   Co-opting Humor and Laughter 
 Laugh alone and the world thinks you ’ re an idiot.  
 — American Proverb 
 Nothing shows a man ’ s character more than what he laughs at. 
 — Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 
 When we have read a book or poem so often that we can no longer ﬁ nd any 
amusement in reading it by ourselves, we can still take pleasure in reading it to 
a companion. To him it has all the graces of novelty; we enter into all the surprise 
and admiration which it naturally excites in him, but which it is no longer capable 
of exciting in us; we consider all the ideas which it presents rather in the light in 
which they appear to him, than in that in which they appear to us, and we are 
amused in sympathy with his amusement which thus enlivens our own. 
 — Adam Smith ([1759] 1976) 
 Once this rudimentary form of proto-humor and its attendant laughter 
was in place, it was available to be co-opted by evolution for other pur-
poses. And, in fact, the broad range of ways we see humor and laughter 
used today stands as testament to the fact that this trait must have been 
co-opted for quite a few additional purposes. Nonetheless, whatever 
retooling laughter has undergone, it still plays the role of a communica-
tion, and so it will still be useful to ask: What is the behavior, which 
laughter reliably elicits in the receiver, that beneﬁ ts the laugher? Let us 
ﬁ rst consider in particular the hypothesis that sexual selection played a 
major role in shaping — enhancing and reﬁ ning — and multiplying the occa-
sions on which laughter was the natural response. The basic claim is that 
humor evolved into a social tool that could be used to great advantage in 
the competition for mates. 
 The ﬁ rst step in the argument is to assess the relationship between 
laughter and cognitive ability and knowledge. The acquisition of knowl-
edge has an obvious evolutionary purpose: to create the expectations 
that guide the organism ’ s behavior. In organisms simpler than us, these 
anticipations tend to be stereotyped and local, permitting them to avoid 
immediate threats and track the simpler patterns in their environment 
that portend good or ill to them. In us, the arms race of anticipation-
generation has created an unremitting pressure on us to become virtuoso 
expecters. Everybody anticipates, in mental spaces, as much of the rele-
vant future as possible, to the best of their ability given the speciﬁ c 

But Why Do We Laugh? 
265
knowledge they have already collected. We aspire to decide on the basis 
of  “ all things considered, ” but of course we must always truncate our 
considerations in order to meet the deadlines of effective action. So each 
of us is engaged in a never-ending round of  heuristic search , building 
partial, and risky, structures — mental spaces — that depend on  jumping to 
conclusions — as deftly as possible. Our particular  “ choices ” (and these 
must almost always be unconscious, or unconsidered) are to some degree 
idiosyncratic, depending on what experience we have had, and what 
matters most to us at the moment. Whenever a mental space is created 
upon perception of some information, it must be the case that it is 
swiftly populated by all the inferences (to a reasonable recursive inferen-
tial depth) that are available from existing knowledge. This is what 
 understanding the new datum consists in: integrating it with what you 
already know. 
 Our model has it that the humor response is always triggered by the 
detection of a false belief in a mental space. Since we each can be expected 
to have tried to optimize our use of our inferential capacities to create these 
mental spaces, every such false anticipation reveals something about the 
limits of our useful knowledge about the domain involved. Clearly, then, 
when you laugh as a result of the detection of humor, you  unintentionally 
reveal something of strategic interest about your knowledge (and your 
largely unconscious methods of putting it to use). Agents that take the 
intentional stance toward you will often be able to determine what you 
had falsely anticipated — and to some degree, then, what you know. Both 
knowledge and ignorance are valuable strategic secrets. A comedian telling 
jokes about marijuana, for instance, typically confronts a sharply divided 
audience of slyly knowing laughers and others sitting in uncomfortable 
clueless silence. And an unstiﬂ ed giggle or raised eyebrow in response to a 
subtle double entendre can betray one ’ s  “ dirty mind ” to the vicar, or to 
the parents of one ’ s beloved. In even more serious circumstances, a coun-
terintelligence agent could slip a referential joke revolving around the 
structure of some secret information into a conversation, and watch for 
any lips that curl up. 
 Keeping up with the competition in the knowledge acquisition sweep-
stakes puts a premium on  recently discovered information. (A  “ quidnunc ” —
 from the Latin for  “ what now? ”  — is a person obsessed with the very 
latest news. We all have — and should have — quidnunc tendencies, since 
the latest news creates an information gradient that may be exploited by 
others at our expense.) If we partition a person ’ s information store 
into the latest news on the one hand and familiar — tried and true, 

266 
Chapter 12
hackneyed, trite — information on the other hand, which will be, on our 
model, more vulnerable to mistaken inferences? Will it be the least-
digested, newest information, or the long-neglected, maintenance-
deferred, taken-for-granted information? The answer is not clear, but 
humor helps us to explore the question. Some humor seems to depend 
on our unthinking reliance on overfamiliar patterns of inference. Other 
humor capitalizes on the relatively unexplored implications and presup-
positions of novel topics. Developmental research has shown that it is 
the most recently mastered items that often give rise to greater 
mirth during childhood (McGhee 1971), though if these children are 
frequently making mistaken inferences with this new information, this 
raises the question of what we mean by  “ mastery ” ; the same may not 
hold for adults or those who have  truly mastered a domain. Nevertheless, 
the level of cognitive accessibility for pieces of knowledge will have 
biasing effects on the ways in which that knowledge is integrated into 
JITSA-built mental spaces and thus on its likelihood of participating 
in humor. 
 Young children also seem more susceptible to tricks for which older 
children and most adults have mastered metacognitive avoidance 
techniques. 
 Answer quickly: What do cows drink? 
 The ﬁ rst thing that comes to mind for many is  “ milk. ”  And, if you 
almost said it just now, you might have amused yourself a bit. But cows 
don ’ t drink milk. Well,  calves do, but cows usually drink water. The ten-
dency to think of milk here (even if meta-awareness and top-down control 
helps you avoid saying it) betrays the automatic JITSA behavior of the 
mind — we just can ’ t help it when thinking of cows and drinking at the 
same time. A similar little trick sometimes heard in the schoolyard is 
this one: 
 A:  What is the most popular drinking soda? 
 B:  Coke. 
 A:  What ’ s something that ’ s funny? 
 B:  A joke. 
 A:  What ’ s the word for the white part of an egg? 
 B:  The yolk. Wait, no! It ’ s the . . . 
 Usually the interrogating child laughs at the other child ’ s mistake. The 
word for the white part is  “ albumen, ”  but it ’ s not a common word, espe-
cially among school children. Again, child B is primed by  “ Coke ”  and 
 “ joke, ”  which helps the spreading activation in their mind settle on the 

But Why Do We Laugh? 
267
only word for a part of an egg that they can think of . . . which happens 
to rhyme, too.  3 
 The relative immunity adults have to childish humor clearly reﬂ ects a 
difference in the cognitive accessibility of various mistaken inferences, an 
effect that manifests further in the pride that people often take in their 
connoisseurship of more abstract and sophisticated forms of humor. 
 Then there is the robust phenomenon of expert,  “ in-joke ”  humor, 
which exploits and delights in the discrepancy between the mental spaces 
of novices and experts. A person ’ s sense of humor will reﬂ ect not only their 
quick-witted ability to detect logical ﬂ aws and work on resolving them, 
but also both the domains of knowledge that they hold and the most 
recent levels of cognitive mastery that they have within those domains. 
 If the intellectual disparity between audience and butt is too great, the 
result is not as funny, since the comparison is so one-sided to begin with. 
In effective humor you want the butts of your jokes to be approximately 
equal in cleverness to the audience — there ’ s no mirth in pointing out the 
 “ stupidity ”  of (real) idiots, or infants, or cows, for instance. This is why 
moron jokes lose their allure once childhood is over. There are exceptions, 
for cases of spectacular idiocy, as in this true story, recounted some years 
ago by a professor friend of one of the authors whose ofﬁ ce phone rang 
one day:  
 
 “ Hello. ” 
 “ Hello, are you a biologist? ”  
 “ Yes. ” 
 “ I ’ ve got a bet on with my buddies. Here ’ s the question: Are rabbits 
birds? ” 
 “ Um, no. ” 
 “ Aw shit! ” [hangs up]  
 
 Laughter is a hard-to-fake signal of cognitive prowess — and weakness. 
It is not surprising, then, that humor-detection has come to play a central 
role in human communication. Aside from fabricated (non-Duchenne) 
laughter and stiﬂ ed laughter, our every roar and giggle broadcasts some-
thing about our cognitive abilities and knowledge. But once there exists 
the option of subtly communicating cognitive mastery, it is a trivial step 
3.   They also know  “ shell ”  but that depends on thinking of the egg as a whole object 
rather than a cooked object. We suspect it crosses their minds but is less strongly activated 
because of children ’ s prototypical interaction with eggs (i.e., they eat them, their  parents cook 
them).

268 
Chapter 12
to begin using that information to one ’ s own advantage. Laughter may be 
a hard-to-fake signal, but faking is not impossible, and an arms race of 
exploratory provocation and detection has ensued. The game-theoretic 
aspects of humor communication begin here. 
 When we encounter a new person, we immediately adopt the inten-
tional stance and begin ﬂ eshing out a portrait of the person as a knower 
and believer, an agent with desires, tastes, weaknesses, and all manner of 
attitudes. Without resorting to exhaustive questionnaires and invasive 
little social psychology experiments, we aim a few quick probes that will 
highlight the crucial points of knowledge and attitude that interest us. 
Humor is a particularly efﬁ cient and reliable — though not foolproof —
 quick probe. The role of humor as a relatively hard-to-fake or costly signal 
in mate assessment is thus not hard to discern (see Miller 2000 for a clear 
account). 
 The next step on the escalator is also quite obvious. If the intentional 
stance allows you to model others by provoking laughter in them, others 
must be similarly modeling you. This recognition opens the door to the 
search for ways of manipulating these others by contriving to control 
your laughter or at least suppress or mask particularly revealing instances, 
and to emphasize ﬂ attering instances of  “ involuntary ”  laughter. Like the 
peacock caught on the treadmill of ever rising standards, you will invest 
heavily to make yourself look like a more desirable mate by displaying 
your humor feathers as best you can. You will try to stiﬂ e laughter when 
it might reveal your limit of cognitive mastery, and you will exaggerate 
laughter when you think it may express a level of mastery that you do 
not have. (There is an old job-interviewer ’ s ploy of telling an entirely 
nonfunny  “ joke ”  to see if the aspirant will chortle gleefully — one of the 
countermeasures in the arms race.) You will work harder to detect the 
humor in situations as quickly as possible, taking barely conscious pride 
in being the ﬁ rst one to laugh. You may, without knowing it, acquire a 
habit of laughing when others laugh, just to make them believe that you 
understand what is going on, even when you have not received the stim-
ulus that evoked their laugher. Here, then, is another mechanism that 
could explain the contagion of laughter. While there may well be a genet-
ically inherited predisposition to laugh whenever you hear laughter — and 
Ramachandran ’ s false-alarm theory could explain this — it may also be true 
that a socially evolved and transmitted habit is spread under the pressure 
of this arms race. There would be  two levels of contagion: The contagious 
 habit of laughing when others laugh would underlie the contagious 
spread of laughter on particular occasions among people who had acquired 
that habit. And ﬁ nally, given enough time, this culturally transmitted 

But Why Do We Laugh? 
269
uniformity in habit could be driven, by the Baldwin effect, into the 
genome after all. (For a recent survey of the Baldwin effect see Weber and 
Depew 2003.) Those who most readily  acquire the habit of laughing when 
others laugh will be those in whom the tendency is already present in 
the form of a partial genetic predisposition, and with steady selection 
pressure, this predisposition will become ever more easily triggered. Over 
only a few hundred generations this could establish an  “ instinct ” for 
joining in the laughter — like the  “ language instinct ” itself (Pinker 1994). 
It goes without saying that these considerations also provide a natural 
account of the existence and persistence of non-Duchenne laughter in 
our species.  4 Once commonplace, non-Duchenne laughter may come to 
serve a number of uses too, from group cohesion and hegemony to social 
lubrication or Hinde ’ s (1985a,b) ethological notion of emotional expres-
sion as a form of negotiation, and more. A thorough discussion of these 
topics is beyond the scope of our work, but see Provine 2000 for a good 
introduction. 
 Returning to the question of communication — how is laughter a form 
of action at a distance? — one answer, as we ’ ve detailed, is that it may have 
been exapted from its ancestral version to help a laugher enhance their 
reputation of intellectual capacity in the minds of potential mates and 
competition. Owren and Bacharowski propose a slightly different use (also 
readily predicted by the strategic stance we give above): We use laughter 
as a way of  “ inducing positive affect in the perceiver in order to promote 
a favorable stance toward the laugher ” (Owren and Bacharowski 2003, 
p. 183). One way this might happen is through the creation of the enjoy-
ment of mirth. But another way may be through laughter as a form of 
praise or admiration. Several studies have found differential humor pro-
duction and appreciation between members of social status categories, 
with those of higher perceived status being more proﬂ igate producers (e.g., 
Coser 1960; Keltner et al. 1998; Greengross and Miller 2008).  5 Whether a 
laugher provokes belief or affect, or more likely both, in a recipient — that 
is, whether the sender gives a recipient beliefs about the laugher or beliefs 
about the laugher ’ s beliefs — they have generated a likelihood of some kind 
of more favorable treatment from the recipient. 
 Perhaps the most pervasive of the ways we have co-opted humor is the 
least competitive. We are referring to the commonplace behavior of 
4.   One might ask why, if it is deceitful and thus induces or hides some false beliefs, isn ’ t non-
Duchenne laughter funny itself? The answer is yes — it can be: Recall the joke about the German 
from chapter 3.
5.   The ﬂ ipside of this is, of course, the use of humor for hegemonic purposes.

270 
Chapter 12
shooting the breeze. Although it is often riddled with instances of superior-
ity humor as well as instances of all the aforementioned ploys and strate-
gies, one of its main purposes is relatively benevolent, done in the spirit 
of economic surplus. Many times when we sit around with friends, chewing 
the fat, there seems to be no overarching communicative goal to the con-
versation taking place. As we all know, the actual goal is simply  enjoyment , 
and one of the kinds of enjoyment widely employed at such a time is 
humor. The pastime of permeating casual conversation with witticisms not 
only serves the simple selﬁ sh goal of ﬂ aunting one ’ s wit, but is also a 
method of trade in the currency of social capital. We value friends who 
can make us laugh; they provide us with a valuable recreational drug — the 
endogenous mind-candy of mirth — and that value is cashed out in good 
will and reciprocity — though those who are less skilled at humor creation 
or purveying pay their friends back in other kinds of social capital. The 
value of this social capital is made more tangible when compared with its 
industrial counterpart: Professional comedians, like musicians, pornogra-
phers, and confectioners in their own ﬁ elds, have reﬁ ned their skills at 
providing a kind of enjoyment, and instead of trading them for social 
capital, use their talents to earn cold hard cash. 
 C.   The Art of Comedy 
 If you ’ re reading this and don ’ t think it ’ s funny, maybe your timing is off.  
  
 “ Who is the greatest Polish comedian? ” 
 “ I am. ” 
 “ And what is the secret of your suc- ” 
 “ Timing! ” 
  
 I ’ ve been doing a lot of abstract painting lately, 
 extremely abstract. 
 No brush, no paint, no canvas, 
 I just think about it. 
 — Steven Wright 
 We have spoken in very general terms about the way cultural evolution, 
including more or less insightful human tinkering, could design supernor-
mal stimuli that pack a bigger punch than those usually found in nature. 
Supernormal stimuli can occur by coincidence or accident, of course, in 
the everyday environment, but unless there is a mechanism — some form 
of cultural evolution — to replicate, and thus preserve, these happy acci-
dents, they tend to go extinct with a single burst. 

But Why Do We Laugh? 
271
 In  Guns, Germs, and Steel (1997), Jared Diamond argues that, to a ﬁ rst 
approximation, in every culture on every continent, human exploration 
over the millennia has discovered  all the local edible plants and animals, 
including many that require elaborate preparation to make them non-
poisonous. Moreover, the people have domesticated whatever local 
species have been amenable to domestication. We have had the time, 
intelligence, and curiosity to have made a near-exhaustive search of the 
possibilities — something that can now be proved by genetic analysis of 
domesticated species and their nearest wild relatives. This process of 
trial-and-error prospecting for edible foods (and potent medicinal herbs 
and the like) was simultaneously a process of prospecting our own inner 
constitutions; ﬁ nding out what tasted good and bad, what tasted partic-
ularly yummy, what made you nauseated, sleepy, alert, hallucinatory, or 
sexually aroused. Homing in on the best sources of pleasure, the best 
techniques of preparation, the best overall experiences was a search that 
did not require any technical knowledge of chemistry or nutrition, or 
understanding of human digestion, metabolism, or neurophysiology. 
Practical know-how preceded theoretical understanding by millennia, 
and could be the product of variable measure of utterly insightless trial-
and-error, unimaginative repetition of what one ’ s elders did, canny and 
even systematic titration of techniques by ingenious innovators, and ser-
endipitous breakthroughs that then would spread like a new virus 
through whole populations (Boyd and Richerson 2005; Richerson and 
Boyd 2005; Dennett 2006). Moreover, this incessant exploration of one ’ s 
own sensations could also provoke permanent changes in one ’ s own 
constitution, stretching the boundaries of the acceptable, and raising or 
lowering the thresholds of pleasure. There are acquired tastes in every 
dimension, and the price of acquiring one novel taste may often be 
losing the capacity to be thrilled by the pleasures of one ’ s youth. 
 We propose that the development of comedy in human culture follows 
this pattern exactly. The initial, raw, comedy-in-the-wild consisted of one ’ s 
own inadvertent mental goofs and the pratfalls of others, tickling one ’ s 
funny bone in private. You had to be there, as the saying goes. But eventu-
ally, the human practice of trading narratives, itself an exploratory process 
of developing prowess, compensated for this insulation by making the best 
experiences vicariously available to all, and even, on the best occasions, 
improving on the original stimulus. In successful cases, art outdoes nature: 
You  didn ’ t have to be there, and in fact, the episode is funnier in the (re-)
telling than in its original form, all distracting features abandoned, and 
only the pure, distilled comic essence transmitted. At that point, humor 

272 
Chapter 12
could free itself from the  objets trouv é s of real-world experiences more or 
less truthfully recounted and invent ﬁ ctions ad lib. 
 But how could a narrative be  more effective than seeing the event in the 
wild? What aspects of design and delivery could heighten the likelihood 
and intensity of stimulated mirth? Think of a joke (for instance) as a nar-
rative bound in the ﬁ rst place by all the rules of good storytelling, humor-
ous and otherwise. Narratives intended to impart edifying morals, such as 
Aesop ’ s fables, are streamlined little delivery vehicles; each element plays 
a role in setting up the lesson. There are no digressions or distractions. 
Narratives intended to convey knowledge of important historical events 
direct the audience ’ s attention to the key facts using a variety of devices, 
but also include crowd-pleasing extraneous details that add verisimilitude 
(Barber and Barber 2004). Good storytellers appreciate (unconsciously or 
not) that a liar often gives himself away by too streamlined and perfect a 
tale — a few intrusive and pointless additions can reassure the audience of 
the teller ’ s childlike candor and lack of guile. 
 Jokes, in this arena of competition for the attention and pleasure of the 
audience, can be seen to be like little psychology experiments. One of the 
cardinal rules of experimentation with human subjects is that the experi-
menter must withhold information about the hoped-for effect, since 
subjects will otherwise be unable to refrain from making unwanted con-
tributions and adjustments to the process under study. After the experi-
ment, the  “ na ï ve subjects ” can be debriefed and let in on the joke, in effect. 
In a joke, the withholding of information until the punch line is the 
feature that more or less ensures that the key elements will be covertly 
entered into the mental space, a necessary condition for mirth to occur. 
In the wild, this covert entry occurs when it occurs, and mirth results only 
when circumstances are propitious; in a narrative, the audience can be 
fairly reliably kept in the naive state until the right moment. Of course a 
poor joke teller may telegraph the punch line or a particularly sophisti-
cated audience may  “ get it ” too early, spoiling the sought-after effect. What 
works for one audience may be ineffective for another. The art of the 
comedian is in large measure a matter of delivering highly reliable super-
normal stimuli to subjects who are kept in the naive state until the proper 
moment. 
 Among the artiﬁ cial improvements created by comedians are double 
punch lines, jokes that hit the audience with one delight after another. As 
the laughter is dying down after the ﬁ rst strike, a second volley is 
delivered.  

But Why Do We Laugh? 
273
 (97)  A man goes to the camel market to buy a camel and is told by the 
salesman that for $100 he can have a good camel, and for $150 he can 
get a camel that goes 50 percent farther on a single ﬁ ll-up of water. The 
man expresses interest in the more expensive option when the salesman 
explains that the extra $50 is for a method that you can use on all your 
camels. How does it work? The salesman explains: 
 “ Look at that camel at the oasis just ﬁ nishing drinking. His head is 
under water and with his hind legs like that, his balls are out in the 
open. Watch the camel closely, and  just before he pulls his head out of 
the water, take these two bricks and  wham! right on his balls. He ’ ll suck 
in  ‘ shshshshshlooop! ’  and that will put on board 50 percent more 
water! ” [as the laughter is dying down]  “ But doesn ’ t that hurt? ”  “ Not if 
you hold your thumbs back like so. ”  
 Michael Close (2007, pp. 23 – 24) provides us with an improved 
descendant of the Aggie cruise joke, which actually has  three punch 
lines:  
 (98)  Kowalski sees an enticing ad in the newspaper — Two Week Cruise 
to Bermuda, Only $79! He goes to the travel agency listed in the ad and 
purchases the $79 ticket. On the morning of the cruise, he arrives at the 
dock, walks up the gangplank, and shows his ticket to the steward. The 
steward looks at the ticket and blows a whistle; suddenly two big burly 
guys grab Kowalski and drag him below decks, where he is chained to an 
oar, next to an Armenian fellow. 
 As the day goes on, the hold of the ship ﬁ lls up with people who 
have purchased the $79 cruise ticket. By three o ’ clock every seat is 
occupied. A big man comes in and sits down at a large drum. A man 
with a whip appears. A heavy  “ Boom, boom, boom ” resonates through 
the hold as the drummer pounds out a cadence. Everyone grabs hold of 
the oars, and, under the prodding of the man with the whip, the 
unfortunate passengers row the cruise ship to Bermuda. 
 The trip takes three and a half days. When the ship docks in 
Bermuda, the steward comes down to the hold,  “ We ’ re going to unchain 
you; you can leave the ship and have fun on the island. But be back 
here in seven days. ” The hold empties out in seconds. 
 A week passes and, of course, the $79-ticket passengers fail to return 
to the ship. But the cruise line was prepared; they send out squads of 
big, burly guys who track down the passengers, dragging them kicking 
and screaming back to the hold. They are again chained to the oars; the 

274 
Chapter 12
drummer takes his position, and  “ Boom, boom, boom, ” they row the 
ship back to New York. 
 By this time, Kowalksi has become good friends with the Armenian. 
As they are being unchained he says to him,  “ It is unbelievable that this 
type of inhuman treatment still exists in the world. This was a living 
nightmare. But I have to admit it: That guy was a hell of a drummer. [1] 
Do you think we should tip him? ” [2] 
 The Armenian says,  “ Well, we didn ’ t last year. ” [3] 
 Just as saccharine can supplant calorie-carrying sugar as the stimulator 
of our sweet tooth, and pornography can supplant actual coupling as the 
stimulator of the libido, so humor can jettison the serious business of 
error-cleansing that paid for the evolutionary invention and development 
of the funny bone, and get on with providing it with heightened and 
vicarious delights, supernormal stimuli generated by techniques that have 
been optimized by  “ intuitive ”  humor-engineers for centuries. Jokes, car-
toons, caricatures, parodies, and other humorous artifacts are, then, like 
designer drugs, created deliberately, but with scant understanding of the 
underlying machinery that makes them work, and then delivered to the 
senses, rather than eaten, inhaled, or injected. Saccharine and other arti-
ﬁ cial sweeteners are like slugs that work when put in a coin slot: Their 
functional structure is practically indistinguishable by the  “ sweet tooth 
machinery ”  from sugar, so they trigger the payment of a reward for 
nothing actually valuable (from the point of view of the environmental 
conditions that prevailed when our sweet tooth evolved). Much humor is 
probably in the same category: It has the right structure to trigger the 
reward system without providing the beneﬁ t the system was designed for. 
Probably most of the errors our humor sentries detect and disarm are not 
all that dangerous, all that subversive to our data integrity, so if it weren ’ t 
for the serious errors those sentries intercept on fairly rare occasions, the 
system wouldn ’ t pay for itself and would be likely headed toward extinc-
tion. So contrary to the advertisements that bombarded us on television a 
few years ago, you  can fool Mother Nature. All the arts are engaged in 
delivering artiﬁ cial, supernormal slugs to pump extra rewards from our 
reward systems, and of course we don ’ t mind, because we love the 
rewards for themselves, not for any distant genetic beneﬁ t they may still 
provide us.  6 
6.   And once again, such by-products or spandrels can, of course, be immediately exapted 
to play further genuinely adaptive roles, either by genetic or cultural evolution. Our point is 
that it is a (quite common) mistake to assume that the survival of humor (or music, or 

But Why Do We Laugh? 
275
 Comedians know to target their audiences with content that resides in 
highly accessible knowledge stores, where it is more quickly activated. So 
they tailor their routines to ﬁ t the crowd: stock market jokes for business-
people, jokes about spouses for crowds of married folks, bathroom humor 
for children (of all ages), and sex, death, and current affairs for almost 
everyone. It requires just as much intuition to use these kinds of content 
to enhance humor — through transfer and misattribution of arousal 
(Dutton and Aron 1974; Cantor, Bryant, and Zillmann 1974; see also this 
vol., pp. 217 – 218) — as to create the humor itself. How do such inventors 
of humor direct their design efforts? By large amounts of trial and error, 
adjusting their wording, their timing, their facial expressions, to see what 
combination gets the heartiest laughter — a handy metric, delivered by a 
collection of black boxes whose inner workings they need not understand 
(except  “ intuitively ” ) in order to be guided by its volume. They use them-
selves as their ﬁ rst test beds, trying to gauge the effects on others by 
extrapolating from their own felt twinges of mirth, and one of the occu-
pational hazards of this intense reﬂ exive process is the phenomenon 
described by Carr and Greaves (2006, p. 80):  “ In the process of researching 
this book we must have sifted through over twenty thousand jokes, 
mostly in solitary silence. About halfway through the process Lucy 
[Greaves] went temporarily  ‘ joke-blind ’  — an afﬂ iction that renders the suf-
ferer incapable of distinguishing a funny joke from a hopeless one. Jimmy 
[Carr], already acclimatized to the strange and rareﬁ ed air of the high joke 
country, was completely unaffected. ”  
 The results of this process of testing and reﬁ ning are a well-cultivated 
sense of the subtlety of an audience ’ s perception structure, a polished 
understanding of joke structure, and, of course,  timing . 
 Why does timing matter? Well, it only matters sometimes.  7 Some jokes 
are funny no matter who tells them; you can slow them down or speed 
them up signiﬁ cantly without appreciable effect on their potency. But 
7.   As noted in chapter 3, all humor depends on timing effects in some way, as they are generally 
ruined when told out of  order — a property of time and position. But the most interesting curios-
ity of timing in humor is that the same potentially hilarious remark or punch line, just a few 
seconds late, may lose all ability to amuse. Knowing just how and when these effects will occur 
is where the true art of subtlety lies.
pornography, or dance, or . . .) would be jeopardized unless it contributed directly to genetic 
ﬁ tness somehow. In the case of humor, the (free-ﬂ oating) rationale of humor could be shifting 
slowly away from data-integrity protection to sexually selected prowess-demonstration. The latter 
couldn ’ t exist until and unless the former laid the foundations with a strongly supported reward 
system.

276 
Chapter 12
there are other jokes that seem to  require the artful touch of a master of 
subtlety and timing. When you retell such a joke to your friends and they 
don ’ t laugh, you ﬁ nd yourself apologizing — “ Well, you should have seen 
Eddie Izzard deliver it; he makes it hilarious! ” 
 What does Izzard do differently than the rest of us? A master comic uses 
a variety of semantic tools to control the JITSA of an attentive audience. 
A well-timed glance, an expression of confusion or surprise or shame, or 
just a single word or gesture that refers to an earlier joke, can be used to 
signiﬁ cantly alter the spreading of semantic activation in an audience ’ s 
mind. Well-known comics exploit shared beliefs about their quirks of per-
sonality (Jack Benny ’ s stinginess, George Carlin ’ s anarchistic streak, Joan 
Rivers ’ s vanity) to prompt automatic assumptions in their audiences; in 
such cases, we have slim chance of repeating the joke with much success, 
even when we preface the retelling by citing our source. 
 And then there is timing — the most ineffable of all the qualities of joke 
delivery, and yet, well-predicted and laid out quite simply by the model of 
humor we ’ ve already described: During the process of JITSA, to make an 
improper commitment an audience will often require just enough time to 
make the necessary faulty inference without enough time to double-check 
it. Wait too long, and activation spreads further, increasing the chance that 
some conﬂ icting piece of information will bring the key belief into epis-
temic doubt. 8 Once that occurs, the chance for humor is doomed. Too little 
time and the inference that leads to an improper commitment might never 
be made, as the mind is moving on to the next parts of the delivery and 
leaving the trail of JITSA surrounding the possible joke quickly fading into 
obscurity. These tools of timing are standard apparatus for professional 
rhetoricians, too — leading an audience down a path, activating contents 
just strong enough and long enough for them to seem coherent within 
their context, but not giving the listener enough time to bring in further 
context in order to determine whether or not what they are listening to is 
sound. In this way, a skilled rhetorician and a comedian are quite the same. 
The difference is that the comedian, soon after, lets you in on how they 
have misled you, while the orator has no such intention. 
8.   This creates a caveat for our theory also: For any possible instance of humor, there  may be a 
timing effect that can help or hinder mirth elicitation. The dependency is on whether or not 
the key belief that would cause humor is put into epistemic doubt before being disconﬁ rmed, 
or whether it is directly disconﬁ rmed. Returning a belief to a condition of epistemic doubt 
 uncommits it and thus abolishes its candidacy for humor.

But Why Do We Laugh? 
277
 Over the centuries there have been  “ instinctive ” comedy creators with 
little accessible insight into their own  “ genius, ”  and thoughtful, self-
reﬂ ective comedy creators, with no discernible advantage gained from 
their attempts at theory. It is not surprising that comedic talent, like 
talent in art and music, has a reputation for being unanalyzable, ineffable, 
a gift that should not be disassembled, since it cannot be put back together 
again.  9 Magicians, in contrast, have been more methodical analysts of 
their methods, and the best are often erudite scholars of the history 
of their art.  
 What is the difference between stand-up comedians and stage magi-
cians? The best magicians incorporate humor into their acts to great effect, 
and both practitioners depend on exquisite timing. The best of both, 
moreover, specialize in leading the minds in the audience down quite 
speciﬁ c paths, imperceptibly nudging here and luring there, controlling 
people ’ s thought processes to an amazing degree. As the magician Jamy 
Ian Swiss observes, in an insightful article detailing many of the triumphs 
of such mind control by magicians,  “ The fact is, there is no room for 
solipsism in magic. If the only mind you can imagine is your own, then 
the only person you will end up consistently fooling is yourself — and many 
spend lifetimes in magic doing just that ” (Swiss 2007, p. 41). He quotes 
the magician Roberto Giobbi:  “ A magic effect doesn ’ t take place in the 
hands of the performer, or on the platform he is standing, or in the props 
he is handling, but solely in the heads of the spectators ” (ibid., p. 42). If 
this is so, and we think it is, then there are really just two main differences: 
Both comedians and magicians create conﬂ ict out of clarity, so the confu-
sion you feel is  not their fault but some misstep of your own, and the ﬁ rst 
difference is that magicians — when trying to amaze, rather than amuse 
(they do both!) — leave out important details that would help you debug 
it, and usually you have to just give up. You are left with a deep conﬂ ict, 
made palatable and even enjoyable by the magician ’ s manner. Comedians, 
in contrast, give you just enough information that in most cases will dispel 
your momentary confusion. The second difference, of course, is that 
comedians typically work their brand of sleight of mind without any props, 
but only words and gestures. 
9.   It would be interesting to see if there are notable patterns discernible in the history of humor 
creation, like the patterns we ﬁ nd in musical composition, poetry, etc. What progressions (or 
even progress!) in style or content can be charted? How important is structural or thematic 
novelty? This investigation of details of cultural evolution is, however, beyond the scope of this 
book.

278 
Chapter 12
 Figure 12.1 
 From  < http://www.CartoonStock.com > . 
 D.   Comedy (and Tragedy) in Literature 
 A panhandler approached a pedestrian on Broadway and asked for a small 
loan, to tide him over. The pedestrian replied haughtily:  “ Neither a borrower 
nor a lender be. — William Shakespeare. ” Said the panhandler:  “ Fuck you. — David 
Mamet. ”   
 What ’ s the difference between a park bench and an English major? 
 A park bench can support a family of four. 
 There is a huge body of scholarly work on comedy in literature already, 
and it would be very interesting to show how our theory applies to this 
wealth of material, but for us even to begin to step into that discussion 
would ﬁ ll another book (or two!). Rather than try our hands at such a task, 

But Why Do We Laugh? 
279
we prefer to offer a few words of guidance, and a few caveats, to those who 
are more qualiﬁ ed for it. 
 If, as we expect, science begins to bear out our theoretical claims, we 
invite literary analysts and rhetoricians to apply our theory in their analy-
ses. It would be interesting to see convincing analyses of how different 
authors have constructed various stimulus-delivery devices — not just sen-
tences or short narratives but book-length passages, full of interludes and 
asides serving to distract a reader or create tangential priming effects that 
either inﬂ uence tacit, covert commitment to various beliefs or, in third-
person humor, portray those mistaken commitments in others. It would 
also be interesting to see how authors use different types of d é nouement —
 sometimes instantaneously dramatic, other times in punctuated steps — to 
bring to light these overcommitted jumps to conclusions. And, of course, 
we expect to see virtuoso exploitation of the intentional stance. An author 
may craft the circumstances of humor not just in the reader ’ s mind or in 
the characters ’  minds, but also in the reader ’ s expectations about the 
narrator ’ s intentions, or about the author ’ s intentions about the reader ’ s 
interpretation of the narrator ’ s intentions, and so on. There is no end to 
the ways a creative author can construct humorous circumstances, though 
they will all depend, in some way, we claim, on the demolition of a belief 
commitment. 
 A note of caution: Such analyses, whether done under the framework 
of our theory or another theory, should not be expected to bring us much 
closer to an understanding of the nature of humor unless they attend to 
the dynamics of the emotional and cognitive effects induced in the brains 
of in the audience. Studying the stimulus-delivery devices (more tradition-
ally known as the works of art) by themselves will never provide more than 
a superﬁ cial understanding of why they are vehicles of humor. (Nothing 
could be  “ intrinsically funny. ” ) 
 Among the questions such analyses could illuminate are these: Why are 
some authors considered — by some people — to be funnier than others? 
What categories of comedy appeal to what tastes and why? What are the 
features by which we recognize the distinctive comic style of an author? 
When and why does the detachment of the voyeuristic perspective 
(Boorstin 1990; see our discussion above, pp. 140 – 141), which is more or 
less standard for jokes, get replaced by a more empathic perspective? The 
playwright Neil Simon, for instance, avoids jokes and wisecracks, and 
evokes humor from the untoward consequences of imbalances and weak-
nesses in characters for whom we care: 

280 
Chapter 12
 “ When people care, even the slightest joke will get a big laugh, for they ’ ll be so 
caught up in what ’ s going on, ” he told  Playboy .  “ If they  don ’ t care and are  not 
caught up, you need blockbusters every two minutes and even that won ’ t fulﬁ ll 
an audience. ” (Quoted in Lahr 2010, p. 73) 
 The answers to these and other questions are not going to be simple or 
singular, and they probably depend more on the traditional tools of literary 
analysis than on the cognitive mechanics of humor, though there will have 
to be some interplay. The fact that different comic styles all converge upon 
a central mechanism for humor does not make articulating their differ-
ences any easier — try taxonomizing styles of clothing, all of which are 
constrained in one way or another to cover some parts of the human body. 
Likewise, there are as many goals and motives for creating comedy as for 
cooking. Some folks create humor simply because they enjoy the reputa-
tion of being a funny person. Some put humor into their work for educa-
tional purposes — an offering of mind-candy to their readers to seduce their 
attention or to break down ill-examined presuppositions — or for sheer 
entertainment, only meant to increase enjoyment (and sales). Others have 
political agendas, and are satirizing social roles and habits with the intent 
of changing the balance of power in some domain — gender or class or 
income or ethnicity or, for that matter, academic discipline. Again, we 
think the traditional tools of literary analysis will have — and already have 
had — more to say on these topics than our theory does. 
 Many literary theorists have stressed the importance of what takes place 
in the minds of the audience or readers — “ reader response ” theorists are 
the paradigmatic school — and it is now possible to go beyond the informal 
concepts and introspective methods available to traditional analysts in the 
arts and humanities; we can start using concepts of cognitive science as a 
foundation for the analysis of literary achievement. Looking for events in 
the mind, and taking the JITSA view seriously, has consequences for 
understanding many of the effects authors generate — sometimes wittingly, 
other times not so wittingly. For instance, the distinguished Shakespeare 
expert Stephen Booth (emeritus professor of English literature at the 
University of California, Berkeley) argues for two important notions which 
we ﬁ nd particularly harmonious with our work. The ﬁ rst is the  ideational 
pun , and the second is his view on tragedy. 
 An ideational pun, or  “ almost-pun, ”  according to Booth ’ s coinage, is 
 “ an interplay between an idea and word that could — but does not — express 
or relate to that idea ” (Booth 1977, p. 465). An ideational pun provokes 
an event in the mind that  approaches the status of humor, and which — if 
one reﬂ ects on it — one thinks must be funny somehow, but isn ’ t sure how. 

But Why Do We Laugh? 
281
As Booth stresses, ideational puns are near or below the threshold of aware-
ness; they do not draw attention to themselves, and hence any effect they 
achieve is subtle. We have stressed the importance of consciousness in the 
process of detecting the contradictions, which is a precondition of humor; 
so ideational puns are not outright humor and do not of themselves incite 
laughter, but they do incite microemotional twinges that sometimes let 
you know they are there (especially if, like Booth himself, you are attuned 
to their existence). Occasionally a reader might notice the almost-pun, 
make conscious sense of it, perhaps even extrapolate to ﬁ nd it funny, and 
then even wonder whether the author had intended it. From our perspec-
tive, this is an entirely optional issue; poets, like comedians, may have 
little insight, let alone self-conscious intentions, about why and how 
they achieve the effects that they have learned to produce. Booth puts it 
this way: 
 I mean to suggest by my commentary that Shakespeare uses syntactically and 
logically impertinent ideas, ideas latent in words because of their habitual uses in 
other contexts, in rather the way he uses rhythm and rhyme — that he  “ rhymes ” 
ideas, and  “ rhymes ”  ideas with sounds, and makes rhythm-like patterns in which 
extra-syntactical meanings link to sounds or other extra-syntactical meanings 
or to meanings active in the syntax to give his sonnets extra-logical coherence. 
Shakespeare plays to the mental faculties that under cruder conditions cause us 
to make and understand puns. (1977, p. 371) 
 Let ’ s use Booth ’ s last phrase here to illustrate his point. Is he deliberately 
creating the confusion between the verb  play (the primary or intended 
meaning) and the familiar association of  Shakespeare ’ s plays and, in a 
context where he has just made a gibe about the  “ wanton ingenuity of 
disciples of the new criticism, ” does his juxtaposition of  faculties and  cruder 
echo that gibe and subliminally discredit the discoveries (or hallucinations) 
of cruder academicians? For simplicity, let ’ s make up a dead-obvious 
example of an ideational pun: 
 The garden has ﬂ ourished under their care, but now as Janina and her 
lover part forever, she sees the tulips ’  leaves are wilting. 
 A straightforward analysis might note the obvious symbolism, the parallel 
between their love story and the tulip ’ s ebbing vitality, but what is more 
interesting to someone attuned to Booth ’ s perspective is what happens in 
the reader ’ s mind: The possessive  tulips ’  has phonetic copies of the words 
 “ two ” and  “ lips, ”  which, in the JITSA of a comprehender ’ s mind will be 
initially activated meanings. Normally, these activations would fade fast as 
the disambiguation would be instantaneous, but since the situation 

282 
Chapter 12
involves  two lovers parting (and probably kissing, since that is a ready 
default ﬁ ll-in when we hear of such a parting) there would be some 
priming, some pressure on hearing  tulips ’  — even if it ’ s not quite enough 
pressure to make a full misinterpretation — to activate the meanings for  two 
and  lips all the way to conscious strength. Into the bargain, we can add 
that the word  “ leaves ” has a second interpretation as a verb, with similar 
cross-priming effects due to homonymy and the context. (It doesn ’ t end 
there, of course.) No false interpretation is fully committed to; no full 
humor happens, but much of the same neural dynamics involved in 
humor is occurring, and the reader, without realizing it, may feel that there 
are more connections than necessary — more meaning than seen on the 
surface. That ’ s why Booth calls it an  “ almost-pun. ” 
 Booth ’ s second point in harmony with our view is his claim about the 
role of microemotions in Shakespeare ’ s works (and all good literature, 
really). In his 1969 book,  An Essay on Shakespeare ’ s Sonnets , he describes 
how a reader ’ s emotions  evoked by the experience of reading , on a miniature 
scale, can reﬂ ect the semantic content of the work and deepen the experi-
ence of it. For example, regarding Sonnet 33, he says, “Each violation of 
the reader ’ s conﬁ dence in his expectations about a syntactical pattern 
evokes a miniature experience for the reader that mirrors the experience 
of betrayed expectations which is the subject of the poem” (Booth 1969, 
p. 55). There is a series of microemotions, perhaps just beneath the thresh-
old of consciousness, which color one ’ s reading of the poem even if even 
if one cannot say how or why. Likewise, in a later book, he uses this notion 
to describe the role of  “ indeﬁ nition ” in tragedy, and more speciﬁ cally, in 
 King Lear :  “ Shakespeare presents the culminating events of his  story after 
his  play is over. . . . The play makes its audience suffer  as audience; the fact 
that  King Lear ends but does not stop is only the biggest of a succession of 
similar facts about the play ” (Booth 1983, p. 23). Like his view of ideational 
punning, this claim has the ﬂ avor of JITSA. For Booth, tragedy has a thor-
oughgoing dependence upon the repeated experience of microemotional 
confusion and uncertainty, evoked by the  indeﬁ nition introduced by incon-
clusive acts and speeches. For Booth, tragedy is not so much a part of the 
content of a story as it is an experience in the audience of the consistent 
evocation and reevocation of these other epistemic emotions throughout 
the story. He says,  “ I submit that the tragedy of the play  Macbeth is not of 
the character Macbeth and that it does not happen on the stage. The 
tragedy occurs in the audience, in miniature in each little failure of catego-
ries and at its largest in the failure of active moral categories to hold the 
actions and actors proper to them ” (ibid., p. 109). It is the sum of all these 

But Why Do We Laugh? 
283
little epistemic disappointments of  “ indeﬁ nition ” that gives us a constant 
feeling of uncertainty throughout the play, and then leaves us lingering 
long after with a feeling we name  tragedy .  10  
 Our discussion of Booth ’ s work is meant to provide an example of  one 
of the ways we expect our theory to join forces with the researches of liter-
ary critics and theorists. We wish to forestall a familiar defensive response 
among thinkers in the humanities: we are not out to  replace or  refute their 
projects but rather to  underpin and  enlarge their perspective by going 
into psychological and biological details that they have ignored or 
postponed.  11 
 E.   Humor That Heals 
 First the doctor told me the good news — I was going to have a disease named 
after me. 
 — Steve Martin  
 What do you give a man who has everything? 
 Antibiotics.  
 — Carr and Greeves (2006) 
 The idea of humor that heals is not new, as indicated by an old proverb: 
 “ Laughter is the best medicine, ” a version of which ( “ a merry heart 
doeth good like a medicine ” ) dates back at least as far as the King 
James Bible (Proverbs 17:22, King James Bible; as cited in Martin 2001). 
However, ﬁ nding doctors who take this adage seriously may be a fairly 
recent change. In 1971, Dr. Patch Adams and a group of friends established 
a medical clinic — the Gesundheit! Institute — founded on the principles 
of positive attitude, which notoriously included humorous entertainment 
as a form of treatment for their patients. The institute is still running 
today. 
 Others suggest laughter as a more preventative kind of treatment. Dr. 
Madan Kataria began the ﬁ rst Laughter Yoga Club in 1995 in India, though 
10.   An example that might be easier for modern audiences to grasp is the feeling you have after 
a movie that has left you with a number of questions and loose ends. There is so much epistemic 
dissatisfaction about this movie that you can ’ t take it lightly, whether or not its  content was 
dramatic or comedic. The effect is best coupled with dramatic content, but there is nothing 
wrong with mixing a certain amount of humor in as well.
11.   Huron (2006) makes an eloquent plea for the same alliance of disciplines.

284 
Chapter 12
now there are chapters worldwide. Members of thousands of these clubs 
gather together regularly and go through breathing and laughing exercises. 
If nothing is funny, they even coerce themselves into non-Duchenne 
laughs until the situation appears so farcical that they are compelled to 
natural contagious laughter, which they continue to sustain for quite some 
time and which they believe improves their medical constitution. Keltner 
and Bonanno (1997) have shown that laughter — though only Duchenne 
laughter — predicts swifter recovery from bereavement. An interesting 
result, but keep in mind that causality could go either way here, and it is 
uncertain whether such laughter is simply a signal for the underlying mirth 
reward, another social sharing reward, perhaps both, or even some other 
factor. Whether humor and laughing actually have an effect on health is 
controversial, though many have speculated on the topic, and we will 
continue, cautiously, in that tradition of speculation. 
 Norman Cousins, longtime editor of the  Saturday Review , who strongly 
supported the notion of emotions in healing, has become something of a 
folk legend since supposedly curing himself (he suffered from ankylosing 
spondylitis, a painful inﬂ ammatory arthritis of the spine) by self-
medicating with a cocktail of vitamin C and laughter. Perhaps inspired 
by the telling of his story (Cousins 1979), many have explored, both 
scientiﬁ cally and personally, the notion of humor that heals. However, 
the scientiﬁ c evidence has been inconclusive. Numerous theories (e.g., Fry 
1977, 1994; Kataria, Wilson, and Buxman 1999) and studies (e.g., Dillon, 
Minchoff, and Baker 1985; Lefcourt, Davidson-Katz and Kueneman, 1990; 
Lefcourt et al. 1997) have attempted to support this idea. However, in 
reviews of this literature and much more, Martin (2001, 2004) has disputed 
that there is any evidence of a health beneﬁ t to humor, supporting only 
the possibility that laughter provides some measure of analgesia. It ’ s 
perhaps unsurprising that positive affect (laughter) should have a reducing 
or attenuating effect on negative affect (pain) under the uniﬁ ed formula-
tion of emotions and other affective sensation that we argue for in chapter 
6, keeping in mind the valence-competitive nature of emotions and their 
nature as perceptual stimuli competing for attention. Martin (2001, p. 514) 
even notes that  “ similar [analgesic effect] ﬁ ndings are obtained with [other] 
negative emotions . . . suggesting that the observed analgesic effects may 
be due to general emotional arousal regardless of affective valence. ” This 
is not to say that we should thoroughly discount the notion of humor that 
heals, only that the evidence to date has been weak. Martin ’ s complaints 
are primarily methodological, and resolving them may allow for a more 
careful inquiry. 

But Why Do We Laugh? 
285
 Our own addition to the speculations about humor that heals is unre-
lated to pain, and instead based on the fact that mirth is emotionally 
asymmetrical. Typically an emotion and the contents that elicit it are 
closely related — dangerous things cause fear, and beneﬁ cial things cause 
joy. But the positive affective state of mirth can be triggered by contents 
that are positive, negative, or even neutral, causing sometimes surprising 
effects (recall the positive emotions from violent video games or the laugh-
ter at tragedies mentioned in chapter 9). This feature of mirth, rare among 
emotions, can be — and probably has been — exploited in a number of ways. 
In his 2003 book  Deep Survival , Laurence Gonzales describes how ﬁ ghter 
pilots seem to use a form of dark humor as a tool to keep from panicking 
during dangerous takeoffs and landings on aircraft carriers. Joking about 
the disastrous — using the negatively valenced content to create a positively 
valenced emotion — gives them the necessary levity to perform their dan-
gerous job. Another possibility that we hinted at earlier is that the positive 
affect can be used to disrupt a feedback loop of negative affect and 
negative contents. 
 The feedback loop is a classic recursive problem — a process whose output 
increases (or, at least, repeats) its own input (with a magnitude greater than 
any damping factors) is bound to continue forever until disrupted.  12 We 
are all familiar with feedback loops between microphones and speakers, 
but cognitive versions of this phenomenon exist too: For instance, the song 
that is stuck in your head is self-activating — given the cyclical nature of 
tunes, humming the last stanza often compels you to start over at the 
12.   Here is a joke exemplifying the idea of feedback, adapted from Cathcart and Klein 
(2007):
It was autumn, and the Indians on the reservation asked their chief if it was going to be a 
cold winter. Raised in the ways of the modern world, the chief had never been taught the old 
secrets. To be on the safe side, he advised the tribe to collect wood. A few days later, just to 
be sure, the chief called the National Weather Service and asked whether they were forecast-
ing a cold winter. The meteorologist replied that, indeed, he thought it would be. The chief 
advised the tribe to stock even more wood.
A couple weeks later, the chief checked in again with the weather service,  “ Does it still 
look like a cold winter? ” he asked.  “ It sure does, ” replied the meteorologist,  “ it looks like a 
 very cold winter. ” So the chief advised the tribe to gather up every scrap of wood they could 
ﬁ nd.
A couple of weeks later, the chief called the Weather Service yet again and asked how the 
winter was looking at that point. The meteorologist said,  “ We ’ re now forecasting that it will 
be one of the coldest winters on record! ” 
 “ Really? ”  said the chief.  “ How can you be so sure? ” 
The meteorologist replied,  “ The Indians are collecting wood like crazy! ” 

286 
Chapter 12
beginning. A more troubling kind of cognitive feedback loop happens with 
depressing thoughts — in this case, the negative emotion from the initial 
thought lingers in the mind and may compel one to review what has 
caused this feeling. Such a review stimulates negative thoughts (perhaps 
the same one, perhaps others) in spreading activation, which further 
engenders negative emotions. The cycle may then continue from there.  13 
 A feedback cycle of such negative content can be psychologically dam-
aging, and if related behavior follows, even physically damaging. In some 
cases, humor may be just the necessary cure for this kind of cycle: If those 
same negative thoughts can be turned around, by a humorous transposi-
tion, to engender the positive emotion of mirth, then there is a chance 
that the feedback cycle could be, if not permanently broken, at least tem-
porarily blocked. The hypothesis of humor as a  “ distraction from negative 
affect ”  has also been offered by Strick et al. (2009). They showed this kind 
of distraction to work in the short term, and we think it may be able to 
scale up to be applied to the kind of emotional feedback loop of moods 
that we describe here. There may be some justiﬁ cation, then, in the old 
quip that  “ laughter is the best medicine ”  — humor just may play a role in 
healing depressive cycles. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
13.   We don ’ t claim that this feedback cycle is the cause for clinical depression, though there is 
no reason why, in some cases, it might not be partially involved. Clinical depression more likely 
turns on a more general afﬂ iction of the emotional motivation system. Sadness in depressed 
patients may be a resultant  tendency — an emotional disposition caused by witnessing themselves 
in such an undermotivated state — “ Why am I like this? ” such patients ask themselves in confu-
sion, indicating metacognitive disappointment due to the state.

 13    The Punch Line  
 And so these men of Indostan 
 Disputed loud and long, 
 Each in his own opinion 
 Exceeding stiff and strong, 
 Though each was partly in the right, 
 And all were in the wrong! 
 — John Godfrey Saxe  The Blind Men and the Elephant: A Hindoo Fable  (1873) 
 The fable about the blind men and the elephant is replayed often in science 
and philosophy. The many theories of humor that have been raised over 
the years (see chapter 4) have not been all wrong — they each described 
some important aspect of the elephant. Each has been wrong only in 
declaring itself an alternative to all the others. Taking the Hindu fable to 
heart, and recognizing that we are all in the position of the blind men 
when looking at nature, can help us realize that all that is missing is a way 
of unifying the various descriptions of the elephant — of joining the parts 
that each theorist has wrapped his hands around — to show that they all 
are right. 
 Humor involves a mental space that contains a false belief, a mistaken 
construction, and hence indicates that someone is the maker of that 
mistake. The laugher is always the one who has just discovered the mistake, 
and when the mistake-discoverer is also the mistake-maker, one might 
suppose that the appropriate emotional response would be chagrin or 
dismay or even shame or anger, but nature has arranged to tilt the balance 
in favor of glorying in the discovery, as Hobbes says, instead of sulking. 
The laugher, as the mistake-discoverer, will typically feel some degree of 
superiority over whoever made the mistake, and that could be, as Hobbes 
said, either another person, or a previous version of oneself. The superiority 
theorist thus gets some vindication, for there is always a factor of judgment 

288 
Chapter 13
in humor: This is obvious in the cases of humor that inspired the superior-
ity thesis, the genre in which there is another person or group that is the 
butt of the joke. In cases of impersonal humor, the superiority enjoyed is 
one ’ s later self over one ’ s earlier self; one has discovered a bug and repaired 
it; one is suddenly a little bit better, a little bit wiser, a little bit more in 
the know. Furthermore, superiority theory gave us the insight that the 
(misattributed) joys of Schadenfreude, or insult to a competitor or out-
group, adds to the joy of humor. Incongruity-resolution theorists will ﬁ nd 
their insights deeply embedded and generalized within our model — incon-
gruity is a common way to lead one into either making or discovering a 
mistaken commitment — and it should come as no surprise that surprise 
theorists will also ﬁ nd some vindication. Surprise is the response when a 
speciﬁ c expectation is broken, and the recognition that a committed active 
belief is false is exactly that. First-person humor should be surprising, and 
in the third person, if the false belief we discover in another is not one we 
ourselves would have committed to, we still often ﬁ nd it surprising that 
the third person would have committed to it. The rapidity of change is 
what gives us the sense of surprise in humor. It is not surprise itself that 
brings humor into existence, however, but rather the fact that the engen-
dering episode often contains a structure whose sudden debugging causes 
coincident surprise. To make it clearer: If the debugging wasn ’ t rapid, if 
instead it was a slow dawning, then the intermediate stage of that dawn-
ing — the act of  doubting the belief — would  remove the commitment preemp-
tively before we had the evidence to actually destroy it. Shortly later we 
discover the falseness of the now not-committed belief, but that is not 
enough to cause humor. There would be no instantaneous discovery. Even 
release (and ambivalence) theorists can ﬁ nd some support for their intu-
itions in this model. Huron ’ s trampoline, the vanishingly brief negatively 
valenced emotional response that heightens the positive rebound, applies 
to humor as it does to music. And not only do we agree that the core of 
humor is the positive emotion that attends the debugging, but when there 
is anxiety or confusion or some other negative affect in the prehumorous 
circumstances, the humorous discovery very probably does bring a measure 
of relief, and hence can be expected to have been appreciated by would-be 
therapists over the ages, in the same way that they have recognized the 
analgesic properties of herbs and treatment rituals. Comedians, musicians, 
confectioners, pornographers, and shamans are only ﬁ ve varieties of 
practitioners who have ﬁ gured out, by trial and error, how to exploit 
the underlying biases in our nervous systems to achieve effects their 
clients crave. 

The Punch Line 
289
 A.   Twenty Questions Answered 
 Analyzing humor is like dissecting a frog. Few people are interested and the frog 
dies of it. 
 — E. B. White 
 We can see now why each of the traditional theories of humor was pro-
duced. Each was right in some rather deep way. Each clued us in to some 
important aspect of the way humor operates. Now that we ’ ve presented 
our model, let ’ s see how it answers the questions we posed as desiderata, 
and assure ourselves that we have a full explanation of humor. At this 
point, many of our answers will sound rather repetitive, and some of them 
perhaps even mundane and obvious. Nonetheless it is worth checking our 
list to ensure we ’ ve answered them all cohesively.  
 ✓ 1.   Is humor an adaptation?  Humor is one part of the emotional mecha-
nism that encourages the process that keeps data integrity in our knowl-
edge representation. This process ensures that we reduce the likelihood of 
making faulty inferences and fatal mistakes. Without a trait like this, a 
cognitive agent as complex as we are would be practically guaranteed a 
quick death. 
 Tooby and Cosmides point out that evolutionarily acceptable explana-
tions for human engagement in aesthetic activities, such as the creation 
of and engagement with ﬁ ctions, fall into two categories: The ﬁ rst (which 
they endorse) is that these activities serve (or once served) an adaptive 
purpose that may be difﬁ cult to suss out. The second possible explanation 
is that these behaviors are an accidental not-too-damaging by-product of 
other adaptive functions. We basically agree with their arguments for 
putting the arts into the ﬁ rst category: These things do help in  “ organizing 
the brain both physically and informationally ” (Tooby and Cosmides 2001, 
p. 14). The building of mental spaces and the manipulation and organiza-
tion of data done therein allows for stable and  reliable knowledge. We claim 
further that the process of directing these mental  “ aesthetic ”  behaviors is 
performed by another set of traits: the epistemic emotions. 
 Our theory of humor, however, bridges both of Tooby and Cosmides ’  
categories of evolutionary explanation. There is, we claim, an original 
adaptive purpose for mirth and the epistemic emotions — to encourage a 
particular task of knowledge maintenance — and this puts these traits ﬁ rmly 
into Tooby and Cosmides ’  ﬁ rst category, along with the other ﬁ ctions and 
arts. But that original function recedes into the background when one 

290 
Chapter 13
considers the countless hours that humans devote to humor consumption 
today. Jocular memes, some designed by inadvertent mutation and dif-
ferential cultural replication — folk funnies, you might call them — and 
some the products of intelligent (re-)design by comedians, have hijacked 
the innate funny bone machinery and exploited it to further their own 
proliferation. Our resulting humor addiction (see questions 3 and 17 
below) is not particularly debilitating, and brings lots of pleasure to us —
 which matters more to us than our genetic ﬁ tness, of course.  
 ✓ 2.   Where did humor come from?  The simplest organisms that can learn 
anything ( “ Skinnerian ”  as opposed to  “ Darwinian ”  hard-wired organisms; 
Dennett 1975, 1995, pp. 373 – 383) have an innate feature of their nervous 
systems that  “ rewards ” or reinforces any circuit that captures some local 
regularity in the environment and directs an appropriate response to it, 
seeking the good and ﬂ eeing the bad. Such organisms can thereby acquire 
useful habits in their own lifetimes, but they don ’ t really  represent their 
options (to themselves) because they have no mental space in which to 
 “ consider ”  them; they just execute them whenever they are called. A more 
advanced brain builds up something more like a mental model, a structure 
that can store information about the world to be consulted as necessary 
( “ Popperian ”  creatures). It is here that the simplest form of data integrity 
checking must arise. If new input contradicts what is stored in the model, 
something must give, and something must sort out, fallibly, what stays 
and what goes. Later in evolution came a mind with the ability to keep 
multiple mental spaces, opening the door to  “ Gregorian ”  creatures, capable 
of entertaining ﬁ ctions and counterfactuals (Fauconnier and Turner 2002) 
and  “ theory of mind ” (the intentional stance), as well as creativity and 
problem solving along with the more sophisticated forms of humor that 
we see today. 
 As we have seen, laughter, our most salient response to humor, probably 
shares ancestry with the play panting and false-alarm calls of chimpanzees 
and other primates, but amusement at the plight of others, or more elabo-
rate forms of nonlinguistic humor such as practical jokes, have not been 
observed — though it must be granted that there is always a chance that 
observers have not known what to look for, or how to interpret what they 
have observed. The controversy over whether, or to what extent, chimpan-
zees  “ have a theory of mind ” (Premack and Woodruff 1978) has been 
waged for twenty years without resolution (Dennett 1983, 1998; Savage-
Rumbaugh and Lewin 1994; Povinelli and Eddy 1996; Tomasello, Call, and 
Hare 2003; Grifﬁ n and Dennett 2008), but on even the most  romantic (as 
contrasted with  killjoy ; Dennett 1983) interpretation of the experimental 

The Punch Line 
291
work to date, chimpanzees have at best a rudimentary appreciation of the 
minds of others, and thus the breadth of humor that is due to social 
circumstance and others ’  perspectives (which is the bulk of humor) is lost 
to them, and presumably to all other species. Chimpanzees have consider-
able powers of expectation, but nothing (as best we can tell so far) to rival 
ours, so if they engage in time-pressured heuristic search, it is presumably 
a simpler and lower-dimensional search space. Perhaps, then, they do have 
a humor-like mechanism designed by evolution to maintain data integrity, 
but if so, it shows no signs of explosive elaboration like ours. We concur 
with Deacon:  “ I suspect that implicit in the notion of humor there is a 
symbolic element, a requirement for recognizing contradiction or paradox, 
that the average chimpanzee has not developed ” (Deacon 1997, p. 73). 
 Additionally, we may be the only species with the ability to create 
mental spaces for any context other than the present reality. Our ability 
to maintain ﬁ ctions or counterfactual scenarios in a number of mental 
spaces gives us much more opportunity for humor. If apes have a humor-
like mechanism that operates in the ﬁ rst-person present perceptual reality 
for them, they have no provision for communicating any discoveries they 
make, and hence no practice — beyond their play behaviors and false-alarm 
calls — to which to attach laughter.  
 ✓ 3.   Why do we communicate humor?  The communication of humor may 
have begun as a way of causing our conspeciﬁ cs to know that we were only 
half-serious with them during mock-aggression and play. The effect was 
that these joint behaviors would not aggressively escalate in violence. 
Later, laughter was co-opted for usage in more complex social circum-
stances, especially the mate-attracting display of intellect and the trading 
of social capital in various manners. Telling and retelling humorous stories 
and other jokes is a form of humor communication that evolved (cultur-
ally — there is no need to posit a comedian gene) to exploit this semivol-
untary communicative disposition of laughter. In telling a joke, we show 
that we appreciate a particular instance of humor — and think our listeners 
will, too. (Telling somebody a joke is as much ﬂ attery as showing off.) 
Humor evolves into a medium for the display of intelligence and mutual 
knowledge and opinion. 
 Jokes, as memes (or  “ rogue cultural variants ” ; Richerson and Boyd 
2005), can then hitch rides on this well-designed and well-maintained 
information highway. Exploiting the intrinsic appetite for humor that 
evolved by genetic selection, these quasi-independent informational 
entities can foster their own replication (rehearsal in the individual and 
eventual retelling) independently of any ﬁ tness advantage they speciﬁ cally 

292 
Chapter 13
offer to their hosts. Like Internet spam, stupid and disgusting humor 
that would be unlikely to favorably impress a potential mate, or even a 
rival or ally, can thrive in this medium,  “ bad habits ” that are hard to erase 
and annoyingly infectious. And such rogue cultural variants can go on to 
create their own escalating arms races, in emerging cultural ecosystems 
that take on a life of their own (as illustrated in the recent ﬁ lm 
 The Aristocrats ). 
 ✓ 4.   Why do we feel pleasure in humor?  The pleasure of mirth is an emo-
tional reward for success in the speciﬁ c task of data-integrity checking. This 
is designed (by evolution) to motivate us to persist in this particular cogni-
tive behavior in the future. Mirth is thus related to, and is often accompa-
nied by, the pleasure of discovery, but they are distinct: They reward 
distinct cognitive behaviors. This perspective draws our attention to a 
striking and unexpected linkage: Our playful love of humor and our serious 
allegiance to the Law of Noncontradiction have a common ancestor in the 
evolution of an effective control system for our time-pressured heuristic 
search engines: our brains. 
 ✓ 5.   Why do we feel surprise in humor?    The explicit razing of a previously 
committed belief in a mental space can be nothing if not surprising. In 
the ﬁ rst person, then, humor should always be at least mildly surprising, 
and, much of the time, it will be surprising in the third person too. 
 ✓ 6.   Why is judgment a ubiquitous component in the content of humorous 
stimuli?  When a mental space is invalidated there is always a subjective 
component of rightness or wrongness delivered by the logic employed: 
After all, a mistake has been made and uncovered. All humor, therefore, 
makes judgments. The fact that in much humor there is also a judgment 
of nobility/ignobility arises from the further exploitation of humor for 
socially competitive purposes. 
 ✓ 7.   Why does humor often get used for disparagement?  In the armamentar-
ium of human competition, scorn, insult, and mocking are well-tested 
weapons. Putting someone down by  humorously demonstrating an inﬁ r-
mity in their cognitive capacities efﬁ ciently makes the humorist  and the 
addressed audience look superior in comparison, enlisting the audience as 
like-minded allies and at the same time making the humorist appear good 
natured, not just angry or aggrieved. This is a common use of humor in 
modern society, but not its original or even secondary purpose, which is 
more plausibly the demonstration of intellectual prowess (with or without 
a target or butt of the joke) to potential mates and allies. 
 ✓ 8.   Why does humor so often point to failures?  Because that ’ s exactly 
what it does: It points out failures and mistakes in a mental model. It 

The Punch Line 
293
also brings remedies for those mistakes along with them, but the remedies 
are only a common side effect. The identiﬁ cation of failure is central to 
humor. 
 ✓ 9.   What is the role of nonsense or incongruity in humor?  The sense of non-
sense comes from the exposed (if typically unarticulated) contradiction 
that must underlie any faulty inference in a mental space. 
 ✓ 10.   If incongruity causes humor, how does it do it?  It is not incongruity in 
a stimulus that causes humor; it just happens to be the case that incongru-
ity in a stimulus often plays a part in the discovery of a faulty mental space 
and its deconstruction. 
 ✓ 11.   Why is it that we only laugh at humans or anthropomorphized objects?  Only 
a mind is furnished with the necessary components for humor. Either you 
are laughing at something in your own mind, or you are laughing at some-
thing that has a mind or to which we might counterfactually attribute a 
mind. 
 ✓ 12.   What is right about Bergson ’ s claim that mechanical behavior is humor-
ous?  The mechanical, as Bergson intended it, happens when someone acts 
repeatedly on an assumption that is not true in all circumstances. The 
person has not just a faulty mental space, but a persistent habit of making 
the same faulty mental space over and over again. The larger fault is the 
failure to detect and debug this bug-making bug. This form of repetitious 
humor thus exploits our capacity to  “ go meta ” and notice the patterns in 
others ’  representations of their worlds that are suboptimal. Our capacity 
to generate ever higher metalevels of mental spaces is impressive, but still 
ﬁ nite, and any persistent failure we uncover by this process of ascent strikes 
us as  “ mechanical. ”  
 ✓ 13.   Why can humor be used as a social corrective?  Humor works as a social 
corrective because it points out mistakes, sometimes rather publicly. In 
order to avoid this publicity of our shortcomings, we attempt to avoid 
risking making such mistakes, and thus humor relatively gently encourages 
revisions of behavior. 
 ✓ 14.   What is similar that unites the broad variety of types of humorous 
stimuli?  This should be obvious by now. All types of humorous stimuli 
contribute to a mental space being constructed and subsequently being 
found to contain an overcommitted belief. 
 ✓ 15.   How does play relate to humor?  While the many variations of play 
have their own purposes, some forms of play, including tickling and other 
games (notably chasing), are probably the earliest forms of (proto-)humor; 
they involve broken expectations and suddenly revised models, yet do not 
require a full-blown theory of mind. It is also likely that social play is the 

294 
Chapter 13
original source of laughter, which evolved into the natural expression of 
humor detection. 
 ✓ 16.   What is the relationship between problem solving, discovery and humor?  The 
similarity, noted by Deacon, Koestler, and others, between  “ Ha-ha! ” and 
 “ Aha!, ”  derives from their common co-occurrence and the similar mechan-
ics of problem solving often used in both. Though each may crop up 
unaccompanied, it is not uncommon for the solution of a gap in compre-
hension (which causes the feeling of discovery) to facilitate humor. The 
newly added jigsaw puzzle pieces from problem solving may complete a 
part of the puzzle, and at the same time add a new contradiction which 
helps to pinpoint a mistaken belief — a previously misplaced piece of the 
puzzle — thus causing mirth. 
 ✓ 17.   Why do we desire humor so intensely?  We have a powerful appetite for 
humor because the emotional reward it provides was designed to foster the 
habit of searching for surreptitiously included mistakes in our mental 
spaces. Evolution had no idea that we would eventually turn this desire 
into an addiction to comedy that supports a multibillion dollar industry 
of television production, cartoons, books, comedy clubs, and the like. 
Sugar tastes good and humor feels good. We trade, sell, and buy artifacts 
such as jokes, cartoons, and movies, which capitalize on the fact that we 
get joy from debugging. We then can use them to  create bugs in our mental 
spaces, which we can then enjoy debugging in a sort of mental masturba-
tion, rewarded not with orgasm but with mirth. 
 ✓ 18.   What is the peculiar speciﬁ city often found in humor?  The mental models 
that can be created in a mind are speciﬁ c to the knowledge that person 
has. Any humor that is created in an individual mind is subject to the 
constraints of the knowledge that is available there. Humor does not 
depend on actual truth; it depends on consistency. (Some mental spaces 
are largely ﬁ ctional, but they still have their mutually shared default 
assumptions; witches ride brooms, not hockey sticks, and dragons breathe 
ﬁ re, not snowﬂ akes.) Thus, a person could laugh at something that is not 
funny to the general population if that thing were found to be inconsistent 
in some way with some part of that person ’ s knowledge representation. 
 ✓ 19.   What is the generality in humor?  Many things are common knowledge 
for humans, since we live in the same world. We are likely, to a large extent, 
to have very similar knowledge structures and to use these to develop very 
similar mental spaces. So it is not surprising that we will all ﬁ nd many of 
the same things funny.  
 ✓ 20.   Why are there gender differences in humor?  The assessment of intelli-
gence certainly plays a role in sexual selection, and as humor became more 

The Punch Line 
295
and more used for purposes of sexual competition, the gender divide of 
the trait would tend to have widened. However, this is almost certainly 
more of a social effect than an innate difference — a debugging mechanism 
that serves epistemic purposes will be equally useful for both genders. 
Provine ’ s (2000) data show a bias for males to compete more aggressively 
in humor creation and females to compete among themselves in humor 
connoisseurship. But, if this evidence does not necessarily indicate a greater 
 capacity for humor in men than women, what is responsible for it? 
 We mentioned before that the art of unconscious prospecting will 
equally apply to Dutton and Aron ’ s (1974) transfer of arousal as it does to 
hidden rewards such as mirth, or more tangible overt rewards such as 
sweetness. Individuals may tacitly learn, through causing various kinds of 
arousal and enjoyment  in others , that their efforts are repaid in attention, 
friendliness . . . or even  attraction . These recompenses reward the prospec-
tor and encourage repetition of the act that brought them on. We thank 
an anonymous reviewer for bringing to our attention that this kind of 
prospecting is most likely used, not just by comedians and between friends 
as we said earlier, but also by males in pursuit of females. 
 Despite the recent empowerment of women caused by a growing 
feminist movement, the profound biological differences between males 
and females due to differential reproductive costs (Trivers 1972) still cast 
their shadows in our modern culture: For the most part, males actively 
pursue the attention of females. Any activity that can induce in a 
female a more favorable stance toward a male will be useful to the goals 
of pursuit, and so males — more than females — may learn, through 
this reinforced behavioral prospecting, that humor production is an 
effective strategy because of transfer of arousal. Their ensuing exploitation 
of this strategy would certainly produce the gender differences we see in 
Provine ’ s data. 
 Here is how transfer of arousal could play a role in courtship-by-humor 
(much as in Dutton and Aron ’ s original bridge experiment): The positive 
arousal in a humor appreciator caused by the mental event of satisfactory 
detection of an overcommitted false belief could be transferred (with 
imprecise credit-assignment) to positive arousal about the person one is 
with during this event. Our earlier point about sexual competition still 
holds — members of both genders should be likely to judge each other ’ s 
intellectual capacity through observation of both humor production and 
appreciation, and this tool should be used in mate selection. However, the 
transfer-of-arousal-in-pursuit effect offers a better account of the strong 
bias toward more male humor production. 

296 
Chapter 13
 Another suggestion, by Carr and Greeves (2006), may play a role as well. 
They say, quite bluntly,  “ [Men] don ’ t want women to be funny. They won ’ t 
let women make them laugh ” (p. 154). The idea is that men tacitly know 
that humor production is a signal of intelligence, and that creating a 
culture of suppression of such signals from women will give them an 
advantage. In order to enforce their desired gender roles (mostly uncon-
sciously) through humor, male competitive aggression plays out not just 
in making better jokes than the other guy, or using jokes to disparage the 
other guy, but also in creating an environment in which men will be 
seen as more capable (more witty) and women as subservient — better 
positioned in the humor realm as appreciators of men ’ s wit. All the more 
reason to applaud the women who brave the stand-up stage, despite this 
social force. 
 B.   Could We Make a Robot with a Sense of Humor? 
 Yesterday my friend ’ s computer beat me at chess, but it was no match for me in 
kick-boxing. 
 — Emo Philips 
 The question is not whether intelligent machines can have any emotions, but 
whether machines can be intelligent without any emotions. 
 — Minsky (1986) 
 A ﬁ ne way to test a theory is to build an instantiation of it and see if it 
works as advertised. We are nowhere near ready to write the code and 
install it in a robot, but we can expose the strengths and look for weak-
nesses in our theory  sketch by thought-experimentally considering that 
task in enough detail to clarify the specs for a humorous robot. Suppose, 
then, we set ourselves the task of engineering a robot that not only told 
jokes and sought them out, but responded to humor with  genuine laughter. 
(It might respond to social pressures with robot-Duchenne laughter as well, 
but our goal would be to make it capable of genuine amusement and hence 
genuine laughter.) 
 A trivial and unsatisfying  “ solution ”  to this problem would be to develop 
a standard modern machine-learning algorithm that could use syntactic 
and semantic features as cues to detect (with a high probability) whether 
a joke or other event would be judged humorous according to the hypoth-
esis it developed from its training set, and then output a laugh or other 
signal if (and only if) humor were found. Such a system, it seems, would 

The Punch Line 
297
 “ behave the way we do ” but only superﬁ cially. Even if it were, amazingly, 
good at  generating humor for human consumption, it would not, it seems, 
 appreciate the humor it detected or generated, and its laughter would be 
hollow indeed. Our theory shows what is missing: The cognition required 
to discover humor must be motivated by an emotional drive, and the 
system of emotions that thus controls cognition must exist for a compu-
tational reason — not merely as a facade to satisfy the skeptics. (It would be 
an interesting exercise to write a computer program for doing, say, long 
division problems of the sort that give people trouble simply because of 
their size, and then giving it a human-like fallible memory of the multi-
plication table, distractability, and competing tasks that could lead it into 
error. It might provide a persuasive model of difﬁ cult concentration — 
the sort that twelve-year-olds may or may not muster when solving 
such problems — but this difﬁ culty would be artiﬁ cially imposed on it, for 
the sake of the modeling exercise.) In short, the robot would have to be 
in an epistemic predicament something like ours: under time pressure, 
drowning in a combinatorial explosion of possibly relevant anticipation-
candidates, and hence — hence — obliged to take risks that lead to unsuper-
vised and unﬂ agged insertions of bugs that could later thwart its serious 
goals. 
 We must resist the temptation to divide the emotional and cognitive 
components and model them separately, engineering the cognitive aspect 
by creating an agent that can maintain data consistency in its knowledge 
representation and then engineering the emotional aspect by creating an 
agent that can get a good feeling from hearing jokes and engaging in 
socially mediated enjoyment. This separation would be self-defeating, 
since the emotional aspect needs a trigger to turn it on  appropriately , and 
that trigger must come from the detection of the right kind of (mis-)
information by a cognitive process with the right kind of demands on it. 
Suppose it were possible to design a cognitive agent that had so much 
computing speed at its disposal that it could  “ automatically ”  maintain 
data-integrity without any trade-offs that obliged it to take risky shortcuts 
(impossible in reality, but suppose it). The punch line of every joke would 
be  “ telegraphed ”  to it. While it might have a model of its human compan-
ions that enabled it to see the point of human humor, and even create it 
(the way a sophisticated author of children ’ s books might have a deft touch 
at creating effects that would delight or move children without being in 
the least bit moved by them), it would have none of the cognitive frailties 
escape from which grounds the positive emotion that would permit it to 
 enjoy humor for itself. It would ﬁ nd Oscar Wilde and Robin Williams to be 

298 
Chapter 13
slow-witted belaborers of obvious connections — and would respond to 
their most hilarious moments the way we quick-witted adults do to the 
most inane of children ’ s riddles. 
 If, on the other hand, our artiﬁ cial cognitive agent faced the same sorts 
of overwhelming epistemic demands we do, and its designers solved the 
problem with an emotionally driven competitive reward system somewhat 
like ours, it would be in a position to  “ know from the inside ” how delight-
ful humor can be, even if its own brand of humor was as practically incom-
municable to us Westerners as Korean humor (see chapter 3, section 
E) — and for the same reason: We don ’ t share enough deep background 
 “ knowledge. ”  So if the goal of our endeavor were to engineer something 
that had the capacity to create and appreciate humor across cultural 
borders with humans — a machine that could join us at social events or 
theater productions and laugh together with us, tell jokes, and make witty 
commentary — then we might be in for a disappointment. The model of 
the world that exists in the knowledge structure of an agent depends cru-
cially on the set of sensors with which the agent detects the world, and 
the perceptual architecture behind them. Slight differences in perceptual 
structure will gather subtly different assessments of the gross regularities 
of the world — analogous to the way color-blindness or differences in olfac-
tory sensitivity can skew our individual human perceptual worlds, but in 
every dimension of difference that is perceptible — and these broad differ-
ences in perceptual structure can have a profound impact on an agent ’ s 
model of the world. Not only would our artiﬁ cial cognitive agent require 
a phenomenological worldview that is drastically similar to the human 
view to ﬁ nd most of the same things funny, it would also require a desire 
to censor and ﬂ aunt its humor feathers in the way humans do for each 
other so that it would laugh in the same ways. This is the germ of truth 
behind the clich é s about the  “ Martian ”  sensibilities of robots — or people 
from other ethnic or social or occupational backgrounds. When interacting 
cross-culturally, people often attribute either irrationality or awkwardly 
false beliefs to members of another culture when they behave in ways that 
do not make sense to us, or laugh at something that we cannot ﬁ nd funny. 
It is unlikely, then, that anything that is not structurally equivalent — or 
very close to equivalent — to humans will have the same sense of humor 
as humans. 
 It should now be clear why we claimed at the beginning that the 
problem of engineering artiﬁ cial humor is AI-complete. Humor is 
dependent on nearly all the skills and tools of general cognition, but those 
skills and tools are also, in us if not in all conceivable robots, dependent 

The Punch Line 
299
on the speciﬁ c architectural structures that underlie our sense of humor. 
Our limitations as anticipation-generators are not just a historical hap-
penstance, a weakness of the neurochemical implementation that evolu-
tion discovered for our cerebral computer architecture, but rather an 
inevitable feature of our ﬁ nitude, no matter how our control systems were 
engineered. As long as an agent has less than complete information about 
the world it inhabits, it must proceed heuristically, and the task of main-
taining data integrity in the wake of that risky leaping needs to be con-
trolled by some process that can compete successfully with the other 
demands on the agent ’ s resources. We are not attempting to prove that 
there is no  conceivable way this control could be implemented other than 
by something like the epistemic emotions that govern us (perhaps pseudo-
emotions that meet the same computational needs), but perhaps this is so. 
In that case, we would have to conclude that  Star Trek ’ s character, Data, is 
actually a cognitive perpetual motion machine, not really possible in the 
universe as we know it. Be that as it may, we do claim to have produced 
a model that explains both the data on humor and our responses to it and 
supports the folklore that ﬁ nds a connection between a sense of humor 
and practical, social intelligence. 
 If we ever set out to produce a robot that has epistemic capacities strong 
enough to perform the kind of reasoning we do, we must endow it with 
something like humor and the other epistemic emotions. 


 Epilogue 
 There are two kinds of people in this world: Those who require closure 
 This completes our attempt to lay the groundwork for an empirical theory 
of humor and the brain, explaining why humor exists, how it arises from 
our brain ’ s activities, and why comedy is an art. Like earlier work on 
humor, ours attempts to ﬁ nd and describe patterns in the wealth of humor 
phenomenology, but unlike earlier theorists, we have tried to ground our 
speculations in a realistic model of the cognitive and emotional processes 
occurring in human brains, and also to account for why and how such 
remarkable phenomena could have evolved in the ﬁ rst place. 
 If we are right, the hope of distilling the essence of humor just by study-
ing the history and structure of humorous texts and other artifacts and 
stimuli is systematically forlorn, like studying the molecular structure of 
glucose in search of its intrinsic sweetness. Just as the diverse set of green 
things share only the property of having a common effect on normal 
human color vision systems, the even more diverse set of funny things can 
be identiﬁ ed only by their similar effects on properly tuned normal human 
cognitive and emotional systems. And since those systems vary widely in 
individual human beings, exquisitely sensitive to differences in culture and 
experience, the prospect of a one-size-ﬁ ts-all recipe for humor-creation is 
close to nil. Indeed, as we have shown, since the scope of humor will 
always keep pace with, and even on occasion accelerate the expansion of, 
the scope of human thought, its domain is ever shifting, growing in some 
areas and contracting in others, as species of humor go extinct for want 
of suitably furnished brains to inhabit. 
 There are many ways of studying the brain. David Huron (2006) 
has shown that the phenomena of music make excellent probes for study-
ing the dynamics of human brain activity, because culture over the centu-
ries has prospected the brain ’ s auditory sensitivies and found ways of 

302 
Epilogue
amplifying the effects in human responses, highlighting some of the 
foibles and predilections of our cognitive machinery. Humor, we argue, is 
a similarly valuable source of highly reﬁ ned stimuli to explore the brain ’ s 
powers. 
 Humor proves to be an ideal instrument, in fact, for examining the 
penumbral, covert elements in anybody ’ s conscious states (their mental 
spaces), since although they cannot be introspected without interfering 
with them by raising their proﬁ les in consciousness, we can often argue 
with conﬁ dence from readily observed effects to covert causes: You simply 
could not be amused by joke  J  if you didn ’ t already know that  p , and your 
knowledge or belief has to be active but covert. You may not realize (until 
someone like us comes along and dismantles the joke in slow motion) that 
you  “ entertained ”  these propositions at all, and may sincerely deny having 
been conscious of them, but if they weren ’ t activated enough to generate 
your failed expectation, you would not now be laughing. Humor, then, 
can be used as a sort of cognitive sonar probe that generates perceptible 
echoes of otherwise  “ invisible ”  mental contents. 
 Putting subjects in scanners and then telling them jokes to see what 
lights up is a well-begun research effort, but it is only the ﬁ rst wave of 
informal exploration, laying the foundations and locating the landmarks 
for more telling experiments that will test actual models of the cognitive 
processes involved. The model we have sketched has been deliberately 
noncommittal at this early stage about many measurable dynamical and 
structural features, but the way has been paved for putting more detailed 
versions to the test, against their own variations, and, of course, against 
any other models that are proposed. Any model worth testing in the lab 
should ﬁ rst be shown to be capable of handling the mountains of evidence 
already assembled about what makes people laugh. We are swimming in 
empirical data — the libraries full of comedies, cartoons, jokes, and carica-
tures that have accumulated over the centuries — and a lot can be inferred 
from this variety about the constraints on  any acceptable model of humor 
appreciation. As centuries of frustrated theorists demonstrate, it is hard to 
come up with a hypothesis that has any hope of covering all that ground, 
so the ﬁ rst order of business is, as we think we have demonstrated, to 
canvass the existing proposals, extract the insights from them, and try to 
construct a skeletal theory that  could do justice to it all. This project by 
itself already casts long shadows over ideas about how the brain operates, 
strongly favoring models that rely on emotional dynamics to control all 
aspects of cognition, and motivating the search for larger-scale, more neu-
rally realistic models of just-in-time spreading activation. Our sketch has 

Epilogue 
303
deliberately remained neutral about the options here, content for the time 
being with the task of setting some of the performance specs for a success-
ful model. In the meantime, there are plenty of ways to test our model, 
which puts some quite severe restrictions for what can be funny: Find 
something manifestly unfunny that the model predicts to be funny, or ﬁ nd 
something funny that evades our model in one way or another. We look 
forward to seeing if the theory can meet this challenge. 


 References 
 Ainslie ,  G .  2001 .   Breakdown of Will .  New York :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Alexander ,  R. D.   1986 .  Ostracism and indirect reciprocity: The reproductive 
signiﬁ cance of humor.    Ethology and Sociobiology  7  ( 3 – 4 ): 253  – 270 .  
 Anderson ,  J .  1983 .  A spreading activation theory of memory.    Journal of Verbal Learn-
ing and Verbal Behavior  22 : 261  – 295 .   
 Anderson ,  J. R.   1976 .   Language, Memory, and Thought .  Hillsdale, NJ :  Lawrence  
 Erlbaum .  
 Apter ,  M. J.   1982 .   The Experience of Motivation: The Theory of Psychological Reversals . 
 London :  Academic Press .  
 Aristotle .  1954 .   The Rhetoric and Poetics.  Trans.  Rhys W. Roberts .  New York :  Modern 
Library .  
 Arnold ,  M. B.   1960 .   Psychological Aspects ,  vol. 1 :   Emotion and Personality .  New York : 
 Columbia University Press .  
 Arroyo ,  S. ,  R. P.   Lesser ,  B.   Gordon ,  S.   Uematsu ,  J.   Hart ,  P.   Schwerdt ,  K.   Andreasson , 
and  R. S.   Fisher .  1993 .  Mirth, laughter, and gelastic seizures.    Brain  116 : 757  – 780 .  
 Ashraf ,  A. B. ,  S.   Luceya ,  J. F.   Cohn ,  T .  Chena ,  Z.   Ambadara ,  K. M.   Prkachin , and 
 P. E.   Solomona .  2009 .  The painful face — pain expression recognition using active 
appearance models.    Image and Vision Computing  27 : 1788  – 1796 .  
 Attardo ,  S .  2001 .   Humorous Texts: A Semantic and Pragmatic Analysis .  Berlin :  Mouton 
de Gruyter .  
 Azim ,  E. ,  D.   Mobbs ,  B.   Jo ,  V.   Menon , and  A. L.   Reiss .  2005 .  Sex differences in brain 
activation elicited by humor.    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America  102 : 16496  – 16501 .  
 Bain ,  A.   1875 .   The Emotions and the Will ,  3rd ed.   London :  Longmans  &  Green .  
 Barber ,  E. W. , and  P. T.   Barber .  2004 .   When They Severed Earth from Sky: How the 
Human Mind Shapes Myth .  Princeton :  Princeton University Press .  
 Baron-Cohen ,  S. ,  A. M.   Leslie , and  U.   Frith .  1985 .  Does the autistic child have a 
 “ theory of mind ” ?    Cognition  21  ( 1 ): 37  – 46 .  

306 
References
 Bartlett ,  F. C .  1932 .   Remembering .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 Bergen ,  B. , and  S.   Coulson .  2006.   Frame-shifting humor in simulation-based lan-
guage understanding . In  “ Trends  &  Controversies: Computational Humor , ” ed. Kim 
Binsted.   IEEE Intelligent Systems  21  ( 2 ): 56  – 69 .  
 Bergson ,  H .  1911 .   Laughter: An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic .    Trans.  Cloudesley 
Brereton  and  Fred Rothwell .  New York :  Macmillan .  
 Bergstrom ,  C. T. , and  M.  Lachmann .  2001 .  Alarm calls as costly signals of antipreda-
tor vigilance: The watchful babbler game .   Animal Behavior  61 : 535  – 543 .  
 Binsted ,  K.   1996 . Machine humour: An implemented model of puns. Ph.D. thesis, 
Department of Artiﬁ cial Intelligence, University of Edinburgh. Retrieved July 1, 
2006, from Binsted-McKay company website:  <  http://www.binsted-mckay.com/
KimBinsted-PhDThesis.pdf  > .  
 Binsted ,  K. , and  G.   Ritchie .  2001 .  Towards a model of story puns.    Humor: Interna-
tional Journal of Humor Research  14  ( 3 ): 275  – 292 .  
 Black ,  D. W.   1982 .  Pathological laughter: A review of the literature.    Journal of Nervous 
and Mental Disease  170 : 67  – 71 .  
 Black ,  D. W.   1984 .  Laughter.    Journal of the American Medical Association  252  
( 21 ): 2995  – 2998 .  
 Blackmore ,  S. J.   1999 .   The Meme Machine .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 Blakemore ,  S.-J. ,  D.   Wolpert , and  C.   Frith .  2000 . W hy can ’ t you tickle yourself?  
 NeuroReport  11 : R11  – 16 .  
 Bloom ,  P.   2010 .   How Pleasure Works: The New Sciences of Why We Like What We Like . 
 New York :  W. W. Norton .  
 Boorstin ,  J.   1990 .   Making Movies Work: Thinking Like a Filmmaker .  Los Angeles : 
 Silman-James Press .   
 Booth ,  S.   1969 .   An Essay on Shakespeare ’ s Sonnets .  New Haven :  Yale University Press .  
 Booth ,  S.   1977 .   Shakespeare ’ s Sonnets, Edited with Analytic Commentary .  New Haven : 
 Yale University Press .  
 Booth ,  S.   1983 .   King Lear, Macbeth, Indeﬁ nition, and Tragedy .  New Haven :  Yale 
University Press .  
 Borges ,  J. L.  [ 1944 ]  1962 .   Ficciones . Trans.  Anthony Kerrigan .  New York :  Grove 
Press .   
 Bower ,  Gordon H.   1981 .  Mood and memory.    American Psychologist  36  ( 2 ): 129  – 148 .  
 Boyd ,  R. , and  P. J.   Richerson .  2005 .   The Origin and Evolution of Cultures .  New York : 
 Oxford University Press .  
 Boyer ,  P.   2001 .   Religion Explained: Evolutionary Origins of Religious Thought .  New York : 
 Basic Books .  

References 
307
 Breazeal ,  C.   2000.  Sociable machines: Expressive social exchange between humans 
and robots. Sc.D. dissertation, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  
 Brennan ,  S .  1982 . The caricature generator. Master ’ s thesis, MIT Media Lab, Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts.  
 Brennan ,  S .  1985 .  Caricature generator: The dynamic exaggeration of faces by com-
puter .   Leonardo  18  ( 3 ): 170  – 178 .   
 Bressler ,  E. , and  S.   Balshine .  2006 .  The inﬂ uence of humor on desirability.    Evolution 
and Human Behavior  27  ( 1 ): 29  – 39 .   
 Bressler ,  E. ,  R. A.   Martin , and  S.   Balshine .  2006 .  Production and appreciation 
of humor as sexually selected traits.    Evolution and Human Behavior  27  ( 2 ): 121  – 
130 .  
 Brewer ,  M.  2000 .  Research design and issues of validity . In   Handbook of Research 
Methods in Social and Personality Psychology , ed.  H.   Reis  and  C.   Judd .  Cambridge : 
 Cambridge University Press .  
 Broadbent ,  D. E.   1958 .   Perception and Communication .  London :  Pergamon .  
 Brooks ,  R .  1991 .  Intelligence without representation.    Artiﬁ cial Intelligence 
 47 : 139  – 159 .  
 Bubb ,  C. C.   1920 .   The Jests of Hierocles and Philagrius .  Cleveland :  Rowfant Club .  
 Byers ,  J. A. , and  C.   Walker .  1995 .  Reﬁ ning the motor training hypothesis for the 
evolution of play.    American Naturalist  146 : 25  – 40 .  
 Byrne ,  A .  1993 .  Truth in ﬁ ction: The story continued .   Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy  71 : 24  – 35 .  
 Call ,  J. , and  M.  Tomasello .  2008 .  Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? 
30 years later .   Trends in Cognitive Sciences  12 , 5: 187  – 192 .   
 Cannon ,  W. B.   1927 .   Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear, and Rage: An Account of 
Recent Researches into the Function of Emotional Excitement .  McGrath .   
 Cantor ,  J. R. ,  J.   Bryant , and  D.   Zillmann .  1974 .  Enhancement of humor appreciation 
by transferred excitation.    Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  15 : 470  – 480 .  
 Carr ,  J. , and  L.   Greeves .  2006 .   Only Joking: What ’ s So Funny about Making People 
Laugh?  New York :  Gotham Books .  
 Carroll ,  N .  1999 .  Horror and humor.    Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism  57  
( 2 ): 145  – 160 .  
 Cathcart ,  T. , and  D.   Klein .  2007 .   Plato and a Platypus Walk into a Bar . . .: Understand-
ing Philosophy Through Jokes .  New York :  Penguin .  
 Chalmers ,  D. ,  R.   French , and  D. R.   Hofstadter .  1995 .  High-level perception, repre-
sentation, and analogy: A critique of artiﬁ cial-intelligence methodology . In Douglas 
Hofstadter and the Fluid Analogies Research Group,   Fluid Concepts and Creative 

308 
References
Analogies: Computer Models of the Fundamental Mechanisms of Thought .  New York : 
 Basic Books .   
 Chambers ,  C. G. ,  M. K.   Tanenhaus ,  K. M.   Eberhard ,  H.   Filip , and  G. N.   Carlson . 
 2002 .  Circumscribing referential domains during real-time language comprehen-
sion.   Journal of Memory and Language  47 : 30  – 49 .  
 Chambers ,  C. G. ,  M. K.   Tanenhaus , and  J. S.   Magnuson .  2004 .  Actions and 
affordances in syntactic ambiguity resolution.    Journal of Experimental Psychology 
 30  ( 3 ): 687  – 696 .  
 Chapman ,  A. J. , and  H. C.   Foot , eds.  1976 .   Humour and Laughter: Theory, Research, 
and Applications .  London :  Wiley .  
 Chapman ,  A. J. ,  J.   Smith , and  H. C.   Foot .  1980 .  Humour, laughter, and social 
interaction . In   Children ’ s Humour , ed.  P. E.   McGhee  and  A. J.   Chapman ,  141  – 179 . 
 New York :  Wiley .  
 Cheney ,  D. , and  R.   Seyfarth .  1990 .   How Monkeys See the World .  Chicago :  University 
of Chicago Press .  
 Chislenko ,  A.  1998 . Theory of humor.  <  http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/articles/
humor.html  > .  
 Chwalisz ,  K. ,  E.   Diener , and  D.   Gallagher .  1988 .  Autonomic arousal feedback and 
emotional experience: Evidence from the spinal cord injured.    Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology  54 : 820  – 828 .  
 Clark ,  A .  1997 .   Being There: Putting Brain, Body and World Together Again  . 
 Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Clark ,  A. , and  D. J.   Chalmers .  1998 .  The extended mind.   Analysis  58  ( 1 ): 7  – 19 .  
 Clark ,  M .  1970 .  Humor and incongruity.    Philosophy  45 : 20  – 32 .  
 Clarke ,  A . In press.   A Closer Look at . . . Information Normalization Theory .  Cumbria : 
 Pyrrhic House .  
 Close ,  M .  2007 .  That Reminds Me: Finding the Funny in a Serious World . 
Self-published.   
 Cohen ,  T.   1999 .   Jokes: Philosophical Thoughts on Joking Matters .  Chicago :  University 
of Chicago Press .   
 Collins ,  A. M. , and  E. F.   Loftus .  1975 .  A spreading-activation theory of semantic 
processing .   Psychological Review  82  ( 6 ): 407  – 428 .  
 Coser ,  R. L.   1960 .  Laughter among colleagues: A study of the social functions of 
humor among the staff of a mental hospital.    Psychiatry  23 : 81  – 95 .  
 Coulson ,  S.   2001 .   Semantic Leaps: Frame-Shifting and Conceptual Blending in Meaning 
Construction .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .   
 Coulson ,  S. , and  M.  Kutas .  1998 . Frame shifting and sentential integration. UCSD 
Cognitive Science Technical Report 98-03.  

References 
309
 Coulson ,  S. , and  M.  Kutas .  2001 .  Getting it: Human event-related brain response to 
jokes in good and poor comprehenders.    Neuroscience Letters  316 : 71  – 74 .  
 Cousins ,  N .  1979 .   Anatomy of an Illness as Perceived by the Patient: Reﬂ ections on 
Healing and Regeneration .  New York :  W. W. Norton .  
 Craig ,  A. D.  (Bud).  2003 .  A new theory of pain as a homeostatic emotion .   Trends in 
Neurosciences  26  ( 6 ): 303  – 307 .  
 Crawford ,  M. , and  D.   Gressley .  1991 .  Creativity, caring, and context: Women ’ s and 
men ’ s accounts of humor preferences and practices.    Psychology of Women Quarterly 
 15  ( June ): 217  – 231 .  
 Currie ,  G .  1986 .  Fictional truth .   Philosophical Studies  50 : 195  – 212 .  
 Currie ,  G .  1990 .   The Nature of Fiction .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Damasio ,  A.   1994 .   Descartes ’  Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain .  New York : 
 Grosset/Putnam .  
 Damasio ,  A.   1999 .   The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of 
Consciousness .  London :  William Heinemann Harcourt .  
 Damasio ,  A.   2003 .   Looking for Spinoza: Sorrow, and the Feeling Brain .  London :  William 
Heinemann Harcourt .  
 Darwin ,  C . [ 1872 ]  1965 .   The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals .  New 
York :  Oxford University Press .  
 Dawkins ,  R .  1982 .   The Extended Phenotype .  New York :  Oxford University Press .   
 Dawkins ,  R .  1989 .   The Selﬁ sh Gene ,  2nd ed .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .   
 Dawkins ,  R .  1993 .  Viruses of the mind . In   Dennett and His Critics , ed.  B.   Dahlbom , 
 13  – 28 .  Oxford :  Blackwell .  
 Deacon ,  T. W.   1989 .  The neural circuitry underlying primate calls and human 
language.    Human Evolution  4 : 367  – 401 .  
 Deacon ,  T .  1997 .   The Symbolic Species .  New York :  W. W. Norton .  
 De Groot ,  A. M. B.   1983 .  The range of automatic spreading Activation in word 
priming.    Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior  22 : 417  – 436 .  
 Dennett ,  D. C.   1975 .  Why the law of effect will not go away .   Journal for the Theory 
of Social Behaviour  5 : 179  – 187  R eprinted in Dennett 1978 .  
 Dennett ,  D. C.   1978 .   Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychology. 
 Cambridge, MA :  Bradford Books/MIT Press .  
 Dennett ,  D. C.   1983 .  Intentional systems in cognitive ethology: the  “ Panglossian 
Paradigm ”  defended .  Behavioral and Brain Sciences  6 : 343  – 390 .  
 Dennett ,  D. C.   1984 .  Cognitive wheels: The frame problem in AI . In   Minds, Machines, 
and Evolution , ed.  C.   Hookway ,  128  – 151 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University 
Press .  

310 
References
 Dennett ,  D. C.   1987 .   The Intentional Stance .  Cambridge, MA :  Bradford Books/MIT 
Press .  
 Dennett ,  D. C.   1988 .  Quining qualia . In   Consciousness in Modern Science , ed.  A.  Marcel  
and  E.   Bisiach ,  42  – 77 .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  
 Dennett ,  D. C.   1990 .  Memes and the exploitation of imagination .   Journal of Aesthet-
ics and Art Criticism  48  (spring):  127  – 135 .  
 Dennett ,  D. C.   1991 .   Consciousness Explained .  Boston :  Little, Brown .  
 Dennett ,  D. C.   1995 .   Darwin ’ s Dangerous Idea .  New York :  Simon  &  Schuster .  
 Dennett ,  D. C.   1996a .  Producing future by telling stories . In   The Robot ’ s Dilemma 
Revisited: The Frame Problem of Artiﬁ cial Intelligence , ed.  K.   Ford  and  Z.   Pylyshyn ,  1  – 7 . 
 Norwood, NJ :  Ablex .  
 Dennett ,  D. C.   1996b . Consciousness: More like fame than television. Published in 
German translation as  “ Bewusstsein hat mehr mit Ruhm als mit Fernsehen zu tun , ” 
in   Die Technik auf dem Weg zur Seele , ed.  Christa   Maar ,  Ernst   P ö ppel , and  Thomas  
 Christaller ,  61  – 90 .  Reinbek :  Rowohlt .  
 Dennett ,  D. C.   1996c .  Hofstadter ’ s quest: Review of Hofstadter and F.A.R.G.,  Fluid 
Concepts and Creative Analogies .   Complexity Journal  1  ( 6 ): 9  – 12 .  
 Dennett ,  D. C.   1998 .   Brainchildren: Essays on Designing Minds .  Cambridge, MA : 
 Bradford Books/MIT Press .  
 Dennett ,  D. C.   2005 .   Sweet Dreams: Philosophical Obstacles to a Theory of Conscious-
ness .  Cambridge, MA :  Bradford Books/MIT Press .  
 Dennett ,  D. C.   2006 .   Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon .  New York : 
 Viking .  
 Dennett ,  D. C.   2007a .  Heterophenomenology reconsidered .   Phenomenology and the 
Cognitive Sciences  6  ( 1 – 2 )..   
 Dennett ,  D. C.   2007b .  Instead of a review .   Artiﬁ cial Intelligence  171 : 1110  – 1113 .   
 Dennett ,  D. C.   2007c.   A daring reconnaissance of red territory . [Review of Humphrey 
2006.]   Brain  130 : 592  – 595 .   
 Dennett ,  D. C.   2007d . What could a neuron  “ want ” ? On edge.org, Edge Question: 
 “ What Have You Changed Your Mind About? ”  <  http://www.edge.org/q2008/q08_11
.html  > .   
 Dennett ,  D. C. , and  K.   Akins .  2008 . Multiple drafts model. Scholarpedia.org 
3(4):4321.  <  http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Multiple_drafts_model  > .  
 Descartes ,  R . [ 1649 ]  1988 .  The passions of the soul . In   Selected Philosophical Writings 
of Ren é Descartes , ed. and trans.  J.   Cottingham ,  R.   Stoothoff , and  D.  Murdoch .  Cam-
bridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 de Sousa ,  R.   1987 .   The Rationality of Emotion .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  

References 
311
 Diamond ,  J.   1997 .   Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies .  New York : 
 W. W. Norton .  
 Dillon ,  K. M. ,  B.   Minchoff , and  K. H.   Baker .  1985 .  Positive emotional states and 
enhancement of the immune system.    International Journal of Psychiatry in Medicine 
 15 : 13  – 17 .  
 Dolitsky ,  M .  1992 .  Aspects of the unsaid in humor.    Humor: International Journal of 
Humor Research  5  ( 1/2 ): 33  – 43 .  
 Duchenne (de Boulogne) ,  G.-B.  [ 1862 ]  1990 .   The Mechanism of Human Facial 
Expression . Trans.  R. A. Cuthbertson .  New York :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Dutton ,  D. G. , and  A. P.   Aron .  1974 .  Some evidence for heightened sexual attraction 
under conditions of high anxiety .   Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 30 : 510  – 517 .  
 Eastman ,  M .  1936 .   Enjoyment of Laughter .  New York :  Halcyon House .  
 Eibl-Eibesfeldt ,  I.   1973 .  The expressive behavior of the deaf and blind born . In   Social 
Communication and Movement , ed.  M.  von Cranach  and  I.   Vine ,  163  – 194 .  London : 
 Academic Press .  
 Eibl-Eibesfeldt ,  I.   1989 .   Human Ethology .  New York :  Aldine de Gruyter .  
 Einon ,  D. F. , and  M.   Potegal .  1991 .  Enhanced defense in adult rats deprived of play 
ﬁ ghting experience as juveniles .   Aggressive Behavior  17 : 27  – 40 .  
 Ekman ,  P.   1992 .  An argument for basic emotions.    Cognition and Emotion  6 : 169  – 200 .  
 Ekman ,  P.   1999 .  Basic emotions . In   Handbook of Cognition and Emotion , ed.  T.  
 Dalgleish  and  M.  Power .  Sussex :  John Wiley .  
 Ekman ,  P.   2003 .   Emotions Revealed .  New York :  Times Books .  
 Ekman ,  P. , and  W. V.   Friesen .  1971 .  Constants across cultures in the face and 
emotion.    Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  17 : 124  – 129 . 
 Ekman ,  P. , and  W. V.  Friesen .  1978 .   Facial Action Coding System: A Technique for the 
Measurement of Facial Movement .  Palo Alto :  Consulting Psychologists Press .  
 Ellsworth ,  P.   1994 .  William James and emotion: Is a century of fame worth a century 
of misunderstanding?    Psychological Review  101 : 222  – 229 .  
 Elster ,  J.   1996 .  Rationality and the emotions.    Economic Journal  106 : 1386  – 1397 .  
 Elman ,  J. L.   1991 .  Distributed representations, simple recurrent networks, and gram-
matical structure .   Machine Learning  7 : 195  – 225 .  
 Elman ,  J. L. ,  E. A.   Bates ,  M. H.   Johnson ,  A.   Karmiloff-Smith ,  D.  Parisi , and  K.   Plun-
kett .  1996 .   Rethinking Innateness: A Connectionist Perspective on Development . 
 Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Fagen ,  R.   1993 .  Primate juveniles and primate play . In   Juvenile Primates: Life History, 
Development, and Behavior , ed.  M. E.   Pereira  and  L. A.   Fairbanks ,  182  – 196 .  New York : 
 Oxford University Press .  

312 
References
 Fauconnier ,  G.   1985 .   Mental Spaces: Aspects of Meaning Construction in Natural 
Language .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Fauconnier ,  G. , and  M.  Turner .  2002 .   The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and the 
Mind ’ s Hidden Complexities .  New York :  Basic Books .  
 Feldman ,  J. A.   1989 .  Neural representation of conceptual knowledge . In   Neural 
Connections, Mental Computation , ed.  L.   Nadel ,  L. A.   Cooper ,  P.   Culicover , and  R. M.  
 Harnish ,  68  – 103 .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Fernandez-Dols ,  J. M. , and  M. A.   Ruiz-Belda .  1995 .  Are smiles a sign of happiness? 
Gold medal winners at the Olympic Games.    Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology  69 : 1113  – 1119 .  
  Flack ,  J. C. ,  L. A.   Jeannotte , and  F. B. M.   de Waal .  2004 .  Play signaling and the 
perception of social rules by juvenile chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes ).    Journal of 
Comparative Psychology  118 : 149  – 159 .  
 Fodor ,  J.   2004a .  Having concepts: A brief refutation of the twentieth century .   Mind 
 &  Language  19  ( 1 ): 29  – 47 .  
 Fodor ,  J.   2004b .  Reply to commentators .   Mind  &  Language  19  ( 1 ): 99  – 112 .  
 Fodor ,  J. , and  Z.   Pylyshyn .  1988 .  Connectionism and cognitive architecture: A 
critical analysis.    Cognition  28 : 3  – 71 .  
 Foster ,  C.   A. ,  B. S.   Witcher ,  W. K.   Campbell , and  J. D.   Green .  1998 .  Arousal and 
attraction: Evidence for automatic and controlled processes .   Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology  74 : 86  – 101 .  
 Francis ,  R. C.   2004 .   Why Men Won ’ t Ask for Directions: The Seductions of Sociobiology . 
 Princeton :  Princeton University Press .  
 Frank ,  M. , and  P.  Ekman .  1993 .  Not all smiles are created equal: The differences 
between enjoyment and nonenjoyment smiles .   Humor  6 :  9  – 26 .  
 Frank ,  M. ,  P.   Ekman , and  W. V.   Friesen .  1993 .  Behavioral markers and recogniz-
ability of the smile of enjoyment.    Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 64 : 83  – 93 .  
 Frank ,  R. H.   1988 .   Passions within Reason: The Strategic Role of the Emotions .  New York : 
 W. W. Norton .  
 Frank ,  R. H.   2004 .  In defense of sincerity detection.    Rationality and Society  16  
( 3 ): 287  – 305 .  
 Franklin ,  S .  2007 . A foundational architecture for artiﬁ cial general intelligence. In 
 Advances in Artiﬁ cial General Intelligence: Concepts, Architectures and Algorithms, Pro-
ceedings of the AGI workshop 2006 , ed. Ben Goertzel and Pei Wang, 36 – 54. Amster-
dam: IOS Press.  
 Franklin ,  S. , and  F. G.   Patterson ,  Jr .  2006 . The LIDA Architecture: Adding new 
modes of learning to an intelligent, autonomous, software agent.  Integrated Design 
and Process Technology, IDPT-2006 .  San Diego, CA :  Society for Design and Process 
Science .   

References 
313
 Fredrickson ,  B. L. , and  R. W.   Levenson .  1998 .  Positive emotions speed recovery from 
the cardiovascular sequelae of negative emotions.    Cognition and Emotion 
 12 : 191  – 220 .  
 Fredrickson ,  B. L. ,  R. A.   Mancuso ,  C.   Branigan , and  M. M.   Tugade .  2000 .  The 
undoing effect of positive emotions.    Motivation and Emotion  24 : 237  – 258 .  
 French ,  R.   1995 .   The Subtlety of Sameness: A Theory and Computer Model of Analogy-
making .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Freud ,  S.  [ 1905 ]  1960 .   Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious . Trans.  J. Strachey . 
 New Yor k:  W. W. Norton .  
 Freud ,  S.   1928 .  Humor.    International Journal of Psycho-Analysis  9 : 1  – 6 .  
 Fridlund ,  A. J.   1991 .  Sociality of solitary smiling: Potentiation by an implicit 
audience.    Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  60 : 229  – 240 .  
 Fridlund ,  A. J.   1994 .   Human Facial Expression: An Evolutionary View .  San Diego, CA : 
 Academic Press .  
 Fridlund ,  A. J. , and  J. M.   Loftis .  1990 .  Relations between tickling and humorous 
laughter: Preliminary support for the Darwin – Hecker hypothesis.    Biological Psychol-
ogy  30 : 141  – 150 .   
 Fried ,  I. ,  C. L.   Wilson ,  K. A.   MacDonald , and  E. J.   Behnke .  1998 .  Electric current 
stimulates laughter.    Nature  391 : 650 .  
 Friend ,  T.   2002 .  Dept. of Humor: What ’ s so funny? A scientiﬁ c attempt to discover 
why we laugh.    New Yorker , November 11,  78  – 93 .  
 Frijda ,  N. H.   1986 .   The Emotions .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Fry ,  W. F.   1977 .  The respiratory components of mirthful laughter.    Journal of Biological 
Psychology  19 : 39  – 50 .  
 Fry ,  W. F.   1994 .  The biology of humor.    Humor: International Journal of Humor Research 
 7 : 111  – 126 .  
 Gallese ,  V. ,  Fadiga ,  L. ,  Fogassi ,  L. , and  Rizzolatti ,  G.   1996 .  Action recognition in the 
premotor cortex .  Brain    119 : 593  – 609 .   
  Gazzaniga ,  M. S.   2008 .   Human: The Science of What Makes Us Unique .  New York : 
 HarperCollins .  
 Gervais ,  M. , and  D. S.   Wilson .  2005 .  The evolution and vunctions of laughter and 
humor: A synthetic approach.    Quarterly Review of Biology  80 : 395  – 430 .  
 Gibbard ,  A.   1990 .   Wise Choices, Apt Feelings: A Theory of Normative Judgment. 
 Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press .  
 Gigerenzer ,  G.   2008 .  Why heuristics work .   Perspectives on Psychological Science 
 3 : 20  – 29 .  
 Gigerenzer ,  G. , and  D. G.   Goldstein .  1996 .  Reasoning the fast and frugal way: Models 
of bounded rationality.    Psychological Review  103 : 650  – 669 .  

314 
References
 Goldstein ,  J. H. , and  P.  McGhee .  1972 .   The Psychology of Humor .  New York :  Academic 
Press .  
 Goldstone ,  R. L. , and  L. W.   Barsalou .  1998 .  Reuniting perception and conception.  
 Cognition  65  ( 2 ): 231  – 262 .  
 G ö nc ü  ,  A. ,  J.   Mistry , and  C.   Mosier .  2000 .  Cultural variations in the play of toddlers . 
 International Journal of Behavioral Development  24  ( 3 ): 321  – 329 .  
 Gonzales ,  L .  2003 .   Deep Survival: Who Lives, Who Dies, and Why .  New York :  W. W. 
Norton .   
 Gopnik ,  A .  1998 .  Explanation as orgasm .   Minds and Machines  8 : 101  – 118 .  
 Gopnik ,  A. , and  A. N.   Meltzoff .  1997 .   Words, Thoughts, and Theories .  Cambridge, MA : 
 Bradford Books/MIT Press .  
 Gopnik ,  A. , and  H.   Wellman .  1994 .  The  “ theory theory. ” In   Domain Speciﬁ city in 
Culture and Cognition , ed.  L.   Hirschﬁ eld  and  S.   Gelman .  New York :  Cambridge Uni-
versity Press .  
 Gortner ,  M. ,  1972 .  Marjoe . Film. Sarah Kernochan, Howard Smith, directors.   
 Grahek ,  N .  2007 .   Feeling Pain and Being in Pain ,  2nd ed.   Cambridge, MA : 
 Bradford Books/MIT Press .  
 Gratier ,  M .  2003 .  Expressive timing and interactional synchrony between mothers 
and infants: Cultural similarities, cultural differences, and the immigration experi-
ence .   Cognitive Development  18 : 533  – 554 .  
 Greengross ,  G.  (under review). Does making others laugh lead to mating success? 
Verbal humor as a mental ﬁ tness indicator. Under review for   Evolution and Human 
Behavior .   
 Greengross ,  G. , and  G.   Miller .  2008 .  Dissing oneself versus dissing rivals: Effects 
of status, personality, and sex on the short-term and long-term attractiveness 
of self-deprecating and other-deprecating humor.    Evolutionary Psychology  6  
( 3 ): 393  – 408 .  
 Greenspan ,  P.   2000 .  Emotional strategies and rationality.    Ethics  110 : 469  – 487 .  
 Gregory ,  J. C.   1924 .   The Nature of Laughter .  New York :  Harcourt Brace .  
 Grice ,  P .  1957 .  Meaning .   Philosophical Review  66 : 377  – 388 .  
 Grice ,  P .  1969 .  Utterer ’ s meaning and intention .   Philosophical Review  78 : 147  – 177 .  
 Grifﬁ n ,  R. , and  D. C.   Dennett .  2008 .  What does the study of autism tell us about 
the craft of folk psychology?  In   Social Cognition: Development, Neuroscience, and 
Autism , ed.  T.   Striano  and  V.  Reid ,  254  – 280 .  New York :  Wiley-Blackwell .   
 Grifﬁ ths ,  P. E.   1997 .   What Emotions Really Are .  Chicago :  University of Chicago 
Press .  

References 
315
 Grifﬁ ths ,  P. E.   2002 .  Basic emotions, complex emotions, Machiavellian emotions . 
In   Philosophy and the Emotions , ed.  A.   Hatzimoysis ,  39  – 67 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press .  
 Gruner ,  C. R.   1997 .   The Game of Humor: A Comprehensive Theory of Why We Laugh . 
 New Brunswick, NJ :  Transaction Publishers .  
 Gustafson ,  D.   2006 .  Categorizing pain . In   Pain: New Essays on Its Nature and the 
Methodology of Its Study , ed.  M.  Aydede .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Hall ,  G. S. , and  A.   Allin .  1897 .  The psychology of tickling, laughing, and the comic.  
 American Journal of Psychology  9 : 1  – 42 .  
 Hammerschmidt ,  K. ,  T.  Freudenstein , and  U.   J ü rgens .  2001 .  Vocal development in 
squirrel monkeys.    Behaviour  138 : 97  – 116 .  
 Harris ,  C. R.   1999 .  The mystery of ticklish laughter.    American Scientist  87 : 344  – 351 .  
 Harris ,  C. R. , and  N.   Alvarado .  2005 .  Facial expressions, smile types, and self-report 
during humor, tickle, and pain.    Cognition and Emotion  19 : 655  – 699 .   
 Harris ,  C. R. , and  N.   Christenfeld .  1997 .  Humour, tickle, and the Darwin-Hecker 
hypothesis.    Cognition and Emotion  11 : 103  – 110 .  
 Harris ,  C. R. , and  N.   Christenfeld .  1999 .  Can a machine tickle?    Psychonomic Bulletin 
 &  Review  6  ( 3 ): 504  – 510 .  
 Haugeland ,  J .  1985 .   Artiﬁ cial Intelligence: The Very Idea .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Hauser ,  M. D.   1997 .   The Evolution of Communication .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Hauser ,  M. D.   2000 .   Wild Minds: What Animals Really Think .  New York :  Henry 
Holt .  
 Hebb ,  D. O.   1949 .   The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory .  New 
York :  Wiley .  
 Hecker ,  E.   1873 .   Die Physiologie und Psychologie des Lachen und des Komischen .  Berlin : 
 F. Dummler .   
 Herrnstein ,  R. J.   1970 .  On the law of effect.    Journal of the Experimental Analysis of 
Behavior  13 : 243  – 266 .  
 Hilgard ,  E. R.   1980 .  The trilogy of mind: Cognition, affection, and conation.    Journal 
of the History of Behavioral Sciences  16 :  107  – 117 .  
 Hinde ,  R. A.   1985a .  Expression and negotiation . In   The Development of Expressive 
Behavior , ed.  G.   Zivin ,  103  – 116 .  New York :  Academic Press .  
 Hinde ,  R. A.   1985b .  Was  “ the expression of emotions ” a misleading phrase?    Animal 
Behaviour  33 : 985  – 992 .  

316 
References
 Hobbes ,  T .  1840 .   Human Nature . In   The English Works of Thomas Hobbes of Malmes-
bury ,  vol. 4,  ed.  W.  Molesworth .  London :  Bohn .  
 Hofstadter ,  D. R.   2007 .   I Am a Strange Loop .  New York :  Basic Books .  
 Hofstadter ,  D. R. , and the  Fluid Analogies Research Group .  1995 .   Fluid Concepts and 
Creative Analogies: Computer Models of the Fundamental Mechanisms of Thought . 
 New York :  Basic Books .   
 Hommel ,  B. ,  J.   M ü sseler ,  G.   Aschersleben , and  W.  Prinz .  2001 .  The theory of event 
coding (TEC): A framework for perception and action planning.    Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences  24 : 849  – 937 .  
 Humphrey ,  N.   2006 .   Seeing Red: A Study in Consciousness .  Cambridge, MA :  Belknap 
Press of Harvard University Press .  
 Hurley ,  M .  2006 . The joy of debugging: Towards a computational model of humor . 
Honors 
dissertation 
in 
Cognitive 
Science, 
Tufts 
University, 
Medford, 
Massachusetts.  
 Huron ,  D .  2006 .   Sweet Anticipation: Music and the Psychology of Expectation . 
 Cambridge, MA :  Bradford Books/MIT Press .  
 Hutchins ,  E.   1995a .   Cognition in the Wild .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Hutchins ,  E.   1995b .  How a cockpit remembers its speeds.    Cognitive Science 
 19 : 265  – 288 .  
 Izard ,  C. E.   1971 .   The Face of Emotion .  New York :  Appleton-Century-Crofts .  
 Jackendoff ,  R .  1987 .   Consciousness and the Computational Mind .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT 
Press .  
 Jackendoff ,  R.   1994 .   Patterns in the Mind .  New York :  Basic Books .  
 Jackendoff ,  R .  2002 .   Foundations of Language .  New York :  Oxford University Press .  
 Jackendoff ,  R .  2007 .   Language, Consciousness, Culture: Essays on Mental Structure . 
 Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 James ,  W .  1884 .  What is an emotion?    Mind  9 : 188  – 205 .  
 James ,  W.   1890 .   The Principles of Psychology .  New York :  Henry Holt .   
 Jung ,  W. E.   2003 .  The inner eye theory of laughter: Mindreader signals cooperator 
value.    Evolutionary Psychology  1 : 214  – 253 .  
 Kaas ,  J. H. , and  T. M.   Preuss , eds.  2007 .   Evolution of Nervous Systems , vol.  4 :   The 
Evolution of Primate Nervous Systems .  Oxford :  Elsevier .  
 Kamide ,  Y. ,  G. T. M.   Altmann , and  S. L.   Haywood .  2003 .  The timecourse of 
prediction in incremental sentence processing: Evidence from anticipatory eye 
movements.    Journal of Memory and Language  49  ( 1 ): 133  – 156 .  
 Kant ,  I . [ 1790 ]  1951 .   Critique of Judgment . Trans.  J. H. Bernard .  New York :  Hafner .  

References 
317
 Kataria ,  M. ,  S.   Wilson , and  K.   Buxman .  1999 . Where East meets West: Laughter 
therapy. Workshop presented at the meeting of the International Society for Humor 
Studies, June, Oakland, California.  
 Keith-Spiegel ,  P.   1972 .  Early conceptions of humor: Varieties and issues . In   The 
Psychology of Humor , ed.  J. H.   Goldstein  and  P. E.   McGhee ,  3  – 39 .  New York :  Academic 
Press .  
 Keltner ,  D. , and  G. A.   Bonanno .  1997 .  A study of laughter and dissociation: The 
distinct correlates of laughter and smiling during bereavement.    Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology  73 : 687  – 702 .  
 Keltner ,  D. ,  R. C.   Young ,  E. A.   Heerey ,  C.   Oemig , and  N. D.   Monarch .  1998 .  Teasing 
in hierarchical and intimate relations.    Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 75 : 1231  – 1247 .  
 Kirsh ,  D. , and  P.   Maglio .  1994 .  On distinguishing epistemic from pragmatic action.  
 Cognitive Science  18 : 513  – 549 .  
 Koestler ,  A .  1964 .   The Act of Creation .  London :  Hutchinson .  
 Konner ,  M.  1982 .   The Tangled Wing: Biological Constraints on the Human Spirit . 
 London :  William Heinemann .  
 Kosslyn ,  S. M. ,  G.   Ganis , and  W. L.   Thompson .  2001 .  Neural foundations of imagery . 
 Nature Reviews: Neuroscience  2 : 635  – 642 .  
 Kraut ,  R. E. , and  R. E.   Johnston .  1979 .  Social and emotional messages of smiling: 
An ethological approach.   Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  37 : 1539  – 1553 .  
 Kunz ,  M. ,  K. M.   Prkachin , and  S.   Lautenbacher .  2009 .  The smile of pain.    Pain 
 145 : 273  – 275 .  
 Lachter ,  J. ,  K. I.   Forster , and  E.   Ruthruff .  2004 . F orty years after Broadbent: Still no 
identiﬁ cation without attention .   Psychological Review  111 : 880  – 913 .  
 LaFollette ,  H. , and  N.   Shanks .  1993 .  Belief and the basis of humor .   American Philo-
sophical Quarterly  329  – 339 .  
 Lahr ,  J .  2010 .  Master of Revels .   New Yorker  , May 3,  70  – 76 .  
 Laird ,  J. D.   1974 .  Self-attribution of emotion: The effects of expresxive behavior on 
the quality of emotional experience.    Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  29  
( 4 ): 475  – 486 .  
 Laird ,  J. ,  P.   Rosenbloom , and  A.   Newell .  1987 .  SOAR: An architecture for general 
intelligence .   Artiﬁ cial Intelligence  33 : 1  – 64 .  
 Lakoff ,  G .  1987 .   Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal about the 
Mind .  Chicago :  University of Chicago Press .   
 Lakoff ,  G. , and  M.  Johnson .  1980 .   Metaphors We Live By .  Chicago :  Chicago Univer-
sity Press .  
 Lakoff ,  G. , and  M.   Johnson .  1999 .   Philosophy in the Flesh: The Embodied Mind and Its 
Challenge to Western Thought .  New York :  Basic Books .  

318 
References
 Lakoff ,  G.  and  R. E.   Nu ñ ez .  2000 .   Where Mathematics Comes From: How the Embodied 
Mind Brings Mathematics into Being .  New York :  Basic Books .  
 Lange ,  C. G.   1885 .  Om sindsbevaegelser: Et psyko-fysiologisk studie . Copenhagen: Jacob 
Lunds. Reprinted in   The Emotions , ed.  C. G.   Lange  and  W.   James , trans.  I. A. Haupt . 
 Baltimore :  Williams and Wilkins ,  1922 .  
 Lange ,  C.   1887 .  Ueber Gemuthsbewgungen 3, 8.   
 Lanzetta ,  J. T. ,  J.   Cartwright-Smith , and  R. E.   Eleck .  1976 .  Effects of nonverbal dis-
simulation on emotional experience and autonomic arousal.    Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology  33  ( 3 ): 354  – 370 .  
 Lazarus ,  R. S.   1984 .  On the primacy of cognition.    American Psychologist 
 39 : 124  – 129 .  
 LeDoux ,  J.   1998 .   The Emotional Brain .  New York :  Simon  &  Schuster .  
 LeDoux ,  J.   2002 .   Synaptic Self: How Our Brains Become Who We Are .  New York : 
 Penguin .  
 Lefcourt ,  H. M. ,  K.   Davidson ,  K. M.   Prkachin , and  D. E.   Mills .  1997 .  Humor as a 
stress moderator in the prediction of blood pressure obtained during ﬁ ve stressful 
tasks.    Journal of Research in Personality  31 : 523  – 542 .  
 Lefcourt ,  H. M. ,  K.   Davidson-Katz , and  K.   Kueneman .  1990 .  Humor and immune-
system functioning.    Humor: International Journal of Humor Research  3 : 305  – 321 .  
 Lenat ,  D. B.  and  R. V.   Guha .  1990.    Building Large Knowledge-Based Systems: Representa-
tion and Inference in the Cyc Project .  Reading, MA :  Addison Wesley .   
 Levinstein ,  B .  2007 .  Facts, interpretation, and truth in ﬁ ction .   British Journal of 
Aesthetics  47 : 64  – 75 .   
 Levitin ,  D. J.   2006 .   This Is Your Brain on Music: The Science of a Human Obsession . 
 New York :  Dutton .  
 Lewis ,  D.   1978 .  Truth in ﬁ ction .   American Philosophical Quarterly  15 : 37  – 46 .  
 Locke ,  J .  1690 .   Essay Concerning Human Understanding .  London .  
 Mara ñ on ,  G.   1924 .  Contribution a l ’ etude de Taction emotive de l ’ adrenaline . 
 Rev. Fran. Endo.  2 :  301  – 325 .  
 Marcus ,  G. F.   2001 .   The Algebraic Mind: Integrating Connectionism and Cognitive Science . 
 Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Marinkovic ,  K.   2004 .  Spatiotemporal dynamics of word processing in the human 
cortex.    Neuroscientist  10  ( 2 ): 142  – 152 .  
 Martin ,  R. A.   2001 .  Humor, laughter, and physical health: Methodological issues and 
research ﬁ ndings.    Psychological Bulletin  127 : 504  – 519 .  
 Martin ,  R. A.   2004 .  Sense of humor and physical health: Theoretical issues, recent 
ﬁ ndings and future directions.    Humor: International Journal of Humor Research 
 17 : 1  – 19 .  

References 
319
 Matsusaka ,  T.   2004 .  When does play panting occur during social play in wild 
chimpanzees?    Primates  45 : 221  – 229 .  
 Mauro ,  R. , and  M.   Kubovy .  1992 .  Caricature and face recognition .   Memory  &  Cogni-
tion  20  ( 4 ): 433  – 444 .   
 Maynard Smith ,  J.   1997 .   The Theory of Evolution ,  3rd ed.   Cambridge :  Cambridge 
Universtity Press .  
 McCarthy ,  J .  1980 .  Circumscription — A form of non-monotonic reasoning .   Artiﬁ cial 
Intelligence  13  ( 1 – 2 ).  Reprinted in  Readings in Artiﬁ cial Intelligence , ed. B. L. Webber 
and N. J. Nilsson, 466 – 472, Wellsboro, PA: Tioga, 1981; also in  Readings in Nonmono-
tonic Reasoning , ed. M. J. Ginsberg, 145 – 152, San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann, 1987 .  
  McCarthy ,  J. , and  P. J.   Hayes .  1969 .  Some philosophical problems from the stand-
point of artiﬁ cial intelligence . In   Machine Intelligence 4 , ed.  D.  Michie  and  B.   Meltzer , 
 463  – 502 .  Edinburgh :  Edinburgh University Press .  
 McClelland ,  J. L.,   D. E.   Rumelhart , and the  PDP Research Group .  1986 .   Parallel 
Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition , vol.  2 :   Psychologi-
cal and Biological Models .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 McGhee ,  P. E.   1971 .  Development of the humor response: A review of the literature.  
 Psychological Bulletin  76  ( 5 ): 328  – 348 .  
 McGhee ,  P. E.   1976 .  Children ’ s appreciation of humor: A test of the cognitive 
congruency principle.    Child Development  47  ( 2 ): 420  – 426 .  
 McGhee ,  P. E.   1979 .   Humor: Its Origins and Development .  San Francisco :  Freeman .  
 McKay ,  J.   2000 . Generation of idiom-based witticisms to aid second-language learn-
ing. M.Sc. thesis, Division of Informatics, University of Edinburgh. Retrieved July 1, 
2006, from Binsted-McKay company website:  <  http://www.binsted-mckay.com/
JustinMcKay-MScThesis.pdf  > .  
 McKay ,  R. T. , and  D. C.   Dennett .  2009 .  The evolution of misbelief .   Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences  32 :  493  – 561 .  
 Melzack ,  R. , and  K. L.   Casey .  1968 .  Sensory, motivational, and central control deter-
minants of chronic pain: A new conceptual model . In   The Skin Senses , ed.  D. R.  
 Kenshalo ,  432 .  Springﬁ eld, IL :  Thomas .  
 Mihalcea ,  R. , and  C.   Strapparava .  2005 . Making computers laugh: Investigations in 
automatic humor recognition. In Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP, Vancouver,CA.  
 Miller ,  G .  2000 .   The Mating Mind: How Sexual Choice Shaped the Evolution of Human 
Nature .  New York :  Doubleday .  
 Miller ,  G. , and  D.   Caruthers .  2003 . A great sense of humor is a good genes indicator: 
Ovulatory cycle effects on the sexual attractiveness of male humor ability. Paper 
presented at the Human Behavior and Evolution Society 15th annual meeting, 
Nebraska.  
 Millikan ,  R .  2004 .   Varieties of Meaning .  The Jean-Nicod Lectures , 2002.  Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press .  

320 
References
 Mills ,  C. M. , and  F. C.   Keil .  2004 .  Knowing the limits of one ’ s understanding: The 
development of an awareness of an illusion of explanatory depth.    Journal of 
Experimental Child Psychology  87 : 1  – 32 .  
 Milner ,  A. D. , and  M. A.   Goodale .  2006 .   The Visual Brain in Action ,  2nd ed.   New 
York :  Oxford University Press .  
 Minsky ,  M.  1974 . A framework for representing knowledge. MIT Artif. Intell. Memo 
252.   
 Minsky ,  M .  1975.   Frame system theory . In   Thinking: Readings in Cognitive Science , ed. 
 P. N.   Johnson-Laird  and  P. C.   Wason ,  355  – 376 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University 
Press .  
 Minsky ,  M .  1984 .  Jokes and the logic of the cognitive unconscious . In 
 Cognitive Constraints on Communication , ed.  L. M.   Vaina  and  J.   Hintikka .  Dordrecht : 
 Reidel .  
 Minsky ,  M .  1981 .  Music, mind, and meaning . In   Music, Mind, and Brain: The Neuro-
psychology of Music , ed.  Manfred   Clynes .  New York :  Plenum .  
 Minsky ,  M.  1986 .   The Society of Mind .  New York :  Simon  &  Schuster .  
 Minsky ,  M.  2006 .   The Emotion Machine .  New York :  Simon  &  Schuster .  
 Mo ,  Z. ,  J.   Lewis , and  U.   Neumann .  2004 . Improved automatic caricature by feature 
normalization and exaggeration. Paper presented at ACM Siggraph 2004.  <  http://
graphics.usc.edu/cgit/pdf/papers/caricature_sketch.pdf  > .   
 Mobbs ,  D. ,  M. D.   Grecius ,  E.   Abdel-Azim ,  V.  Menon , and  A. L.   Reiss .  2003 .  Humor 
modulates the mesolimbic reward centers.    Neuron  40 : 1041  – 1048 .  
 Mobbs ,  D. ,  C. C.   Hagan ,  E.   Azim ,  V.  Menon , and  A. L.   Reiss .  2005 .  Personality 
predicts activity in reward and emotional regions associated with humor.  
 PNAS  102 ( 45 ): 16502  – 16506 .  
 Mochida ,  T. ,  A.   Ishiguro ,  T.  Aoki , and  Y.  Uchikawa .  1995 . Behavior arbitration for 
autonomous mobile robots using emotion mechanisms. In  Proceedings of the IEEE/
RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS  ‘ 95) , Pittsburgh, 
PA, 516 – 221.  
 Moran ,  J. M. ,  G. S.   Wig ,  R. B.   Adams ,  Jr .,  P.   Janata , and  W. M.   Kelley .  2004 .  Neural 
correlates of humor detection and appreciation .   NeuroImage  21 : 1055  – 1060 .  
 Morreall ,  J .  1982 .  A new theory of laughter.    Philosophical Studies  42 : 243  – 254 .  
 M ü ller ,  M.  2002 .  Computer Go .   Artiﬁ cial Intelligence  134 :  145  – 179 .  
 Nerhardt ,  G.   1976 .  Incongruity and funniness: Toward a new descriptive model . In 
 Humor and Laughter: Theory, Research, and Application , ed.  A. J.  Chapman  and  H. C.  
 Foot ,  55  – 62 .  New York :  Wiley .  
 Neisser ,  U.   1976 .   Cognition and Reality: Principles and Implications of Cognitive Psychol-
ogy  .  New York :  W. H. Freeman .  

References 
321
 Newell ,  A. , and  H. A.   Simon .  1972 .   Human Problem Solving .  Englewood Cliffs, NJ : 
 Prentice-Hall .  
 Niedenthal ,  P. M.   2007 .  Embodying emotion .   Science  316 :  1002  – 1005 .  
 Oatley ,  K. , and  P. N.   Johnson-Laird .  1987 .  Towards a cognitive theory of emotions.  
 Cognition and Emotion  1 : 29  – 50 .  
 Olds ,  J. , and  P.   Milner .  1954 .  Positive reinforcement produced by electrical 
stimulation of septal area and other regions of rat brain .   Journal of Comparative and 
Physiological Psychology  47 :  419  – 427 .  
 Oliphant ,  M. and  J.   Batali .  1997 .  Learning and the Emergence of Coordinated Commu-
nication: The Newsletter of the Center for Research in Language 11(1).   
  Omark ,  D. R. ,  M.  Omark , and  M.  Edelman .  1975 .  Formation of dominance hierar-
chies in young children: Attentional perception . In   Psychological Anthropology , ed.  T. 
 Williams ,  289  – 314  .  The Hague :  Mouton .   
 O ’ Reilly ,  R. C.   1998 .  Six principles for biologically based computational models of 
cortical cognition .   Trends in Cognitive Sciences  2  ( 11 ): 455  – 462 .  
 O ’ Reilly ,  R. C. ,  Y.   Munakata , and  J. L.   McClelland .  2000 .   Explorations in Computa-
tional Cognitive Neuroscience: Understanding the Mind by Simulating the Brain . 
 Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Oring ,  E .  2003 .   Engaging Humor .  Urbana :  University of Illinois Press .  
 Owren ,  M. J. , and  J.   Bacharowski .  2003 .  Reconsidering the evolution of non-
linguistic communication: The case of laughter .   Journal of Nonverbal Behavior 
 27 : 183  – 200 .  
 Panksepp ,  J. , and  J.   Burgdorf .  1999 .  Laughing rats? Playful tickling arouses high-
frequency ultrasonic chirping in young rodents . In   Toward a Science of Consciousness 
III , ed.  S.   Hameroff ,  D.   Chalmers , and  A.   Kaziak .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Panksepp ,  J. , and  J.   Burgdorf .  2003 .   “ Laughing ” rats and the evolutionary anteced-
ents of human joy?    Physiology  &  Behavior  79 : 533  – 547 .  
 Parr ,  L. A.   2004 .  Perceptual biases for multimodal cues in chimpanzee ( Pan troglo-
dytes ) affect recognition.    Animal Cognition  7 : 171  – 178 .  
 Parvizi ,  J. ,  S. W.   Anderson ,  C.   Martin ,  H.   Damasio , and  A. R.   Damasio .  2001 .  Patho-
logical laughter and crying: A link to the cerebellum.    Brain  124 : 1708  – 1719 .  
 Patel ,  A. D.   2007 .   Music, Language, and the Brain .  New York :  Oxford University 
Press .  
 Patzig ,  G .  1969 .   Aristotle ’ s Theory of the Syllogism . Trans.  Jonathan Barnes .  Dordrecht : 
 D. Reidel .  
 Penﬁ eld ,  W.   1958 .  Some mechanisms of consciousness discovered during electrical 
stimulation of the brain .   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  44  
( 2 ): 51  – 66 .  

322 
References
 Penﬁ eld ,  W. , and  H.   Jasper .  1954 .   Epilepsy and the Functional Anatomy of the Human 
Brain .  Boston :  Little, Brown .  
 Piaget ,  J.  [ 1936 ]  1952 .   The Origins of Intelligence in Children . Trans.  M.   Cook .  New 
York :  International Universities Press .  
 Piaget ,  J.  [ 1937 ]  1954 .   The Construction of Reality in the Child . Trans.  M.   Cook .  New 
York :  Basic Books .  
 Pickett ,  J. , ed.  2001 .   American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language ,  4th ed.  
 Boston :  Houghton Mifﬂ in .  
 Pinker ,  S.   1994 .   The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language .  London : 
 William Morrow .  
 Pinker ,  S.   1997 .   How the Mind Works .  New York :  Norton .  
 Pollock ,  J.   2008 . OSCAR: An architecture for generally intelligent agents. In  Proceed-
ings of the First AGI Conference , AGI 2008, March 1 – 3, 2008, University of Memphis, 
Tennesee, 275 – 286. IOS Press.   
 Popper ,  K. , and  J. C.   Eccles . [ 1977 ]  1986 .   The Self and Its Brain .  London :  Routledge 
 &  Kegan Paul .  
 Potegal ,  M. , and  D. F.   Einon .  1989 .  Aggressive behavior in adult rats deprived of 
play-ﬁ ghting experience as juveniles .   Developmental Psychobiology  22 : 159  – 172 .  
 Povinelli , D. J. and T. J.  Eddy .  1996 .  What chimpanzees know about seeing . 
 Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development  61 ( 2 ), serial no. 247.  
 Premack ,  D. , and  A. J.   Premack .  1983 .   The Mind of an Ape .  New York :  W. W. 
Norton .  
 Premack ,  D. , and  G.   Woodruff .  1978 .  Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind?  
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences  1  ( 4 ): 515  – 526 .  
 Preuschoft ,  S. , and  J. A. R. A. M.   van Hooff .  1997 .  The social function of  “ smile ” 
and  “ laughter ” : Variations across primate species and societies . In   Nonverbal Com-
munication: Where Nature Meets Culture , ed.  U. C.   Segerstr å le  and  P.   Moln á r ,  171  – 190 . 
 Mahwah, NJ :  Lawrence   Erlbaum .  
 Prinz ,  J.   2002 .   Furnishing the Mind. Concepts and Their Perceptual Basis .  Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press .  
 Prinz ,  J .  2004 .   Gut Reactions: A Perceptual Theory of Emotion .  Oxford :  Oxford Univer-
sity Press .  
 Prinz ,  J. , and  A.   Clark .  2004 .  Putting concepts to work: Some thoughts for the 
twentyﬁ rst century .   Mind  &  Language  19  ( 1 ): 57  – 69 .  
 Prkachin ,  K. M.   1992 .  The consistency of facial expressions of pain: A comparison 
across modalities.    Pain  51 : 297  – 306 .  
 Profﬁ tt ,  D. R.   1999 . I nferential vs. ecological approaches to perception . In   The Nature 
of Cognition , ed.  Robert J.   Sternberg .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  

References 
323
 Provine ,  R. R.   1993 .  Laughter punctuates speech: Linguistic, social, and gender 
contexts of laughter.    Ethology  95 : 291  – 298 .  
 Provine ,  R. R.   1996 .  Laughter.    American Scientist  84 : 38  – 45 .  
 Provine ,  R. R.   2000 .   Laughter: A Scientiﬁ c Investigation .  New York :  Viking .  
 Provine ,  R. R. , and  Y. L.  Yong .  1991 .  Laughter: A stereotyped human vocalization . 
 Ethology  89 : 115  – 124 .     
 Ramachandran ,  V. S.   1998 .  The neurology and evolution of humor, laughter, and 
smiling: The false alarm theory .   Medical Hypotheses  51 :  351  – 354 .  
 Ramachandran ,  V. S. , and  S.   Blakeslee .  1998.    Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the 
Mysteries of the Human Mind .  New York :  William Morrow .   
 Ramachandran ,  V. S. , and  D.   Rogers-Ramachandran .  2006 .  The neurology of aesthet-
ics .   Scientiﬁ c American: Mind ( October ).  
 Raskin ,  V .  1985 .   Semantic Mechanisms of Humor .  Dordrecht :  Reidel .  
 Ravaja ,  N. ,  M.  Turpeinen ,  T.  Saari ,  S.   Puttonen , and  L.   Keltikangas-J ä rvinen .  2008 . 
 The psychophysiology of james bond: Phasic emotional responses to violent video 
game events.    Emotion  8  ( 1 ): 114  – 120 .  
 Reber ,  R. ,  M.  Brun , and  K.   Mitterndorfer .  2008 .  The use of heuristics in intuitive 
mathematical judgment.    Psychonomic Bulletin  &  Review  15  ( 6 ): 1174 .  
 Richerson ,  P. J. , and  R.   Boyd .  2006 .   Not by Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed 
Human Evolution .  Chicago :  University of Chicago Press .  
 Ritchie ,  G .  1999 . Developing the incongruity-resolution theory. In  Proceedings of the 
9th AISB Symposium on Creative Language: Stories and Humour , Edinburgh, April 1999, 
78 – 85.  
 Ritchie ,  G .  2006 .  Reinterpretation and viewpoints.   Humor: International Journal of 
Humor Research  19  ( 3 ): 251  – 270  ( special issue on cognitive linguistics) .  
 Ritchie ,  G. ,  R.   Manurung ,  H.   Pain ,  A.   Waller , and  D.   O ’ Mara .  2006 .  The STANDUP 
interactive riddle builder.    IEEE Intelligent Systems  21  ( 2 ): 67  – 69 .  
 Rizzolatti ,  G. ,  L.   Fadiga ,  V.  Gallese , and  L.   Fogassi .  1996 .  Premotor cortex and the 
recognition of motor actions.    Brain Research: Cognitive Brain Research  3  
( 2 ): 131  – 141 .  
 Ross ,  D. , and  P.   Dumouchel .  2004a .  Emotions as strategic signals.    Rationality and 
Society  16  ( 3 ): 251  – 286 .  
 Ross ,  D. , and  P.   Dumouchel .  2004b .  Sincerity is just consistency: Reply to Frank . 
 Rationality and Society  16  ( 3 ): 307  – 318 .  
 Ross ,  W. D. , ed.  1951 .   Aristotle ’ s Prior and Posterior Analytics .  Oxford :  Clarendon Press .  
 Rozenblit ,  L. , and  F.   Keil .  2002 .  The misunderstood limits of folk science: An illusion 
of explanatory depth.    Cognitive Science  26 : 521  – 562 .  

324 
References
 Rumelhart ,  D. E. ,  J. L.   McClelland , and the  PDP Research Group .  1986 .   Parallel 
Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition , vol.  1 :   Founda-
tions .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Russell ,  B.   1912.    The Problems of Philosophy .  London :  Henry Holt .   
 Russell ,  B .  1918 .  The philosophy of logical atomism .   Monist  28 :  495  – 527 ;  29 ,  32  – 63 , 
 190  – 222 ,  345  – 380 . Reprinted in  Logic and Knowledge: Essays 1901 – 1950 , 
ed. Robert Charles Marsh, 177 – 281, London: Unwin Hyman, 1956. Reprinted in 
 The Philosophy of Logical Atomism , ed. David Pears, 35 – 155, LaSalle: Open Court, 
1985.   
 Samson ,  A. C. ,  C. F.   Hempelmann ,  O.   Huber , and  S.   Zysset .  2009 .  Neural substrates 
of incongruity-resolution and nonsense humor .   Neuropsychologia  47 : 1023  – 1033 .  
 Samson ,  A. C. ,  S.   Zysset , and  O.   Huber .  2008 .  Cognitive humor processing: Different 
logical mechanisms in non-verbal cartoons — an fMRI study .   Social Neuroscience 
 3 ( 2 ): 125  – 140 .  
 Samuels ,  R. ,  S.   Stich , and  M.  Bishop .  2002.   Ending the rationality wars: How 
to make disputes about human rationality disappear . In   Common Sense, 
Reasoning, and Rationality , ed.  Renee   Elio ,  236  – 268 .  New York :  Oxford University 
Press .   
 Savage-Rumbaugh ,  S. , and  R.   Lewin .  1994 .   Kanzi: The Ape at the Brink of the Human 
Mind .  New York :  John Wiley .  
 Saxe ,  J. G .  1873 .  “ The Blind Men and the Elephant. ” In  The Poems of John Godfrey 
Saxe , complete ed. Boston: James R. Osgood.   
 Schachter ,  S. , and  J. E.   Singer .  1962 .  Cognitive, social, and physiological determi-
nants of emotional states .   Psychological Review  69 : 379  – 399 .  
 Schank ,  R. C.   1991 .   Tell Me a Story: A New Look at Real and Artiﬁ cial Intelligence .  New 
York :  Atheneum .  
 Schank ,  R. C. , and  R. P.   Abelson .  1977 .   Scripts, Plans, Goals, and Understanding: An 
Inquiry into Human Knowledge Structures .  Hillsdale, NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum .  
 Schooler ,  L. J. , and  R.   Hertwig .  2005 .  How forgetting aids heuristic inference.  
 Psychological Review  112 : 610  – 628 .  
 Schopenhauer ,  A . [ 1883 ]  1969 .  On the theory of the ludicrous . In   The World as Will 
and Representation . Trans.  E. Payne .  New York :  Dover .  
 Schopenhauer ,  A .  1969 .   The World as Will and Representation . Trans.  E. Payne .  New 
York :  Dover .  
 Searle ,  J.   R.   1980 .  Minds, brains, and programs.    Behavioral and Brain Sciences  3  
( 3 ): 417  – 457 .  
 Sedivy ,  J. C. ,  M. K.   Tanenhaus ,  C. G.   Chambers , and  G. N.   Carlson .  1999 .  Achieving 
incremental semantic interpretation through contextual representation.    Cognition 
 71  ( 2 ): 109  – 148 .  

References 
325
 Seyfarth ,  R. M. , and  D. L.   Cheney .  1997 .  Some general features of vocal development 
in nonhuman primates . In   Social Inﬂ uences on Vocal Development , ed.  C. T.   Snowdon  
and  M.  Hausberger ,  249  – 273 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  
 Shammi ,  P. , and  D. T.   Stuss .  1999 .  Humour appreciation: A role of the right frontal 
lobe .   Brain  122 : 657  – 666 .  
 Shastri ,  L. , and  D.   Grannes .  1996 . A connectionist treatment of negation and incon-
sistency. In  Proceedings of the Eighteenth Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , ed. 
Garrison Cottrell, 142 – 147. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
 Shibata ,  T. ,  K.   Ohkawa , and  K.   Tanie .  1996.  Spontaneous behavior of robots 
for cooperation — Emotionally intelligent robot systems.  Proceedings of the IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation , Minneapolis, Minnesota, 
2426 – 2431.  
 Shultz ,  T. R.   1976 .  A cognitive-developmental analysis of humor . In   Humour and 
Laughter: Theory, Research, and Applications , ed.  A. J.   Chapman  and  H. C.   Foot ,  11  – 36 . 
 London :  Wiley .  
 Smith ,  A . [ 1759 ]  1976.    A Theory of Moral Sentiments . Ed.  D. D.   Raphael  and 
 A. L.   MacFie .  Oxford :  Clarendon Press .   
 Smith ,  J. E. ,  V. A.   Waldorf , and  D. L.   Trembath .  1990 .  Single white male looking for 
thin, very attractive. . .  .   Sex Roles  23  ( 11 – 12 ): 675  – 685 .  
 Solomon ,  R. C.   1976 .   The Passions .  New York :  Doubleday .  
 Solomon ,  R. L. , and  J. D.   Corbit .  1974 .  An opponent-process theory of motivation: 
I. Temporal dynamics of affect .   Psychological Review  81  ( 2 ): 119  – 145 .   
 Soussignan ,  R.   2002 .  Duchenne smile, emotional experience, and autonomic reactiv-
ity: A test of the facial feedback hypothesis.    Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 2 : 52  – 74 .  
 Spencer ,  H.   1860 .  The physiology of laughter.    Macmillan ’ s Magazine  1 : 395  – 402 .  
 Sperber ,  D. , and  D.   Wilson .  1986 .   Relevance: Communication and Cognition .  Oxford : 
 Blackwell .   
 Sperber ,  D. , and  D.   Wilson .  1995 .   Relevance: Communication and Cognition ,  2nd ed.  
 Oxford :  Blackwell .  
 Sperli ,  F. ,  L.   Spinelli ,  C.   Pollo , and  M.  Seeck .  2006 .  Contralateral smile and laughter, 
but no mirth, induced by electrical stimulation of the cingulate cortex.    Epilepsia 
 47 : 440  – 443 .  
 Spinka ,  M. ,  R. C.   Newberry , and  M.  Bekoff .  2001 .  Mammalian play: Training for the 
unexpected.    Quarterly Review of Biology  76 : 141  – 168 .  
 Spivey ,  M. J.   2007 .   The Continuity of Mind .  Oxford :  Oxford Universiuty Press .   
 Spivey ,  M. J. ,  M. K.   Tanenhaus ,  K. M.   Eberhard , and  J. C.   Sedivy .  2002 .  Eye move-
ments and spoken language comprehension: Effects of visual context on syntactic 
ambiguity resolution.    Cognitive Psychology  45 : 447  – 481 .  

326 
References
 Sterelny ,  K .  2003 .   Thought in a Hostile World: The Evolution of Human Cognition . 
 Oxford :  Wiley-Blackwell .  
 Stock ,  O. , and  C.   Strapparava .  2005 . HAHAcronym: A computational humor system. 
In  Proceedings of the ACL Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions , 113 – 116, Ann 
Arbor, June. Madison, WI: Omnipress.  
 Strack ,  F. ,  L.   Martin , and  S.   Stepper .  1988 .  Inhibiting and facilitating conditions of 
the human smile: A nonobtrusive test of the facial feedback hypothesis.    Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology  54 : 768  – 777 .  
 Strick ,  M. ,  R. W.   Holland ,  R. B.   van Baaren , and  A.   van Knippenberg .  2009 .  Finding 
comfort in a joke: Consolatory effects of humor through cognitive distraction.  
 Emotion  9  ( 4 ): 574  – 578 .  
 Suls ,  J. M.   1972 .  A two-stage model for the appreciation of jokes and cartoons . In 
 The Psychology of Humor , ed.  J. H.   Goldstein  and  P. E.   McGhee .  New York :  Academic 
Press .  
 Suls ,  J. M.   1977 .  Cognitive and disparagement theories of humour . In   It ’ s a 
Funny Thing, Humour , ed.  A. J.   Chapman  and  H. C.   Foot .  London :  Pergamon 
Press .  
 Swinney ,  D.   1979 .  Lexical access during sentence comprehension: (Re)consideration 
of context effects.    Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior  18 : 645  – 659 .  
 Swiss ,  J. I .  2007 .  Empathy .   Antinomy  11 : 41  – 47 .  
 Tanenhaus ,  M. K. ,  J. M.   Leiman , and  M.  Seidenberg .  1979 .  Evidence for multiple 
stages in the processing of ambiguous words in syntactic contexts.    Journal of Verbal 
Learning and Verbal Behavior  18 : 427  – 440 .  
 Tanenhaus ,  M. K. ,  M. J.   Spivey-Knowlton ,  K. M.   Eberhard , and  J. C.   Sedivy .  1995 . 
 Integration of visual and linguistic information in spoken language comprehension.  
 Science  268  ( 5217 ): 1632  – 1634 .  
 Thelen ,  E. , and  L. B.   Smith .  1994 .   A Dynamic Systems Approach to the Development of 
Cognition and Action .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Thompson ,  J.   1941 .  Development of facial expression of emotion in blind and seeing 
children.    Archives de Psychologie  37 : 1  – 47 .  
 Thorndike ,  E. L.   1898 .  Animal intelligence: An experimental study of the associative 
processes in animals.    Psychological Review Monograph Supplement  2  ( 8 ): 1  – 109 .  
 Thorndike ,  E. L.  [ 1911 ]  2000 .   Animal Intelligence ,  2nd ed.   New York :  Hafner .  Transac-
tion Publishers .  
 Tinbergen ,  N .  1951 .   The Study of Instinct .  Oxford :  Clarendon Press .  
 Tinbergen ,  N .  1953 .   The Herring Gull ’ s World .  London :  Collins .  
 Tomasello ,  M. , and  J.   Call .  1997 .   Primate Cogition .  Oxford :  Oxford University 
Press .  

References 
327
 Tomasello ,  M. ,  J.   Call , and  B.   Hare .  2003 .  Chimpanzees understand psychological 
states: The question is which ones and to what extent .   Trends in Cognitive Science 
 7 : 153  – 156 .  
 Tomkins ,  S. S.   1962 .   Affect, Imagery, and Consciousness .  New York :  Springer .  
 Tooby ,  J. , and  L.   Cosmides .  2001 .  Does beauty build adapted minds? Toward an 
evolutionary theory of aesthetics, ﬁ ction, and the arts .   SubStance  30 ( 1 ): 6  – 27 .  
 Treisman ,  A. ,  1960 .  Contextual cues in selective listening .   Quarterly Journal of 
Experimental Psychology  12 : 242  – 248 .  
 Trivers ,  R. L.   1971 .  The evolution of reciprocal altruism .   Quarterly Review of Biology 
 46  ( 1 ): 35  – 57 .  
 Trivers ,  R. L.   1972 .  Parental investment and sexual selection . In  Sexual Selection and 
the Descent of Man , ed.  B.   Campbell ,  1871  – 1971 .  Chicago :  Aldine .  
 Turing ,  A. M.   1950 .  Computing machinery and intelligence.    Mind  59 : 433  – 460 .  
 Tversky ,  A. , and  D.   Kahneman .  1974 .  Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and 
biases.    Science  185 : 1124  – 1131 .  
 Tversky ,  A. , and  D.   Kahneman .  1983 .  Extensional versus intuitive reasoning: The 
conjunction fallacy in probability judgment.    Psychological Review  90 : 293  – 315 .  
 Uekermann ,  J. ,  I.   Daum , and  S.   Channon .  2007 .  Toward a cognitive and social 
neuroscience of humor processing .   Social Cognition  25 : 553  – 572 .  
 van Hooff ,  J. A. R. A. M.   1972 .  A comparative approach to the phylogeny of laughter 
and smiling . In   Non-Verbal Communication , ed.  R. A.   Hinde ,  209  – 243 .  Cambridge : 
 Cambridge University Press .  
 van Gelder ,  T. , and  R. F.   Port .  1995 .  It ’ s about time: An overview of the dynamical 
approach to cognition . In   Mind as Motion: Explorations in the Dynamics of Cognition , 
ed.  R. F.   Port  and  T.  van Gelder .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Veatch ,  T. C.   1998 .  A theory of humor.    Humor: International Journal of Humor Research 
 11  ( 2 ): 161  – 215 .  
 Vogt ,  B. A.   2005 .  Pain and emotion interactions in subregions of the cingulate gyrus . 
 Nature Reviews: Neuroscience  6 : 533  – 544 .  
 Watson ,  K. K. ,  B. J.   Matthews , and  J. M.   Allman .  2007 .  Brain activation during sight 
gags and language-dependent humor .   Cerebral Cortex  17 ( 2 ): 314  – 324 .  
 Weber ,  B. H. , and  D. J.   Depew , eds.  2003 .   Evolution and Learning: The Baldwin Effect 
Reconsidered .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Weisfeld ,  G. E.   1993 .  The adaptive value of humor and laughter.    Ethology and Socio-
biology  14 : 141  – 169 .  
 Wild ,  B. ,  F. A.   Rodden ,  W.   Grodd , and  W.  Ruch .  2003 .  Neural correlates of laughter 
and humour .   Brain  126 : 1  – 18 .  

328 
References
 Wild ,  B. ,  F. A.   Rodden ,  A.   Rapp ,  M.  Erb ,  W.   Grodd , et al.  2006 .  Humor and smiling: 
Cortical regions selective for cognitive, affective, and volitional components .   Neurol-
ogy  66 : 887  – 893 .  
 Wilson ,  E. O.   1975 .   Sociobiology: The New Synthesis .  Cambridge, MA :  Belknap Press 
of Harvard University Press .  
 Wiseman ,  R .  2002 .   LaughLab: The Scientiﬁ c Search for the World ’ s Funniest Joke . 
 London :  Arrow .  
 Wittgenstein ,  L.   1953 .   Philosophical Investigations . Ed.  G. H.   von Wright ,  R.   Rhees , 
and  G. E. M.   Anscombe . Trans.  G. E. M. Anscombe .  Oxford :  Blackwell .  
  Wolfe ,  T .  1965 .   The Kandy-Kolored Tangerine-Flake Streamline Baby .  New York :  Farrar, 
Strauss  &  Geroux .  
 Wyer ,  R. S. , and  J. E.   Collins ,  II .  1992 .  A theory of humor elicitation.    Psychological 
Review  99  ( 4 ): 663  – 688 .  
 Yamamoto ,  M.  1993 .  Sozzy: A hormone driven autonomous vacuum cleaner . 
 Proceedings of Mobile Robots  VIII : 162  – 165 .  
 Zahavi ,  A.   1996 .  The evolution of communal roosts as information centers and the 
pitfall of group-selection: A rejoinder to Richner and Heeb .   Behavioral Ecology 
 7 : 118  – 119 .  
 Zajonc ,  R. B.   1980 .  Feeling and thinking: Preferences need no inferences.    American 
Psychologist  35 : 151 .  
  Zajonc ,  R. B.   1984 .  On the primacy of affect.    American Psychologist  39 : 117  – 123 .  
 Zigler ,  E. ,  J.   Levine , and  L.   Gould .  1967 .  Cognitive challenge as a factor in children ’ s 
humor appreciation.    Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  6  ( 3 ): 332  – 336 .  
 Zillmann ,  D.   1983a .  Disparagement humor . In   Handbook of Humour Research , ed. 
 P. E.   McGhee  and  J. H.   Goldstein ,  85  – 107 .  New York :  Springer-Verlag .  
 Zillmann ,  D.   1983b .  Transfer of excitation in emotional behavior . In   Social Psycho-
physiology: A Sourcebook , ed.  J. T.   Cacioppo  and  R. E.   Petty ,  215  – 240 .  New York : 
 Guilford Press .  
 Zillmann ,  D. ,  A. H.   Katcher , and  B.   Milavsky .  1972 .  Excitation transfer from physical 
exercise to subsequent aggressive behavior.    Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 
 8 : 247  – 259 .   
 Ziv ,  A.   1984 .   Personality and Sense of Humor .  New   York :  Springer-Verlag .  

 Index 
 Abdel-Azim, E., 320 
 Abelson, R. P., 51 – 52, 324 
 Absurd, 30, 47 
 Absurdiceptors, 85 
 Absurdity, 15 
 Academicians, 281 
 Accessibility, cognitive, 266 – 267 
 Acronym, 5 
 Adams, Katharine Donnelly, xiii 
 Adams, Patch, 283 
 Adams, Reginald B., Jr., ix, xii, xiii, 320 
 Adams, Scott, 80 
 Adaptation, evolutionary theory, 10 – 11, 
38, 43, 58, 62, 63, 90, 91, 94 – 95, 97, 
111, 125 – 126, 127, 258, 274n, 289 
 Adaptive behavior, 54, 59, 251 
 Addiction, 84, 294 
 to alcohol, 1, 81 – 82 
 to caffeine, 1 
 to chocolate, 1 
 to drugs, 81 – 82 
 to endorphins, xi, 253 
 to food, 81 – 82 
 to gambling, 81 – 82 
 to humor, 1, 26, 62, 253, 290, 294 
 to laziness, 81 – 82 
 to mind candy, xi 
 to music, 1, 253 
 to peek-a-boo, 220 
 to sex and affection, 81 – 82 
 to tobacco, 1 
 Additives, 217, 250.  See also Spice(s) 
 Adrenaline, 68, 70, 221 
 Aesop, 154, 272 
 Aesthetics, 80n, 289 
 Affordance, 9 
 Agency, 242, 243 
 Aggression, 52n, 262 – 263, 291, 296 
 and nonaggression, 40, 261, 262 
 AGI models, 86, 88, 89n 
 Agora, Van, xiii 
 “ Aha!, ”  60, 78, 125, 214, 219, 294 
 AI, strong, 5, 86n.  See also Artiﬁ cial 
intelligence 
 AI, weak, 86n.  See also Artiﬁ cial 
intelligence 
 AI-complete, 4, 5, 88, 95, 298 
 AI-hard, 5n 
 Ainslie, G., 82, 84, 91, 305 
 Akins, K., 119, 310 
 Alarm calls, false-alarm, 262 – 263, 
290 – 291 
 Alcohol, 1, 82, 128 
 Alexander, R. D., 60, 305 
 Algorithm, ix, x, 4 – 6, 83, 86 – 89, 296 
 Algorithmic approach to humor, 4, 5, 
296 
 Allegiance probing, 7, 12, 265 
 Allin, A., 221n, 315 
 Allison, Mose, 19 
 Allman, J. M., 327 
 Almost-puns.  See Puns, almost- 

330 
Index
 Altmann, G. T. M., 98 – 99, 316 
 Alvarado, N., 133n, 223, 315 
 Ambadara, Z., 305 
 Ambiguity, 29, 46, 99 – 100, 106, 110, 
134, 135, 136, 165 – 166, 180, 203, 
209, 281 
 Ambivalence theory, 44n, 288 
 American Heritage Dictionary , 16, 322 
 America ’ s Funniest Home Videos , 152, 
153 
 Amusement, xii, 4, 16, 24 – 25, 132, 
140, 145, 181, 198, 203, 210, 219n, 
220, 257, 264, 290, 296.  See also 
Mirth 
 Analgesia 
 herbs as, 288 
 mirth and laughter as, 284 – 285, 288 
 morphine as, 70n, 253 
 Anderson, Barton L., 232 
 Anderson, J. R., 86, 101, 305 
 Anderson, S. W., 321 
 Andreasson, K., 305 
 Angelman disorder, 21 
 Anger, 19, 31, 48, 71, 83, 86, 172, 198, 
257 – 259, 287 
 Anglophone academics, as target 
audience, 34n 
 Anthropocentrism, 155 – 157 
 Anthropomorphism, 55, 59, 133, 145, 
155 – 157, 293 
 Anticipation, 18, 51, 53 – 54, 72, 123, 
126, 146, 152, 156, 161, 171, 174, 
182, 220, 222, 235, 243, 250, 
251 – 254, 263, 264 – 265, 297.  See also 
Expectation 
 Anticipation generation, 62n, 93 – 95, 
97, 102, 107, 120, 127, 136, 147, 
166, 221, 222, 264, 299, 302.  See also 
 “ Producing future ” 
 Anxiety, 79, 147, 217, 257, 263, 288 
 Aoki, T., 320 
 Apes, 39 – 40, 55n, 91, 125, 131, 261, 
262, 291 
 Aphorisms, 214 
 Apple-peeler, 9 – 10 
 Apples, 9, 38, 242 – 243 
 Appraisal, 66n, 69, 70n, 73, 133, 252 – 253 
 Apter, M. J., 50 – 51, 305 
 Archimedes, 48, 122 
 Arctic, 243, 245 
 Aristocrats, The , 292 
 Aristophanes, 31n 
 Aristotle, 41, 43, 53, 59, 64, 90, 305, 
321, 323 
 Arms race, evolutionary, 23, 264, 268, 
292 
 Arms race, in pornography tastes, 156n 
 Armstrong, Neil, 104 
 Arnold, M. B., 70n, 305 
 Aron, A. P., 217, 275, 295, 311 
 Arousal, 133, 176, 217 – 219, 227 – 229, 
247, 251, 252, 275, 284, 295 
 Arroyo, S., 21, 22, 25, 305 
 Art(s), x, 128 – 129, 140, 159, 251, 274, 
280, 289, 301 
 of caricature, 239 
 humor as a, 6, 270 – 283, 301 
 Artiﬁ cial agent with humor, 3 – 5, 27, 
297 – 299 
 Artiﬁ cial general intelligence, 86, 88, 
89n.  See also Artiﬁ cial intelligence 
 Artiﬁ cial intelligence, 65 – 66, 86 – 88, 
89n, 95, 121n, 218 
 Aschersleben, G., 316 
 Ashraf, A. B., 133n, 305 
 Asimov, Isaac, 1 
 Assessment of intellect, 11 – 12, 
264 – 269, 294, 295 
 Assumption, 32 – 33, 99, 118, 121, 125, 
127, 132, 134, 137, 151, 153, 158, 
161, 162, 163, 168 – 169, 172, 175, 
186 – 188, 191, 193, 195, 200, 
203 – 206, 209, 230, 232, 235, 240, 
243, 249 – 250, 254, 276, 293 – 294.  See 
also Jump to a conclusion; Leap to a 
conclusion 

Index 
331
 Asymmetry 
 in activity of belief, 198 – 199 
 of directional concepts, 136 
 of empathy, in Boorstin ’ s perspectives, 
142 
 of knowledge, 160 
 perspectival, 148 – 155, 213 
 Atkinson, Rowan, 147, 234 
 Atom, 240, 242 
 Atomic level of analysis, 160, 252 
 Attardo, S., 5n, 46, 50 – 51, 59, 100, 
305 
 Attention, 40, 58, 71, 77, 85, 91, 95, 
98, 158n, 211, 235 – 236, 280, 284, 
295, 297 
 as social capital, 295 
 Attraction, human sexual, 128, 217, 
291, 295 
 Austin, J. L., 27 
 Autism, 180 
 Aversive touch, of tickling, 221 – 229 
 Awe, 202, 251 
 Azim, E., 35, 305, 320 
 
 Bacharowski, J., 269, 321 
 Bachelor party, 215 
 Background assumptions, shared.  See 
Knowledge, shared 
 Bad joke, 213, 216 
 Bain, Alexander, 42, 48, 49, 194, 305 
 Baker, K. H., 284, 311 
 Baldwin effect, 126n, 155, 269 
 Balshine, S., 35, 307 
 Barber, E. W., 272, 305 
 Barber, P. T., 272, 305 
 Baron-Cohen, S., 306 
 Barry, Dave, x 
 Barsalou, L. W., 77n, 113, 314 
 Bartlett, F., 52n, 306 
 Basic humor, 117, 121, 127, 130 – 138, 
144, 147, 214n, 243.  See also 
First-person humor 
 Batali, J., 260, 321 
 Bates, E. A., 311 
 Batesian mimicry, 23 
 Beethoven, Ludwig van, 257 
 Behavior, covert, 74, 76 – 78, 89, 110, 
201, 289.  See also Cognitive behavior 
 Behnke, E. J., 313 
 Bekoff, M., 80n, 260, 325 
 Belencaia, Adriana, xiii 
 Belief(s) 
 active, 157, 177, 179, 187, 188 – 189, 
194, 197, 199, 201, 208n, 225, 230, 
242, 288 
 attribution of, 6, 65n, 143, 147 – 150, 
152 – 153, 158n, 161 – 162, 169, 178, 
293, 298 
 commitment ( see Epistemic 
commitment) 
 default, 103, 104, 110, 163, 166, 170, 
172, 173, 176, 181, 198, 199, 223, 
282, 294 
 “ false, ”  111, 113, 121, 124, 132, 137, 
192 – 193, 195, 197, 198, 206 – 208, 
216, 234, 244, 250, 265, 287 – 288, 
294, 295, 298 
 high-level, 223, 225, 227 
 inferential, 152, 185 – 187, 187, 
204 – 205 
 perceptual, 225 
 tacit, 225, 231 – 232 
 Beneﬁ t, evolutionary, 10, 38, 40, 
58 – 59, 74 – 76, 81, 154, 258 – 260, 
263 – 264 
 Bennett, A., 63 
 Benny, Jack, 93, 276 
 Bereavement, 284 
 Bergen, B., 306 
 Bergson, H., 54 – 55, 59, 141, 155, 176, 
257, 293, 306 
 Bergstrom, C. T., 263, 306 
 Bile, 24 
 Binsted, K., 5, 306 
 Biological theory of humor, 1, 7, 9, 23, 
37 – 39 

332 
Index
 Bipersonal humor, 151, 153, 168, 172, 
216 
 Bird song, 260 
 Bishop, M., 65, 324 
 Black, D., 21, 224n, 306 
 Black boxes, audience members as, 275 
 Blackmore, S., 11, 306 
 Blakemore, S. J., 221, 222, 227, 306 
 Blakeslee, S., 40, 48, 146n, 222, 223, 
225, 261, 262, 323 
 Blind Men and the Elephant, The: A 
Hindoo Fable , 287 
 Bloom, P., 146, 306 
 Blushing, 68, 74, 258 
 Bonanno, G. A., 20, 284, 317 
 Bonding, social group, 11, 225 
 Books, of comedy, 294 
 Boorstin, J., 140 – 142, 153, 171, 207, 
279, 306 
 Boorstinian perspectives, 140 – 142, 153, 
171, 207, 279 
 Booth, Stephen, 252 – 253, 280 – 283, 306 
 Borges, J. L., 188, 306 
 Borges, Priscilla, xiii 
 Bower, G. H., 72n, 101, 306 
 Boyd, R., 11, 118n, 271, 291, 306, 323 
 Boyer, P., 38, 159, 306 
 Boyle, Charles, 16 
 Br ’ er Rabbit, 249 
 Brains, x, xi, 12, 62 – 64, 66 – 69, 76 – 77, 
83, 93 – 96, 101 – 103, 118 – 121, 
125 – 126, 128 – 129, 129n, 130, 158, 
178, 216, 218 – 220, 228, 239, 251, 
279, 292, 301 – 302.  See also Neural 
funny bone 
 electrophysiology, 52 
 functional architecture of, 2, 4, 21, 
25, 97, 101, 289 – 290, 299 
 Brain scans, 35, 179, 302 
 Branigan, C., 313 
 Breazeal, C., 86, 307 
 Brennan, S., 239, 307 
 Bressler, E., 35, 307 
 Brewer, M., 181n, 307 
 Bridge experiment, 217, 295 
 Broadbent, D. E., 98, 307 
 Brooks, Mel, 141 
 Brooks, Rodney, 307 
 Brun, M., 80n, 323 
 Bryant, J., 217, 275, 307 
 Bubb, C. C., 117, 215, 218, 249, 307 
 Buddhist, 32 
 Burgdorf, J., 125n, 261, 321 
 Butt of the joke, 40, 43, 139, 140, 162, 
246, 248, 267, 288, 292 
 Buxman, K., 284, 317 
 Byers, J. A., 80n, 260, 307 
 By-product, evolutionary, 10, 48, 127, 
154, 225, 254 – 255, 257, 274n, 289 
 Byrne, A., 193n, 307 
 
 Caffeine, 1.  See also Coffee 
 Calculus, mathematical, 175 
 Calculus, social, 76 
 Call, J., 55n, 145, 290, 307, 326, 327 
 Campbell, W. K., 312 
 Camus, A., 15 
 Candid Camera , 163 
 Cangiano, Caston, xiii 
 Cannon, W. B., 69, 307 
 Cantor, J. R., 217, 275, 307 
 Caricature, 7, 55, 138, 239, 274, 302 
 Carlin, George, 24, 136n, 276 
 Carlson, G. N., 308, 324 
 Carpenter, Karen, 214 
 Carr, J., 67, 150, 275, 283, 296, 307 
 Carrey, Jim, x, 7 
 Carroll, N., 242, 307 
 Cartoon(s), 7, 17, 35, 60, 68, 274, 294, 302 
 analyzing humor, 278 
 Darwin caricature, 241 
 Dilbert anticipating problems, 94 
 Kasparov chess, 83 
 Mother Goose and Grimm,  “ funny 
noise, ” 183 
 XKCD, hypothetical situation, 96 

Index 
333
 Cartwright-Smith, J., 22n, 318 
 Caruthers, D., 319 
 Casey, K. L., 70n, 319 
 Catch trials, 181 
 Cathcart, T., 112, 178, 285n, 307 
 Causation, theory of, 18, 78 
 Censor model of humor, 44, 51, 52, 
204 – 206 
 “ Central conundrum ” of humor, 26 
 Chair sculpture.  See  Oops! ,   sculpture 
 Challenged expectations, 183, 184 
 Challengers (beliefs), 184, 185 
 Chalmers, D. J., 65, 77n, 85, 154, 307, 
308 
 Chambers, C. G., 99, 308, 324 
 Channon, S., 129n, 327 
 Chaplin, Charlie, x, 7, 146 
 Chapman, A. J., 35, 308 
 Chasing, in play, 152, 261 – 263, 293 
 Cheating, 75, 76n, 82, 198 – 199, 
258 – 259 
 Chena, T., 305 
 Cheney, D. L., 262, 308, 325 
 Chess, ix, x, 66, 83n, 88, 93 – 94, 107, 
188, 191 – 192, 232, 263, 296 
 Chevrolet brain, 12, 126 
 Children, humor and mirth in, 32, 
35, 38, 42, 58, 157, 180, 220 – 221, 
242, 266 – 267, 275, 298.  See also 
Infants 
 Chimpanzees, 90, 125 – 126, 261 – 263, 
290 – 291 
 play in, 145, 261 
 theory of mind in, 145 
 Chislenko, Alexander, xii, 159n, 308 
 Chocolate, 1, 2, 214n, 218 
 Christenfeld, N., 39, 228, 315 
 Chwalisz, K., 69, 308 
 Circular deﬁ nition, 24.  See also 
Deﬁ nition, circular 
 Clark, A., 65, 85, 154, 308, 322 
 Clark, M., 219n, 308 
 Clarke, A., 127, 308 
 Classifying humor, 143, 156, 280.  See 
also Humor, taxonomy of 
 Cleverness, 120, 123, 198, 246 – 249, 
267.  See also Wit 
 Close, M., 160, 273, 308 
 Closure, 107 – 108, 301 
 Coffee, 105, 107, 214n, 218 
 Cognition, xii, 63, 66, 70n, 73, 79, 
83 – 91, 95, 97, 100 – 101, 104, 117, 
120, 154, 297, 298 
 distributed, 154 
 embodied, 69, 85, 89 – 92 
 extended, 154 
 Cognitive accessibility, 266 – 267 
 Cognitive agent, 289, 297 – 298 
 Cognitive anchor, 203 
 Cognitive architecture, 17, 18, 65, 76, 
86, 89, 94, 117, 123 – 125 
 Cognitive behavior, 77 – 78, 80, 86, 292. 
 See also Behavior, covert 
 Cognitive bug, 225 
 Cognitive censors, 52, 204 – 206 
 Cognitive collusion, 154 
 Cognitive elaboration, 204n 
 Cognitive emotions, 66, 81, 85, 87.  See 
also Epistemic emotions 
 Cognitively impenetrable belief, 227n 
 Cognitive mastery, 266 – 268 
 Cognitive mechanisms, 26, 103n 
 Cognitive processes, 66, 70, 301 – 302 
 Cognitive processing, 5, 61, 62 
 Cognitive scaffolding, 65 
 Cognitive science, 4, 39n, 66, 83 – 84, 
280 
 Cognitive theory, 6, 57 
 Cohen, T., 33 – 34, 308 
 Coherence, 15, 62n, 98, 124 
 Cohesion, group, 269 
 Cohn, J. F., 305 
 Collins, A. M., 101, 308 
 Collins, J. E., II, 17, 49, 50, 173, 
202 – 204, 206, 328 
 Color-blindness, 18, 298 

334 
Index
 Color perception, 16 – 18, 178, 298, 301 
 Combinatorial explosion, 93, 96, 97, 
192, 297 
 Comedian(s), 1, 16, 54, 60, 93n, 112, 
130, 157, 158n, 164, 181, 216, 240, 
246, 255, 265, 270, 272, 275, 281, 
290, 295 
 gene for, 291 
 Comedy, x, 1, 7, 23, 39n, 55, 60 – 61, 
68, 117, 139, 159, 164, 182n, 189, 
219 – 220, 228, 229, 270, 271, 277, 
278 – 280, 294, 301, 302 
 Comedy clubs, 294 
 Comedy-in-the-wild.  See Humor  “ in the 
wild ” 
 Comic essence, 271 
 Commitment.  See Epistemic 
commitment 
 Commitment indicator, used in joke 
analysis, 161 – 162, 165, 166, 169, 
171, 173 
 Commitment problem, 74 – 75, 81 
 Common ancestor, of logic and humor, 
292 
 Common code theory, 77n 
 Common knowledge.  See Knowledge, 
shared 
 Communication, 235, 255, 258 – 263, 
291 
 intention in, 160, 270 
 laughter as, 23, 38, 58, 131, 257 – 270 
 Competition, 41, 43, 83, 88, 147, 250, 
261, 263, 265, 269, 288, 292, 
295 – 296 
 in the brain, 13, 86, 89, 90 – 91, 118, 
120 – 121, 140, 284, 297, 298 
 of jokes as memes, 272 
 sexual, 7, 128, 263 – 264, 295 
 Complexity theory, 4, 5n 
 Comprehension, 6, 35, 51, 89, 91, 
97 – 105, 110, 114, 118 – 123, 134 – 135, 
148, 175, 204 – 206, 209, 249, 253, 
254, 294 
 Compression tool, used in joke 
analysis, 163, 169 
 Computation, 102, 297 
 theory of, 4 
 Computational model of humor, 3 – 6, 
86 – 88, 129 
 Computational problem of humor, xi, 
12 
 Conation, 83 
 Conception, 47, 50, 59, 72, 77n, 
113 – 114, 148, 183 – 184, 206 
 Conception of babies, 179 
 Conception/perception distinction, 
113 – 114 
 Concepts, 77, 91 – 92, 97, 101, 136, 197, 
228 
 Conceptual blending, 85, 97 
 Concern, 142, 184, 185, 188, 197, 254, 
262 
 Confectioners, 68, 270, 288 
 Conﬂ ict resolution, 79, 111 – 116 
 Confusion, 21 – 22, 27, 29, 79, 81, 
84 – 85, 87, 91, 110 – 115, 124, 184, 
194 – 197, 201, 230, 254, 276 – 277, 
281, 282, 286n, 288 
 Connoisseurship, 219, 267, 295 
 Conscious accessibility, 19, 26, 110, 
221, 242, 282, 302 
 Consciousness, 13, 115, 123 – 124, 126, 
131, 199, 200, 281, 302 
 Contagion of laughter, 22n, 262, 268, 
284 
 Context free, 17 
 Contradiction, 15, 52, 54, 62n, 64n, 
79, 84 – 85, 87, 98, 100 – 102, 112 – 114, 
118, 124, 175, 184, 188 – 189, 192, 
195 – 197, 201, 209 – 210, 230, 240, 
242, 281, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294 
 Contrastive valence, 45n, 253.  See also 
Limbic contrast 
 Co-opting, 43, 263, 264 – 270, 291 
 Corbit, J. D., 140, 325 
 Correa, Rodrigo, xiii 

Index 
335
 Coser, R. L., 269, 308 
 Cosmic coincidence, 18 
 Cosmides, L., 289, 327 
 Coulson, S., 52, 98, 100, 122, 126, 204, 
306, 308, 309 
 Counterexamples, 177, 182 – 201 
 Counterfactuals, 72, 126, 191, 244, 
290, 291, 293 
 Cousins, N., 284, 309 
 Covert entry, 118 – 119, 121, 127, 132, 
135, 147, 158, 161, 162, 165, 167, 
169, 170, 179, 181, 193, 208n, 225, 
230, 238, 272 
 Cows, 266 
 Craig, A. D., 70n, 309 
 Crawford, M., 34, 309 
 Creativity, 84 – 85, 141n, 290 
 Credit-assignment problem, 218 – 219, 295 
 Cress, Jacob, 180, 236 
 Creutzfeld-Jakob disease, 21 
 Crick, F., 43 
 Cuckoo chick, 12 
 Cultural ecosystems, 292 
 Cultural evolution, 12, 30, 63, 68, 117, 
128, 155, 213, 270, 274n, 277n, 291 
 Cultural ﬁ tness, 214 
 Cultural magniﬁ cation, 122 
 Cultural replicators, 11, 290 
 Cultural selection, 214 
 Cultural symbiont, 11 
 Cultural transmission  
 of habit, 268 – 269 
 of information, 154, 164 
 Culture, 32, 35n, 38, 52, 58, 96, 100, 
154, 214, 215, 220, 249, 259n, 262, 
271, 295, 298, 301 
 vs. instinct, 38 
 Currie, G., 193n, 309 
 Cuteness, 67 – 68n, 74 
 
 Dachille, Lindsay, xii 
 Damasio, A. R., 66, 69, 71, 72, 73, 84, 
97n, 111, 309, 321 
 Damasio, H., 321 
 Darwin, Charles, 7, 8, 39, 239, 261, 
290, 309 
 caricature of, 239, 241 
 post-Darwinian biology, 3 
 Darwin – Hecker hypothesis, 39, 228 
 Data, 66, 72, 77, 86 – 87, 97, 99, 100, 
102, 103n, 106, 118, 120, 146, 
163 – 164, 185, 205, 209 – 210, 234, 
289.  See also Knowledge 
 for analysis of humor, 39, 130, 148, 
159, 178, 299 
 empirical, ix, 5n, 8, 20, 26 – 27, 99, 
102, 125, 133, 181, 295, 302 
 Data (character on  Star Trek ), 3, 299 
 Data consistency.  See Data integrity 
 Data integrity, 67, 127, 274, 275n, 289, 
291, 294, 297, 299 
 checking of, 290, 292 
 Daum, I., 129n, 327 
 Davidson, K., 318 
 Davidson-Katz, K., 284, 318 
 Dawkins, R., 11, 259, 263, 309 
 Deacon, T. W., 122, 125, 262, 291, 294, 
309 
 Death, 217, 221, 289 
 Debugging, xi, 111, 118, 120 – 121, 
129n, 133, 178, 199, 234, 277, 288, 
293 – 295, 297 
 Deception, trickery, 28, 110, 138, 145, 
151, 155, 161 – 163, 168, 174, 184, 
185, 193, 198, 216, 227n, 235, 
243 – 244, 263, 269n 
 Deception indicator, used in joke 
analysis, 162 
 Decision making, 72, 76, 83, 84, 86n, 
88, 90, 97n, 118n 
 Deconstruction, of text, 216 
 Deep Blue, 88 
 Deﬁ nition, circular.  See Circular 
deﬁ nition 
 Deformity, 41, 55, 242 
 DeGeneres, Ellen, 216 

336 
Index
 De Groot, A. M. B., 309 
 D é j à  vu, 25, 122 
 Delirium, 250 
 Del Prete, Sandro, 226 
 Demons, 243 
 Dennett, D. C., ix, xii, xiii, 10, 11, 24, 
25, 26, 32, 55, 62, 63, 66, 67, 87, 91, 
96, 106, 115, 119, 123, 124, 126, 
130n, 143, 148, 154, 167, 171, 179, 
181, 199, 200, 252n, 253n, 271, 290, 
309 – 310, 314, 319 
 Dennett, Susan, xiii 
 Dependent variables, 178, 179, 181 
 Depew, D. J., 269, 327 
 Depression, 38, 286 
 Derision, 41, 42, 137, 238 
 Descartes, R., 53, 70, 310 
 Desiderata, 289 
 Designer drugs, 274 
 Desire attribution, 6 
 de Sousa, R., 66, 310 
 Development, 2, 6n, 35, 220, 261, 
266 
 de Waal, F., 261, 312 
 Diamond, J., 271, 311 
 Diener, E., 69, 308 
 Differential cultural replication, 158, 
290 
 Differential reproductive costs, 
295 
 Dillon, K. M., 284, 311 
 Diminishment, 50, 173, 203 
 Dirty jokes, x, 61, 214n 
 Dirty mind, 265 
 Disambiguation, 29, 99 – 100, 209, 
281 – 282.  See also Ambiguity 
 Disappointment, 141 – 142n, 192, 254, 
282 – 283, 286n 
 Discovery, 13, 25, 27, 60, 67, 78 – 79, 
87, 119, 122 – 125, 127, 214, 219, 
254, 288, 292, 293, 294.  See also 
Insight 
 Discrimination, in sense of humor, 
11 – 12 
 Disparagement, 42, 58 – 59, 249, 
292 
 Display of intellect, 291 
 Dissonance, 242 
 Distress, 91, 254 
 “ D ’ oh, ”  161, 174, 190 
 Dolitsky, M., 119, 311 
 Dolphins, 55n 
 Domestication, evolution of, 271 
 Double take, 164, 243 
 Doubt, 79n, 81, 110, 111, 187, 188, 
276, 288 
 Doyle, Arthur Conan, 192 – 193 
 Drunkenness, 41, 128, 161, 183, 185, 
217, 259 
 Dual-perspective humor, 151, 169, 172, 
173 
 Duchenne, G., 19 – 20, 178, 311 
 Duchenne laughter, 19 – 25, 39 – 40, 133, 
140, 142, 178, 179, 284, 296 
 vs. non-Duchenne laughter, 267, 269, 
284 
 Duck, 230 
 Dumouchel, P., 258n, 323 
 Dutton, D., 217, 275, 295, 311 
 
 Eastman, M., 40, 42, 130, 157, 176, 
311 
 Eberhard, K. M., 308, 325, 326 
 Eccles, J. C., 322 
 Ecological validity, 181n 
 Ecology, mental spaces as, 246 
 Eddy, T. J., 290, 322 
 Edelman, M., 35, 321 
 Eibl-Eibesfeldt, I., 38, 262, 311 
 Einon, D. F., 260, 311, 322 
 Ekman, P., 20, 23n, 70, 311, 312 
 Elaboration, 98, 204n, 291 
 Eleck, R. E., 22n, 318 
 Electrostimulation, 25 

Index 
337
 Elephant, and the blind men, 287 
 Elliot ’ s problem, 96n 
 Ellsworth, P., 311 
 Elman, J. L., 89n, 311 
 Elster, J., 66, 311 
 Emotion(s), 6, 7, 12, 21, 22n, 24 – 26, 
45, 61, 146n, 147, 155, 165, 167, 
217, 219, 228, 247, 249, 250 – 254, 
255, 257, 258, 259, 284 – 285, 297, 
302 
 conﬂ icting, 146n 
 dynamics of, 279 
 epistemic ( see Epistemic emotions) 
 interfering, 139 – 142, 189 – 190 
 lack of, 3, 142 
 concurrent with mirth, 155, 165, 167, 
190, 192, 198, 219, 228n, 288 
 non-interference of other, 179 
 Emotional algorithms, 86 
 Emotional ampliﬁ er, 253 
 Emotional embodiment, 69, 91 – 92 
 Emotional mechanism, 289 
 Emotional processes, 301 
 Emotional responses, unconscious, 
242 
 Empathic perspective, 279 
 Empathy, 140, 141, 146n, 153, 
207 – 208 
 Endorphins, xi, 253 
 Energy, nervous, 44 
 Enev, Miro, xiii 
 Enhancement effects, 180 
 Entertainment industry, 294 
 Enthymematic jokes, 32 
 Epilepsy, 25, 55 
 gelastic, 21 
 Epinephrine, 68n.  See also Adrenaline 
 Epistemic actions, 191 
 Epistemic capacities, 91, 184, 186, 
299 
 Epistemic caution, 109 – 111, 152, 158, 
162, 191, 200, 215, 223, 231 
 Epistemic commitment, 91, 104 – 116, 
118, 121, 124, 131 – 132, 134, 149, 
152 – 153, 155, 158, 160 – 162, 
164 – 166, 168 – 173, 175, 177, 179, 
186 – 187, 191, 192, 194 – 195, 
197 – 198, 200, 202, 208n, 221 – 222, 
225, 229, 234 – 235, 238 – 239, 254, 
279, 288, 292 – 293, 295 
 Epistemic emotions, 66 – 67, 66n, 
76 – 80, 84 – 92, 111, 122 – 127, 214, 
249, 254, 259, 282, 289, 299 
 adaptive purpose for, 289 
 Epistemic incompatibility, 184 
 Epistemic integrity, 154.  See also Data 
integrity 
 Epistemic power, 184 – 187, 225, 234 
 Epistemic predicament, 298 
 Epistemic reconciliation chart, 116, 
234 
 Epistemic strength.  See Epistemic power 
 Epistemic undecidability, 184, 196 
 potent, 184 – 185 
 weak (asymmetric), 185 
 Erb, M., 328 
 “ Eroica ”  Symphony, 194 
 ERP experiments, 52 
 Errors, 249.  See also Mistakes 
 Escher, M. C., 229 
 Essentialism, 3 
 Ethnicity, 280 
 Ethnic slur jokes, 32 
 Eugenspiegel, Till, 249 
 Eureka! , 1, 122, 123, 254 
 Evolution, 1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 17, 18, 40, 
144n, 213, 243n, 258, 264, 274, 290, 
291, 292, 294, 299 
 cultural ( see Cultural evolution) 
 of funny bone, 12 
 of laughter, 262 
 Evolutionary beneﬁ t.  See Beneﬁ t, 
evolutionary 
 Evolutionary explanation, 6, 289 

338 
Index
 Evolutionary theory, 63 
 of emotion, 74 – 76, 127 – 130 
 Exaptation, 7, 23, 154, 255, 269, 274n 
 Expectation(s), 18, 27 – 29, 42, 45n, 47, 
49n, 50, 54, 59, 62n, 72, 84, 93, 97, 
99, 100, 102, 106 – 108, 110, 121, 
134, 138, 145n, 146, 148, 152, 154, 
158, 163, 165n, 168, 170, 171, 
172 – 174, 182, 183, 185 – 187, 191, 
194, 198 – 200, 202, 203 – 205, 
209 – 210, 217, 221 – 222, 234 – 235, 
238 – 240, 250 – 254, 262 – 264, 279, 
288, 291, 293.  See also Anticipation 
 strained, 47, 253 
 violation of, 108, 138, 199 – 200, 240 
 Experimental controls, 181 
 Extended cognition, 154 
 Externalization, 18 – 19, 43 
 Extinction 
 of behavioral traits, 74 
 of the humor trait, 274 
 of jokes, 32 – 33, 215 
 
 Fables, 154, 272 
 Facial action coding (FAC), 133, 223 
 Facial expressions, 22, 181, 275 
 Fadiga, L., 313, 323 
 Fagen, R., 80n, 260, 311 
 Fallon, J., 142 
 False alarm, 70, 146n, 253, 268, 
290 – 291 
 signal, 262 
 theory, 146n, 262, 268 
 False expectations, 99 
 False negatives, 178 
 False positives, 162, 178, 188 
 Falsiﬁ ability, 159, 177 – 182, 197 
 Family resemblances, 201, 213 
 Fan, Justina, xii 
 Fauconnier, Gilles, xiii, 77, 85, 97 – 98, 
126, 130n, 290, 312 
 Faulty inference, 111, 209, 276, 289, 
293.  See also Reasoning, mistakes in 
 Feedback, 22n, 69 – 73, 90, 92, 191, 228, 
285 – 286 
 Feldman, J. A., 312 
 Feminism, 175, 295 
 Fernandez-Dols, J. M., 259, 312 
 Fibonacci series, ix 
 Fictional mental spaces.  See Fictions 
 Fictions, 98, 103, 113, 120, 133, 138, 
156, 165, 192 – 193, 243, 261, 
289 – 291 
 Fields, W. C., x 
 Filip, H., 308 
 Filling in, 32, 103, 172, 282 
 First-person humor, 131, 133, 135, 
137 – 139, 142, 143, 147, 148 – 157, 
165n, 170, 180, 182, 188, 190, 207, 
213, 216, 223, 227, 234 – 235, 246, 
288, 292.  See also Basic humor 
 audience-subject coincidence in, 
156 
 First-person perceptual reality, 98, 261, 
291 
 First-person perspective, 131, 261 
 Fisher, R. S., 305 
 Fitness 
 genetic, 10, 11, 43, 63, 259, 263, 
274 – 275n, 290 – 291 
 memetic, 214 
 Flack, J. C., 261, 312 
 Flattery, 268, 291 
 Flavor perception, 82, 178.  See also 
Sweetness 
 Flavors, of mirth and other emotions, 
68, 123, 147, 216, 236, 238, 247 
 Fluid Analogies Research Group 
(FARG), 85, 88, 89n, 100, 101, 235, 
307, 310, 316 
 fMRI, 35 
 Fodor, J., 89n, 312 
 Fogassi, L., 313, 323 
 Folk funnies, 290 
 Folk hero, 174, 249 
 Folklore, 299 

Index 
339
 Folk psychology, 55n, 160 
 Folk theories of humor, 26, 179, 
243 
 Fool, 15 – 16, 41 
 Fooled, being, 44, 223, 225, 227, 230, 
277 
 Foolishness, 190 
 Foot, H. C., 35, 308 
 Forgetting, 157, 188 – 191 
 Forster, K. I., 98, 317 
 “ Forward model, ” 222 
 Foster, C. A., 217, 312 
 Fowler, Malcolm, 236 
 Frame problem, 96 – 97, 107, 164 
 Frames, 51 – 52, 97, 100 – 102, 103, 155, 
205 
 Frame-shifting, 51 – 53, 100, 204 – 205 
 Francis, R., 2, 312 
 Frank, M., 20, 312 
 Frank, R. H., 66, 74 – 75, 75n, 78, 81, 
84, 258, 259, 312 
 Franklin, S., 86, 312 
 Fredrickson, B. L., 140, 313 
 French, R., 77n, 89n, 101, 307, 313 
 Freud, S., 37, 44 – 45, 51 – 52, 205n, 
313 
 Freudenstein, T., 262, 315 
 Frey, Seth, xii 
 Fridlund, A. J., 39, 259, 313 
 Fried, I., 25, 313 
 Friend, T., 54, 313 
 Friendliness, with regard to social 
capital, 295 
 Friesen, W. V., 20, 23n, 311, 312 
 Frijda, N. H., 73, 313 
 Frith, C., 221, 306 
 Frith, U., 306 
 Frog, 137, 154, 289 
 Frontal lobe, 25 
 Frozen accident, evolutionary, 43 
 Fructose, 1.  See also Sugar 
 Fry, W. F., 284, 313 
 Funhouse, 49 
 Funny, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 15, 16, 18, 19, 
20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 33, 35, 46, 
50, 53, 55, 61, 99, 110, 123, 129, 
130 – 131, 133, 135, 137, 139 – 140, 
142, 145, 148, 150, 151, 153, 154, 
155, 158, 159, 161, 162, 163, 167, 
170, 171, 173, 188, 195, 196n, 199, 
213, 214, 249, 279, 280, 302 
 intrinsically, 17 
 why some jokes are more so than 
others, 213, 216 – 219 
 words for in other languages, 28 – 30 
 Funny bone, 2, 6, 10, 62, 117, 129n, 
133, 271, 274, 290 
 two senses of, 28 
 Funny-ha-ha, 27 – 34, 183, 184, 186 
 Funny-huh, 27 – 34, 79, 182, 184, 186 
 Fusiform gyrus, 25 
 
 Gallagher, D., 69, 308 
 Gallese, V., 77n, 207, 313, 323 
 Ganis, G., 77n, 113, 317 
 Garden-path sentence(s), 98 – 99 
 Gardner, Martin, ix 
 Gargalesis, 221n 
 Gazzaniga, M. S., 125, 313 
 Gender, 280 
 differences, 11, 34 – 35, 45, 60, 
294 – 296 
 Gene(s), 2, 6n, 12, 38, 43, 58, 74 – 75, 
79, 81, 260 
 of bacteria, 144 
 gene ’ s eye point of view, 74 – 75, 79, 
258 – 259 
 genes for  x , 2 
 Generality, 33, 60, 294 
 General Problem Solver, 65 
 Genome, 269 
 Gervais, M., 20, 22, 39 – 40, 261, 313 
 Gesture, 7, 20, 164, 276, 277 
 Gesundheit! Institute, 283 
 Getting a joke, 19, 25, 27, 60, 107, 
119, 130 

340 
Index
 Gibbard, A., 259n, 313 
 Gigerenzer, G., 118n, 313 
 Gilbert, William, 15 
 Giobbi, R., 277 
 Glee, xi, 3, 50, 268 
 Glitch, 43, 113, 251 
 Glucose, 1, 2, 301.  See also Sugar 
 God(s), 53, 156, 243 
 GOFAI processing model, 106 
 Goldstein, D. G., 38, 118n, 313 
 Goldstein, J. H., 35, 314, 328 
 Goldstone, R. L., 77n, 113, 314 
 Goldsworthy, A., 243, 244 
 G ö nc ü , A., 220, 314 
 Gonzales, Laurence, 64, 285, 314 
 Goodale, M. A., 102, 320 
 Good taste, 38n 
 Goose bumps, 10 
 Gopnik, A., 67, 78 – 79, 314 
 Gordon, B., 305 
 Gortner, Marjoe, 250, 314 
 Gould, L., 328 
 Gradient ascent, 238 
 Grahek, N., 70n, 314 
 Grammar-based models, 6 
 Grammatical humor, 51 
 Grannes, D., 85, 101, 325 
 Gratier, M., 220, 314 
 Greaves, L., 67, 150, 275, 283, 296, 307 
 Grecius, M. D., 320 
 Green, J. D., 312 
 Greengross, Gil, xiii, 35, 269, 314 
 Greenspan, P., 140, 314 
 Greenspan, S., 73 
 Gregory, J. C., 224n, 314 
 Gregory, R., 134, 290 
 Gressley, D., 34, 309 
 Grice, Paul, 160, 235, 314 
 Gricean humor, 235, 246 
 Gricean maxims, 235 
 Grifﬁ n, R., 290, 314 
 Grifﬁ ths, P. E., 66, 69, 75n, 314, 315 
 Grodd, W., 327, 328 
 Grotesque items of humor, 242 
 Group selection, 263 
 Gruner, C. R., 315 
 Guha, R. V., 66, 318 
 Gull chicks, 159 
 Gustafson, D., 70n, 315 
 G ü zeldere, G ü ven, xiii 
 
 Haas, Heejeong, xiii 
 Habits 
 acquired, 290 
 bad, 292 
 of thought, 90, 156, 293 
 Hagan, C. C., 320 
 HAHAcronym, 5 
 Hairs, as levers, 224 
 Half-serious.  See Nonserious 
 Hall, G. S., 221n, 315 
 Hallet, B., 244 
 Hallucination, 18, 25, 271, 281 
 Hamlet ’ s problem, 96 
 Hammerschmidt, K., 262, 315 
 Hammer sculpture, 236 
 Handicap, in evolution, 258n 
 Happiness, 3, 259 
 Hard-wired instincts, 67, 158 – 159 
 Hare, B., 290, 327 
 Harris, C. R., 39, 133n, 223, 228, 315 
 Hart, J., 305 
 Harvard Square, 200 
 Haugeland, John, 64, 315 
 Hauser, M. D., 55n, 199, 200, 260, 315 
 Haydn, Joseph, 238 
 Hayes, P. J., 96, 319 
 Haywood, S. L., 98 – 99, 316 
 Headlong commitments, 200.  See also 
Presumptions 
 Healing, 283 – 286 
 Hebb, D. O., 218n, 315 
 Hecker, E., 39, 315 
 Hedberg, M., 148 
 Heerey, E. A., 317 
 Hegemony, 269, 296 

Index 
341
 Hempelmann, C. F., 324 
 Herbs, 288 
 Herrnstein, R. J., 74, 315 
 Hertwig, R., 118n, 324 
 Heterophenomenology, 26 – 27, 148, 
178 – 179 
 Heuristic leap, 149, 157, 177, 179, 185, 
225.  See also Assumption; Jump to a 
conclusion; Leap to a conclusion 
 Heuristics, 82, 88, 94 – 95, 107 – 108, 
117 – 118, 121, 149, 160 – 162, 180, 
187, 201, 205 – 206 
 used in joke analysis, 160 – 164 
 Heuristic search.  See Time-pressured 
heuristic search 
 Hierocles, 215, 249 
 Hijacking 
 of airplanes, 166 
 of funny bone by memes, 290 
 of reward systems, 82 
 of rodent-sensors, 225 
 Hilgard, E. R., 83, 315 
 Hinde, R. A., 269, 315 
 Hinton, G., 136n 
 Hobbes, Thomas, 40 – 41, 287, 316 
 Hodja, Nasrudin, 249 
 Hoffman, Lisa, 80 
 Hofstadter, Douglas R., xiii, 77n, 85, 
88, 100, 101, 130n, 235, 307, 316 
 Holland, R. W., 326 
 Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 193 
 Holmes, Sherlock, 192 
 Hominid, 10, 40, 125, 262 
 Hommel, B., 77n, 316 
 Homonymy, 31, 215, 281 – 282 
 Homo-ridens , 55 
 Homo sapiens , 26, 91, 220 
 Honeyguide, 260 
 How vs. Why questions, 2 
 Huber, O., 129n, 324 
 Huh, Angie, xiii 
 Human touch, 223 – 224 
 Hume, D., 18 
 Humming, 222, 285 
 Humor 
 in ancient physiology, 24 
 appetite for, 121n, 291, 294 
 appreciation of, 2, 3, 6, 12, 15, 23, 
34 – 35, 121n, 154, 156, 164, 175, 
180, 257, 269, 291, 295, 297 
 approximate conditions for, 121, 
157 – 158, 230 
 as a backup system, 206 
 boundaries of, 213 – 214, 216, 220 – 250 
 close kin of, 214, 219, 239 
 consumption of, 144, 290, 297 
 creation of, 5, 12, 16, 150, 157, 188, 
270, 277n, 280, 295, 301 ( see also 
Humor, production of; Humor, 
generation of) 
 deﬁ nition of, 16 
 dependence on thought, 5 
 detection of, 5n, 20 – 21, 24, 40, 62, 
140, 159, 205, 265, 267 – 268, 
294 – 295 
 epistemic function of, 295 ( see also 
Data integrity) 
 essence of, 2, 213, 301 
 generation of, x, 3, 6, 57, 191, 246, 
274, 297 ( see also Humor, production 
of; Humor, creation of) 
 no necessary and sufﬁ cient conditions 
for, 213 
 as a probe, 302 
 production of, 35, 130, 157, 269, 295, 
296 ( see also Humor, creation of; 
Humor, generation of) 
 purpose of, 9, 41, 43, 111 
 “ real world, ” 7 ( see also Humor  “ in 
the wild ” ) 
 like redness, 17 – 18, 34 
 sense of, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9 – 10, 11, 17, 18, 
28, 33, 34, 35, 43, 50, 60, 62, 157, 
159, 220, 267, 296, 298 – 299 
 as a social corrective, 293 
 sophistication in, 156 

342 
Index
 taxonomy of, 57, 280, 301 ( see also 
Classifying humor) 
 theories of, 37 – 55, 201 – 208 
 travels poorly, 34n 
 Humor feathers, 268, 298.  See also 
Display of intellect; Showing off 
 Humor  “ in the wild, ” 150, 271 – 272 
 Humphrey, N., 130n, 316 
 Hunches, 108, 186, 200 
 Hurley, M., ix, xii, xiii, 127, 191, 316 
 Huron, David, xii, 10, 45n, 71, 72, 
104n, 129, 238, 240, 250 – 254, 283n, 
301, 316 
 Hutchins, E., 85, 154, 316 
 Huxley, J., 143, 144n 
 Hypotheticals, 191 
 
 Idealized cognitive model/rationality 
(ICM), 84, 97, 101 
 Ideational pun.  See Puns, almost- 
 Ideomotor theory, 77n 
 Ignorance, 265 
 Illusion(s), 229 – 234 
 bistable, 230, 231 
 chess piece color, 232 – 233 
 devil ’ s tuning fork, 229 
 duck – rabbit, 230 – 231 
 elephant legs, 114 
 moving almonds, 232, 234 
 Necker cube, 230 – 231 
 Penrose triangle, 229 – 230 
 in tickling, 225 
 unstable, 229, 230 
 wheel spokes, 115 
 Imagination, 219, 252 
 Impersonal humor, 156, 288 
 Implicit sociality, 259 
 Implied audience.  See Implicit sociality 
 Impressions, 240 
 Inappropriate comparisons, 205 
 Ince-Cushman, Alexander, xii 
 Incomplete information, 82, 299 
 Incongruity, 59, 146, 182, 183, 203, 
288, 292, 293 
 Incongruity-resolution theory of 
humor, 37, 45 – 53, 55, 60, 171, 194, 
201 – 203, 206, 209, 220, 222, 262, 
288 
 Indeﬁ nition, 282, 283 
 Independent variables, 178, 179 
 Ineffability, 24, 277 
 Infants, humor and mirth in, 38 – 39, 
58, 131, 220.  See also Children 
 Inference, 147, 225, 234, 266 
 high-level, 225 
 logical, 232 
 tacit, 232 
 Information, 17, 18, 259 
 taken for granted, 266 
 Information gradient, 265 – 266 
 Information-handling process, 4, 5 
 Information highway, 10 – 11, 291 
 In-group humor, 33 
 Innateness, 6n 
 Inner eye theory of humor, 207 
 Insect-detectors, 224 
 Insects, 221n, 224 
 Inside jokes, 60, 215 
 Insight, 67, 78, 79, 80, 81, 89, 91, 
122 – 125, 214, 219, 249.  See also 
Discovery 
 Inspector Clouseau, 54 
 Instinct, 38, 269 
 Instinctive comedians, 277 
 Insult, 292 
 Intelligence, 15 
 Intelligent design, 290 
 Intentional stance, 6, 55, 143 – 148, 150, 
151, 154 – 158, 158n, 160 – 161, 166, 
174 – 175, 180, 187, 207, 228n, 246, 
265, 268, 290 
 higher-order, 261 
 recursion of, 144 – 145, 158n 
 Intentional system, higher-order, 55 
 Interference effects, 180 
Humor (cont.)

Index 
343
 Internet spam, 292 
 Interpretation, 194, 203, 209, 210, 230 
 role of in joke analysis, 178 
 Intrinsically funny, 279 
 Intrinsic appetite for humor, 
exploitation of by memes, 291 
 Intrinsic quality, 17 – 18 
 Introspection, 26 
 Introspective methods, 280 
 Ishiguro, A., 320 
 ITPRA model of expectation, 45n, 
251 – 252 
 Ivanov, Kaloyan, xiii 
 Izard, C. E., 70, 316 
 Izzard, Eddie, 276 
 
 “ Jack and the Beanstalk, ” 249 
 Jackendoff, R., 6, 85, 238, 316 
 Jack tales, 249 
 James, William, 68, 77n, 184n, 311, 
316 
 Janata, P., 320 
 JAPE, 5 
 Jasper, H., 322 
 Jeannotte, L. A., 261, 312 
 Jests of Hierocles and Philagrius, The , 
215 
 Jigsaw puzzle, 123, 235, 294 
 JITSA.  See Just-in-time spreading 
activation 
 Jo, B., 305 
 Job-interview ploy, 268 
 Johnson, M., 85, 91, 311, 317 
 Johnson, Virginia, ix, x 
 Johnson-Laird, P. N., 70, 320, 321 
 Johnston, R. E., 259, 317 
 Joke(s), x, 1, 17, 23, 27, 29, 31 – 34, 44, 
46 – 47, 50 – 51, 61, 93n, 100, 107, 
118, 121, 130 – 138, 144, 147 – 153, 
157 – 176, 192, 214, 216, 247, 272, 
274, 294, 296, 297, 302 
 abstract painting, 270 
 afraid of widths, 136 
 Aggie cruise emended, 273 – 274 
 Aggie on cruise, 149 
 AIDS and Alzheimers, 188 
 analysis of, 157 – 176, 178 
 antibiotics, 283 
 antique desk, 135 
 appendectomy patient, 168 
 appreciation of, 291 
 atheist in Amazon, 53 
 bamboo chopsticks, 31 
 banana in your ear, 160 
 behaviorists, 34 
 being talked about, 247 
 Jack Benny stick-up, 93 
 blurry face, 19 
 brain as greatest organ, 67 
 bulimic bachelor party, 215, 216 
 Bush on  Roe v. Wade , 41 
 buttered toast, 177 – 178 
 camel purchase, 273 
 cancer improving, 135 
 capitalism and communism, 169 
 cardboard belt, 208 
 Carpenter, Karen, 214 
 Catholic photons, 45 
 chatting barber, 117 
 Cheerios, 218 
 chess riddle, 188 
 chewing ice cubes, 155 
 chicken and egg, 155 
 chicken crossing road, 180 
 chromosome, 9 
 circular deﬁ nition, 24 
 class assignment, 257 
 closure, 301 
 clown chef, 27 
 cofﬁ n riddle, 124 
 coke, yolk, 266 
 Conestoga wagon settler, 182 
 confessional, 217 
 cowboy riddle, 124 
 currency exchange, 172 
 died in the service, 165 

344 
Index
 dinner special, 135 
 dirtbag riddle, 238 
 disease named after me, 283 
 dissecting a frog, 289 
 doctor at home?, 50 
 doctor:  “ So are we going to tell your 
husband, or what?, ” 143, 144 – 145, 
175 
 dog for sale, 135 
 “ d ’ oh, ”  164 
 drinking classes, 247 
 driving the wrong way, 170 
 drugstore cigarette sales, 164 
 eating lettuce, 218 
 email, 45 
 Empire State Building run-up, 142 
 explaining jokes, 130 
 face as mop, 127 
 face of a child, 45 
 fear and sex, Freud, 45 
 ﬁ sh tank, 209 
 French horn player, 250 
 Freudian slip, 44 
 Freud ’ s theory of, 44 
 Frisbee, 16 
 Germans laugh, 19 
 “ get your own damn blanket, ” 168 
 “ goes without saying, ” 24 
 goldﬁ sh tank, 42, 110, 119, 206, 209, 
216 
 greatest Polish comedian, 270 
 hair breaks, 135 
 half a dog, 31 
 happy and sad at same time, 139 
 “ here, whisper in my ear, ” 171 
 he who laughs last, 15 
 “ Hi, Ball, ” 167 
  “ Hi, Jack, ” 166 
 hold the nail, 136 
 horn louder, 51 
 horticulture, 211n 
 hot dog vendor, 32 
 hunters — “ First, let ’ s make sure he ’ s 
dead, ”  164 
 “ I don ’ t have a girlfriend, but . . . , ” 
148 
 “ I like your dog, ” 135 
 “ illiterate?, ”  175 
 “ I ’ m a married man!, ” 160 – 161 
 “ in case of beer, ” 135 
 Indian beer, 47 
 inferiority, 40 
 integral of x-squared, 174 
 Irish frog on head, 137 
 “ I want to die peacefully in my sleep 
. . .,  ” 150 
 jockey without horse, 64 
 judge bribing attorneys, 151 
 judgment, 42 – 43, 58, 287, 292 
 kickboxing computer, 296 
 Korean, 31 – 32, 298 
 laugh alone, 264 
 lawyer, 213 
 life is like a bridge, 208 
 lightbulb riddle, 249 
 little girl buying candy, 151 
 look out for number 1, 117 
 lost luggage, 187 
 man about to throw himself off 
bridge, 138 
 masturbation, 61 
 mayonnaise or spinach, 51 
 medical practice, 135 
 memetic evolution of, 11, 158, 209, 
214, 217, 290 – 292 
 Mephistopheles and lawyer, 54 
 meteorologist and Indian, 285n 
 morality, 247 
 mufﬁ n, 193 
 nail and hammer, 136 
 Newﬁ e with bandaged ears, 32 
 nice belt, 201 
 no checkbook, 135 
 nothing to play with, 38 
 orange juice concentrate, 148 
Joke(s) (cont.)

Index 
345
 outdone yourself, 220 
 outhouse, 82 – 83 
 panhandler and David Mamet, 278 
 park bench, 278 
 pastry cook, 37 
 pearly gates, 193 
 pedant and silversmith, 215 
 petting zoo, 216 
 philosopher and pizza, 137 
 pig thief, 249 
 play fairly, 247 
 a priest, a rabbi, and a nun, 138 
 prisoner free to go, 135 
 puns, 134 
 quickie, 172 
 rednecks, 57 
 resist temptation, 247 
 robbery acquittal, 46 
 rope walks into a bar, 89 
 ruined, 32, 181, 200 
 Santa riddle, 238 
 senator, 169 
 serf elk, 112 
 seventeen legs, 104, 235 
 Sinatra, Frank, 173 
 O.J. Simpson riddle, 238 
 speed of dark, 51 
 squeaky sandals, 215 
 stuck truck, 247 – 248 
 as supernormal stimuli, xi, 159, 270, 
272, 274 
 surgeon riddle, 195 – 196, 200 
 surgeons on operations, 41 
 survival of the ﬁ ttest, 37 
 talking mufﬁ n, 137 
 teacup and antelope, 235 
 tell the truth, 247 
 10 kinds of people, 33 
 Texan prepositions, 40 
 Thanksgiving, 112 
 that look, 34 
 tickle my fancy, 220 
 timing, 270 
 told in the forest, 16 
 tragedy vs. comedy, 141 
 used cars, 135 
 ushers, 41 – 42 
 ventriloquist, 169 
 walk a mile in their shoes, 200 
 what we know for sure, 109 
 Wilde, Oscar — friends, 246 
 Winnie the Pooh, 31, 33 – 34 
 “ yeah, yeah, ” 27 
 “ Yo, Gert, ” 167 
 young enough, 247 
 “ young lady named Tuck ” limerick, 
163 
 Joke-blindness, 275 
 Jump to a conclusion, 137, 156, 189, 
193, 198, 265, 279.  See also 
Assumption; Leap to a conclusion; 
Heuristic leap 
 Jung, W. E., 137, 206, 208, 316 
 J ü rgens, U., 262, 315 
 Just-in-time (JIT) processing, 101 – 104 
 Just-in-time spreading activation 
(JITSA), 101 – 104, 107 – 109, 112, 
118 – 119, 126, 131, 154, 179, 204n, 
216, 238, 266 – 267, 276, 280, 282, 
286, 302 
 
 Kaas, J. H., 125, 316 
 Kahneman, D., 327 
 Kamide, Y., 98 – 99, 316 
 Kant, Immanuel, 47, 50, 59, 122, 202, 
253, 316 
 Karmiloff-Smith, A., 311 
 Kataria, M., 283, 284, 317 
 Katcher, A. H., 328 
 Keil, F. C., 320, 323 
 Keith-Spiegel, P., 37 – 38, 44, 317 
 Keller, Helga, xiii 
 Kelley, W. M., 320 
 Keltikangas-J ä rvinen, L., 323 
 Keltner, D., 20, 269, 284, 317 
 Kessler, M., 244 

346 
Index
 Kickboxing, 296 
 Killjoy, interpretation of  “ theory of 
mind ”  results, 290 
 Kim, Ally, xiii 
 King James Bible, 283 
 King Lear , 282 
 Kinzel, Doreen, xiii 
 Kirsh, D., 66, 191, 317 
 Klein, D., 112, 178, 285n, 307 
 Knismesis, 221n 
 Know-how, practical, 271 
 Knowledge, 27, 63, 89 – 91, 101, 109, 
112, 113, 119 – 120, 127, 147 – 149, 
151 – 152, 154, 158, 160 – 161, 
173 – 175, 181, 192 – 194, 196, 199, 
202 – 203, 207, 209, 234, 238, 240, 
249, 264 – 268, 275, 294, 298, 302 
 shared, 7, 13, 23, 33, 112, 113, 144, 
158, 163, 164, 166, 168, 169, 276, 
291, 294, 298 
 statistical, 242 
 Knowledge-relativity of humor, 31 – 34, 
213, 214, 216 
 Knowledge representation, 51, 120, 
127, 144 – 145, 289 – 290, 294, 
297 – 298 
 Koestler, Arthur, 9, 55, 122 – 123, 125, 
170, 294, 317 
 Konner, M., 75n, 317 
 Kosslyn, S. M., 77n, 113, 317 
 Krakauer, David, xiii, 191 
 Kraut, R. E., 259, 317 
 Kubovy, M., 239, 319 
 Kueneman, K, 284, 318 
 Kunz, M., 133n, 317 
 Kuru, 21 
 Kutas, M., 52, 308, 309 
 
 Lachman, M., 263, 306 
 Lachter, J., 98, 317 
 LaFollette, H., 206, 317 
 Lahr, John, 317 
 Laird, J. D., 22n, 86, 317 
 Lakoff, George, 3, 91, 97, 317, 318 
 Lange, C. G., 68, 318 
 Language, 10 – 11, 31, 35, 38, 68n, 126, 
129n, 166, 197 
 Language instinct, 269 
 Language of thought, 106 
 Lanzetta, J. T., 22n, 318 
 Larson, Gary, x 
 Laughlab, 164 
 Laughlin, Philip, xiii 
 Laughter, 9, 11, 12, 16, 19, 34, 41, 45, 
47, 48, 49, 145, 146, 148, 150 – 153, 
155, 157, 164, 165, 171, 181, 191, 
198, 199, 202, 220, 230, 246, 249, 
250, 253, 255, 257, 259, 260, 263, 
264, 290, 291, 294, 296, 297 
 as being  “ about ”  humor, 23 
 as analgesic, 284 
 is the  “ best medicine, ” 283 
 in blind and deaf children, 38, 58 
 contagion of, 22, 262, 268 
 evolution of, 262 
 as hard-to-fake signal, 267 – 268 
 inappropriate, 21 
 as nonaggression signal, 261 
 purpose of, 24 
 in rats, 261 
 social, 19 
 Laughter Yoga Club, 283 – 284 
 Laugh track, 22 
 Laurel and Hardy, 234 
 Lautenbacher, S., 133n, 317 
 Law of Noncontradiction, 64n, 65, 76, 
85, 292 
 Lawyers, 41, 54, 108, 151, 152, 213 
 Laying on of hands, 250 
 Lazarus, R. S., 70n, 318 
 Leap to a conclusion, xi, 4, 149, 181, 
208n, 299.  See also Assumption; 
Jump to a conclusion; Heuristic leap 
 LeDoux, J., 70, 83 – 84, 318 
 Lefcourt, H. M., 284, 318 
 Leiman, J. M., 100n, 326 

Index 
347
 Lemmon, Jack, 234 
 Lenat, Douglas B., 66, 318 
 Leslie, A. M., 306 
 Lesser, R. P., 305 
 Levelt, P., 134 
 Levenson, R. W., 140, 313 
 Levine, J., 328 
 Levinstein, Ben, 193n, 318 
 Levitin, D. J., 10, 318 
 Lewin, R., 290, 324 
 Lewis, D., 193n, 318 
 Lewis, J., 239, 320 
 Libido, 62, 67, 74, 274 
 Lieckfeldt, Ina, xiii 
 Lies, 116, 193 
 Limbic contrast, 253 – 254 
 Lincoln, Abraham, 210 
 Linguists, 27, 28, 100n, 104n, 134n, 
239 
 Literary analysts, 279, 280 
 Locke, John, 16, 318 
 Loftis, J. M., 39, 313 
 Loftus, E. F., 101, 308 
 Logic, 46, 49, 51 – 52, 63 – 67, 76, 87, 
89 – 90, 92, 109, 197, 201, 205, 225, 
232, 267, 292 
 Logical mechanism, 138, 157, 163, 
201, 204 
 Long division, 297 
 Longstocking, Pippi, 249 
 Lucas, Katerina, xiii 
 Luceya, S., 305 
 Ludicrous, 15, 16, 38, 48, 159 
 Lust, 79, 121, 246 
 
 MacDonald, K. A., 313 
 Machine-learning, 86, 93, 296 
 Magicians, 199, 201 – 202, 277 
 Maglio, P., 66, 191, 317 
 Magnetism, 15 
 Magnuson, J. S., 99, 308 
 Mammal, 26, 43, 125, 128, 198, 213, 
220, 260 
 Manakata, Y., 89n 
 Mancuso, R. A., 313 
 Manurung, R., 323 
 Mara ñ on, G., 69, 318 
 Marcus, Gary F., 89n, 318 
 Marijuana, 265 
 Marinkovic, K., 99, 318 
 Marriage, 161, 275 
 Martin, C., 321 
 Martin, L., 22n, 326 
 Martin, Rod A., 35, 283 – 284, 307, 
318 
 Martin, Steve, x, 34, 283 
 Marx, Groucho, 45 
 Marx, K., 87 
 Marx brothers, 15 
 Maserati software, 12, 126 
 Masters, William, ix, x 
 Masturbation, 61, 63, 142, 214n 
 mental, 294 
 Mate-attraction, 291 
 Mate search, 291, 292 
 Mate selection, 295 
 Matsusaka, T., 261, 319 
 Matthews, B. J., 327 
 Mauro, R., 239, 319 
 Maynard Smith, J., 260, 319 
 Mayonnaise, 168 
 McCarthy, J., 96, 108 – 109, 171, 319 
 McClelland, J. L., 89n, 319, 321, 
324 
 McGhee, P. E., 35, 38, 266, 314, 319, 
328 
 McKay, J., 319 
 McKay, Ryan T., 91, 319 
 Mechanical behavior, 54 – 55, 59, 171, 
176, 293 
 Mechanical theory of humor, 54 
 Mechanism of humor, 42 
 Meltzoff, A. N., 78, 314 
 Melzack, R., 70n, 319 
 Memes, 11, 64, 214, 209, 214, 217, 
290, 291 

348 
Index
 Memory, 20, 66, 72, 85, 89, 119, 140, 
185, 188, 219, 297.  See also 
Forgetting 
 emotion and, 155 
 fallibility of, 297 
 long-term, 97, 105, 106, 110 – 112, 
116, 120, 154, 157, 198 – 199 
 working, 86, 97, 101, 103, 105, 106, 
110 – 112, 157, 158n, 179, 184, 201, 
213, 254 
 Menon, V., 305, 320 
 Mental models, 154, 171, 294 
 Mental space(s), 12 – 13, 77, 90, 95 – 104, 
105, 114, 117 – 122, 126, 127, 130n, 
134, 138, 144 – 150, 144n, 155 – 156, 
162 – 163, 166, 169, 171 – 175, 191, 
210, 215, 234, 238, 240n, 243, 254, 
263 – 267, 272, 287, 289, 290, 291, 
292, 293, 294 
 consistency checking in, 210 
 Mesolimbic ﬁ ngerprint, 178 – 179 
 Metacognition, as a solution to the 
credit assignment problem, 219 
 Metacognitive avoidance techniques, 
266 
 Metahumor, 146, 163, 193 
 Microemotions, 240, 252, 254, 282, 
288 
 Microexpectations, 240 
 Mihalcea, R., 5n, 319 
 Milavsky, B., 328 
 Miller, Geoffrey, 12, 268, 269, 314, 319 
 Miller, George, 67 
 Millikan, Ruth, 160, 319 
 Mills, C. M., 320 
 Mills, D. E., 284, 318 
 Milner, A. D., 73n, 102, 320 
 Milner, P., 321 
 Mimicry, Batesian, 23 
 Minchoff, B., 284, 311 
 Mind, 255, 293, 294 
 Mind candy, xi, 270, 280 
 Mind control, by magicians, 277 
 Minsky, Marvin, 10n, 37, 51, 52, 
100 – 101, 103n, 122, 155, 130n, 204, 
205, 296, 320 
 Mirror neurons, 77n, 207 
 Mirth, 6, 13, 21 – 25, 27, 39n, 44, 47, 
48, 50, 58, 67 – 68, 81, 85, 87, 
117 – 142, 146, 147, 149, 155, 163, 
165, 170, 178, 179, 180, 191, 200, 
210, 215, 216, 218, 221, 227, 229, 
240, 254 – 255, 266, 267, 269, 270, 
272, 275, 276, 284, 285, 286, 292, 
294, 295, 297 
 adaptive purpose for, 289 
 degrees of, 216 
 -delivery systems, jokes as, 31n  
 modiﬁ ers ( see Mirth modiﬁ ers) 
 pleasure of, 292 
 as a product of other enjoyments, 
219n 
 trigger of, 297 
 Mirth modiﬁ ers.  See also Emotions, 
concurrent with mirth 
 derogation, 170 
 self-congratulation, 147 
 sex, 176 
 wit, 175 – 176 
 Misattribution of arousal, 171, 217, 
247, 275, 295 
 Misdirection, 157, 216.  See also 
Deception, trickery 
 Misinterpretation, 133 – 135, 216, 227, 
282 
 Mistakes, xi, 40, 43, 51 – 52, 59, 85 – 87, 
117 – 118, 120 – 121, 132 – 133, 
141 – 142, 146, 148, 150, 152 – 154, 
165, 166, 168, 169, 172 – 173, 175, 
188 – 192, 195 – 197, 202 – 206, 
210 – 211, 221, 230, 232, 234, 238, 
243, 250, 254, 287, 292, 293, 294 
 cost of to organism, 161, 289 
 Mister Hulot ’ s Holiday , 152n 
 Mistry, J., 220, 314 
 Misunderstanding, 59, 173 

Index 
349
 Mitterndorfer, K., 80n, 323 
 Mo, Z., 239, 320 
 Mobbs, D., 62, 129, 305, 320 
 Mochida, T., 86, 320 
 Mock aggression, 291 
 Mocking, 58, 292 
 Models of learning, 218n 
 Monarch, N. D., 317 
 Monkhouse, B., 150 
 Montalvo, F., 5n 
 Monty Python and the Holy Grail , 
153 – 154 
 Moran, J. M., 129n, 320 
 Morgenbesser, S., 27 
 Moron joke, 267 
 Morreall, John, 320 
 Morrison, Keith, xii 
 Moser, David, xiii 
 Mosier, C., 220, 314 
 Mother Nature 
 fooling, 274 
 natural selection, xi 
 Motion picture video, 234 
 Motion-sickness, 48 
 Motivation, 60, 66n, 67, 70, 71n, 
72 – 84, 86, 90, 113, 120, 122, 140, 
160, 251, 258 – 260, 286n, 292, 295, 
297, 298 
 Motoneurons, 77 
 Mount Olympus, 156 
 Movies, 294 
 Mr. Bean, 147 
 Mr. Magoo, 147, 161 
 M ü ller, M., 88, 320 
 Multipersonal humor, 151, 172, 180n, 
217 
 Munakata, Y., 89n, 321 
 Munroe, Randall, 96 
 Murray, B., 244 
 Music, 10, 157, 194, 238, 240, 250, 
251, 253, 288, 301 
 Musical joke, 7 
 Musicians, 252n, 255, 270, 288 
 M ü sseler, J., 316 
 Myers, Mike, 54 
 Myths, 154 – 155 
 
 Na ï ve Bayes classiﬁ ers, 5n 
 Na ï ve subject, 272 
 Narrative, 46, 49, 113, 140, 148, 155, 
163, 167, 171, 192, 209, 239 – 240, 
271 – 272, 279 
 Nativism, 6n, 37, 58, 62, 65, 67, 78, 
85, 90, 220, 255, 290 
 Natural causes, nonintentional, 
243 
 Natural history of humor, 8 
 Natural selection, xi, 2, 7, 102, 126n, 
127 – 128, 140, 159, 258 – 259, 291 
 Near-humor, 213 
 Negotiation, emotional expression as, 
269 
 Neisser, U., 181n, 320 
 Nerhardt, G., 202, 205, 320f 
 Nervous systems, 43, 69, 93, 225, 288, 
290 
 Neumann, U., 239, 320 
 Neural funny bone, 61, 62n, 129.  See 
also Brains 
 Neural network, 4, 101, 106, 111 
 Neurons, 69, 77, 218n 
 Neuropathology  
 of humor, 25 
 of laughter, 21 – 23 
 Neurophysiology, 17, 35, 62, 64, 68, 
70, 71, 72, 225, 251, 271 
 Neuroscience, 21, 125, 128 – 129, 178, 
180, 242 
 cognitive, 179, 181n 
 computational, 4 
 Neurovascular bundle, 183 
 Newberry, R. C., 80n, 260, 325 
 Newell, A., 65, 86, 317, 321 
 New Mexico, University of, xiii 
 Nichols, Eric, xii 
 Niedenthal, P. M., 69, 321 

350 
Index
 Nietzsche, F., 80 
 Nixon, R., 240 
 Nonhumor, 3, 57, 158, 194 
 Nonjokes, 158, 181, 200, 213 
 Nonlinguistic humor, 290 
 Nonreplacement, 50, 173, 202 – 204 
 Nonsense, 15, 46, 48, 51, 59, 201, 292, 
293 
 Non sequitur, 51, 235 
 Nonserious, 15, 40, 59, 291 
 Nonverbal humor, 234 
 “ No soap radio, ” 181 
 Nostalgia, 219 
 Novelty, 67, 242, 264, 266, 277 
 NP-complete problems, 4, 5 
 Nucleus accumbens, 35, 62 
 Nu ñ ez, Rafael E., 91, 318 
 
 Oatley, K., 70, 321 
 Object permanence, 64 – 65, 220 
 Oemig, C., 317 
 Ofﬁ ce, The , 31n 
 Ohkawa, K., 86, 325 
 Olds, J., 73n, 321 
 Olfaction, 298 
 Oliphant, M., 260, 321 
 O ’ Mara, D., 323 
 Omark, D. R., 35, 321 
 Omark, M., 35, 321 
 One-liners, 5n, 136, 236 
 Ontogeny, of laughter, 58 
 Oops! , sculpture, 235 – 237 
 Orbicularis oculi muscle, 19, 133 
 Order, proper for joke delivery, 32, 
275n 
 O ’ Reilly, R. C., 89n, 321 
 Organon, 64 
 Orgasm, ix, 67, 70, 79, 216, 294 
 Orientation response, 262 
 Oring, Elliott, 155, 321 
 Other minds, 143, 144, 243, 291.  See 
also  Problem of other minds 
 Outrageous Okona, 3n 
 Owren, M. J., 269, 321 
 Oxford English Dictionary , 16 
 
 Pain, 25, 48, 69n, 70 – 74, 76, 78 – 80, 
84 – 85, 139, 152, 164, 174, 182, 216, 
253 – 255, 284 
 Pain, H., 323 
 Panksepp, J., 125n, 261, 321 
 Pantelidou, Athina, xiii 
 Paradox, 138, 234, 260, 291 
 Parahippocampal gyrus, 25 
 Paresthesia, 182 
 Parisi, D., 311 
 Parker, Charlie, 214 
 Parker, Dorothy, 211n 
 Parody, 238 – 239, 274 
 Parr, L. A., 261, 321 
 Parvizi, J., 22n, 321 
 Patel, A. D., 10 
 Patterson, F. G., 312 
 Patzig, G ü nther, 321 
 PDP Research Group, 324 
 Peacock, 268 
 Peak shift, 240n 
 Peek-a-boo, 39, 220, 234 
 Penﬁ eld, W., 25, 128, 321, 322 
 Penumbral cases, 201, 213 – 255 
 Pepe le Pew, 54 
 Perception, 18, 22, 47 – 48, 50, 59, 69n, 
71, 72, 77n, 78, 83 – 85, 91, 95, 98, 
101 – 102, 105, 113 – 114, 116, 128, 
140, 146 – 147, 155, 158, 161, 180, 
183 – 185, 206 – 207, 217, 225, 232, 
261, 265, 275, 298 
 Perceptual beliefs, 185, 221 
 Perpetual motion machine, cognitive, 
97, 299 
 Phenomenology, 68, 84, 85, 102, 119, 
123, 128, 180, 223, 225, 240, 298, 
301 
 of humor, 15 – 35, 61, 301 
 original meaning of term, 15 
 Phenylthiocarbamide, 17n 

Index 
351
 Philagrius, 215, 249 
 Philips, Emo, 67, 127, 296 
 Philosophy, 18, 24, 193n, 206n, 287 
 Phlegm, 24 
 Physical humor, 61, 138, 234 – 235, 238 
 Physiology, 19, 24, 38, 69, 75, 179, 
252, 258 
 Piaget, J., 52n, 64, 322 
 Pickett, Joseph, 322 
 Picture with no woman, 225, 226, 227 
 Pinker, S., 10, 48, 269, 322 
 Plato, 90 
 Play, 59, 80n, 122, 124, 145, 152, 262, 
281, 291, 293 
 as practice, 80n, 260 – 261 
 purpose of, 293 
 social, 261 
 Play behavior, 145, 220, 260, 291 
 Play face, of chimp, 261 
 Play panting, in chimpanzees and 
other primates, 290 
 Play theory, 37, 38 – 40, 201, 244, 260, 
262 – 263 
 Pleasure, xi, 3, 7, 11, 41, 43 – 44, 58 – 60, 
69n, 70, 72 – 74, 76, 80, 84 – 85, 
117 – 119, 123, 125, 127, 140, 147, 
156, 171, 175, 191, 210, 214, 219, 
238, 242, 246 – 247, 249 – 250, 253, 
257, 262, 264, 271 – 272, 290, 292 
 Pleh, Csaba, xiii 
 Plunkett, K., 311 
 Poker face, 258 
 Pollo, C., 325 
 Pollock, John, 86, 322 
 Popper, K., 322 
 Popperian creatures, 290 
 Poppins, Mary, 249 
 Popularity, with regard to social capital, 
11 
 Pornographers, 68, 270, 288 
 Pornography, 63, 156n, 159, 270, 274 
 Port, R. F., 89n, 327 
 Potegal, M., 260, 311, 322 
 Povinelli, D. J., 145, 290, 322 
 Powers, Austin, 54 
 Practical jokes, 162 – 163, 198, 290 
 Pragmatic actions, 191 
 Praise, laughter as, 269 
 Prasertdee, Jenny, xiii 
 Pratfall, 11, 145, 220, 246, 271 
 Preachers, preaching, 250 – 251 
 Predator, 23, 40, 58, 262 
 vs. prey, 263 
 Prediction(s) 
 behavioral, 21, 57, 129, 180 – 182, 
196 – 197 
 in ITPRA model, 251 – 252 
 Prefrontal cortex, 35 
 Prejudice 
 as content in jokes, 39n, 163 
 about robot lack of humor, 3 
 as a source of faulty assumption, 195, 
196 
 surgeon-as-male, 196 
 Premack, A. J., 55n, 322 
 Premack, D., 55n, 290, 322 
 Prerational processing, 225 
 Presumptions, 12, 113, 118, 150, 186, 
200, 202, 240n 
 Preuschoft, S., 262, 322 
 Preuss, T. M., 125, 316 
 Primary and secondary qualities, 16 – 17 
 Primates, 26 
 intentional states of, 145 
 play in, 261 
 theory of mind in, 145 
 Priming, 99, 180 – 181, 215, 218, 228, 
229, 279, 282 
 emotional, 72, 218, 228 ( see also 
Transfer of arousal) 
 Prinz, Jesse J., 69, 70 – 71n, 73, 322 
 Prinz, W., 316 
 Prion, 21 
 Prkachin, K. M., 133n, 305, 318, 322 
 Probe, humor as, 268, 302 
 Problem of other minds, 24 

352 
Index
 Problem solving, 3, 25, 27, 50, 60, 77, 
78, 84, 92, 103, 105, 118, 125, 165, 
191, 192, 214, 236, 254, 290, 294 
 Producing future, 120, 220, 239, 263. 
 See also Anticipation generation 
 Profﬁ tt, D. R., 78, 322 
 Projection error, 19, 121, 194, 279 
 Promiscuity, 11 
 Prospecting by trial and error, 134, 
271, 275, 288, 295, 301 
 Proteins, 4 
 Proto-humor, 133, 246, 261, 264, 
293 
 Provine, R., 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 34, 35, 
38, 39, 40, 228n, 259, 261, 262, 269, 
295, 323 
 Pseudobulbar palsy, 21 
 Psychology experiments, jokes as, 
272 
 Psychophysiology, 132 
 Punch line, 46, 49, 51, 134, 136, 138, 
149, 152, 157, 158n, 169, 171 – 176, 
181, 182n, 189, 202 – 204, 211, 215, 
222, 230, 270, 272 – 273, 275n, 287, 
297 
 Punishment, 73, 74, 79, 90, 218 
 Punning riddles, 5 
 Puns, 5, 7, 27, 31, 42, 45, 51, 61, 99, 
110, 133 – 135, 141 – 142n, 144, 153, 
156, 166 – 167, 170, 206, 208 – 209, 
216, 234, 238, 247 
 almost-, 280 – 282 
 Purpose, 9 – 13, 45, 68, 94, 234, 235 
 of emotion, 73, 75n 
 of humor, 9 – 13, 40, 41, 43, 55, 58, 
111, 289, 292 
 of laughter, 20, 23 – 24, 40, 45, 58, 
264, 291 
 of play, 80n, 260, 293 
 of tickling, 225 
 Purposes, derived, of humor, 154, 
264 – 270, 290 
 Puttonen, S., 323 
 Puzzles, 7, 85, 108 – 109, 122 – 123, 125, 
136n, 200, 214, 235, 249 – 250, 294 
 Pylyshyn, Z., 89n, 312 
 
 Qualia, 123 – 124, 124n, 129, 178, 252, 
254 – 255 
 inverted, 24 
 of mirth, 254 
 Qualiﬁ cation problem, 108 – 109 
 Quality, intrinsic.  See Primary quality 
 Queior, Paul, xii 
 Quidnunc, 265 
 
 Rabbits 
 are they birds?, 267 
 are they ducks?, 230n 
 Racist humor, 39n, 218 
 Ramachandran, V. S., xii, 40, 48, 146n, 
222 – 223, 225, 240n, 261, 262, 268, 
323 
 Ramachandran and Blakeslee theory of 
tickling, adaptation of, 222 
 Rapp, A., 328 
 Raskin, Victor, 46, 50, 59, 100, 323 
 Rationale 
 of behavior, 12 
 free-ﬂ oating, 275n 
 Rationality, 73 – 74, 76, 80 – 81, 84 – 85, 
258, 298 
 Rats, laughter in, 261 
 Rattlesnake, 260 
 Ravaja, N., 132, 323 
 Reaction, in ITPRA model, 251 – 253 
 Reader response, 280 
 Real time, 4, 12, 94 
 Reason gone mad, 45 
 Reasoning, 64 – 67, 76, 78, 84, 87, 91, 
111, 118, 120, 148 – 150, 191, 
204 – 206, 221, 225, 299 
 mistakes in, 51 – 52, 195, 259 ( see also 
Faulty inference) 
 Reber, R., 80n, 323 
 Recipe for humor, x, 57, 157, 301 

Index 
353
 Reciprocal altruism, 75, 154 
 Reciprocity, 270 
 Recurrent loops, 22 
 Recursion, 126, 144 – 145, 158, 228n, 
261, 285 – 286 
 Recursive inferential depth, 265 
 Rehearsal, 63, 220, 291 
 Reiss, A. L., 305, 320 
 Release theory of humor, 37, 44 – 45, 
51 – 53, 201, 288 
 Religion, 63, 80, 159 
 as an in-group, 33 
 Religionist humor, 39n 
 Repetition, of jokes and other humor, 
154, 180, 219, 221, 276, 291 
 Replication, 11, 74, 158, 260, 270, 290, 
291 
 Replicator, 10, 11, 158, 290, 291 
 Representations, of perception and 
abstract, 47 
 Reptiles, 213 
 Reward system, 2, 12, 13, 35, 62, 62n, 
63, 73, 73n, 74, 82, 84, 90, 111, 
120 – 121, 123 – 124, 127 – 130, 140, 
147, 218 – 219, 254 – 255, 274, 275n, 
290, 292, 294 – 295, 298 
 Rhapsodies, 251 
 Rhetoricians, 276, 279 
 Rhyme, 267, 281 
 Richerson, Peter J., 11, 118n, 271, 291, 
306, 323 
 Riddles, xii, 3, 5, 53, 76, 80, 124 – 125, 
188, 194 – 197, 200, 214, 235 – 236, 
238, 249 – 250, 298 
 Ridicule, 42, 137 
 Ridiculous, 15, 29, 131 – 132, 138, 156, 
176 
 Ritchie, Graeme, 5, 46, 59, 97, 98, 140, 
208 – 211, 306, 323 
 Ritual, 262, 288 
 Rivers, Joan, 276 
 Rizzolatti, G., 77n, 207, 313, 323 
 Robot, 66, 86, 296 – 299 
 Rock circles, 243 – 245 
 Rodden, F. A., 327, 328 
 Rodent-detectors, 224, 225, 227 
 Rogers-Ramachandran, Diane, 240n, 
323 
 Rogue cultural variants, 291 – 292 
 Roller-coasters, 167, 220 – 221 
 Romantic, interpretation of  “ theory of 
mind ”  results, 290 
 Rosenbloom, P., 86, 317 
 Ross, D., 258n, 323 
 Ross, W. D., 323 
 Roy, Deb, xii 
 Rozenblit, L., 323 
 Ruch, W, 327 
 Ruiz-Belda, M. A., 259, 312 
 Rumelhart, D. E., 319, 324 
 Runners ’  high, xi, 253 
 Russell, Bertrand, 64, 90, 250, 324 
 Ruthruff, E., 98, 317 
 
 Saari, Donald, xiii, 229 
 Saari, T., 323 
 Saccharine, 274 
 Sadness, 48, 198, 216, 286n 
 Safety signal, 38, 40 
 Salvato, Teresa, xiii 
 Samson, A. C., 129n, 324 
 Samuels, R., 65, 324 
 Santa Fe Institute, xiii, 191 
 Savage-Rumbaugh, S., 290, 324 
 Saxe, John Godfrey, 287, 324 
 Scatological, 12 
 Scenario(s) 
 Apartment, The , tennis racket scene, 
234 – 235 
 “ are rabbits birds?, ” 267 
 ATM forgetting, 190, 246 
 banana peel, 146 
 bingo, 235 
 birthday gift, 193 
 bison discovering grass, 123 
 box of apples, 242 

354 
Index
 Boy who Cried Wolf, 154 
 break-dancing video, 153 
 cheating wife, 198 – 199 
 chess blunder, 191 – 192 
 clicking  “ undo, ”  132 
 coffee cup glued to the table, 107 
 Complacent Frog, 154 
 daisy, rock, and cloud, 156 
 daughter late at airport, 208 
 discovering the lights are on at home, 
182, 185, 186, 201 
 Divorce Barbie, 198 
 drinking old milk, 183, 185 – 187 
 duplicate hat deception, 162 – 163 
 entering a restaurant, 103 
 explaining the Newﬁ e joke, 33 
 exploring a room in the dark, 161 
 ﬁ le not in folder, 254 
 foam-rubber brick, 198 – 9 
 football blunder, 191 – 192 
 forgetting to press a button in the 
elevator, 131 
 “ forty miles per gallon!, ” 162 
 gas station cigarette, 154 
 Grasshopper and the Ant, 154 
 Hamlet ’ s problem, 96 
 having a stroke, 183 
 hearing a  “ funny sound ” while 
driving, 183, 185 – 186 
 hollering to someone not there, 131 
 Holmes, Sherlock, 192 – 193 
 hyena, wildebeest, and baboons in the 
ofﬁ ce, 108 
 incongruous symptoms, 49 
 instrument out of tune, 194 
 jigsaw puzzle that doesn ’ t all ﬁ t, 235 
 Kandy-Kolored Tangerine-Flake 
Streamlined Baby car, 106 – 107 
 keys left on the table, 184 
 kicking a ball ﬁ lled with air, vs. lead, 
161 
 lava spurts, 235 
 looking for lost sunglasses, 131 
 mailman ’ s bicycle, 199 
 McCarthy, John:  “ funnier!, ” 171 – 172 
 nuclear reactor, 189 
 oysters, 155 – 156 
 painting oneself into a corner, 154 
 penguins and fried eggs, 96 
 phantom pain or paresthesia, 182, 
185 – 186 
 pizza delivery video, 153 
 playing catch on the beach, 103 – 104 
 playing chase, 152 
 prize-winning pussy, 167 
 raccoon in the garage, 111 
 rats in the dark, 224 
 recognizing there is coffee in a cup, 
105 
 river-wading, 151 
 sawing off the limb we sit upon, 154 
 sea-sickness, 48 
 slipping on the staircase, 197 
 spare tire story, 150 
 tall, thin, and short, fat clowns, 242 
 tennis, 188 – 189 
 three ends of rope, 201 – 202 
 Three Stooges carpentry, 234 
 throwing the anchor in the water, 
110 
 waiting for the instant replay, 132 
 walking across the rotating funhouse 
bridge, 49n 
 wet-paint signs, 152 
 Schachter, S., 69, 217, 324 
 Schadenfreude, 139, 152, 214, 219, 
238, 246, 254, 288 
 Schank, R. C., 51 – 52, 100 – 101, 155, 
155n, 324 
 Schemas, 46, 97 
 Schemata, 52n 
 Schickele, Peter, 194 
 Schooler, L. J., 118n, 324 
 Schopenhauer, Arthur, 47, 50, 53, 59, 
113 – 114, 122, 183, 202, 206, 324 
Scenario(s) (cont.)

Index 
355
 Schwerdt, P., 305 
 Science ﬁ ction, 3 
 Scientiﬁ c American , ix 
 Scorn, 29, 292 
 Scripts, 46, 50 – 51, 53, 97, 100 – 101, 
103n, 107, 155, 166, 171 
 Scruggs, Dickie, 38 
 Search space, x, 77, 96, 107, 108, 191, 
197, 238, 271, 291 
 Searle, John R., 5, 324 
 Sedivy, J. C., 324 – 326 
 Seeck, M., 325 
 Seidenberg, M., 100n, 326 
 Seidl, Bettina, xiii 
 Self-control, 82, 114, 140, 188, 258 
 Self-evident principles, of logic, 64 – 65, 
90 
 Self-reference, 243 
 Self-report, 21, 25, 35, 39n, 178 – 179, 
181, 197 
 Semantics, 5, 20, 29, 52 – 53, 62, 77 – 78, 
97, 99, 101, 105, 110, 117, 124, 
129n, 134 – 136, 149, 173, 178, 193n, 
276, 296 
 Semantic script theories, 46, 53, 100, 
171 
 Sensation, 17 – 18, 68n, 70, 73 – 74, 79, 
91 – 92, 101, 179, 182, 185, 221, 
223 – 225, 227, 232, 234, 258, 271, 
284 
 Sentences, any one as a punch line, 
211 
 Sex, ix, 34, 44 – 45, 54, 63, 70, 78 – 79, 
99, 128, 173, 176, 214n, 217, 238, 
257, 275 
 Sexist humor, 39n 
 Sexual emotions, 11, 82, 123, 257, 271 
 Sexual humor, 51 
 Sexually transmitted disease vectors, 11 
 Sexual selection, 11, 12, 23, 264, 268, 
275n, 294 – 295 
 Sexy, 67 – 68 
 Seyfarth, R. M., 262, 308, 325 
 Shakespeare, W., 278, 280 – 282 
 Shamans, 288 
 Shammi, P., 129n, 325 
 Shanks, N., 206, 317 
 Shastri, L., 85, 101, 325 
 Shepard, R., 113 – 115 
 Shibata, T., 86, 325 
 Showing off, 153, 291 
 Shultz, T. R., 46, 59, 202, 209, 325 
 Siamese cat, 167 
 Sick jokes, 49 
 Simon, H. A., 65, 321 
 Simon, Neil, 279 – 280 
 Simpson, Homer, 164 
 Singer, J. E., 217, 324 
 Situation comedy, 7, 60, 182n, 228n 
 Skinnerian organisms, 290 
 Slapstick, x, 52, 61, 234, 238 
 Slipping on a banana peel, 52, 55, 94, 
141, 146 
 Slugs, saccharine and humor as, 274 
 Smiling, 7, 19, 21, 22n, 25, 30, 133n, 
203, 220, 227n, 235, 239, 259 
 Smith, Adam, 264, 325 
 Smith, Jane Ellen, 34, 308, 325 
 Smith, Jean R., 35, 308 
 Smith, L. B., 89n, 326 
 Smullyan, Raymond, 220 
 Sneezing reﬂ ex, 11 
 Social capital, 7, 11, 75, 139, 270, 291 
 Social competition, 292 
 Socrates, 59, 90 
 Solemnity, 1, 21, 34, 250 
 Solipsism, 277 
 Solomon, Richard. L., 140, 325 
 Solomon, Robert C., 69, 71, 325 
 Solomona, P. E., 305 
 Somatic marker hypothesis, 72, 
111 – 112 
 Soussignan, R., 22, 325 
 South America, 26 
 Spandrel, 154, 274n.  See also 
By-product, evolutionary 

356 
Index
 Species 
 human, xii, 6, 9, 11, 18, 26, 43, 81, 
126 – 127, 269, 291 
 of humor, 3, 61, 133, 144, 301 
 of meme, 11 
 nonhuman biological, xii, 6n, 18, 39, 
55n, 58, 62 – 63, 123, 128, 159, 220, 
261 – 262, 271, 291 
 Speciﬁ cations, of a model for humor, 
302 
 Speciﬁ city, 31 – 34, 60, 294 
 Spectrum, inverted, 24 
 Speech acts, 17, 19, 98, 135, 161, 166, 
168, 169, 172, 173 
 Spencer, H., 44, 325 
 Sperber, D., 160, 325 
 Sperli, F., 21, 325 
 Spice(s), 171, 205n, 214, 217, 238 
 death as a, 217 
 disparagement as a, 249 
 excrement as a, 217 
 insight as a, 214, 219 
 nostalgia as a, 219 
 racial perception as a, 217 
 Schadenfreude as a, 214, 219 
 sex as a, 214, 217 
 superiority as a, 214 
 violence as a, 217 
 wit as a, 175, 176, 214 
 Spinelli, L., 325 
 Spinka, M., 80n, 260, 325 
 Spivey, M. J., 98 – 99, 325 
 Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., 326 
 Spreading activation, 97, 101, 106, 158, 
193, 196, 228, 266, 276, 286.  See also 
Just-in-time spreading activation 
(JITSA) 
 STANDUP, 5 
 Stand-up, 60, 164, 277, 296 
 Star Trek , 3, 299 
 Statistical regularities, as a solution 
to the credit assignment problem, 
219 
 Stepper, S., 22n, 326 
 Sterelny, Kim, 11, 326 
 Stereotypes, 163, 168, 169, 173, 175, 
195, 197, 238 
 Stewart, J., 112 
 Stich, S., 65, 324 
 Stimulus-delivery devices, 279 
 Stock, Oliviero, 5, 326 
 Stone, Tom, xiii 
 Strack, F., 22n, 326 
 Strapparava, Carlo, 5, 319, 326 
 Strick, M., 286, 326 
 Stupidity, 11, 15, 29, 126, 147, 159, 
165, 170, 267 
 Stuss, D. T., 129n, 325 
 Subjective qualities, 124, 179.  See also 
Qualia 
 Sudden glory, 40, 43, 53, 123 
 Sugar, 1, 67, 73, 82, 124, 214n, 218, 
274, 294.  See also Glucose; Fructose 
 Suls, J. M., 45, 46, 49, 59, 202, 209, 
326 
 Superiority theory of humor, 37, 
40 – 43, 45, 48, 50, 53, 55, 58 – 60, 139, 
147, 171, 194, 201, 214, 234n, 
249 – 250, 270, 287 – 288 
 Supernormal stimuli, xi, 159, 270, 272, 
274 
 Support Vector Machines, 5n 
 Surplus, economic, 75, 270 
 Surprise, 47, 58, 106 – 110, 118, 133, 
136, 170, 193, 198, 238, 242 – 243, 
251 – 252, 254, 264, 276, 288, 292 
 Surprise Symphony , 238 
 Surprise theory of humor, xii, 37, 
53 – 55, 58, 122 288, 292 
 Survival value, 9, 73n 
 Suspended disbelief, 138, 193 
 Sweet Anticipation :  Music and the 
Psychology of Expectation (Huron), 
251 – 253 
 Sweetness, 1, 67, 124, 159, 214n, 274, 
295, 301 

Index 
357
 Sweet tooth, evolution of, 2, 10, 28, 
67 – 68, 274 
 Swinney, D., 100n, 106, 190, 326 
 Swiss, Jamy Ian, 277, 326 
 Symbiont, cultural, 11 
 Sympathetic instant utility, 207 – 208 
 Sympathy, 38, 71, 146n, 264 
 Syntax, 5, 99, 134, 135, 281, 296 
 Szarmarasz, Vera, xiii 
 
 Taboos, 205n, 219, 246, 258 
 Tag, as chess for chimps, 263 
 Tanazawa, Takao, xiii 
 Tanenhaus, M. K., 99, 100n, 308, 
324 – 326 
 Tanganyika, laughing epidemic, 228n 
 Tanie, K., 86, 325 
 Tati, Jacques, 152n, 234 
 Taxonomy of clothing, as a metaphor 
for taxonomy of humor, 280 
 Telegraphing the punch line, 134, 
158n, 171, 189, 222, 230, 272, 
297 
 Television, 1, 22, 60, 93n, 141, 152, 
163, 274, 294 
 Tension, 11, 44 – 45, 52 – 53 
 in ITPRA model, 251 – 252 
 Texts, humorous, 5n, 51, 203, 209 – 210, 
216, 301 
 Theater, 1, 298 
 Theater of cruelty, 49 
 Thelen, E., 89n, 326 
 Theodorus, 53 
 Theory of humor, 15, 159, 178, 206, 
223, 253n, 289, 301 
 Theory of mind, 55n, 144, 180, 207, 
261, 263, 290, 293 
 Therapsids, 213 
 Third-person humor, 138, 139, 
140 – 142, 143 – 176, 180, 189 – 190, 
192, 207 – 208, 213, 246, 249, 288 
 beneﬁ t of, 154 
 evolution of, 147 
 Thompson, J., 38, 326 
 Thompson, W. L., 77n, 113, 317 
 Thorndike, E. L., 73 – 74, 326 
 Thought experiment, 25 – 26, 113, 224, 
296 
 Thought-provoking (vs. laugh-
provoking), 247 
 Three Stooges, the, 141, 210, 234 
 Threshold, variable, of pleasure, 271 
 Threshold of awareness, 281, 282 
 Tickling, 39 – 40, 48, 59, 220 – 229, 232, 
234, 262, 263, 293 
 of apes, 39, 261 
 aversiveness of, 221, 223, 224 
 as a cognitive bug, 225 
 inability to perform on oneself, 
221 – 222 
 of the mind, xi, 24, 39, 117 
 of rats, 261 
 Time-pressured heuristic search, xi, 4, 
12, 82, 88, 94, 117 – 118, 121, 164, 
210, 265, 291 – 292, 297 
 Timing, 61, 93, 123, 146, 158, 167, 
172, 186 – 187, 200, 229, 239, 255, 
270, 275 – 277, 275n, 288 
 Tinbergen, Niko, 159, 326 
 Tobacco, 1 
 Tomasello, M., 55n, 145, 290, 307, 326, 
327 
 Tomkins, S. S., 70, 327 
 Tomlin, Lily, 37, 61 
 Tooby, J., 289, 327 
 Toy model, 85, 263 
 Training set, 296 
 Trampoline, Huron ’ s backstage, 
253 – 254, 288 
 Transfer of arousal, 176, 217 – 219, 227, 
228, 229, 247, 275, 288, 295 
 Treisman, A., 98, 327 
 Trembath, D. L., 34, 325 
 Trickery.  See Deception, trickery 
 Tricksters, 174, 198, 249 
 Trimmer, Barry, xii 

358 
Index
 Triumph, 27, 40, 41, 147, 246, 250 
 Trivers, R. L., 75, 154, 295, 327 
 Trottier, Leo, xii 
 Trust, 12, 71, 109, 111, 258 
 Trust falls, 198, 220, 221, 234 
 Truth, 12, 80n, 112, 118, 193, 294 
 Tufts University, xii, 199 
 Tugade, M. M., 313 
 Tulips, 281 – 282 
 Tunes, recursion in, 285 
 Turing, A. M., 327 
 Turner, M., 97 – 98, 126, 312 
 Turning the knobs, 177, 178, 179, 192, 
194 
 Turpeinen, M., 323 
 Tversky, A., 327 
 Twain, Mark, 109, 139, 177 
 Twenty questions, 57 – 60, 289 – 296 
 as a model-selection criteria, 180 
 Type I errors.  See False positives 
 Type II errors.  See False negatives 
 
 Uchikawa, Y., 320 
 Uchino,Toshiyuki, xiii 
 Uekermann, J., 129n, 327 
 Uematsu, S., 305 
 Unchallenged perceptual beliefs, 185 
 Unger, Felix, 54 
 Unsupervised cognitive process, 12, 93, 
200, 297 
 
 Vaartjes, Johan, xiii 
 Valence, 69 – 74, 84, 121 – 122, 135, 
139 – 140, 147, 189 – 190, 217, 219, 
229, 253, 254, 257, 284 – 285, 288, 
295 
 contrastive ( see Contrastive valence) 
 negative, 69, 79 – 80, 121, 135, 139, 
140, 142, 190, 193, 198, 217, 230, 
254, 257, 284 – 286, 288 
 positive, 24, 44, 69, 78, 80, 122, 133, 
140, 142n, 147, 198, 217, 219, 254, 
269, 284, 285, 286, 288, 295, 297 
 Val é ry, P., 120 
 van Baaren, R.B., 326 
 van Gelder, T., 89n, 327 
 van Hooff, J. A. R. A. M., 261, 262, 
322, 327 
 van Knippenberg, A., 326 
 Veatch, T. C., 327 
 Verbalization paradigm, 197 
 Vervet monkey, 262 
 Vestibular system, 48 – 49, 80 
 Vidal, Gore, 250 
 Violence, 81, 153, 217, 238, 291 
 Virginity, for a joke, 230 
 Viruses, cold, 11 
 Viruses, memes as being like, 11, 
271 
 Viscera, 69 
 Visceral, 70, 74 
 Visceral eye, of Boorstin, 140, 142 
 Visual puns, 234, 247, 248, 249 
 Vogt, B. A., 70n, 327 
 von Goethe, J. W., 264 
 Voyeuristic perspective, of Boorstin, 
140, 141, 142, 153, 171, 279 
 
 Waldorf, V. A., 34, 325 
 Walker, C., 80n, 260, 307 
 Waller, A., 323 
 “ Warming-up, ” 228, 229 
 Wary commitments, 200.  See also 
Hunches 
 Watson, K. K., 129n, 327 
 Weber, B. H., 269, 327 
 Weirdness, 242 
 Weisfeld, G. E., 35, 327 
 Wellman, H., 78, 314 
 “ What it is like, ” 26 
 White, E. B., 289 
 Wig, G. S., 320 
 Wild, B., 129n, 327, 328 
 Wilde, Oscar, x, 40, 246, 297 
 Willful agents, 225, 243 
 Williams, Robin, 297 

Index 
359
 Wilson, C. L., 313 
 Wilson, D. S., 20, 22, 39 – 40, 160, 261, 
313, 325 
 Wilson, E. O., 259, 260, 328 
 Wilson, S., 284, 317 
 Winawer, Jonathan, 232 
 Wincing, 133, 152, 153 
 Wine tasting, as metaphor for humor 
connoisseurship, 246 
 WISCRAIC, 5 
 Wiseman, R., 164, 328 
 Wit, x, 3, 15 – 16, 117, 128, 130, 132, 
157, 175 – 176, 197, 198, 214, 
238 – 239, 246, 247, 249, 250, 254, 
267, 270, 296, 298 
 Witcher, B. S., 312 
 Wittgenstein, L., 3, 100, 204, 328 
 Witticisms, 1, 55, 117, 155, 163 – 164, 
247, 257, 270 
 Witty rhymes, 31, 214 
 Wodehouse, P. G., x 
 Wolfe, Tom, 107, 328 
 Wolpert, D., 221, 306 
 Woman, old, who lived in a shoe, xi 
 Wonder tissue, x 
 Woodruff, G., 290, 322 
 Wordplay, 3, 7, 15, 156 
 Wright, Steven, 16, 51, 122, 136, 
270 
 Wyer, R. S., 17, 49, 50, 173, 202 – 204, 
206, 328 
 
 Xie, Stephanie, xiii 
 XKCD, 96 
 
 Yaglovskaya, Yuliya, xiii 
 Yamamoto, M., 86, 328 
 Yong, Y. L., 323 
 Young, R. C., 317 
 
 Zahavi, A., 263, 328 
 Zajonc, R. B., 70n, 73, 328 
 Zigler, E., 328 
 Zillmann, D., 217, 275, 307, 328 
 Ziv, A., 35, 328 
 Zysset, S., 129n, 324 

