 Gazzaniga ’ s essay provides a useful elementary overview of the ways in 
which physics has moved away from Laplace ’ s vision of determinism and 
how the sciences in general have moved to a more nuanced appreciation 
of the relationships between multiple explanatory levels — subatomic, 
atomic, molecular, cellular, organismic, personal, social. He quotes an apt 
observation by Philip Anderson (1972):  “ The ability to reduce everything 
to simple fundamental laws does not imply the ability to start from those 
laws and reconstruct the universe. ” Neuroscientists, he says, have been 
slow to appreciate the idea of emergence and often persist in trying to 
couch their interpretations in the language of what I have called  greedy 
reductionism (Dennett, 1995, pp. 81 – 82) as contrasted with good reduc-
tionism (which amounts, in Gazzaniga ’ s terms, to  no magic ). I would add 
that an even greater foible of the neuroscientists is their uncritical reliance 
on the obsolete categories of prescientific traditions, what Wilfrid Sellars 
(1962) called the manifest image. 
 In fact the point that emerges most forcefully for me from Gazzaniga ’ s 
essay is not what he intended to demonstrate, but nevertheless something 
he should be happy to have shown, because it is an important first step in 
clearing away the ancient presuppositions that make the free will issue so 
resistant to dissolution: The traditional ways of thinking about these phe-
nomena — about decisions, about selves or minds, about conscious con-
trol — are relentlessly seductive. Even after we have glimpsed and appreciated 
better perspectives thanks to advances in science, we find ourselves being 
drawn back to the old habits of thought, trying to find, in our modern 
scientific picture of the brain, our dear old friends from long ago: the ego, 
the immortal soul, impervious to causal influence, wellspring of choices 
so free that even God could not predict them in advance. They aren ’ t there 
to be found, of course, and Gazzaniga does a good job of sketching what 
is in our brains instead of these items, but much more important, they 
 2.1  Seduced by Tradition 
 Daniel C. Dennett 

76 
Daniel C. Dennett
don ’ t  have to be there for us to be agents with the sort of freedom that is 
a prerequisite for moral responsibility, for genuine authorship of our deeds 
and misdeeds. Many scientists are still succumbing to the temptation to 
 assume — for it is never carefully argued for — that if these antiquated notions 
are illusory (if  “ free will is an illusion ” as so many of them put it), then so 
is our moral agency. This theme in recent public pronouncements by 
leading scientists, especially neuroscientists, is deplorable, and Gazzaniga 
has attempted to expose the flaws in this thinking:  “ In what follows, while 
the goal will be to challenge the very concept of free will, the concept of 
personal responsibility remains untouched. The idea outlined below is that 
a mechanistic concept of how the mind works eliminates the need for the 
concept of free will. ” 
 Gazzaniga inadvertently shows, however, how nearly irresistible the 
categories are, by lapsing into them himself. Consider this, from his final 
summary:  “ The course of action taken appears to us as a matter of  ‘ choice, ’ 
but the fact is, it is the result of a particular emergent mental state being 
selected by the complex interacting surrounding milieu. ” 
 That phrase,  “ but the fact is, ” suggests that the  “ particular emergent 
mental state being selected ” is  not a choice, especially not a  free choice, 
and Gazzaniga underlines this suggestion with his closing line:  “ Our inter-
preter then claims we freely made a choice. ” The almost-invited inference 
is that our interpreter in the left hemisphere fools us, convinces us that 
we made a free choice when in fact we didn ’ t. This needs to be challenged. 
There are indeed times when we fool ourselves — when our interpreter fools 
us if you like — into thinking we are making a free choice when in fact we 
are being manipulated by some other agent, or when the  “ complex inter-
acting surrounding milieu ” is seriously deranged by delusion or other 
cognitive pathology. When, on the other hand, we have our wits about us, 
and are not massively misinformed or otherwise manipulated, then  there 
is no important sense in which the outcome of all the interactions in the 
many levels or layers of  “ machinery ” is not a free choice. That ’ s what a 
free choice  is ! It ’ s the undistorted, unhindered outcome of a cognitive/
conative/emotive process of exquisite subtlety, capable of canvassing the 
options with good judgment and then acting with fairly full knowledge of 
what is at stake and what is likely to transpire. 
 We say we try to choose our actions as the best options  “ all things 
considered, ” but of course we cannot consider  all things, and not even all 
 relevant things, but we can accomplish a fair approximation of that inves-
tigation, thanks to all the cognitive machinery and its interlocking systems 
of emotive control. The fact that our decision systems are  “ automatic, 

Comment on Gazzaniga 
77
deterministic, modularized, and driven not by one physical system at any 
one time but by hundreds, thousands, and perhaps millions ” (Gazzaniga, 
this volume) does not show that they are not just what the doctor ordered 
for those of us who want to be responsible agents. Artificial intelligence 
has not yet produced an artificial decider as robust and reliable as your 
average well-informed citizen, but at least we ’ re beginning to understand 
the sorts of subsystems and  “ moving parts ” from which to construct such 
a thing. And nothing we have yet learned in cognitive neuroscience and 
related fields suggests that any and all such systems would have to be 
defective. 
 That, however, is the impression many neuroscientists are conveying to 
the general public. Tom Wolfe, an acute and sardonic taster of the winds 
of cultural change, puts it dramatically in his aptly titled essay,  “ Sorry, but 
your soul just died ” (2001, p. 100):  “ The conclusion people out beyond 
the laboratory walls are drawing is:  The fix is in! We ’ re all hardwired! That, 
and:  Don ’ t blame me! I ’ m wired wrong! ”  
 Wired wrong? What would it be to be wired right?  That is a question 
for cognitive scientists to answer, and when they don ’ t even address it, 
they are succumbing to the temptation to go along with — and even 
endorse — the mythology that anything that is  “ wired, ” that is mere 
 “ machinery, ” couldn ’ t possibly have the kind of freedom required for 
moral responsibility. 
 Above I called this theme in the public statements of neuroscientists 
deplorable. Isn ’ t that a little strong? Well consider this thought experi-
ment: Once upon a time a brilliant neurosurgeon said this to a patient on 
whom she had just performed an implantation procedure in her shiny 
high-tech operating theater: 
 The device I ’ ve implanted doesn ’ t just control your obsessive – compulsive disorder; 
it controls your every decision, thanks to our master control system which maintains 
radio contact with your microchip 24 hours a day. In other words, I ’ ve disabled your 
conscious will; your sense of free will henceforth will be an illusion. 
 In fact she had done no such thing; this was simply a lie she decided to 
tell him to see what would happen. It worked; the poor fellow went out 
into the world convinced that he was not a responsible agent, but rather 
a mere puppet, and his behavior began to show it: He became irresponsible, 
aggressive, negligent, indulging his worst whims until he got caught and 
put on trial. Testifying in his own defense, he passionately protested his 
nonresponsibility, because of the implant in his brain, but nobody believed 
him, and the neuroscientist, when called to testify, admitted she ’ d said it, 

78 
Daniel C. Dennett
 “ but I was just messing with his mind — a practical joke, that ’ s all. I never 
thought he ’ d believe me! ” It really doesn ’ t matter whether the court 
believed him or her, sentenced him or her; either way she ruined his life 
with her ill-considered assertion, robbing him of his integrity and shutting 
down his conscience. In fact, her false  “ debriefing ” of her patient actually 
accomplished nonsurgically much of what she claimed to accomplish 
surgically: She disabled him for life. 
 If we agree that she is responsible for this dire consequence, what shall 
we say about the neuroscientists currently filling the media with talk about 
how their science shows that free will is an illusion? Are they not risking 
doing the same, by mass production, to all the people who take them at 
their word? 
 Michael Gazzaniga has been keenly aware of this responsibility and has 
been a vigorous and resourceful leader in the effort to clarify these delicate 
issues for the general public. And yet even he can be lulled into honoring —
 at least not challenging — a presupposition that should be banished. 
 Notice that in my story the neuroscientist didn ’ t  say she had destroyed 
his moral responsibility; she  “ just ” said she had rendered his free will 
illusory, and it was he who drew the further dire conclusion. That is, 
however, the natural conclusion for lay people to draw, and overcoming 
that presumption is an uphill battle. In addition to Gazzaniga, there are 
some philosophers — notably John Martin Fischer — who claim that free will 
is not necessary for moral responsibility, but it is a hard sell, given such 
familiar locutions as  “ You signed the contract of your own free will ” and 
 “ Since you weren ’ t coerced, but acted of your own free will, you are respon-
sible  … ” Here the issue is not factual, or metaphysical, but tactical, a matter 
of good pedagogy or diplomacy. Two apparently wildly different claims 
turn out to  mean the same thing , once you understand how the terms are 
being used: 
 A. Neuroscience shows that we don ’ t have free will, but we can neverthe-
less be responsible for our actions under normal conditions. 
 B. Neuroscience shows that we do (under normal conditions) have free 
will, but free will turns out to be quite different from what prescientific 
folks thought it was. 
 Wilfrid Sellars (1962) characterizes the task of philosophy as negotiating 
the problematic traffic of thought between what he calls the manifest 
image (the everyday world of colors and sunsets and people and solid 
objects and free will) and the scientific image (of proteins, atoms, electrons, 
and the like). The free will issue is above all an opportunity to find paths 

Comment on Gazzaniga 
79
between these two perspectives that are not deeply and even catastrophi-
cally misleading. Prescientific understanding of free will is tethered to two 
conditions: It is supposed to be incompatible with determinism, and it is 
supposed to be a necessary condition for responsibility. Something has to 
give, but each tether is a powerful intuition that must either be honored 
in how we use the term or denied with careful argument. (The  “ libertari-
ans ”  1  try to honor both tethers, with the result that they end up defend-
ing mysterious doctrines of  “ agent causation ” which defy any scientific 
understanding.) 
 Whenever philosophers or scientists have to negotiate the foggy chasm 
that separates the manifest image from the scientific image, tactical issues 
arise. Given what ordinary folks think color is, you  might say that  color is 
an illusion ; nothing turns out to be colored in the nonscientific sense of 
the term. And nothing is solid, not really, not  through-and-through . And 
dollars are an illusion, and so is software! Not a very convincing tactic. Or 
you could say colors are perfectly real, but quite surprisingly different from 
what you thought they were, and similarly for dollars and software — and 
free will. (I know from long and frustrating experience that no matter how 
many times I say that consciousness is real, but not what you think it is, 
many  “ clever ” commentators assure us that the title of my book should 
have been  Consciousness Explained Away or  Consciousness Denied , that what 
I ’ m actually saying is that consciousness isn ’ t real. Well in  their sense of 
consciousness, they ’ re right! Consciousness is not a magical extra ingredi-
ent in the physical world, and not a nonphysical ingredient either.) 
 Free will, similarly, is beset with  “ magical ” connotations, a  “ tiny miracle ” 
in the words of one libertarian philosopher (who did not mean them as 
disparagement!). If we decide, tactically, to let that tether fix our under-
standing of the term, then Gazzaniga is right  “ to challenge the very 
concept of free will, [while] the concept of personal responsibility remains 
untouched. ” But then he has to work harder on the positive account of 
responsibility, showing in detail how (shockingly, to the layperson) it does 
not require free will. And that task will be made much more difficult by 
the chorus of other neuroscientists who say (with tradition, and hence 
with scant argument if any) that responsibility does ( “ of course ” ) require 
free will, and therefore we are  not responsible, not really. 
 The tactical alternative, followed here by me, is to examine the require-
ments of responsibility and argue that nothing in neuroscience to date 
shows that those conditions are not met by normal adults, and that it is 
thus legitimate, honoring the other tether, to conclude that we have dis-
covered what free will really is — nothing magical, nothing miraculous —

80 
Daniel C. Dennett
 but just something rather unlike the inflated notion of tradition. As with 
our everyday concepts of color and solidity, we have to bend a bit, and 
take on a more informed and sophisticated concept to see that it is a per-
fectly real phenomenon. One of the chief advantages of this tactical alter-
native is that it allows us to honor the intuitively compelling contrasts 
between normal people who do have free will and people suffering from 
pathology, victims of manipulation, and so on, who do not. If we go the 
other way, we have to admit that a normal person and a psychotic or 
manipulated  “ puppet ” person are really no different in the free will depart-
ment. Neither has free will. 
 Since cognitive science can contribute a lot to our understanding of the 
differences between normal people and pathological decision makers  and 
why the differences are important for morality and law , the second tactic is 
thus much to be preferred since it allows us to couch our  scientific image 
explanations in terms of which conditions diminish or obliterate free will 
and which do not. That is what the law will need, and common under-
standing as well.  
 Note 
 1.  Unfortunately, philosophical tradition has its own meaning of  “ libertarian, ” 
which has nothing to do with the more widespread political meaning(s). A free will 
libertarian is one who claims that free will is incompatible with determinism, is nec-
essary for responsibility, and exists. 
  

 Moral Psychology  
 Volume 4: Free Will and Moral Responsibility 
 edited by Walter Sinnott-Armstrong 
 A Bradford Book 
 The MIT Press 
 Cambridge, Massachusetts 
 London, England 

 ©  2014   Massachusetts Institute of Technology  
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any 
electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information 
storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher. 
  
 MIT Press books may be purchased at special quantity discounts for business or sales 
promotional use. For information, please email special_sales@mitpress.mit.edu. 
  
 This book was set in Stone Sans and Stone Serif by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited, 
Hong Kong. Printed and bound in the United States of America.  
  
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Moral psychology / edited by Walter Sinnott-Armstrong. 
   v. cm. 
 “ A Bradford Book. ” 
 Includes bibliographical references and index. 
 Contents: v. 1. The evolution of morality : adaptations and innateness — v. 2. The 
cognitive science of morality : intuition and diversity — v. 3. The neuroscience 
of morality : emotion, disease, and development. — v. 4. Free will and moral 
responsibility 
 ISBN 978-0-262-19561-4 (vol. 1 : hardcover : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-262-69354-
7 (vol. 1 : pbk. : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-262-19569-0 (vol. 2 : hardcover : alk. 
paper) — ISBN 978-0-262-69357-8 (vol. 2 : pbk. : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-262-19564-
5 (vol. 3 : hardcover : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-262-69355-4 (vol. 3 : pbk. : alk. 
paper) — ISBN 978-0-262-02668-0 (vol. 4 : hardcover : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-262-
52547-3 (vol. 4 : pbk : alk. paper) 
 1. Ethics.   2. Psychology and philosophy.   3. Neurosciences.   I. Sinnott-Armstrong, 
Walter, 1955 – 
 BJ45.M66 2007 
 170 — dc22 
  
 10   9  8  7  6  5   4  3  2  1 

