THE 
PHILOSOPHICAL 
LEXI CON 
DANIEL DENNETT, EDITOR 

Copies of The Philosophical Lexicon may be obtained from: 
single copy 
American Philosophical Association 
University of Delaware 
Newark, Delaware 19711 
Price, prepaid, postage included: 
twenty-five copies or more 
$3.00 
$2.50 
Checks should be made payable to the American Philosophical Associa­
tion. All royalties to the American Philosophical Association. 
Copyright@ 
1987 by Daniel Dennett 

PREF ACE TO THE EIGHTH EDITION 
The Eighth Edition of The Philosophical Lexicon is only the second 
to be published. 
The Seventh Edition was published in 1978. while 
the earlier editions circulated in mimeograph form. 
(In 1980, a Serbo­
Croation translation of selections from the Seventh Edition was published 
in Zagreb, joining the German translation of the Sixth Edition published 
a few years earlier in Austria.) 
The Lexicon began one night in September of 1969 when I was writing 
lecture notes and found myself jotting down as a heading "quining in­
tentions" 
I saw fit to compose a definition of the verb. In the morning 
I was ill prepared to lecture, but handed a list of about a dozen definitions 
together with the Introduction to my colleagues at Irvine. Joe Lambert 
promptly responded with several more definitions and sent the first 
batch to Nuel Belnap and Alan Anderson at Pittsburgh. 
Almost by 
return mail their first entries arrived, and within a few months we pre­
pared a second edition, and then a third. The editions have been cumula­
tive, but along the way a few entries have either been dropped as sub­
standard or replaced by better definitions of the same term. 
Originally 
with Joe Lambert's help, I have gathered, refined, combined, and edited 
as I have seen fit, with a few rules and little consistency. 
Originally. 
only twentieth century philosophers were considered eligible. but how 
could we resist the pronoun .. hume''? 
The one unexceptioned rule 
is that no one has been permitted to define himself--editors included. 
Hundreds of entries have been submitted over the years. The Seventh 
Edition contained 163 entries. all included in the Eighth Edition, together 
with 8Ǘ new entries. The contributors of new entries include: 
Kathleen Akins 
Brian Barry 
Simon Blackburn 
George Boolos 
John Cronquist 
Bill de Vries 
Don Garrett 
Martin Hollis 
Gary Iseminger 

Philip Kitcher 
Bill Lycan 
Hugh Mellor 
Robert Nozick 
Hilary Putnam 
David Sanford 
George Sher 
Steve Stich 
Philip Turetsky 
Steve Wagner 
David Weinberger 
Roger White 
Jennifer Whiting 
For this Eighth Edition, as for the Seventh, all (living, locatable) 
definienda were sent advance copy of the Lexicon and given the opportu­
nity to delete the entry on them if they wished. 
I am happy to say 
that once again philosophers have proven to be good sports about being 
satirized, even when the satire is quite rude and unfair! All the proceeds 
from the sale of this edition go to the American Philosophical Association. 
My thanks go to all our eponymous colleagues, and my apologies to all 
the illustrious members of the profession who deserve to be included 
but have so far failed to inspire a suitably pungent definition. 
Dan Dennett 
Editor 
Philosophy Department 
Tufts University 
Medford, Massachusetts 02155 

INTRODUCTION 
The pantheon of philosophy has contribukd precious little to the 
English language, compared with other fields. 
What can philosophy 
offer to compare with the galvanizing volts, ohms and watts of physics, 
the sandwiches, cardigans, and raglan sleeves of the British upper crust, 
the sado-masochism of their Continental counterparts, or even the leo­
tards of the circus world? 
We speak of merdy platonic affairs, and 
Gilbert Ryle has given his name to a measure of beer (roughly three­
quartcrs of a pint), but the former is inappropriate to say the least, 
and the latter is restricted to the patois used in certain quarters of Oxford. 
There are, of course, the legion of pedantic terms ending in "ian" and 
"ism" 
such as "neo-Augustinian Aristotelianism", "Russellian theory 
of descriptions" 
and such marginally philosophic terms as "Cartesian 
coordinate" 
and 
"Machiavellian", 
but 
these terms have never been, 
nor deserved to be, a living part of the language. To remedy this situation 
we propose that philosophers make a self-conscious effort to adopt 
the following new terms. 
With a little practice these terms can become 
an important part of your vocabulary, to the point that you will wonder 
how philosophy ever proceeded without them. 

ackack, n .. rapid-fire criticism. 
"I had scarcely finished my talk when I was cut 
down by a withering barrage of ackack." 
Hence ackerman, n. Rapid-fire critic 
(cf. thomson gun). 
aiken, adj. Said of one who is in the grip of some urgently occurrent aesthetic emo­
tion, or in whom merely pleasurable impressions of reflection have given way to 
paroxysms. 
"Leo was moved by the performance, but as the orchestra finished 
the adagio of the Beethoven, Henry was just aiken." 
albritton, adj., 
Contraction of "all but written" 
"It's albritton here: I'll be with 
you in a minute." 
alvinize, v. To stimulate protracted discussion by making a bizarre claim. "His con­
tention that natural evil is due to Satanic agency alvinized his listeners." 
ameliorortate, v. To complicate discussion of a theory or topic by drawing attention 
to a panoply of distinctions, difficult examples, and writings whose relevance had 
hitherto been conveniently underestimated. 
"We were really making progress 
until she had to go and ameliorortate the issue." 
anscombe, v. (1) To gather for safe-keeping. 
"She anscombed with all the notes 
and letters." 
(2) To go over carefully, with a fine-tooth comb, in an oblique 
direction. 
armstrong unit, n. Measure of the wavelength of belief ( = 10 micro-smarts). 
a rortiori, adj. For even more obscure and fashionable Continental reasons. 
arthurdantist, n. One who straightens the teeth of exotic dogmas. "Little Friedrich 
used to say the most wonderful things before we took him to the arthurdantist ! " 
--Frau Nietzsche 
assearltion, n. A speech act whose illocutionary force is identical with the speaker. 
"He assearled himself across the room." 
austintatious, adj. Displaying a fine sense for niceties of the language. "I'm not sure 
what his point was, but his presentation was certainly austintatious." 
ayer, v. (from Spanish, ayer, meaning yesterday) 
To oversimplify elegantly in the 
direction of a past generation. 
"Russell, in the Anaǖysis of Mind, ayers a beha­
vioristic account of belief." 
bahm. v. To devastate with reprints. "He bahmed the country with his latest piece." 
baier, n.m. 
One who obtains his ethical theory from a vendler. Also, n.f .. one who 
obtains her philosophy of mind from sellers. 
bambrough, n. (1) a rare and umbrageous tree in the shelter of which all philosophical 
perplexity can be charmed away. 
Where the bread fruit fall 
And the penguin call 
And the sound is the sound of the sea 
Under the barn 
Under the brough 
Under the bambrough tree. 

THE PHILOSOPHICAL LEXICON 
(2) (from bang-brow) a comment of such transcendent obviousness that were 
any hearer actually infonned by it, he would smite his forehead with the heel of 
his hand. "Such a bambrough! Why didn't I think of it?" 
barcan, n. the cry of the bulldog. 
"Tho 'bitin' may scar us, no barcan can mark 
us"·· 01d Professor's Song at Yale. 
bar-hillel, n. A whipping post. "We've got him over a bar-hilel." 
hary, v., To inter dismissals of philosophical skepticism. Cf. hume. ''It was haried 
in a long white stroud." 
bedau, n. A water bed, equipped with a light show and a hi fi system with recordings 
of the sea surf; one lies gently lulled by the sound of the sea going on and on. 
It is reputed by its users to foster a heightened sense of social justice, and hence 
is often advocated by rehabilitationists as a benign alternative to the electric chair. 
"You'll get the chair for this--or at least the bedau!" 
belnap, n. (from bel·, beautiful, + camap) A camap felicitously def med in ordinary 
idiomatic language (e.g. "synonymous" for "intensionaly isomorphic"). 
bennettiction, n. Praise for a philosopher for solving a problem that was not invented 
until several hundred years after his death. 
"His study of Kant concludes with 
a bennettiction of Kant for solving the problem of a private language." 
bergson, n. A mountain of sound, a "buzzing, blooming confusion" 
berlin, N. An old fashioned stage coach, filled with international travelers, all talking 
rapidly and telling anecdotes of vivid life elsewhere. "As the berlin came through 
town, one could hear many accents one had never heard before, and delightful 
tales." 
bemard, n. (from St. Bernard) A shaggy dog story. Hence bernard, v., to tell such 
stories in lieu of making general arguments. 
"The risk one takes in bemarding 
is that one may be outsmarted." baow n., the punch line of a bemard. 
bertrand, n. (1) A state of profound abstraction of mind and spirit; a trance. "He 
went into a bertrand and began to babble about the class of all classes which are 
not members of themselves." (2) The state of a person who suffers from delusions 
(e.g. as of one who doubts that, when he sees a table, he sees a table}, or has visions 
(e.g. of the present King of France). (3) A state of linguistic amnesia, as of one 
who believes that "this" is a proper name and "Plato" a description. 
Black Max, the, n. 
Coveted decoration, annually awarded to the philosopher who 
stays aloft the longest by flying in circles. 
blanshard, v., To tum deathly pale at the sight of an external relation. 
block, n., 
(I) (shortened from mental block). A sort of organic stoprule or safety 
valve that prevents people from going crazy when they consider thought experi­
ments exploiting combinatorial explosion. 
"It's a good thing I had a block just 
then! I was getting a trifle dizzy when he started going on about storing all the 
possible descriptions of the universe in a book made out of tiny galaxies pretend­
ing they're electrons." 
n. (2) 
A smal but obdurate obstacle preventing the 
smooth operation of a mechanism, a spanner in the works. Hence, mental block, 
an objection to functionalism obsessively maintained in the face of al manner of 
refutations, blandishments and appeals to common cause. 
bouwsma, n. 
The sound made by a dogma, hence bouwsmatic, said of one who 
philosophizes by ear. 

AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL ASSOCIATION 
boyd, (1) n., According to non-reductionist materialism, one of the basic constitu­
ents of the universe. (The term originated with Democritus who said, "by con­
vention grue, by convention bleen; in reality only atoms and the boyd.") (2) 
adj., said of a philosopher euphorically afloat on a theory. "He was boyd up 
by his realism." 
braithwaite, n. The interval of time between two books. "His second book followed 
his first after a long braithwaite." 
bmndt, v. To take a flexible and complex posltlon and stun if by affixing a slogan 
description, with its own mark attached as a label. "The argument was good for 
a long run until he brandt it, and then al it could so was look dazed and sorry." 
brodbeck, n. 
A female expert in a predominantly male field, especially one who 
can carry the extra load involved. 
brouw, n. Intuition. Hence, heybrouw, adj., of refined intuition. 
brownian motion, n. A very small oscilation about an almost invisible point, often 
found in minute philosophical analyses. "His chisholming of that definition was 
a textbook example of brownian motion." 
buber, v. To struggle in a morass of one's own making. "After I defined the self as a 
relation that relates to itself relatingly, I bubered around for three pages." Hence 
buber, n., one who bubers. ''When my mistake was pointed out to me, I felt 
like a complete buber ." 
bunged-up, adj. Ful of unnecessary material. 
camap, n. (1) A formally defined symbol, operator, special bit of notation. "His 
prose is peppered with carnaps" or "the argument will proceed more efficiently 
if we introduce a few camaps." n. (2) Loss of consciousness while being taken 
for a ride. 
cartwrlght, adj. Characterizing one who takes such pains in constructing the cart 
that one never gets to see whether the cart is put before or after the horse. Hence, 
cartwrong, adj., slapdash. 
castaneda, n. 
An elaborate musical instrument, emitting a confused sound when 
agitated. ''The original theme was lost in the sound of the castaneda." 
cavell, v. An exquisitely sensitive distinction of language, hence cave/lier, adj., charac­
terizing a writing style common among extraordinary language philosophers. 
chihara.tiri, n. The death of aleph-nought cuts. 
chishohn, v. To make repeated small alterations in a definition or example. "He start­
ed with definition (d.8) and kept chishohning away at it until he ended up with 
(d.8 '"' "" )." 
chomsky, adj. 
Said of a theory that draws extravagant metaphysical implications 
from scientifically established facts. "Essentially, Hume's criticism of the Argu­
ment from Design is that it leads in all its forms to blatantly chomsky conclusions." 
"The conclusions drawn from Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle are not only on 
average chomskier than those drawn from Godel's theorem; most of them are 
downright merleau-ponty ." 
church, n. A tightly constructed, heavily defended medieval place of worship, now 
primarily a tourist attraction. 
churchland, n., (1) Two-ring traveling circus, a cross between a chautauqua and Dis­
neyland, at which philosophers are given entertaining religious instruction in 
Science and nothing to eat but "phase space sandwiches". (2) A theocracy whose 
official religion is eliminative materialism. 

THE PHILOSOPHICAL LEXICON 
code, v. To render unintelligible by substituting a literal translation. Hence code, n., 
the product of coding. "What he says about Aristotle sounds like code to me." 
(See also kripkography.) 
cohen, n. (from cohort and coven). A collection of philosophers. 
copiwrite, v. To come out with a revised edition for some purpose (e.g. to remove 
inconsistency or cut off the used book market). 
comell, n. The tolling of the bell to mark the end of ordinary language oltilosophy. 
croce. n. A method ot knitting spaghetti; thus, an intricate tangle. 
curry, n. 
A work well seasoned with neologisms; hence, curried, adj., 
"His work 
was an indigestible mass of curried grice." 
dagfinn, n. One of the two possible outcomes of crossing a shark with a dolphin 
(the other is the follesdal). The daf,!finn is touRhminded and tenderhearted, while 
the follesdal is soft-minded and hard-hearted; travelling together in symbiotic 
pairs, they are the only intelligent creatures at home in deep waters. 
davidsonic, adj. of speed: minimum forward velocity required to keep a research 
program in the air. Superdavidsonic, of research program for which this speed 
is zero. Hence, davidsn11ic boom, the sound made by a research program when 
it hits Oxford. 
dennett, v. (I) To while away the hours defining surnames; hence, dennettation, n. 
The meaning of a surname. "Every surname has both a meinong and a dennetta­
tion." n. (2) An artificial enzyme used to curdle the milk of human intentionality. 
dennett, n. An artificial enzyme used to curdle the milk of human intentionality. 
derek, n. 
A philosophical skyhook , purportedly capable of transporting one to the 
"standpoint of the universe." 
"The only way to raise yourself up to the point 
where you can understand how it can be good to do bad, and rational to be irra­
tional, is to take a derek ." 
derrida, From an old French nonsense refrain: "Hey nanny derrida, nonny nonny 
derrida falala 
" 
desousaphone, n. 
A musical instrument. descended from the harmanica (q.v.); like 
the bassoon, it is often used to provide comic effects in program music. 
deweyite , adj. Full of vague and impractical but well-intentioned ideas. 
donagan. v. 
To subject a thinker ro periodic 
revival, as in "I thought it was time 
to discover Collingwood , but I found he had already been donaganed." 
donnellan. v. 
Contraction of "don't know from nothing." "This stuff about refer­
ence I donnellan." 
dreb(n). n. 
A function mapping the natural numbers onto the ineffable. 
Hence. 
dreb. v .. to insist violently that something cannot be said, but to sa:v it anyway. 
Hence, dreben, n., 
"He took the recalcitrant philosopher behind t-1e barn and 
gave him a good drcben." 
dretske. n. (usually in the idiom tlu· .Ʈtraigltt dr<'t.l'ke, a Midwestern German-American 
euphemism). 
Information with no admixture of misinformation. 
"Just give 
me the strJight dretskc. and none of your tricks ƭ " 
dreyfus. n. (from "dry" & "fuss") an arid ad hominem controversy. "What began 
as an interesting debate soon degenerated into a dreyfus." 
dummett. v. 
Contraction of "thumb rhrough it"; as in 'Tm afraid the only index 
this book has is almost the same as the table of contents. so you'll just have to 
dummett ... 

AM ERIC AN PHILOSOPHICAL ASSOCIATION 
dwork, v. (Perhaps a contraction of harcl work'!) To drawl through a well prepared 
talk, making it appear effortless and extemporaneous. 
"I bin dworkin on de 
lecture circuit" ··old American folk song. 
enc, n. The purported distance between a mechanical device and a mind. 
ew., v. 
To work in an impenetrable medium. 
..Ile spent his whcle life ewing an 
idealistic line." 
feigl, v. (with out) To give up a previously held position. ··once the antinomy was 
pointed out to him he feigled out." 
feinberg, n. 
A mountain of finely grained distinctions; henr;e.feinberg, v. To work 
one's way out of a corner by building and mounting a feinberg. "I was pinned 
in my his argument, but then managed to feinberg my way out." 
feyerabend, n. (fr. German "feuer" & "abend") The last brilliant moment of a con­
ceptual framework before death and transfiguration. 
Every conceptual frame· 
work has its feyerabend. 
feys. n. 
An important work (text or reference) in an esoteric subject. "To all who 
observed him, the graduate student appeared to be going through a feys." Hence, 
feys, v. To seem on first reading to be an important work. "Quine's latest book 
did not feys him for a minute." 
findlay, n. An implement used in the exploration of r;aves. It is not known exactly 
what it is because it is only used in total darkness. 
fitch. v. 
To seek sound arguments for positions no 
one holds. 
"In his last article he really went filch· 
ing." 
Hence, [itch, n. Such an argument, and [itch· 
ous, adj., describing such arguments (e.g. a litchous 
circle), also fitchy, adj. 
"His argument struck me 
as !itchy." 
flew, (I) n. An old-fashioned device for blowing smoke 
into churches. 
"He was so annoyed by the litch 
that he stuck it up the flew." (2) v. To glide rapidly 
and superficially 
over difficult 
terrain 
(cf. fout 
and ra11Jall). "We were trying to heidegg the suppesi· 
lions in hampshire but he just flew right by." 
fodor, 
n. (I) A jaunty hat worn at a rakish angle, 
under which one keeps one's katz-kradle (q.v.). 
n. (2) (short for fodorgraph). 
A fodorgraph is 
-
·=- --
an explicit representation which is what is lert when 
/kn 
you take a literal physical image. subtract the spatial 
array of colored marks, and then throw away the 
paper. 
fogel, v. (with i11) (cf. feigl oufl To adopt a position just aftc1 its futility has been 
widely acknowledged (e.g., to accept the chairmanship of Yale in the mid-sixties). 
foot. v. 
To work one's way close to the ground, in a descriptive manner. avoiding 
all flights of construction. (cf. .flew, ramla/I) 
foster, v. 
To insist on the importance or existence of somc1hing insignifican1 or 
unreal. 
--Qualia should not be quincd. but fostcrcd!"--rnmmen1ary by J. Foster 
on "'Quining Qualia'', Oxford. 1979. 

THE PHILOSOPHICAL LEXICON 
foucault, n. 
A howler, an insane mistake. "I'm afraid I've committed an egregious 
foucault." 
frege, n. 
(only in the idiom, to beg the frege) 
To acknowledge the inconsistency 
of one's position but maintain it anyway. 
gadam, v. 
To expound the meaning of abstruse writings, dreams, arcane and necro­
mantic symbols, and the rest of the universe, in ways pleasing to the humanist. 
Hence, gadamer, n., one who gadams. Hence, also the adjective, gadam, gadamer, 
gadamest, of or pertaining to the activity of gadaming. 
"I done my gadamest." 
gas, v. (1) To write philosophy like a novelist; (2) To write novels like a philosopher. 
geach, 
v. (I) To hold onto a view in the face of difficulties you would be quick to 
fmd insuperable in an opponent's position. 
Particularly in the idiom, "geach to 
his own taste." (Cf. Fr. "bergson a son goo.") n. (2) lndefmable term, which 
can be learned only by ostension, having to do with the way one reacts to a philo­
sophic issue or individuals. 
"It made me want to geach." "They were sitting in 
the bar, geaching at Whitehead." 
"It is hard to say whether he is seriously chis­
holming the defmition or just geaching off." 
gerasimos santas, interj. Ritual chant of the moravcsiki. 
getty, adj. 
Describing a counterexample that obtains its conclusion. "Your first 
rule raises some interesting questions, but your second is gettier." 
gibbard, n. A cumbersome balance-beam device used by decision theorists for decid­
ing among equally unsavory alternatives. 
"Such a dilemma! 
That's one for the 
gibbard!" 
glover, n. 
One who manufactures utilitarian articles from materials supplied by a 
skinner. 
glymour, n. An illumination, usually enveloped in darkness; often used metaphori-
caly, as in "I read all the equations, but I just had a glymour of what they meant." 
gnoaJR, n. Homunculus. 
godel, adj. Said of a contribution: fundamental. (see Kleene). 
goldfarbrication, n. 
The alchemical transformation of slapdash investigations into 
precious philosophical ore. 
"In this day and age there are still some who believe 
that goldfarbrication is possible, even to the extent of devoting their careers to 
the attempt." 
goodij• n. 
An entry in a utility matrix - more specificaly, the utility of actj in the 
event of outcomej. 
goodman, n. 
An apparent straw man that does not succumb to repeated glancing 
blows, a riddle that resists solution. "It's hard to keep a goodman down." 
grice, n. Conceptual intricacy. "His examination of Hume is distinguished by erudi· 
tion and grice." 
Hence, griceful, adj., and griceless, adj., "An obvious and grice­
less polemic." pl. grouse, A multiplicity of grice, fragmenting into great detail, 
often in reply to an original grice note. 
grunbaum, n. (in German folklore) 
A tree which, when one of its fruits is bruised, 
produces another of the same shape, taste, and texture but five times as large. 
gunderstanding, n. 
Machine intelligence. 
Also, gunderstatement, n., a print-out. 
gustav, n. 
Metaphysical abandon. 
"He conducts the argument with great gustav." 
habennas, (from the Middle High German ha/her Marx; cf. ganzer Marx) n. A reli­
gious ceremony designed to engender an illusion of understanding through chants 

AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL ASSOCIATION 
describing socioŶconomic conditions. Hence also, habermass, v. "He habennassed 
Einstein; he attempted to deduce the special theory of relativity from the social 
structure of the Zurich patent office." "Nothing but a gadam habermass" -- H.S. 
Truman. 
hack, v. To deal vigorously with. "He spent years hacking his way through the 
stochastic jungle." See also ew, a gentler variant. 
haksar, n. Sharp implement for boring intricately shaped holes. 
hampshire, n. A scenic bit Df English countryside, providing broad prospects and 
distant horizons, but one must foot one's way carefully; under the marsh there 
is a bog. 
hare, n. Standard unit of moral indignation, as felt by Professor Hare when observ· 
ing a motorist breaking the Highway Code. (Standard, of course, to be specified.) 
hannanica, n. A musical instrument played with tongue in cheek. Also, hannaniac, 
n. One who does not realize a harmanica is played with tongue in cheek. 
ham.ad, n. In the idiom to get a hamod (Obs.) To be seized with an insatiable appetite 
for academic miscegenation, with voyeuristic, exhibitionistic and sadomasochistic 
features; usually requiring the possession of an intact, bilaterally symmetric organ 
of dissemination (the harnads), capable of emitting an unrelenting stream of bbs. 
harp, v. To converse at great length and with immense 
enthusiasm about something totally incomprehen· 
sible to one's listener. 
heidegger, n. 
A ponderous device for boring through 
thick layers of substance. 
"It's buried so deep 
we'll have to use a heidegger." 
hempel, adj. (only in the idiom hempel·minded) Said 
of one who insists on recasting the problem in the 
first order logic. 
henk, v. To accuse someone of not having first-hand 
/u·i<k.ƫ.Ƭ··r 
acquaintance with what he is talking about. (cf. 
the German "daraus werde der Henker klug") The 
mathematicians held a henlc-in at the philosophy 
colloquium." "I'm henlced even if I know." 
hesean, n., a kind of sackcloth worn at a habermass (q.v.) by those renouncing hem· 
ple mindedness. 
hilary, n. (from hilary term) A very brief but significant period in the intellectual 
career of a distinguished philosopher. "Oh, that's what I thought three or four 
hilaries ago." 
hintika, n. A measure of belief, the smallest logicaly discernible difference between 
beliefs; "He argued with me all night, but did not alter my beliefs one hintika." 
honderich, interj. (contraction of "Hound the rich!") The battle cry of those who 
subscribe to the violent otherthrow of inequality. "The toast at the dinner party 
in Hempstead was 'honderich!'" 
hosper, v. To publish philosophical textbooks and anthologies with great frequency; 
hence, hosperous, adj., said of one who hospers. 
home, pron. (1) Indefinite personal and relative pronoun, presupposing no referent. 
Useful esp. in writing solipsistic treatises, sc. •·to hume it may concern." v. (2) To 
commit to the flames, bury, or otherwise destroy a philosophical position, as in 
"That theory was humed in the 1920's." Hence, exhume, v., to revive a position 
generally believed to be humed. 

THE PHILOSOPHICAL LEXICON 
jaegwon, n. (from oriental mythology). A small cat-like dragon patrolling the maze 
of metaphysics. 
Hence, to be on a jaeg: to engage in a relentless exploration of 
metaphysical avenues and byways. 
jaspers, n. 
The hours when darkness returns; a time for self-examination, and medi­
tation upon the human condition. 
jerry-mander, v. To tailor one's metaphysics so as to produce results convenient for 
the philosophy of mind. 
E.G., "Paramecia don't have mental representations; 
therefore the properties they react to are nomic." 
Hence jerry-rigged, adj., said 
of an argument proceeding from jerry-mandered premises. "Paramecia only react 
to nomic properties; therefore, they don't have mental representations." 
kaplan, n. 
Ecclesiastical spokesman appointed by the A.P .A. to deliver a lengthy 
impromptu benediction after every paper at a recognized colloquium. 
katz, n. {shortened from kotz-kradle) A device of wires and pulleys for determining 
meanings. 
kemp, n. (of Scottish origin). 
An instrument for the careful dissection and recon· 
struction of a philosopher. 
"Thomas, a kemp is necessary in dealing with De 
lmitatione Christi." 
·- Mersenne, correspondence with Hobbes. 
Hence, kemp, 
v., to reconstruct a philosopher by using a kemp . Also unkempt, adj., ungroomed, 
unreconstructed. 
"Hume was quite unkempt until about 1905 ." 
Also kemp 
smith, n., maker of kemps . 
keny, adj . Clever. 
kitch, n. 
Popular and pretentious academic nonsense, such as creationism or pop 
sociobiology . 
Hence kitcher, n., a kitch critic. ••If only we had a kitcher around 
to tackle the anthropic principle! " 
kleene, adj. Exhaustive, complete; ••Kleeneness is next to gcidelness." 
komer, n. 
Quasi-quotation. 
Also, komer, v. 
To paraphrase. 
"He kornered my 
ideas with great accuracy, but his criticisms were well wide of the mark." 
Hence 
also k(imercom, v. To dennett. 
kreisel, n. An imperfect crystal. Hence, kreisel-clear, adj., obscure. 
kripke, adj. 
Not understood, but considered brilliant. 
"I hate to admit it, but I 
found his remarks quite kripke ." 
kripkography, n. The opposite of cryptography: the art of translating a meaningless 
message (about, e.g., de re necessity) into expressions that an uninitiated observer 
would take to be straightforwardly meaningful (e.g., "Look, it's not so hard. 
Al he's saying is that since the tennis a rigid designator, it refers to the same thing 
in al possible worlds."). 
"He used to claim he just 'couldn't understand' essen­
tialism, but now, thanks to kripkography, he just sits there nodding and smiling." 
kuhn, n. A fox often mistaken for a hedgehog; it is usually attended by such a com· 
motion that it appears more than twice as heavy as it really is. 
lacanthropy, n. 
The transformation, under the influence of the full moon, of a du­
bious psychological theory into a dubious social theory via a dubious linguistic 
theory. 
lakoff, v. To rub the deep structure of a sentence until it expresses its logical fonn. 
"Too much laking off can cause insanity.'' 
lambert, n. 
The whinny of a non-existent horse. 
"Pegasus lamberted plaintively: 
'E!E!E!E!'" 

AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL ASSOCIATION 
leblanc, n. 
A place-holder symbol. 
"When a variable isn't available use leblanc." 
levi, n. A betting rate or tax. 
levi strauss, (trade mark). 
Manufacturer of coveralls to which symbols, emblems 
and patches are usually applied. 
Originaly levi strauss products were working 
hypotheses, then in the nineteen-sixties flaunting them in conventional settings 
acquired political significance. They are now accepted almost everywhere. 
lewis, adj. (said of an argument) Having premises and conclusions unrelated in con­
tent (e.g., The entailment-of "Russell is the Pope" by "2+2=S"). If the argument 
is valid, the relation between premises and conclusion is that of lewis implication. 
loar, n. (shortened from folk/oar) 
Twin-earthian folk psychology, which differs 
from our sort of folk psychology in ways that can be discerned only by an expert 
folkloarist . 
locke, v. To mistake a contemporary philosopher with an earlier philosopher of the 
same name. "I'm afraid you have David and CJ. Lewis locked"; hence, to unlocke, 
to become otherwise (q.v.). 
lucas-pocus, interjection, an incantation, ritualisticaly 
utte1ed by users of the abracadabracus, an organic, 
non-mechanistic calculating device for producing 
Godel sentences. 
ludwig, n. 
A smal beetle that looks exactly like an 
earwig, but is invisible. 
lycan, n. An automated trash sorter containing a power­
ful solvent; one deposits a jumble of theories in it, 
pushes a button, and the mess is dissolved into its 
components, neatly packaged and ready to discard. 
lyotard, n. The new clothes of the present King of 
France. 
lynm 
mach, n. 
A measure of speed; mach one, the speed at which a research program 
(e.g., phenomenalism) becomes superdavidsonic tq.v.). 
macintyre, n. An inflated wheel with a slick, impeivious coating; hence, derivatively, 
an all-terrain vehicle equipped with macintyres. "If you want to cover that much 
territory that fast, you'd best use the macintyre." 
malcolm, n. 
Measure of resistance to the encroachment of scientific results on a 
philosophic position; hence malcolmtent, n. one who so resists. 
(Malcolmtents 
have been said to rely heavily on a certain text known as the vade malcolm) 
marcuse, v. 
To criticize vehemently from a Marxist perspective. 
..Je marcuse!"-· 
J.P. Sartre. 
martin, v. To overwhelm with camaps. "If he was martinned by the book, he should 
not have agreed to review it." 
masey, adj. Describing the work of someone who is hemple-minded. 
mctaggart, n. 
A black hole which not only sheds no light but in which time stands 
still. "Some mctaggarts are rather broad." 
meinong, n. The intension of a meaningless term. 
merleau-ponty, adj. In the wrong order, with confused foundations, said of a theory; 
figurative synonyms are upside-down, topsy-turvy, front-to-back. 
"The sense­
datum approach to certainty was al merleau-ponty in the first place." 

THE PHILOSOPHICAL LEXICON 
michiganer. adj. 
Crazy, stupid (a derogatory term typically, but not exclusively, 
applied to ethical doctrines). 
"Well, I wouldn't say it is michiganer, but it's cer· 
tamly off the wal." 
moore, v. 
To try to win an argument by taking something out of your pocket. 
couldn't think of anything to say so I hauled off and moored him." 
mooring, n. A common-sense belief, attitude, etc. "In his youth he was so overcome 
by Hegelian rhetoric that he lost his moorings." 
moravcsiki, n. pl. Subversive mystery cultists who worship Plato and Aristotle. 
nagel, v. To sense, vaguely, that something crucial but ineffable has been left out of 
account. 
"No sooner had I completed my proof that the robot was conscious 
than I was beset by a swarm of nageling doubts." 
nerlich, adj. (often mistranslated into English as knee-like). Characterizing the unima­
ginable shape of the most inclusive space-time worm. 
neurotto, adj. Obsessed with protocol. 
nicknack, n. 
An interesting oddity of no real importance. 
"He devoted his time 
to such nicknacks as the Cartesian Circle, the Naturalistic Fallacy, and the Ontolo­
gical Argument." 
Hence. 11icknackia11, n. One preoccupied with nicknacks, and 
nacknickian, n. a merleau-ponty nicknackian. 
noam, n. Unit of Resistance. "Hilary is a popper noam.'' 
nozick, n. (from nostrum + physick) 
Political snake oil, a patent medicine, esp. a 
cathartic or purgative. 
"Waste not logick, not yet strong physick, on the Levia­
than; serve it nozick. and stand back."·· Hobbes. 
otherwise adj. 
Knowing the difference between two philosophers with identical 
mterests and the same name, hence utlzerwisdom, n. 
Also, v. (with "up"). 
"I 
got otherwiscd up about the Smullyans." 
outsmart, v. 
To embrace the conclusion of one's opponent's reductio ad absurdum 
argument. 
"They thought they had me, but l outsmarted them. I agreed that it 
was sometimes just to hang an innocent man." 
owen, v. 
To be indebted to the entire Greek corpus for one's views. 
"I owened 
winning the argument to 1094b 12-14." 
parfit, n. (I) (often pl.) metaphysical gain. Hence parjlt, v., to make a parfit. "What 
parfit a man that he gain immortality and lose his own identify?" adj. (2) Gene­
rally used il poetic and fanciful fiction, to describe a medieval knight on a single­
minded but learned quest for an mvisible and impossible ŧoal. 
Cf. 
"He was a 
gentel, parfit knight."·· Chaucer. 
partee, n. (in the idiom, tu be a partee to) To become an enthusiastic spokesperson 
for someone else's theory. Hence. repartee, n. repeated championing. 
pastin, n. 
A statement (ordered triple of sentence. proposition and condition of 
assertion) with an infinitely convoluted warrant profile. (Acronym from p is ac­
cepted by sat t even though intelligible only after n readings). 
pasmore. n. 
A larger, antipodal version of the lycan (q.v.), capable of digesting 
a century of philosophy in a single pass. 
pcock, n. Writing profusely sprinkled with carnaps. 
perry, n. 
A sparkling and apparently light alcoholic beverage which is deceptively 
strong: in even moderate quantities it can lead the drinker to wonder who he is. 

AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL ASSOCIATION 
peter song, n. related to the patter song (e.g., "Birds do it, bi:es do it, even educated 
fleas do it. 
") a popular ditty exhorting one to love all creatures great and small, 
except those born deformed. Hence peter singer, n .. a singer of peter songs. 
phippogriff, n (also phi/Uppogrif/) 
A legendary creature, now almost inaccessible 
to either knowledge or belief. 
pitcher , n. 
A perceptually caused, non·imagistic belief. 
"I'm having this mental 
pitcher of Mary " .. "What'?" .. "l'm causally-receiving in the standard visual way 
a perceptual belief about Mary'' -- "Oh." 
planting. v. To use twentieth century fertilizer to encourage new shoots from eleventh 
century ideas which everyone thought had gone to seed; hence. p/antinger, n. 
one who plantings. 
popkin, n. An expletive indicating great doubt. 
popper, adj. 
Exhibiting great moral seriousness; im­
popper, frivolous. 
prior, n. 
What one must know if one is to know any· 
thing about a subject. 
..When it comes to tense 
logic he doesn't know his prior from his posterior:· 
propylyshyn, n. 
A proposition of a thousand words 
(worth one mental picture). Cf. fodorgraph. 
puccetto, n. 
A smal vociferous sub-personal center 
of consciousneÕ residing in a single cerebral hemis­
phere. 
"The first sign of the breakdown of a bica­
meral mind is a cacophony of puccetti." --J . Jaynes. 
putname, n. A presumed expert authorized by a society 
to name a natural kind and determine its members. 
putnom<' 
quine, v. (I) To deny resolutely the existence or importance of something real or 
significant. 
"Some philosophers have quined clases, and some have even quined 
physical objects." Occasionaly used intr., e.g., "You think I quine, sir. I assure 
you I do not!" (2) n. 
The total aggregate sensory surface of the world; hence 
quinitis. irritation of the quine . 
quintify, v. 
To give a popular and oversimplifying account of a philosophical prob­
lem. 
(a) 
quintifying in opaque contexts: writing an article on Wittgenstein for 
the Sunday papers; (b) existential quintifier: Walter Kaufmann; (c) universal 
quintifier: Mortimer Adler. 
quinton, n. (from quintal, a measure of grain). A large amount of chaff. 
ramsify, v. To simplify, e.g., ramsified theory of types. 
randall, n. A brisk entertaining stroll through a philosophical subject, footing none 
too carefully and proceeding too fast to allow for thorough acquaintance with 
the terrain. 
Hence randa/I, v. with on. 
"His book randalls on about Plato, but 
it is far too long." 
raw), n. A fishing line, baited with a few apparently innocent intuitions about fair· 
ness. but capable of bringing in such big fish as Pareto optimality and God knows 
what else. 
"But some who use a raw! are only fitching." Hence, rawl, v. "When 
he raw led that slender line in, I could hardly believe my eyes." 

THE PHILOSOPHICAL LEXICON 
resch, (1) v. 
To evince an extravagant or pathological degree of intellectual energy 
in many directions. 
"He is always resching into print-one can't keep up with 
his stuff." (2) rescher, n. A unit for measuring the volwne of printed pages, equal 
to the collected works of Francis Bacon (hence, a rescher of Bacon). 1 rescher 
= 10,000 sheffers. 
"The new wing will increase the library capacity by over a 
thousand reschers." 
richmond, n. The capital of the possible U.S. in which the Confederates won. 
ricoeur, v. 
To interpret all philosophical questions by means of a limited range of 
insights and themes. Hence ricoeursive procedure, a recipe for generating infinite 
philosophical insights from a very limited subset thereof. 
"The Tractatus pro· 
ceeds ricoeursively ." 
roderick, n. 
The art of writing purely decorative scholarly footnotes. 
"The first 
principle of roderick is to quote authors whose names are known widely but 
whose works are read seldom." 
·- John Venn. 
(The trivium, or lower division 
of the seven liberal arts, consists of transformational grammar, modal logic, and 
roderick.) 
rort, n. m. (I) An incorrigible report; hence, rorty, adj., incorrigible. n. (2) Fash· 
ionable but confused discourse. "Don't talk rort." 
routle, n. 
An implement for probing the fragile substructure of rain forests; esp. 
in the phrase routle-rattling, referring to environmentalist rhetoric. 
Once the sylvan dell was routley, 
ln the land where men speak stoutly, 
Jungle routles then were legion 
Poking relevantly round the region. 
royce, v. 
To involve the topic "in such adamantine cobwebs of voluminous rolling 
speculation that no one could regain his senses thereafter." -· John Jay Chapman, 
Memories and Milestones, 1915. 
rush rhees, n. A type of plaited prayer-mat used by pietist sect founded by the spiri­
tual leader, Ludwig II. 
ryle, v. To give examples. "He ryles on and on without ever daring a conclusion.' 
Hence, n. An example. 
"His argument was elucidated by a variety of apt ryles." 
"The original ryle has been chisholmed beyond recognition." (2) 
A variety of 
smooth, lucid, thin ice that forms on bogs. 
salmon, n. An inductive fitch. 
santayana, n. A hot, exhausting wind originating in the desert areas of Spain. 
schanksmare, n. 
A recurrent, obsessive dream of walking into restaurant after res· 
taurant, ordering a meal, and leaving a small tip. 
scheme, v. To try to J!;ain one's footing between two jointly exhaustive and mutually 
exclusive positions such as consequentalism and agent centered moral theory. 
Hence, scheffler, one who scheffles. 
schiffer, n. (from Neurath, "Wie Schiffer sind wir 
") One who uses great ingenuity 
in repairing a sinking ship. 
"There's no griceful way of saving this theory; even 
the rats have abandoned ship. There's no one aboard but the schiffer." 
schilpp, n. 
A high level of distinction, hence on the schilpp, adj., said of someone 
who has nowhere to go. 
schlick, adj. 
Characterizing a theory or position close-shaven by Occam's razor. 
"Push, pull, schlick, schlick." 

AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL ASSOCIATION 
scrive, v. To write in tongues, the orthographic equivalent of glossolalia. "What 
can't be said, can't be said, and it can't be whistled either ·• but it can be scriven." 
-· attributed to F .P. Ramsey. 
scrutonize, v. "To conflate two disciplines at a superficial level so that dinner party 
conversations could continue in the spurious belief that matters of moment were 
being discussed while the port was passed." ·· David Dunster, Architectural Design, 
December 1979, p. 327. 
searley, adj. Contemptuous of leftist political thought, because of presumed lack 
of rigor. 
"When the demonstrators asked whether 'academic freedom' meant 
freedom to pursue war research, the Dean turned quite searley." 
sellar, n. A deep, dark place beneath a weighty edifice that lacks foundations. 
shoemaker, n. 
A cobbler's body that has been entered and informed by the soul 
of a prince. 
skin, v. To ignore the inside of something. "There is more than one way to skin 
a katz." Hence, skinner, n. one who skins. 
sklar, adj., (contraction of German sehr klar). Balanced and comprehensive, as in 
"His article was sklar-every conceivable position was explained and none adopted." 
sleigh, v. To kil with a chishohn. (Cf. chihara-kiri.) 
slote, v. To swallow something large or cumbersome (e.g., a sword, a horse, an epis· 
temic principle). "She just opened her throat and sloted the goat" 
"If you can 
slote that you must be pretty ungry." 
smart, v. To argue against someone until what is going on in him is like what would 
be going on in him had he sat on a tack. "That smarts." See also outsmart. 
smitherens, n. pl. (from Smith Verein ). Pluralists. In the jargon of analytic philoso· 
phers, demonstrating the incoherence of a position is sometimes called blowing 
it to smithereens. 
stalnaker, n. 
An idee fixe that brings a theory or theorist to a halt. "He was going 
great until he got the idea that there was just one mathematical truth, and that 
stalnaker hung him up for years." "Einstein's stalnaker was that God does not 
play dice." 
stich, n. (Cf. croce) The art of eliminative embroidery. In the art of stich, one 
delicately strips the semantics off the rich tapestry of folk psychology revealing 
the bare warp and woof of pure syntax. "A stich in time saves Quine." 
strawson, n. The descendant of a strawman, a position obscurely descended from 
a position never occupied. 
suppes, n. A suppes--an ordered quadruple consisting of a philosopher, a problem, 
axiomatic set theory, and a Federal grant. 
suppesition, n. Any assumption equivalent to the axiom of choice. 
taylor, v. (in the idiom, to taylor the argument) To defend an absurd position or 
conclusion by inventing equally absurd premises or inferences; as in, "It's easy 
to get a proof of fatalism if you know how to taylor the argument." Also, tay· 
/or 's dummy, an absurd principle on which to hang bits of metaphysical non­
sense. 
thomson gun, n. A double-barreled sniping weapon developed at M.I.T. 
turing, adj. Mindless, stupid. "I've seldom heard such a turing lecture." "You have to 
take a lot of turing tests to get into college." Hence turing machine, n. a machine. 

THE PHILOSOPHICAL LEXICON 
unger, n. 
Extreme epistemic undernourishment, often developing into a sceptic 
ulcer. 
"The suggestion that no one knows what he had for breakfast this morn· 
ing is strictly from unger." 
vendle. v. To attempt to sell a philosopher a linguistic bill of goods; hence, vend/er, 
n. One who vendles. 
vlast, v.i. 
To bounce back from terrific (q.v.) blows. 
Vlastic, adj. 
Characterizing 
a tendency to vlast off things. 
vlastos, n. 
Ceremonial denunciation by the moravcsiki of anyone doubting the con­
temporary relevance of Plato or Aristotle. 
Hence, vlast, v with off, to issue a 
vlastos. 
wang. n. (not in polite usage): the organ of ramification . 
wamock, n. 
A bruise, sustained in fencing. "I was lucky to get away from Oxford 
with nothing more than a couple of warnocks." 
weiss, adj. Said of one who royces. "He's a weiss guy." 
wej, n. The sign of disjohnson . 
wiggins, n. pl. 
A series of small jumps, inserting missing premises between any two 
others. 
"As we proceeded along with our wiggins, the conclusion seemed to get 
farther and farther away." 
wilfrid, adj. 
Said of a theory one presumes to be true but finds incomprehensible; 
"You physicists all seem to agree, but it's wilfrid to me." "I'm sorry, your Holi­
ness, but every time you explain the Trinity to me it goes all wilfrid in my mind." 
Also, said of a person, bewilfrid. 
williams, n. pl. 
The dream-sensation of running for one's life while wearing diving 
boots. "His comments on my paper gave me the williams." 
winch, n. 
A delicate shudder of incomprehension. 
"Give him a winch and he'll 
take a ryle." Hence, winchcraft, an incomprehensible social institution. 
winograd, n. 
The degree of intoxication occasioned by moving to the West Coast. 
wisdom, n. 
A state of clarity and understanding so complete and exhaustive, yet 
also so detailed and complex, as to be totally incommunicable. 
wollheim, n .  
A leisurely investigation, with well-intentioned desires to return home 
to the point, but always wandering off again. 
ziff, n. A nasty philosophical dispute. 
.., had a ziff with him once in the journals." 

