-  by Daniel Dennett   -  
F
or as long as our ancestors have been
making tools, it has no doubt seemed
obvious that an excellent artifact can be
created only by something even more ex-
cellent: a clever artificer. You never see a
shoe creating a cobbler; you never see a
house making a carpenter. Darwin over-
threw that received wisdom. One of Dar-
win’s earliest critics, Robert Beverley
MacKenzie, could not contain his outrage:
In the theory with which we have to
deal, Absolute Ignorance is the artifi-
cer; so that we may enunciate as the
fundamental principle of the whole
system, that, IN ORDER TO MAKE A PER-
FECT AND BEAUTIFUL MACHINE, IT IS NOT
REQUISITE TO KNOW HOW TO MAKE IT.
This proposition will be found … to
express in a few words all Mr.
Darwin’s meaning; who, by a
strange inversion of reasoning,
seems to think Absolute Ignorance
fully qualified to take the place of
Absolute Wisdom in all the achieve-
ments of creative skill.
This is indeed a “strange inversion of rea-
soning,” but once the topsy-turvy per-
spective it implies has been accepted,
most of what we have believed about
who we are survives intact. We can still
be in awe of the “Wisdom in all the
achievements of creative skill” while at-
tributing this wisdom not to a single Cre-
ator, but distributing it over billions of
years in trillions of lineages of replicators,
trying their luck in the great tournament
of life, mindlessly discovering and redis-
covering the brilliant design principles
that constitute the diversity of life. Tradi-
tion honors the trickle-down theory of
value: what we do and think can be valu-
able only if it derives its value from some-
thing even more valuable—only if we are
the servants, in effect, of a greater master.
Darwin’s “strange inversion” obliges us
to rethink what could make something
valuable, and then we notice that a bub-
ble-up theory has much to recommend it.
There was a time when there was no
morality on this planet, and now it has
evolved. Just as the air we breathe was
created as a by-product of the activities of
billions of years of simpler life forms, the
very meaning of life on this planet has
emerged from the efforts of the life forms
that the atmosphere enabled.
We are animals. Are we just animals?
The ideological tug-of-war over “human
exceptionalism” can be damped, if not
stopped outright, by emphasizing a few
uncontroversial facts. Sight, the capacity
to extract huge amounts of relevant infor-
mation from a relatively safe distance, was
an innovation that multiplied the oppor-
tunities of intelligent behavior: locomo-
tion, predation, evasion, migration, and so
on. Sight and flight have each evolved nu-
merous times, but language has evolved
just once, so far as we know—in our
genus. (Neanderthals may have been a
second talking species for a while.) Lan-
guage is the key to our huge advantage in
knowledge and technology. Other animal
species transmit significant amounts of
know-how nongenetically from parent to
offspring, but without language, the les-
sons to be learned are rather simple pref-
erences and prohibitions, not elaborate
systems of hard-won technique and pa-
tiently gathered data.
It has taken our species thousands of
years of communication and investigation
to begin to find the keys to our own iden-
tities. Our newfound capacity for long-dis-
tance knowledge gives us powers that
dwarf those of all the rest of the life on
Earth. It has been estimated that ten thou-
sand years ago, the human population
comprised a small fraction of 1 percent of
the mass of vertebrate life on land; today,
we, together with our livestock and pets,
make up about 98 percent of that total. We
exploit an ever increasing share of the
planet’s resources, but we do offer some-
thing in return. Now, for the first time in
its billions of years of history, our planet is
protected by far-seeing sentinels, able to
anticipate danger from the distant fu-
ture—an asteroid on a collision course, or
global warming—and devise schemes for
doing something about it. The planet has
finally grown its own nervous system: us.
We are responsible for the future of life on
the planet, in a way no other species could
ever be.
1. What developments would make it possi-
ble or likely for language to evolve again,
in another species?
2. Are there any good reasons, aside from
tradition, for favoring a trickle-down 
theory of value over a bubble-up theory
of value?
3. Beavers build elaborate dams; so do civil
engineers. What role does language play
in determining the kinds of artifacts a
species can make? 
4. How would you defend the hypothesis
that our ancestors learned to control fire
before they mastered language?
Discussion Questions
Center for Cognitive Studies at Tufts
University: ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/
Darwin Day, University of Tennessee at
Knoxville: fp.bio.utk.edu/darwin/
The C. Warren Irvin, Jr., Collection of
Darwiniana: www.sc.edu/library/
spcoll/nathist/darwin/darwin.html
Web Links
How has Darwin’s theory of natural selection transformed our view of
humanity’s place in the universe?
LIFE ESSAY
Daniel Dennett is Uni-
versity Professor and 
Director of the Center 
for Cognitive Studies at
Tufts University,Medford,
Massachusetts.He is the
author of many books
and articles,
among
them Consciousness Ex-
plained (1991), Darwin’s
Dangerous Idea (1995),
and Freedom Evolves (2003).

