Эпистемология и философия науки
2019. Т. 56. № 2. С. 26–28
УДК 101.2 
Epistemology & Philosophy of Science
2019, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 26–28
DOI:
PHILOSOPHY OR AUTO-ANTHROPOLOGY?
Daniel C. Dennett – PhD, 
Austin B. Fletcher Professor 
of Philosophy.
Tufts University.
419 Boston Ave, Medford,
MA 02155, USA.
e-mail: daniel.dennett@
tufts.edu
Timothy Williamson is mainly right, I think. He defends armchair
philosophy as a variety of armchair science, like mathematics, or
computer modeling in evolutionary theory, economics, statistics,
and I agree that this is precisely what philosophy is, at its best:
working out the assumptions and implications of any serious
body of thought, helping everyone formulate the best questions
to ask, and then leaving the empirical work to the other sciences.
Philosophy – at its best – is to other inquiries roughly as theo-
retical physics is to experimental physics. You can do it in the arm-
chair, but you need to know a lot about the phenomena with
which the inquiry deals. 
Keywords:  armchair philosophy, method, auto-anthropology, meta-
philosophy
ФИЛОСОФИЯ ИЛИ АУТО-АНТРОПОЛОГИЯ?
Дэниел Деннет – доктор
философии, профессор.
Университет Тафтса.
419 Boston Ave, Мэдфорд, 
Массачусетс, 02155, США.
e-mail: daniel.dennett@
tufts.edu
Автор в целом согласен с позицией Т.Уильямсона. Уильямсон
защищает кабинетную философию, ставя ее в один ряд с ма-
тематикой, компьютерным моделированием в эволюционной
теории, экономике и статистике. Автор согласен, что кабинет-
ная философия связана с одним из лучших проявлений фило-
софии вообще – выявлением предпосылок и оценкой резуль-
татов тех или иных способов мышления. Философия помогает
тем самым ставить правильные вопросы, не вмешиваясь при
этом в эмпирические исследования, которыми занимаются
конкретные науки. В этом смысле роль философии сопостави-
ма с ролью теоретической физики по отношению к физике
экспериментальной. Вы можете заниматься ею, сидя в крес-
ле, но вы должны обладать достаточным знанием о фено-
мене, который вы изучаете.
Ключевые слова:  кабинетная философия, метод, ауто-антропо-
логия, метафилософия
Williamson acknowledges that “Armchair thinking is far from a ‘pure’
method,” and goes on to make some important observations:
The belief that philosophy should never rely on non-armchair methods is
increasingly rare. Philosophers of perception often learn from experimen-
tal results in the psychology of perception; it would be foolish not to.
Philosophers of space and time must take account of theories in physics,
most obviously Einstein’s special relativity. Of course, some philosophers
insist that their interest is in our experience or concepts of space and time,
not in physical space and time, but such attempts to avoid interaction with
the natural and social sciences do not end well. Even if they can es-
cape physics, how can they ignore the non-armchair work of experimental
psychologists on human experience of time, or of linguists on the seman-
tics of tense in different natural languages?
26
© Daniel C. Dennett

PHILOSOPHY OR AUTO-ANTHROPOLOGY?
How can they indeed, but they often do. That is not philosophy at its
best, but it still passes as good work in all too many quarters. He goes on:
“In any case, contemporary metaphysicians are less interested in our ex-
perience or concepts of space and time than in the real nature of space
and time themselves.” His parade case is David Lewis:
A clear and well-articulated philosophical theory may consist of a few gen-
eral principles, as informative, simple, and elegant as they can consistently
be. A philosopher may then argue for the theory by demonstrating its ca-
pacity to provide unifying explanations of many specific, apparently dis-
parate matters. The leading analytic metaphysician of the late twentieth
century, David Lewis, explicitly argued for his signature theories in just
that way [Lewis, 1986].
Yes, David Lewis, my friend for four decades, was a master of
the method, but I think these two assertions by Williamson can be easily
misread as endorsing a blinkered approach that Lewis himself eschewed.
They provide a near-perfect expression of the position I have called “naïve
naïve axiomatic auto-anthropology” [Dennett, 2013]: thinking that the roy-
al road to truth is to attempt to axiomatize, with your companions, your
shared intuitions. I contrast it with sophisticated naïve axiomatic auto-
anthropology, exemplified by Patrick Hayes’ (1978) ambitious, if failed, ef-
forts to axiomatize the naïve physics of liquids. The difference is this: so-
phisticated Hayes knew full well that naïve physics – the physics of
the manifest image, approximately – is full of flaws (siphons and pipettes
are impossible, no sailing upwind, ‘centrifugal force’,...), but still an intel-
lectual structure worth getting clear about. Why bother? One good – philo-
sophical – reason is to clarify the manifest image so that we can better exe-
cute  Wilfrid  Sellars’ definition  of  philosophy’s  task,  explaining  “how
things, in the broadest sense of the term, hang together, in the broadest
sense of the term.” Some of Lewis’s work can be seen, in fact, to be a fine
contribution to Judea Pearl’s (2009) seminal work on causality, not because
it succeeded in getting at the “real nature” of causation but because it gave
Pearl, as an engineer/philosopher, something to fix. 
If David Lewis and his many disciples thought that his methods,
taken without deep knowledge of science, would yield “the real nature of
space and time themselves,” as Williamson put it, they were committing
themselves to naïve naïve axiomatic auto-anthropology, using their own
coterie as their “native informants” and taking their intuition-pumped con-
sensus as a sure path to “the real nature” of whatever they were talking
about. That this presumption has been common for decades is nicely pre-
saged in Williamson’s quotation from Austin. Right in the middle of his
apologia for ordinary language philosophy Austin helps himself to a tell-
tale word, “surely”, which I have argued [Dennett, 2013] is such a reli-
able, if fallible, marker of the weak link in any persuasion that we should
all, as scrupulous thinkers, inculcate the mental habit of interrupting our
27

DANIEL C. DENNETT
train of thought with a “surely” alarm —  ding!  — whenever we en-
counter it. Austin may well have been right that his perspicuous and imag-
inative methods of examining ordinary language were better than the neo-
logistic fantasies of some metaphysicians back then, but this passage
misdirects our attention and our energies if it is read as a complacent as-
surance that the time-honored, well-honed home truths of the manifest im-
age are the last word on anything. 
I thank Williamson for drawing our attention to the wonderful pas-
sage from Russell, which describes a sort of feedback loop between ven-
tured  premises  and  encountered  results.  What  we  philosophers  have
learned in recent decades is that if our feedback loops are myopically con-
strained by our ignorance of advances in the other sciences, they are, at
best, perceptive accounts of the lore of idiosyncratic tribes of ill-informed
opinionators. That might be useful anthropological ground-clearing, a nar-
row investigation of a particular tiny subset of WEIRD subjects (Western,
Educated, Industrialized, Rich, Democratic – see [Henrich et al, 2010]),
useful grist for the Sellarsian mill, along with the contributions of properly
conducted x-phi. But it wouldn’t be good philosophy.
Список литературы / References
Dennett, 2013 – Dennett, D.C. “Kinds of Things – Towards a Bestiary of the
Manifest Image,” in: D. Ross, J. Ladyman & H. Kincaid (eds.). Scientific Metaphysics,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 96‒107.
Hayes, 1978 – Hayes, P. “The Naive Physics Manifesto’”, in: D. Michie (ed.)
Expert Systems in the Mocroelectronic Age. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press,
1978, pp. 242‒270. 
Henrich et.al., 2010 – Henrich, J.; Heine, S.J; and Norenzayan, A. “The Weirdest
People in the World”, Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 2010, vol. 2(3), pp. 61‒83.
Pearl, 2009 – Pearl, J. Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2009, 484 pp. 
28

