 
 
Journal of Philosophy, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Journal of Philosophy.
http://www.jstor.org
Journal of Philosophy, Inc.
Review 
Author(s): Daniel C. Dennett 
Review by: Daniel C. Dennett 
Source: 
 
 
The Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 96, No. 8 (Aug., 1999), pp. 430-435
Published by: 
 
Journal of Philosophy, Inc.
Stable URL: 
 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2564631
Accessed: 15-12-2015 12:54 UTC
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
 
info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
This content downloaded from 67.66.218.73 on Tue, 15 Dec 2015 12:54:53 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

430 
THEJOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
BOOK REVIEWS 
Having T/zozght: Essays in the Metaphysic.s 
of Mind. JOHN HAUGELAND. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1998. 390 p. Cloth $29.95. 
On the back of the dust jacket of this fine book, one can barely make 
out two representations of a customized penny for our thoughts, 
drawn byJohn Haugeland. Accompanying Honest Abe on the heads 
side appear the words 'Existential Commitment', 'Thought', and 
'Self'; while tails shows the Lincoln Memorial and E plurabus unum, 
surrounded by two unlikely additions: 'Constituted Domain' and 
'Objects'. Haugeland explains: "The basic Kantian/Heideggerian 
conclusion can be summed up this way: the constituted objective 
world and the free constituting subject are intelligible only as two 
sides of one coin." Not everything with eyes and ears and a brain is a 
"free constituting subject"; apes and dogs and dolphins do not have 
ontologies because they do not have thoughts; they do not have 
thoughts because they do not have the "censoriousness" in their cul- 
tures or social structures which provides the leverage for understand- 
ing, distinguishing a true thought from a false thought, and without 
that, thoughts cannot really have content. There are, to be sure, im- 
portant differences in the Umwelt or manifest image of different 
species, but cats have no more metaphysics than clams or chrysan- 
themums do. Objects are constituted by people only, and our ulti- 
mately moral sense of norms, of "existential" commitment, far from 
being a sort of ethical add-on to the factual world of objects and 
properties, is the very ground on which our capacity to know, and re- 
flect upon, objects depends. 
This is a collection of essays, all but two previously published, so 
the question must be posed: Are the benefits of the synergy worth 
the cost? Here is one point in favor: I had read almost all these es- 
says several times, and discussed some of them with Haugeland for 
dozens of hours, and even published commentaries on several of 
them, but I did not get the big picture until I read the book. That is, 
I had seen what he was driving at, but was unpersuaded until I saw 
the pieces put together anew. I now think he is largely right. Even 
better: the points on which I harbor residual doubts are, in general, 
more empirical than philosophical, and will mostly sort themselves 
out as we learn more about how minds are actually constructed. 
0022-362X/99/9608/ 430-35 
(C) 1999 TheJournal of Philosophy, Inc. 
This content downloaded from 67.66.218.73 on Tue, 15 Dec 2015 12:54:53 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

431 
BOOK REVIEWS 
Haugeland claims that the difference in kind, not degree, between 
the "cognitive" capacities of people and animals is too obvious to re- 
quire argument. This might be true in the philosophical commu- 
nity, but it is at any rate no longer true in the world of animal 
cognition research, where the backlash against the behaviorism of 
yore makes fighting words of any such pronouncement. Still, 
Haugeland is right that the gulf between animal mind and human 
mind is huge. It is not that surprising to see a philosopher claim 
that even the brightest of beasts do not have a manifest image much 
like ours, but the paths he takes from this starting point are strik- 
ingly novel. In particular, he firmly bucks the fashion and declares 
that language is not the key to this huge chasm. 
I certainly do not deny that language is characteristic of people, and 
centrally importallt to what we are. But I want to resist what strikes me 
as an all too prevalent tendency to make of language a magic fulcrum 
on which every human quality turns as if language were the whole 
essence of what distinguishes us from machines on the one hand, and 
beasts on the other (256). 
A strange centerpiece of Haugeland's case against the role of 
language in making not just marking the chasm is an extended 
thought experiment about imaginary "supermonkeys" who have no 
language but nevertheless play chess! They play real chess, embed- 
ded in the matrix of norms that constitute proper play, not the 
pseudo-chess of Deep Blue, whose Umwelt is as bereft of the appre- 
ciations of norms as a spreadsheet's Umwelt is of an appreciation of 
the human value of a dollar. There is nothing constitutively lin- 
guistic about chess, certainly, but the contortions of Haugeland's 
tale of how the supermonkeys come to their norm-guided involve- 
ment in the game are unpersuasive to me. Let us compare these 
curious beings to others we might imagine: superorangutans, also 
languageless, who somehow manage to build and navigate aircraft 
carriers. An aircraft carrier with no written signs, no instruction 
manuals, no gossiping crew or order-issuing captain may be logically 
possible in some philosophical sense, but so what? Haugeland is 
right to resist the popular, lazy idea of language as a magic ful- 
crum; but what about language as a garden-variety fulcrum, causally 
required in this world for chess, for building aircraft carriers and 
for "normativity" itself? If human language and human norms 
emerged in a co-evolving package, with innovations in each laying 
the ground for elaborations in the other, back and forth and that 
is how evolution typically works then both 'Language made norms 
possible' and 'Norms made language possible' are misleading over- 
This content downloaded from 67.66.218.73 on Tue, 15 Dec 2015 12:54:53 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

432 
THEJOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
simplifications. Haugeland's resistance to the foriner is, however, 
salutary. 
Haugeland's work on the conceptual foundations of cognitive sci- 
ence has been deservedly influential, and several of the classics are 
reprinted here: his auspicious debut with a target article in Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, "The Nature and Plausibility of Cognitivism" 
(1978), and "The Intentionality All-Stars" (1990). Put these to- 
gether with "Analog and Analog" (1981) and "Mind Embodied and 
Embedded" (1995), and you have a lucid and balanced setting for 
what I consider the most valuable essay in the collection, "Represen- 
tational Genera" (1989). He describes this as "perhaps the most di 
sheveled piece in the volume" (5), but while one can see why he was 
tempted to issue this self-disparagement, the fact is that this is a stun- 
ning piece, hugely ambitious, and surprisingly successful in meeting 
its ambitions. It purports to be a revisionist taxonomy of representa- 
tions, and that it surely is, but its new taxonomy amounts to a strik- 
ingly new way of thinking about representations. Few topics have 
been mulled over more than representations in the last half century, 
and one would think that by now all the major moves had been 
made, and that it was time for fine tuning. Indeed, as Haugeland 
says, all this mulling has congealed into canonical accounts which he 
nicely defines as "what almost everybody expects almost everybody 
else to believe." 
According to the canon, the two main genera are logical/linguis- 
tic and iconic/pictorial. Today, we are faced with the interesting 
question of whether the much-touted distributed 
representations 
of con- 
nectionism (or holograins, for instance) deserve to be recognized as 
a distinct genus, as different from pictures and sentences as pictures 
and sentences are from each other. Although the quirky problems 
in characterizing the "essences" of these primary genera have long 
been acknowledged, the canonical wisdom has been that this is not 
to be done in terms of the content of what they represent, but some- 
how in their manner or format or systein of representing. Hauge- 
land sets out to show that the received wisdom is not just bedeviled 
by unsolved problems (everybody knows that), but that these prob- 
lems are unlikely to be solved since this underlying assumption is a 
huge mistake. This certainly must strike the mavens of the field, as it 
first did me, as wildly implausible. Ah, all the more reason to think 
that maybe Haugeland has caught a big fish. 
He develops his case with a very well-considered game plan. In- 
deed, this essay is a bravura display of philosophical move making of 
the highest order. If I were to put together a "how to" book on 
This content downloaded from 67.66.218.73 on Tue, 15 Dec 2015 12:54:53 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

433 
BOOK REVIEWS 
"how to do philosophy," this essay would be one I would dissect at 
length, revealing its virtues. Most philosophical books and articles 
have a rather plodding plan of attack, along the lines of: many be- 
lieve that p; there are n familiar arguments against p, and there are n 
+8 familiar rebuttals to those arguments; here is a new argument 
against p. Haugeland sees his task more subtly in a tllree-stage devel- 
opment. It begins with some loosening-up counterexamples which 
he does not bother refining in the standard way, since they are just 
attention directors; this he follows by some "outlandish counter the- 
ses," which are themselves not to be taken seriously but which hint at 
the opening to come in the third movement: a way of seeing how 
our canonical assumption might be undercut. 
I am arguing instead that all three canonical accounts misfire for a sin- 
gle underlying reason-namely, they all mislocated the generic essences 
in the representing relation-and hence, the appropriate response is 
neither repair nor despair, but fundamental reconception (177). 
The fundamental reconception involves taking on a hitherto unre- 
marked distinction between recording, which can be a "witless" 
process, and representing, 
which, in general, cannot. This is promis- 
ing, somewhat to our surprise, precisely because Haugeland is not 
planning to use it to make some 'No machine can ever do ' claim a 
good example of the tactical discretion which abounds in this essay. 
His distinction between "witless" and "knowing" processes enables 
him to describe a new type of theoretical entity: "'virtual logical rep- 
resentations' (the 'facts')" (183). We all know, do we not, that any 
doctrine of atomic and molecular facts is doomed if it treats such 
facts as somehow independent of language expressing them? But 
once again, he is not planning to push his doctrine of facts into that 
hopeless cause; he has imagined another, more defensible use for 
them. 
The task facing any "Heideggerian/Kantian" theorist is to do jus- 
tice to the role of us in constituting 
the denizens of "our" world with- 
out lapsing into awful relativism/subjectivism on one side or caving 
in to noumena or a "God's eye view," on the other. Haugeland's so- 
lution, which grows on me, is to show how and why it is hard to "con- 
stitute" a world (that takes care of anything-goes relativism) but not 
because there is a privileged way that the world the real world has 
always been constituted. His view is a close kin, I think, of my view of 
the evolution of colors: before color vision evolved on this planet, 
sunsets and cliffs and volcanic eruptions had the reflective proper- 
ties they did, but it makes no sense to ask if those sunsets were, say, 
This content downloaded from 67.66.218.73 on Tue, 15 Dec 2015 12:54:53 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

434 
THEJOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
red-since that question has no meaning independently of a refer- 
ence class of normal observers. We can, of course, extrapolate back 
from our current vantage point and fix and answer such questions, 
using ourselves as the touchstone for colors, but we must recognize 
that we are doing that. Were there dinosaurs before Homo sapiens 
came along and invented censoriousness and then ontology so that 
dinosaurs could be constituted? Of course there were, but do not 
make the mistake of thinking that this acknowledges a fact that is in- 
dependent of Homo sapiens. 
Haugeland is not a neurophilosopher or psycllophilosopher or 
cognitive scientist; he is a pure (or hard core chacun a son gout) 
philosopher. Yet he brings to his task the unflinching considera- 
tion of grand metaphysical themes from Imrnanuel Kant to Richard 
Rorty an engineer's deep commitment to clarity and making sure 
things work. He once turned an old IBM selectric typewriter into a 
computer printer (think about that interface problem!) and is the 
author (in assembly language) of some impressive software for doing 
automatic file back-ups, so he has plenty of hands-on acquaintance 
with the relations between mechanisins and codes, "symbols" and re- 
alities, hardware and software. Like the computer scientist/meta- 
physician Brian Cantwell Smith, whose remarkable book On the 
Oragin of Objectsl would make a superb seminar mate with this vol- 
ume, he has seen that philosophers' fantasies about computation 
and representation have not been innocent oversimplifications but 
major misleaders that must be replaced. 
The corrections of outlook Haugeland recommends are always 
presented in a constructive spirit. "The Intentionality All-Stars" is a 
frequently hilarious view of all the occupied positions on the topic of 
intentionality, laid out on a baseball diamond, and while he makes it 
very clear where his own sympathies lie, there are no idiots on the 
field of play. Haugeland's pedagogical caricatures, unlike many in 
philosophy, bring out the best in each position. It turns out, for in- 
stance, that the main differences along the spectrum from first base 
(neo-Cartesian theory for example, Jerry Fodor) and second base 
(neo-bellaviorist for example, Donald Davidson and me), to third 
base (neo-pragmatic theory for example, John Dewey, Martin Hei- 
degger, Wilfrid Sellars, and Haugeland himself) can be seen to be 
due mainly to different empirical hunclles about the relative impor- 
tance of factors admitted by all. For all its brilliance, this essay will 
not be readily understood by those without a substantial knowledge 
' Cambridge: MIT, 1996. 
This content downloaded from 67.66.218.73 on Tue, 15 Dec 2015 12:54:53 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

435 
BOOK REVIEWS 
of baseball; the many allusions to the lore of the game really do a lot 
of work, and I know from experience that British philosophers of 
mind miss a lot of the wisdom. My prescription: philosophers every- 
where now have a very good reason to add baseball to their stock of 
common knowledge. I also know from experience that my Ameri- 
can undergraduates, who know the baseball, need help appreciating 
the essay's glories because they do not have the requisite familiarity 
with the philosophical literature it pOSitiOllS. Same prescription: do 
your homework; it is worth it. 
Finally, I want to end this review with a specific compliment and a 
general complaint and call to arms. Some of the footnotes in this 
book are gems, deeply important, and not to be missed: for example, 
footnote 7 on page 44; footnote 10 on page 61; footnote 9 on pages 
164-65. Down with "endnotes"! There is no excuse, in this age of 
computer typesetting, for the "economy" of endnotes, either at the 
end of each chapter or at the end of the book. Few if any philoso- 
phy books need be read with only one hand, but why should we 
need three? I find that placing a Post-it on the edge of the current 
notes page provides a useful fingertab, and can be moved along as 
one goes, but this is still an annoying interruption. Authors, join the 
cause: ask publishers to put substantive footnotes at the bottom of 
each page, and all bibliographical material in some version of scien- 
tific format (Jones, 1994, p. 17) ! Then philosophy books can aspire 
to be page turners in the good sense. 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
Tufts University 
This content downloaded from 67.66.218.73 on Tue, 15 Dec 2015 12:54:53 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

