
SCIENCE 
AND 
RELIGION 

POINT/COUNTERPOINT SERIES 
Series Editor 
James P. Sterba, University of Notre Dame 
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND RACIAL PREFERENCE 
Carl Cohen and James P. Sterba 
G OD? A DEBATE BETWEEN A CHRISTIAN AND AN ATHEIST 
William Lane Craig and Walter Sinnott-Armstrong 
DOE S  FEMINISM DISCRIMINATE AGAINST MEN? 
Warren Farrell and James P. Sterba 
ABORTION: THREE PERSPECTIVES 
Michael Tooley, Celia Wolf-Devine, Philip E. Devine, and 
Alison M. Jagger 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
Daniel C. Dennett and Alvin Plantinga 

SCIENCE 
Are They Compatible? 
Daniel C. Dennett 
Alvin Plantinga 
PmNT/CouNTERPOINT SERIES 
]AMES P. STERBA, SERIES EDITOR 
New York 
Oxford 
OXFO R D  UN I V E R S I TY P R ESS 
201 1 

Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that further Oxford University's 
objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education. 
Oxford 
New York 
Auckland 
Cape Town 
Oar es Salaam 
Hong Kong 
Karachi 
Kuala Lumpur 
Madrid 
Melbourne 
Mexico City 
Nairobi 
New Delhi 
Shanghai 
Taipei 
Toronto 
With offices in 
Argentina 
Austria 
Brazil 
Chile 
Czech Republic 
France 
Greece 
Guatemala 
Hungary 
Italy 
Japan 
Poland 
Portugal 
Singapore 
South Korea 
Switzerland 
Thailand 
Turkey 
Ukraine 
Vietnam 
Copyright © 2011 by Oxford University Press, Inc. 
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc. 
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016 
http://ww.oup.com 
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
. 
otherwise, 
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press. 
Ubrary of Congress Cataloging-In-Publication Data 
Dennett, Daniel Clement. 
Science and religion : are they compatible? / Daniel C. Dennett, 
Alvin Plantinga. 
p. cm.- (Point/counterpoint series) 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-0-19-97 3842-7 
1. Religion and science. 
I. Plantinga, Alvin. 
II. Title. 
BL240.3.D46 2011 
201'.65-dc22 
98 
Printed in the United States of America 
on acid-free paper 
2010024690 

CONTENTS 
FOREWORD 
vii 
Jam es P. Sterba 
Chapter 1: SCIENCE AND RELIGION: Where 
the Conflict Really Lies 
1 
Alvin Pla ntinga 
Chapter 2: TRUTH S THAT MISS TH EIR MARK: 
Naturalism Unscathed 
25 
Da niel C. Dennett 
Chapter 3: SUP ERMAN VS . GOD? 
39 
Alvin Pla nttnga 
Chapter 4: HABITS OF IMAG INATI ON AND 
THE I R  EFFECT ON INCREDULITY: 
Reply to Plantinga (Essay 2) 
45 
Da ntel C. Dennett 
Chapter 5: NATURALISM AGAINST SCIENCE 
57 
Alvtn Pla nttnga 
Chapter 6: NO MI RACLES NEEDED 
73 
Da niel C. Dennett 
INDEX 
79 
v 


FOREWORD 
It was the last time slot of the American Philosophical 
Association Central Division Meeting in Chicago for 2009. 
Sessions at that time slot for obvious reasons are usually not 
well attended, but this debate between Alvin Plantinga and 
Daniel Dennett was going to be different. As I approached 
the room assigned for the debate, I was redirected to a 
much larger room. Although I was still about ten minutes 
early, when I got to the new room all the seats had already 
been taken. I could have stood in the back or joined those 
who were beginning to fill the center aisle. Instead, I 
decided to walk to the very front of the room and found an 
empty spot just to the side of the speakers next to the wall. 
I couldn't have been closer. 
Soon nearly all the floor space was occupied. The ses­
sion was as well attended as a Presidential Address, and 
the room was abuzz with excitement, very different from 
a typical philosophy session. You could tell that people in 
attendance were expecting this to be a memorable event. 
And it was. 
Plantinga began by narrowing the debate topic from "Are 
science and religion compatible?" to "Are contemporary 
vii 

viii 
FOREWORD 
evolutionary theory and the God of traditional Christian 
belief compatible?" He argued that not only is contempo­
rary evolutionary theory compatible with the Christian 
God, but that it would be incredible to believe that "the 
wonders of the living world" resulted from an unguided 
evolution. In short, belief in evolutionary theory required 
belief in God. 
Somewhat surprisingly, Dennett, at least initially, agreed 
with Plantinga that contemporary evolutionary theory and 
theistic belief were compatible. What Dennett strongly 
rejected, however, was the idea that unguided evolution 
was incredible or that belief in evolutionary theory required 
belief in God. 
At various points in the debate, Superman, under differ­
ent guises, the biochemist Michael Behe, and hand calcula­
tors, from simple to complex, were all used by Plantinga 
and Dennett to support their respective sides of the argu­
ment. When the debate concluded, no one really wanted 
it to be over. 
So what we have done in this book is allow the debate 
to go on. First, we have reproduced the debate as it orig­
inally took place. Then, we have added a response of 
Dennett to Plantinga, another of Plantinga to Dennett, and 
a final response of Dennett to Plantinga. Hopefully, in this 
expanded version of the debate, one or the other of these 
distinguished philosophers will have succeeded in win­
ning you over to his side of the argument. 
fames P. Sterba 
Serles Editor 

Acr<XO\\TLEDG MENTS 
®@I 
The authors of this book, along with Oxford University 
Press, would like to thank the following professors who 
provided useful feedback on this project: Robert M. Geraci 
at Manhattan College, Matt Lawrence at Long Beach City 
College, Michael L. Peterson at Asbury College, Gary 
Rosenkrantz at L'niversity of North Carolina at Greensboro, 
and several anonymous reviewers. 


SCIENCE 
AND 
RELIGION 


I 
ScrE(CE .AND RELIGION 
\Yhere the Conflict Really Lies 
Alvin Plantinga 
Our question: Are science and religion compatible? A useful 
project would be to try to make the question more precise: 
What is religion? What is science? What is incompatibil­
ity, and what varieties does it come in (explicit contradic­
tion, implicit contradiction, contradiction in the presence 
of plausible assumptions, improbability of their conjunc­
tion)? Some claim that theism is itself inconsistent, in 
which case, naturally enough, it will be incompatible with 
science (and everything else). Others retort that the same 

2 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
goes for science: Current general relativity is incompat­
ible with current quantum theory, so that current science 
itself is inconsistent, in which case it is incompatible with 
religion (and everything else). These are good topics, but 
they'll have to wait for another occasion; here I'll assume 
that we have at least a rough grasp of the question. I won't 
be talking about religion generally, but about specifically 
theistic religion, in particular Christian belief; and when 
I speak of Christian belief, I'm thinking of C. S. Lewis's 
"mere Christianity," something like the intersection of the 
great Christian creeds. Although what I say is explicitly 
concerned with Christian belief, it will also be relevant to 
many versions of Judaism and Islam. 
Why think there is conflict here? Many suggestions have 
been offered. Theistic religion endorses special divinচ action 
in the world-miracles, for example-but such action would 
contravene the laws promulgated by science. There is such a 
thing as tne scientific worldview, and it is incompatible with 
theistic religion. Christian belief implies that human beings 
have been created in God's image, but contemporary evo­
lutionary theory, properly understood, implies that neither 
God nor anyone else has designed, planned, or intended 
that human beings come to be. Evolutionary psychology 
is full of theories incompatible with theistic understand­
ings of human beings. Some scientific historical Biblical 
scholarship argues that historical claims of Christianity, 
for example, that Jesus rose from the dead, are false or 
anyway groundless. These are all of great interest, but I'll 
limit myself, in this talk, to a cluster of issues having to do 
with evolution. I'll argue that (1) contemporary evolution­
ary theory is not incompatible with theistic belief; (2) the 
main anti-theistic arguments involving evolution together 
with other premises also fail; (3) even if current science, 

SCIENCE AND RELIGION 
3 
evolutionary or otherwise, were incompatible with theistic 
belief, it wouldn't follow that theistic belief is irrational or 
unwarranted or in any other kind of trouble; and finally, (4) 
naturalism, the thought that there is no such thing as the 
God of theistic religion or anything like him, is an essen­
tial element in the naturalistic worldview, which is a sort 
of quasi-religion in the sense that it plays some of the most 
important roles of religion; the naturalistic worldview is in 
fact incompatible with evolution. Hence there is a science­
religion (or science-quasi-religion) conflict, all right, but it 
is a conflict between naturalism and science, not theistic 
religion and science. 
I. Contemporary Evolutionary Theory Is 
Compatible with Theistic Belief 
The term evolution covers a variety of theses: (1) the ancient 
earth thesis; (2) the thesis of descent with modification, that 
is, the thought that the enormous diversity of the contem­
porary living world has come about by way of offspring 
differing, ordinarily in small and subtle ways, from their 
parents; and (3) the common ancestry thesis: the claim that, 
as Gould put it, there is a "tree of evolutionary descent link­
ing all organisms by ties of genealogy."1 I'll use the term 
evolution to refer to the conjunction of these three. There 
is also (4) the claim that the principle mechanism driving 
this process of descent with modification is natural selec­
tion winnowing random genetic mutation. Since a similar 
proposal was characteristic of Darwin ("Natural selection 
has been the main but not exclusive means of modifica­
tion"), call this thesis Darwinism. It's clear, I think, that 
there is no conflict between theistic religion and the ancient 
earth thesis, or the descent with modification thesis, or the 

4 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
common ancestry thesis. According to theistic belief, God 
has created the living world; but of course he could have 
done so in many different ways, and in particular in ways 
compatible with those theses. What about the fourth thesis, 
Darwinism? Is it incompatible with theistic religion? 
Many apparently think so: Among them are Richard 
Dawkins, Daniel Dennett, George Gaylord Simpson, and 
many others, and far to the other side, Philip Johnson. But 
are they right? Where, exactly, would the incompatibility 
arise? A suggested source of conflict has to do with the 
Christian doctrine of creation, in particular the claim that 
God has created human beings in bis image. This requires 
that God intended to create creatures of a certain kind and 
planned that there be creatures of that kind-rational crea­
tures with a moral sense and the capacity to know and love 
him-and then acted in such a way as to accomplish this 
intention. This claim is dearly consistent with evolution, 
as conservative Christian theologians have pointed out as 
far back as 1871. 2 But is it also consistent with Darwinism? 
It looks as if it is. God could have caused the right muta­
tions to arise at the right time, he could have preserved 
populations from perils of various sorts, and so on; in this 
way, by orchestrating the course of evolution, he coufd 
have ensured that there come to be creatures of the kmd 
he intends. 
What is not consistent with Christian belief, however, is 
the claim that evolution and Darwinism are unguided­
where I'll take that to include being unplann,d apq unin­
tended. What is not consistent with Christian belief is the 
claim that no personal agent, not even God, has guided, 
planned, intended, directed, orchestrated, or shaped this 
whole process. Yet precisely this claim is made by a large 
number of contemporary scientists and philosophers 

SCIENCE AND RELIGION 
5 
who write on this topic. There is a veritable choir of 
extremely distinguished experts insisting that this process 
is unguided, and indeed insisting that it is a part of con­
temporary evolutionary theory to assert that it is unguided, 
so that evolutionary theory as such is incompatible with 
Christian belief. According to George Gaylord Simpson, for 
example, "Man rand no doubt woman as well] is the result 
of a purposeless and natural process that did tWt b.a.le_him 
in mind."·i In this connection the late Stephen). Gould and 
others have emphasized what they take to be the chancy, 
contingent, and undirected character of evolution; if the 
evolutionary tape were to be rewound and then let go for­
ward again, the chances are we'd get creatures of very dif­
ferent sorts from the ones actually present on earth. The 
chances are we'd get nothing much like Homo sapiens. But 
Gould's suggestion presupposes that God has not guided 
and orchestrated the course of evolution, and hence can't 
be appealed to as a reason for supposing that he has not 
done so. Given the biological evidence and the proposition 
that God has indeed created human beings in his image, 
Gould's suggestion is wholly implausible; for if the tape 
were rewound and let go forward again, no doubt God 
would still have intended that there be creatures created 
in his image, and would still have seen to it that there be 
such creatures. 
What about the fact that the relevant genetic mutations 
are said to be random? You might wonder whether genetic 
mutations could be both random and intended and caused 
by God: If these mutations are random, aren't they just a 
matter of chance, blind chance? But it is no part of current 
evolutionary theory to say that these mutations are random 
in a sense implying that they are uncaused (they are said to 
be caused by cosmic rays, for example); still less that they 

5 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
occur just by chance. According to Ernst Mayr, the dean of 
post-World War II biology, "When it is said that mutation 
or variation is random, the statement simply means that 
there is no correlation between the production ol nছ gen­
otypes and the adaptadonal needs of an organism in the 
given environment.'14 Elliott Sober puts the point a bit more 
carefully: "There 1s no physical mechanism (either inside 
organisms or outside of them) that detects which muta­
tions would be beneficial and causes those mutations to 
occur.''5 The point is that a mutation accruing to an organ­
ism is random just if neither the organism nor its envi­
ronment contains a mechanism or process or organ that 
causes adaptive mutations to occur. But clearly a mutation 
could be both random in that sense and also intended and 
indeed caused by God. 
Hence the randomness involved in Darwinism does not 
imply that the process is not divinely guided. The fact, if it 
is a fact, that human beings have come to be by way of nat­
ural selection operating on random genetic mutation is not 
at all incompatible with their having been designed by God 
and created in his image. Therefore Darwinism is perfectly 
compatible with God's guiding, orchestrating, and oversee­
ing the whole process. Indeed, it is perfectly compatible 
with that idea that God causes the random genetic muta­
tions that are winnowed by natural selection. Those who 
claim that evolution shows that humankind and other living 
things have not been designed apparently confuse a natu­
ralistic gloss on the scientific theory with the theory itself. 
The claim that evolution demonstrates that human beings 
and other living creatures have not, contrary to appear­
ances, been designed, is not part of or a consequence oJ 
the scientific theory as such, but a metaphysical or theolog· 
ical add-on.6 Naturalism implies, of course, that we human 

SCIENCE AND RELIGION 
7 
beings have not been designed and created in God's image 
(because it implies that there is no God); but evolutionary 
science by itself does not carry this implication. Naturalism 
and evolutionary theory together imply the denial of divine 
design, but evolutionary theory by itself doesn't have that 
implication. It is only evolutionary science combined with 
naturalism that implies this denial. Since naturalism all 
by itself has this implication, it is no surprise that when 
you conjoin it with science or, as far as that goes, anything 
else-the complete works of William McGonagall or the 
Farmer's Almanac, or the Apostle's Creed-the conjunc­
tion will also have this implication. 
I I. Broader Anti-theistic Arguments 
from Evolution 
Darwinism as such doesn't include or imply the proposi­
tion that the process is unguided; what about broader anti­
theistic arguments involving evolution? I'm aware of three 
sorts of arguments proposed here. First, there is the claim 
that evolution undercuts the argument from design, thus 
reducing the rational support, if any, enjoyed by theism. 
Second, there is the suggestion that the process of evolu­
tion, so wasteful and productive of suffering, is not the 
sort of process God would use or permit. And third, there 
is the thought that unguided evolution, as a hypothesis, is 
superior to the hypothesis that the process of evolution has 
been guided or orchestrated by mind, divine or otherwise, 
because it is simpler and more Ockhamistic. None of these 
objections, I believe, is promising. While I can't deal prop­
erly with any or all of them in the time allotted to me, I'll 
briefly outline a response to each. 

8 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE TuEY CoMPATIBLE? 
Start with the claim that evolution undercuts the argu­
ment from design, thus making it less reasonable to accept 
theistic belief. According to John Dupre, "Darwinism 
undermines the only remotely plausible reason for believ­
ing in the existence of God"-that is, the argument from 
design.' 
Now it's reasonable to think that evolution makes it 
somewhat easier to be rational or sensible in accepting 
atheism; prior to 1859 there simply weren't decent answers 
to the question, "If this abundant variety of life wasn't cre­
ated by God, how did it get here?" But making it easier 
to be a rational atheist doesn't as such make it harder to 
be a rational theist, and doesn't as such create a religion­
science conflict. And how much support does the argu­
ment from design actually offer theistic belief? Perhaps it 
supports belief in the existence of a very powerful, very 
knowledgeable being or group of beings, but that's a long 
way from theism. 
In any event, however, current molecular biology may 
offer the materials for a different sort of argument from 
design, as explained in the much maligned Michael Bebe's 
recent book, The Edge of Evolution. 8 His argument is one of 
the few serious and quantitative arguments in this area. We 
have the living cell, both prokaryotic and eukaryotic, with 
its stupifying complexity and its multitude of elaborately 
complex protein machines.9 Bebe argues that unguided 
natural selection is probably incapable of producing these 
protein machines. His argument is quantitative and empiri­
cal rather than a priori; its centerpiece is the saga of the 
malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciperum, and its long 
trench warfare with the human genome. I don't have the 
space here to outline his argument; but to me as a layman, 
the argument seems reasonably powerful, though far from 

SCIENCE AND RELIGION 
9 
conclusive. If Behe is right, or anywhere near right, the 
probability of the existence of the cell as we find it is much 
greater on theism than on naturalism. And if this is so, the 
argument from design is reinstated at a deeper level. What 
current biological science takes away with one hand, it 
restores with the other. 
But the real point lies in a different direction. Belief 
in God is seldom accepted on the basis of the teleologi­
cal argument, or indeed any argument or propositional 
evidence at all. Both untutored observation and current 
research in the scientific study of religion suggest that a 
tendency to believe in God or something like God, apart 
from any propositional evidence, is part of our native cog­
nitive endowment. Furthermore, if theistic belief is true, 
it probably doesn't require propositional evidence for its 
rational acceptance. As I argue in Warranted Christian 
Belief, if theistic belief is true, then very likely it has both 
rationality and warrant in the basic way, that is, not on the 
basis of propositional evidence. If theistic belief is true, 
then very likely there is a cognitive structure something 
like john Calvin's sensus divinitatis, an original source of 
warranted theistic belief. In this way belief in God, like 
belief in other minds, has its own source of rationality 
and warrant, and doesn't depend on argument from other 
sources for those estimable qualities. The demise of the 
teleological argument, if indeed evolution has compro­
mised it, is little more of a threat to rational belief in God 
than the demise of the argument from analogy for other 
minds is to rational belief in other minds. 
Second, there is the suggestion, made by Gould and oth­
ers, that the waste and suffering involved in evolution is 
evidence against theism. Philip Kitcher puts it like this: 
"When we envisage a human analogue presiding over a 

10 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE ThEY COMPATIBLE? 
miniaturized version of the arrangement-it's hard to 
equip the face with a kindly expression." He goes on to 
suggest that "had a benevolent creator proposed to use 
evolution under natural selection as a means for attain­
ing his purposes, we could have given him some useful 
advice."10 I don't know how such advice would be received, 
but of course we don't require evolutionary theory or cur­
rent science to tell us that the animal world is full of pre­
dation, death, pain, and suffering. Alfred Tennyson noted 
that "nature is red in tooth and claw"11 well before 1859, 
and no doubt some suspected this even earlier. Still, cur­
rent science gives us reason to believe that suffering and 
death have afflicted the human and animal world for a 
much longer time than was ordinarily thought before the 
nineteenth century. It has therefore given us information 
about the extent and duration of animal suffering, includ­
ing human suffering. 
The first thing to see is that this is a special case of the 
so-called problem of evil, a problem alleged to afflict theis­
tic belief. Sin and suffering do indeed constitute a problem 
or perplexity for theism, although it may be hard to spec­
ify precisely what this problem is. Most atheist thinkers 
have given up the idea that the existence of sin and suf­
fering is logically incompatible with theistic belief; some 
kind of inductive or probabilistic anti-theistic argument is 
presumably what's at issue. It has proven surprisingly dif­
ficult, however, to give a plausible statement of a probabi­
listic argument from evil, 12 and as these arguments become 
more complex, they also become less convincing. Surely, 
however, sin and suffering and evil present some kind of 
problem or at least perplexity for theists; the existence of so 
much suffering and hurt in God's world certainly seems to 
call out for an explanation of some sort. And what current 

SCIENCE AND RllLIGION 
11 
biological science adds to the problem is that predation, 
suffering, and death have been going on for a very long 
time. But does this put any additional presঘmre on the vari­
ous theistic or Christian responses to suffering and evil? 
My own favorite response is the "O Felix Culpa" response, 
according to which all of the really good possible worlds 
involve divine incarnation and atonement, or at any rate 
atonement.Li But then all the best possible worlds also 
involve a great deal of sin and as a consequence a great 
deal of suffering. Some of this suffering is on the part of 
nonhuman creatures. Christians think of suffering, both 
human and nonhuman, as due in one way or another to 
sin, although not necessarily to human sin; there are also 
Satan and his minions, who may, as C. S. Lewis suggests, 
be involved in one way or another in the evolution of the 
nonhuman living world. But learning that sin and suffer­
ing have been going on for much longer than we origi­
nally thought shouldn't raise an additional difficulty for 
the "O Felix Culpa" response. Suppose we learn that our 
world, with all its problems, heartaches, and cruelty, will 
endure for millions of years before the advent of the New 
Heaven and the New Earth; that wouldn't have much bear­
ing, so one thinks, on the viability or satisfactoriness of 
this response to evil. (The New Heaven and the New Earth, 
after all, will exist for a vastly longer period than our cur­
rent sad and troubled old world.) But the same goes, I 
should think, for our learning that our world, with all the 
ills it is heir to, has gone on for much longer than origi­
nally thought. Current science shows that suffering, both 
human and animal, has gone on much longer than previ­
ously thought; but it doesn't thereby diminish the value of 
Christian responses to the problem of evil and in this way 
doesn't exacerbate that problem much, if at all. 

12 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE ThEY CoMPATIBLE? 
Finally, there is the claim, perhaps made more often 
in the oral tradition than in print, that the hypothesis 
of unguided evolution is simpler, more in accord with 
Ockhamistic injunctions, than the hypothesis that God or 
other intelligent beings have shaped and guided the course 
of terrestrial evolution. Here two points are relevant. First, 
even if unguided evolution is more Ockhamistic than 
guided evolution, it isn't at all clear that the former is all­
things-considered superior, as a hypothesis, to the latter. It 
involves fewer kinds of beings, yes, but that isn't the only 
relevant consideration. Another is their respective likeli­
hoods, the probabilities of the living world (more exactly, 
its variety) coming to be by way of these two hypotheses. 
Let D be the proposition that the variety of the living world 
has come to be by Darwinian processes, E the relevant 
biological evidence, G the proposition that evolution is 
guided, and U the proposition that it is unguided. Then 
our question is which is greater: P(D/E&G) or P(D/E&U)?14 
It i&, of course, overwhelmingly difficult to make anything 
like reasonably precise judgments here, but perhaps we 
can make sensible comparative judgments. Consider first 
P(D/E&G). Clearly God could have created living things 
by way of natural selection, causing the right mutations to 
arise at the right time, preserving the relevant populations 
from disaster, and the like; he could also have allowed 
other intelligent creatures to be involved in the whole pro­
cess. Again, it is overwhelmingly difficult to estimate the 
probability that this is the way in which it has in fact hap­
pened; but P(D/E&G) is perhaps not terribly low. 
What about P(D/E&U)? Going all the way back to St. 
George Mivart, critics have expressed serious doubts as to 
whether the eye, for example, could have come to be by 
way of unguided natural selection operating on random 

SCIENCE AND RELIGION 
13 
genetic mutation-could have, that is, apart from absolutely 
stunning improbability. The eye, the mammalian brain, 
and other organs remain difficult problems for unguided 
evolution. But the really hard problem here for unguided 
Darwinists isn't the development of macroscopic organs 
such as eyes and hearts. The hard problem is rather at the 
microscopic (molecular) level: the stupefying complexity15 
of the living cell, both prokaryotic and eukaryotic. It's only 
in the last half-century or so that this enormous complex­
ity has come into view; the eminent scientist Ernst Haeckel 
summed up nineteenth-century opinion when he declared 
the cell "a simple little lump of albuminous combination of 
carbon."16 
Of course it is widely assumed that in fact the cell must 
have come to be in that fashion; but there is little by way 
of serious argument for the conclusion that its thus com­
ing to be is less than prohibitively improbable. On the 
other hand, as I said above, Michael Bebe has proposed 
a serious and quantitative argument for the opposite con­
clusion.'" Given the stunning complexity of the living cell 
with its enormous complication, together with what we 
know about mutation rates, the age of the earth, popula­
tion sizes, and the like, it seems reasonable to estimate that 
P(D/E&U) is exceedingly low, orders of magnitude lower 
than P(D/E&G). If this is right, then even if we think U, as 
an explanation, is Ockhamistically superior to G, it is inte­
rior to G in that the relevant likelihood is lower. 
But again, the real point lies in a different direction. 
The theistic noetic structure already, of course, includes 
the existence of God. Relative to that noetic structure, 
therefore, there is no additional Ockhamistic cost in the 
hypothesis of guided evolution. As an analogy, suppose 
we land a spaceship on a planet we know is inhabited by 

14 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE ThEY COMPATIBLE? 
intelligent creatures. We find something that looks exactly 
like a stone arrowhead, complete with grooves and inden­
tations apparently made in the process of shaping and 
sharpening it. Two possibilities suggest themselves: one, 
that it acquired these characteristics by way of erosion, 
let's say, and the other, that it was intentionally designed 
and fashioned by the inhabitants. Someone with a couple 
of courses in philosophy might suggest that the former 
hypothesis is to be preferred because it posits fewer enti­
ties than the latter. He'd be wrong, of course; since we 
already know that the planet contains intelligent creatures, 
there is no Ockhamistic cost involved in thinking those 
structures designed. The same would go for evolution; the­
ists already accept divine design, and do not incur addi­
tional Ockhamistic cost by way of thinking of evolution as 
guided. 
This objection to guided evolution would have more by 
way of teeth if we, theist and atheist alike, were starting 
from an agnostic position, and then the theist proposed 
to postulate the existence of a divine designer to explain 
the course of evolution. That would be substantially like 
offering a theistic argument; and then the availability of 
a nontheistic alternative hypothesis, provided the relevant 
likelihood wasn't too overwhelmingly small, would under­
cut the argument. But of course in this context the theist 
isn't presenting a theistic argument. She already accepts 
divine design; hence the fact that guided evolution involves 
more entities than unguided evolution is no reason in 
favor of the latter. Since that is so, there is no conflict here 
between theistic religion and evolutionary science. 
I've argued that the contemporary scientific theory of 
evolution (taken as including Darwinism) does not entail 
the claim that natural selection is unguided. But suppose 

SCIENCE AND RELIGION 
15 
I'm mistaken, or suppose instead that current evolution­
ary theory itself evolves in such a way that this claim 
becomes part of it. This could certainly happen. We can 
easily imagine the authorities and the textbooks stating 
the theory in such a way as to explicitly include the claim 
that natural selection is unguided by any personal agent; 
after all, many, probably most biologists believe that it is 
unguided. Would that show that there is scientific evidence 
against theism? Hardly. We could imagine physics evolving 
in the same direction: all the physics textbooks unite in 
endorsing general relativity, adding that the behavior of 
large-scale physical systems is never guided by any per­
sonal agents. In neither case, obviously, would it follow 
that there is scientific evidence against theism. Annexing 
a proposition p to one for which there is evidence doesn't 
automatically confer evidence on p. I learn that Feike is a 
Frisian lifeguard; that increases the probability that he can 
swim, and also the probability of the proposition Feike can 
swim and the next toss of this coin wil land heads; it does 
not increase the probability that the next toss of this coin 
wil land heads. 
And even if, contrary to fact, there were scientific evi­
dence for unguided evolution and hence for atheism, that 
woulti by no means settle the issue. Suppose there is sci­
entific evidence against theism: it doesn't follow that the­
ism is false, or that theists have a defeater for their beliefs, 
or that theistic belief is irrational, or in some other way 
problematic. Perhaps there is also evidence, scientific or 
otherwise, for theism. But second, and more important, 
as I mentioned, if theism is true, it is likely that it has 
its own intrinsic and basic source of warrant-something 
like the sensus divinitatis proposed by John Calvin, or 
the natural but confused knowledge of God proposed 

16 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
by Thomas Aquinas.111 If so, the warrant for theistic belief 
doesn't depend on the state of current science. Indeed, 
what Christians and other theists should think of current 
science can quite properly depend, in part, on theology. 
For example, science has not spoken with a single voice 
about the question of whether the universe has a begin­
ning: First the idea was that it did, but then the steady state 
theory triumphed, but then Big Bang cosmology achieved 
ascendancy, but now there are straws in the wind suggest­
ing a reversion to the thought that the universe is without a 
beginning. The sensible Christian believer is not obliged to 
trim her sails to the current scientific breeze on this topic, 
revising her belief on the topic every time science changes 
its mind; if the most satisfactory Christian (or theistic) the­
ology endorses the idea that the universe did indeed have 
a beginning (isn't eternal), the believer has a perfect right 
to accept that thought. If so, then even if there were sci­
entific evidence against theism, and no propositional evi­
dence, scientific or otherwise, in favor of it, it might still be 
both rational and warranted. 
III. Naturalism vs. Evolution 
Naturalisnu:omes in more than one variety. Here, as I said, 
I take it to be the view that there is no such person as the 
God of theistic religion nor anything like God. So taken, 
naturalism is not a religion. Nevertheless it is a crucial part 
of the naturalistic worldview, which in turn plays at least 
one of the most important roles of a religion. This world­
view functions as a sort of myth, in a technical sense of 
that term: It offers a way of interpreting ourselves to our­
selves, a way of understanding our origin and significance 
at the deep level of religion. It tells us where we come from, 

SCIENCE AND RELIGION 
17 
what our prospects are, what our place in the universe is, 
whether there is life after death, and the like. We could 
therefore say that it is a "quasi-religion." What I propose 
to argue next is that naturalism and current science are 
incompatible, so that there is a religion (or quasi-religion) 
conflict, sure enough, but it is between science and natu­
ralism, not science and theistic religion. What I'll argue is 
that naturalism is incompatible with evolution, in the sense 
that one can't rationally accept them both. Since I've given 
this argument elsewhere, here I can be brief. 
First, note that naturalists are all or nearly all material­
ists about human persons; a human perঙon is a material 
object through and through, with no immaterial self or 
soul or subject. For present purposes, tht::refore, I'll assimi­
late materialism to naturalism. The central premises of the 
argument are as follows. Where N is naturalism, E is cur­
rent evolutionary theory and R is the proposition that our 
cognitive faculties are reliable, 
1. P(R/N&E) is low.19 
2. One who accepts l\'&E and also sees that 1 is true 
has a defeater for R. 
3. This defeater can't be defeated. 
4. One who has a defeater for R has a defeater for any 
belief she takes to be produced by her cognitive fac­
ulties, including N&E. 
Therefore 
5. N&E is self-defeating and can't rationally be 
accepted. 
These premises need defense, perhaps the first one in 
particular. So suppose there are beliefs; this isn't essential 
to the argument for premise 1, but it will facilitate brief 
statement of it. From the point of view of materialism, a 

18 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE ThEY COMPATIBLE? 
belief will presumably be an event or structure in the ner­
vous system, perhaps in the brain. It will be a structure 
involving many neurons connected in various ways. This 
structure will respond to input from other such structures, 
from sense organs, and the like; it may also send signals 
along effector nerves to muscles and glands, thereby caus­
ing behavior. Such a structure will have at least two kinds 
of properties: On the one hand, it will have neurophysio­
logical properties (NP properties) specifying, for example, 
the number of neurons involved in the structure, the rate 
of fire in various parts of it, the change in rate of fire in 
one part in response to change of rate of fire in another, 
the way in which it is connected with other structures and 
with muscles, and so on. But if it is a belief, it will also have 
a property of a quite different sort, a mental property: It 
will have a content; it will be the belief that p, for some 
proposition p. 
NP properties are physical properties; having such and 
such a content is a mental property. There are three ways 
in which, given materialism, mental and physical proper­
ties can be related. First, nonreductive materialism: While 
mental properties can't be reduced to physical properties, 
they supervene on them. (Take supervenience as follows: 
Properties of sort A supervene on properties of sort B just 
if necessarily, if entities x and y differ with respect to their 
A properties, then they differ with respect to their B prop­
erties.) The necessity involved can be either broadly logical 
(metaphysical) necessity, or nomological necessity, giving 
us two varieties of supervenience, logical and nomologi­
cal, and hence two possibilities as to the relation of mental 
properties to physical properties. The third possibility for 
that relation is reductive materialism: Every mental prop­
erty is identical with some physical property. 

SCIENCE AND RELIGION 
19 
To avoid interspecific chauvinism, suppose we think not 
about ourselves, but about a population of creatures, per­
haps in one of those other cosmoi proposed by inflationary 
scenarios, who resemble us in holding beliefs, changing 
beliefs, making inferences, and so on. Suppose also that 
naturalism holds for these creatures, and that they have 
come to be by the processes specified in contemporary 
evolutionary theory. Now ask about P(R/N&E) specified, 
not to us, but to them; and consider that probability with 
respect to each of the preceding three suggestions about 
the relation of mental and physical properties. Consider 
first logical nonreductive materialism (LNM): Mental prop­
erties are distinct from physical properties, but supervene 
upon them, where the necessity involved is broadly logical. 
What is P(R/N&E&LNM)? These creatures have evolved; 
we may therefore assume that their behavior is adaptive, in 
their circumstances, and that, accordingly, the neurophys­
iology producing that behavior is also adaptive. But natu­
ral selection doesn't give a fig for true belief just as such. 
It rewards adaptive behavior and punishes maladaptive 
behavior, but it doesn't care about truth of belief; as Patricia 
Churchland says, "Truth, whatever that is, definitely takes 
the hindmost."10 So choose any particular belief B held by 
one of those creatures. We may assume that B is adaptive 
in that its NP properties are adaptive; but of course noth­
ing follows about the truth or falsehood of the content that 
supervenes on those properties. If the supervening con­
tent is true, excellent; but if it is false, that's just as good. 
Its falsehood in no way interferes with the adaptivity of 
the NP properties. We should assume, therefore, that the 
probability of that belief's being true, given N&E and non­
reductive logical supervenience, is about .5. But then the 
probability of their faculties being reliable will be low. If 

20 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
you have 100 independent beliefs and the probability of 
each is .5, the probability that three-fourths of them are 
true, which is a modest requirement for reliability, will be 
less than one out of a million. 
P(R/N&E&LNM), therefore, is low. 
But of course the very same thing will hold, for the 
same reasons, for P(R/N&E&NNM), where NNM is the ver­
sion of non-reductive materialism where mental proper­
ties supervene upon physical properties with nomological 
necessity. That leaves reductive materialism (RM). What 
is P(R/N&E&RM)? Here the property of having such and 
such a content is identical with some physical, presumably 
neurological property. Again, consider any particular belief 
B held by one of those creatures. We may suppose that 
having Bis adaptive, and adaptive by virtue of its content 
as well as its other physical properties. But once again, it 
doesn't matter whether the content associated with B is 
true or false. We may assume that the physical property 
identical with the property of having B's content is adap­
tive; the content associated with B is of course either true 
or false; if it happens to be false, this in no way compro­
mises the adaptivity of B. Once more, then, we must sup­
pose that the probability of that belief's being true is about 
5; but then it will be unlikely that the cognitive faculties of 
these creatures are reliable. 
It follows, therefore, that P(R/N&E) with respect to these 
hypothetical creatures is low. But then of course the same 
goes for us; P(R/N&E) is low for us as well. The next step 
is to note that anyone who sees that P(R/N&E) is low, and 
also accepts N&E, has a defeater for R in her own case, 
a reason for rejecting R, for giving it up, for no longer 
believing it. This defeater cannot itself be defeated; that is 

SCIENCE AND RELIGION 
21 
because a defeater for this defeater would have to take the 
form of an argument. But of course one who accepts N&E 
will also have a defeater for the premises of this argument, 
as well as the proposition that if the premises are true, so 
is the conclusion. Another way to put it: Any argument 
for R will be epistemically circular, in that reliance on the 
argument presupposes that the conclusion of the argument 
is true. 
But anyone who has a defeater for R has a defeater 
for any belief she takes to be produced by her cognitive 
faculties-including, of course, N&E itself. Hence one who 
accepts N&E (and sees the truth of the first premise) has 
a defeater for N&E; N&E, therefore, is self-defeating and 
cannot rationally be accepted. If so, however, there is a 
conflict between naturalism and evolution; their conjunc­
tion cannot rationally be accepted. Evolution, however, is 
one of the pillars of contemporary science. Hence there is 
a science-religion or perhaps science-quasi-religion con­
flict in the neighborhood of evolution, all right, but not 
between evolution and theistic religion. The real conflict 
is between evolution, that pillar of contemporary science, 
and naturalism. 21 
NOTES 
l. Stephen Jay Gould, Hen's Teeth and Horse's Toes (New York: 
W.W. Norton, 1983), 236 . 
2. Thus Charles Hodge, the distinguished Princeton theologian, 
speaking of the design of plants and animals, "If God made 
them, it makes no difference how He made them, as far as the 
question of design is concerned, whether at once or hy a pro­
cess of evolution." Charles Hodge, What Is Darwinism? (New 
York: Charles Scribner, 1871), 44. 

22 
SCIENCE AND Rm.IGION: ARE TuEV COMPATIBLE? 
3. George Gaylord Simpson, The Meaning of Evolu tion (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, rev. ed., 1967), 344-45. 
4. Ernest Mayr, Toward aNewPhilosophyofBiology: Observation s 
of an Evolu tionist (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Universit y Press, 
1988), 99. 
5. Elliott Sober, "Evolution Without Metaphysics?" 
6. I don't mean to suggest that no scientific theory can contain 
metaphysical elements. The suggestion is onl y  that this partic­
ular claim is clearly metaphysical, and also clearly an add-on: 
It isn't part of evolutionary theory as currently stated and 
understood. 
7. John Dupre, Darwin 's Legacy: What Evolu tion Means Today 
(Oxford, U K: Oxford University Press, 2003), 56. 
8. Michael Behe, The Edge of Evolution: The Search for the Limits 
of Darwinism (New York: Free Press, 2007). 
9. See Bruce Alberts, "The Cell as a Collection of Protein Machines: 
Prepari ng the Next Generation of Molecular Biologists," Cell, 
92: 291-94. 
10. Philip Kitcher, "The Conflict Between Science and Religion," 
in The Blackwell Guide to th e Philosoph y  of Religion , ed. 
William E. Mann (OJI.ford, UK: Blackwell, 2005), 268. 
11. Alfred Tennyson "In Memoriam A. H. H.," Alfred Lord 
Tennyson: Selected Poems, canto 56, 135. 
12 . See, for example, William Rowe, "The Evidential Argument 
from Evil: A Second Look," in The Evidential Argumen t 
from Evil, ed. Daniel Howard-Snyder (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1996), and Michael Tooley's statement of the 
argument in Alvin Plantinga and Michael Tooley, Knowledge 
of God (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2008), 98ff. 
13. See Alvin Plantinga, "Superlapsarianism, or 'O Felix Culpa,"' 
in Christian Faith and the Problem of Evil, ed. Peter van 
Inwagen (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1994). 
14. "P(D/E&G)" and "P(D/E&U)" are to be read as "the proba­
bility of D, given E and G" and " the probabilit y of D, given 
E and U." 

SCIENCE AND RELIGION 
23 
15. Thus, according to Bruce Alberts, President of the National 
Academy of Sciences, "Nearly every process in a cell is carried 
out by assemblies of 10 or more protein molecules .. . . Indeed, 
the entire cell can be viewed as a factory that contains an elab­
orate network of interacting assembly lines, each of which is 
composed of a set of large protein machines." Alberts, "The 
Cell as a Collection of Protein Machines: Preparing the Next 
Generation of Molecular Biologists," 291. 
16. Ernst Haeckel, in John Farley, The Spontaneous Generation 
Co1ltrot•ersy from Descartes to Oparin, 2nd ed. (Baltimore, 
MD: The Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 1977), 73. 
17. Behe, The Edge of Evolution. 
18. See Alvin Plantinga, Warranted Ch1'istian Belief (New York: 
Oxford Vniversity Press, 2000), part JU, especially ch. 8 and 9. 
19. "P(R/N&E)" is to be read as "the probability of R, given N 
and E." 
20. Patricia Churchland, journal of Philosophy (LXXIV, Oct. 
1987), 548. 
21. Thanks to Nathan Ballantyne, Mike 
Bergmann, 
Brian 
Boeninger, Tom Crisp, Eric Hagedorn, Matthew Lee, Trenton 
Merricks, Anne Peterson, Josh Rasmussen, Luke Van Horn, 
Rene van Woudenberg, and especially Michael Rea. 


2 
TRUTHS THAT Mrs s THEIR 
MARK 
Xaturalism U nscathe<l 
Daniel C. Dennett 
I am going to show that three of Professor Plantinga's cen­
tral claims are right , but only in senses that fail to support 
his larger project. 
I. 
"Contempora ry evolutionary theory 
is 
compatible 
with theistic belief." 
II. " [I]t is no part of current evolutionary theory to 
say that . . .  mutations are random in a sense imply­
ing . . .  that they occur just by chance." 
25 

26 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARI! THEY COMPATIBLE? 
III. "Naturalism and evolutionary theory together imply 
the denial of divine design, but evolutionary biology 
by itself doesn't have that implication." 
I. "Contemporary evolutionary theory is 
compatible with theistic belief." 
Plantinga is right about this, given the way he defines his 
terms, and lurking within his claim is an important point I 
have often stressed myself, since I first expressed it in 1990. 
In our world today, there are organisms we know to be 
the result of foresighted, goal-seeking redesign efforts, but 
that knowledge depends on our direct knowledge of recent 
historical events (we've actually watched the breeders at 
work), but these special events might not cast any fossily 
shadows into the future. To take a simpler variation on 
our thought experiment, suppose we were to send Martian 
biologists a laying hen, a Pekingese dog, a barn swallow, 
and a cheetah and ask them to determine which designs 
bore the mark of intervention by artificial selectors. What 
could they rely on? How would they argue? They might 
note that the hen did not care "properly" for her eggs; some 
varieties of hen have had their instinct for broodiness bred 
right out of them, and would soon become extinct were 
it not for the environment of artificial incubators human 
beings have provided for them. They might note that the 
Pekingese was pathetically ill suited for fending for itself 
in any demanding environment. The barn swallow's fond­
ness for carpentered nest sites might fool them into the 
view that it was some sort of pet, and whatever features of 
the cheetah convinced them that it was a creature of the 
wild might also be found in greyhounds, and have been 
patiently encouraged by breeders. Artificial environments 
are themselves a part of nature, after all. 
Prehistoric fiddling by intergalactic visitors with the 
DNA of earthly species cannot be ruled out, except on 

Thtrms THAT Miss TuEtR MARK 
grounds that it is an entirely gratuitous fantasy. Nothing 
we have found (so far) on earth so much as hints that such 
a hypothesis is worth further exploration. (And note-I 
hasten to add, lest creationists take heart-that even if we 
were to discover and translate such a " trademark message" 
in our spare DNA, this would do nothing to rescind the 
claim of the theory of natural selection to explain all design 
in nature without invocation of a foresighted Designer­
Creator outside the system. If the theory of evolution by 
natural selection can an:ount for the existence of the peo­
ple at NovaGene who dreamt up DNA branding, it can also 
account for the existence of any predecessors who may 
have left their signatu res around for us to discover.) The 
power of the theor)' of natural selection is not the power to 
prove exactly how (pre-)history was, but only the power to 
prove how it could have been, given what we know about 
how things are.1 
27 
So I agree that contemporary evolutionary theory can't 
demonstrate the absence of intelligent design, and any biol­
ogist who insists that we can is overstating the case. But 
Plantinga must deal with the implications of one sentence 
in the passage above: "Prehistoric fiddling by intergalactic 
visitors with the Dl\'A of earthly species cannot be ruled 
out, except on grounds that it is an entire(y gratuitous fan­
tasy" (emphasis added). Now we might draw the debate 
to a close right here. I could happily concede that any­
body who wishes to entertain the fantasy that intelligent 
designers from another galaxy <or another dimension) fid­
dled with our evolutionary prehistory, or salted Earth with 
life forms, or even arranged for the constants of physics to 
take on their particular "local" values will find their fantasy 
consistent with contemporary evolutionary biology. There 
is not a shred of evidence for any such fantasy, but it's a 
free country, and it might be harmless enough to keep 
such fairy tales alive, but in general, I think, it is wise of 

28 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE ThEY COMPATIBLE? 
us not to respect such frivolities, since they can, in fact, do 
serious damage to the epistemological fabric of our soci­
ety. For instance, they might mislead deluded people into 
basing policy on them, for instance, by offering public sac­
rifices to those imagined intelligent designers in hopes of 
enticing them to return and repair our damaged planet, or, 
to take two entirely real and utterly deplorable examples, 
they might mislead deluded people into dismissing envi­
ronmental concerns since the End Times will soon be upon 
us in any case, or spawn hatred of a political candidate 
because he is deemed to be the Antichrist. (I call on all 
Christians to speak out publicly and explicitly to dismiss 
as pernicious nonsense such obscene creeds, which have 
an altogether worrying grip on the popular imagination of 
too many of our fellow citizens.) 
Perhaps, you think, Plantinga's theistic creed is in bet­
ter position than any science-fictional fantasy. Let us con­
sider, for concreteness's sake, a candidate. Superman, son 
of Jor-el, also later known as Clark Kent, came from the 
planet Krypton about 530 million years ago and ignited 
the Cambrian explosion. Superman "could have caused the 
right mutations to arise at the right time, he could have 
preserved populations from perils of various sorts, and so 
on; in this way, by orchestrating the course of evolution, he 
could have ensured that there come to be creatures of the 
kind he intends" (Plantinga, p. 4). 
Superman, according to my hypothesis, seeded a handy 
planet so that in the fullness of time he could have play­
things, a sort of Super Ken and Barbie World. A rather 
adolescent project, perhaps, but nevertheless a motivated 
instance of intelligent design. 
Now the burden of proof falls on Plantinga to show why 
his theist story deserves any more respect or credence than 

TRUTHS ThAT Miss ThEIR MARK 
29 
this one. I myself cannot see any rational grounds for pre­
ferring his theism over my Supermanism-which I don't 
espouse, but see as perfectly consistent with contemporary 
evolutionary theory. Moreover, I can describe experiments 
that could make my Superman hypothesis highly probable 
if they panned out. 
Here's a crude example: We drill and dynamite a big cra­
ter in the Burgess Shale, and thereby expose, for the first 
time in over half a billion years, a set of golden plates, not 
the Angel Moroni's golden plates, but Jor-el's golden plates, 
which, unlike Moroni's, don't conveniently disappear, and 
are soon carefully studied by the National Academy of 
Sciences. The inscriptions on them prove to be instruc­
tions from )or-el to his son, explaining how to ensure that 
the intended gene duplications occur to hasten the path to 
new body plans, the evolution of vision, and eventually of 
vertebrates. 
Of course it is just as true that tomorrow the clouds could 
part, and a giant voice could boom out in all the languages 
of the world simultaneously, saying "I, Allah, of whom 
Muhammad is the prophet, have been intervening in evo­
lution for billions of years on this little planet." I wonder if 
Plantinga would say, "You see? You see? I was right!" 
I I. Plantinga is right that "it is no part of current 
evolutionary theory to say t h at . . .  mutations arc 
random in a sense implying t hat t.hcy arc uncaused 
(they are said to be caused hy cosm ic rays, for 
example); still less that they occur just by chance." 
This is often misunderstood. As I pointed out in Elbow 
Room, 2 even so great an evolutionist as Nobel Laureate 
Jacques Monod could make the mistake of thinking that 

30 
SCIENCE AND REUGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
evolution could not occur in "Laplace's world, from which 
chance is excluded by definition."3 Evolution can occur just 
fine in deterministic worlds, as thousands of determin­
istic computer models of evolution demonstrate on a daily 
basis (they are all deterministic, relying on pseudo-random 
number generators as their source of "random" mutation). 
Indeterminism is indeed a red herring, both for evolution 
and for free will, as I have argued for decades. 
I II .  Plantinga's largest claim is that 
"Naturalism and evolutionary theory together 
imply the den ial of d ivi ne design, but 
evolutionary biology by itself doesn't have 
that i mplication." 
This is also true, but in its own special way, which I illus­
trate with a parallel story: 
Fred the nasty art critic has published a scathing review of an exhi bit 
of Tom's a rt, and is found dead i n  his apartment the next day, his 
head bas hed i n  by one of Tom's scu lptures, which lies soaked in 
blood beside the corpse, with the published review d raped over the 
body. M u rder most foul, it appears, but at Tom's trial the defense 
is impressive: The sculpture i n  question had belonged to Fred for 
years, and can be seen perched precariously on the high shelf above 
his read ing chair  i n  a photograph ta ken a week earl ier. Moreover, 
that morn ing shortly after 9, at which time Fred habitually read the 
morning pa per, a moderate earthquake (see the evidence here on 
the seismograph) had shaken all the houses i n  the neighborhood . 
M any similar items were jiggled off shelves and tables in the neigh· 
borhood that day, and there was no evidence that Tom was any· 
where nearby: no sign of breaking and enteri ng, no fingerprints, no 
DNA, etc. In all likelihood , Fred's death was by natural causes, not a 
murder, not a death with an intending and intelligent author. 

TRUTHS ThAT Miss THEIR MARK 
31 
Tom's acqu ittal now seems assured , but the prosecutor isn't 
fi n ished; he calls an expert witness , Professor Plantinga. 
" Do you bel ieve Tom murdered Fred ?" 
"Yes I do." 
" But hasn't the defense shown that it was an accident, a death 
by natu ral causes, not a murder?" 
" No, the defense has shown, I grant, that it could have been an 
accident, but not that it was an accident. There is no inconsistency 
between the case that the defense has made and the proposition, 
which I find enti rely reasonable, that Tom was the deliberate author 
of Fred's death ." 
" Do you deny that there was a n  earthquake sufficient to topple 
the scu l pture?" 
" N o, but Tom could have arranged for the earthquake to hap­
pen just so! Nothing we know i n  geology by itself rules out the 
possi bility that people can cause earthquakes by wishing for them 
hard enough .  Or, as I have said, ' Satan and h i s  minions' . . .  may be 
involved in one way or another." 
" But . . .  " 
" I  grant you that naturalism com bi ned with what we know of 
geology has the impl ication that Fred 's death was almost certainly 
not a murder, but n atu ralism has not been established or even 
defended in this court." 
Of course not, because naturalism is tacity assumed 
in all reputable courts of law, and throughout scientific 
investigation. 
As Plantinga makes clear, naturalism is the creed he 
wants to discredit. This puts him in an awkward position. 
If he wants to champion the "much maligned" Michael 
Behe, he needs to make his peace with naturalism. Behe's 
so-called scientific work has been carefully judged by the 

32 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE TuEV COMPATIBLE? 
scientific community and thoroughly rejected. The last 
thing Michael Behe needs is a defender who insists that 
naturalism is not to be assumed for the sake of argument. 
Without naturalism Behe is just another theological specu­
lator, not the scientist he claims to be. 
In this regard, a little history is relevant. In 1997, Plantinga 
and Peter van Inwagen issued a challenge to me. According 
to them, the Lehigh University biochemist Michael Behe's 
forthcoming book, DarwinD Black Box, 4 was a deeply seri­
ous, high-quality challenge to evolutionary theory, and 
my intellectual integrity as a Darwinian was on the line. 
Would I debate him? I took their endorsement seriously, 
and, not being a biochemist, asked for their permission 
to team up with somebody who knew the technicalities 
better than I did. I passed on their endorsement of Bebe's 
book to my friend, the eminent Harvard evolutionary biol­
ogist David Haig, and he agreed to join me. When copies 
of the book arrived, we were appalled. This was not at all 
a serious science book, but hugely disingenuous propa­
ganda, full of telling omissions and misrepresentations. We 
went to Notre Dame in April and dealt firmly, fairly, and 
objectively with Behe's claims, pointing out that his argu­
ments were not just inconclusive; they gave every sign of 
willfully ignoring contrary evidence and argument. There 
was precious little rebuttal at that meeting in Notre Dame, 
and I figured that Haig and I had done our duty. I see that 
Plantinga no longer expresses any endorsement of Behe's 
first book, but now gives his layman's approval to his sec­
ond book. I'm not biting. I've paid my dues. 
Plantinga says, "If Behe is right, or anywhere near right, 
the probability of the existence of the cell as we find it is 
much greater on theism than on naturalism" (p. 9). Since 

TRUTHS ThAT Miss ThEJR MARK 
33 
Plantinga is a layman, as he notes, he is really in no posi­
tion to assess the antecedent of this claim: He finds the 
case that Behe makes is "reasonably powerful though far 
from conclusive." Where might an inquiring layman turn, 
then, for further guidance? He might turn to the scientific 
reviews, which have been uniformly devastating.5 Or he 
might consider the following argument: 
Let B be "Behe is right, or anywhere near right." 
Let N be "Knowledgeable scientists rush to their labs to 
steal Bebe's thunder and win the Nobel Prizes that 
will surely be awarded to anyone who demonstrates 
irreducible complexity." 
Here then is my argument: 
P(N/B) is very high. (Remember cold fusion?) 
N is false. 
: . P that Behe is right, or anywhere near right, is 
negligible. 
But there is more to be said about this interesting case of 
a dog that isn't barking. There's one thing Michael Behe is 
right about: There are large gaps in our detailed accounts 
of the evolution of many complex features-for the trivial 
reason that it will take biologists centuries to investigate 
all the nooks and crannies of the biosphere. But more 
to the point, there are complex features-are they "irre­
ducibly complex"?-that we know quite a bit about but 
still haven't much of a due about how they evolved (if 
they did). 
The question of how they evolved hasn't been studied for 
an interesting sociological reason: The young researchers 
who have the training to do it prefer to tackle other topics. 

34 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
Why? Not because they fear that there is no evolutionary 
explanation of them, but for roughly the opposite reason. 
They fear that they would work hard for a decade, solve 
the problem, and show exactly how the features evolved, 
and hence are not, in spite of first appearances "irreduc­
ibly complex"-and their scientific colleagues would say, in 
effect, "What else is new? Of course they evolved. Thanks 
for proving something we never doubted in the first place." 
It's not just that most researchers, being prudent and cau­
tious with their careers, prefer to work on the low-hanging 
fruit first, the topics that appear likely to produce signifi­
cant results in a relatively short time, but that even those 
who are comfortable with the strategy of risking all for 
a Nobel Prize no matter how arduous and uncertain the 
prospect, are pretty sure that no Nobel Prizes are to be 
found down the ID pathways. That's how sure they are 
that the theory of evolutiruLbv natural selection is funda­
mentally confirmed. Of course they might be wrong, but 
who would advise them to risk wasting their professional 
careers on such a hunch? 
That's why we should welcome the founding of Biologic, 
the Redmond, Washington, research entity (funded by the 
Discovery Institute) designed to house and fund those tal­
ented researchers-if such can be found-who think they 
can disprove the theory of evolution.6 Let's hope they do 
first-rate science, and fill in a lot of the mildly embarrassing 
gaps in our knowledge of how various features evolved. If 
history is any guide, their quest for skyhooks will net them 
some interesting new cranes, and we'll all learn something. 
And in the meantime, we needn't lose any sleep over their 
spending their time on wild goose chases; they'll be on a 
crusade, and what could be more fulfilling than that, even 
if you come back empty-handed? 

TRUTHS THAT Miss THEIR MARK 
35 
IV. Is nat u ral ism i ncompat ible wit h evolution'? 
What, finally, of Plantinga's argument that "naturalism is 
incompatible with evolution" (p. 17)? He's given the argu­
ment elsewhere, he says, so he can be brief. As he sur­
mises, his first premise is the problematic one: 
1. P(R/N&E) is low. 
In evervdav language, this says that the orobability is low 
that our cognitive faculties are reliable, given natural­
ism and evolutionary theorv. I have given the-arguments 
against this premise elsewhere, and at great length, over 
more than thirty years, so I can be even briefer.' 
Evolution by 
natural selection, with its naturalistic 
presuppositions, explains why hearts are highly reliable 
pumps, lungs are highly reliable blood oxygenators, eyes 
are highly reliable distal-information acquirers, and the 
beliefs that are provoked by those eyes (and other senses) 
are highly reliable truth trackers. I'm not sure what Pat 
Churchland meant when she said, "Truth, whatever that 
is, definitely takes the hindmost," but it shouldn't be taken 
to have the implication Plantinga puts on it. It is true that 
every belief state is what it is, and locally causes whatever 
it causes, independently of whether it is true or false. As 
I have said, our brains are syntactic engines, not seman­
tic engines, which, like perpetual motion machines, are 
impossible. But syntactic engines ce designcdto track 
truth, and that is iust whaLel!Olution has done. A useful 
comparison might be with a hand calculator. 
Arithmetical truth, whatever it is, definitely takes the 
hindmost, when it comes to what happens inside a hand 
calculator. For instance, it would be easy enough to design 
a bogus hand calculator that usually, or always, got its 

36 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
arithmetical answers wrong. Such a device is just as physi­
cally possible as a highly reliable calculator. But for obvi­
ous reasons, such devices have not been made. For the 
same sorts of reasons, unreliable empirical-belief calcula­
tors have not been generated by evolution. And in the case 
oT human beHef generation, we can add that cultural evo­
lution over thousands but not millions of years has honed 
our belief-tracking systems by detecting and correcting 
dozens of blind spots and flaws discovered by . . .  the very 
belief-tracking mechanisms that evolution endowed us 
with. 
Descartes may have thought that we need God's benign 
intervention to have any trust in our cognitive abilities, 
but Descartes didn't have the benefit of Darwin's insights 
when he wrote (cf. my "Descartes's Argument from Design," 
fournal of Philosophy 2008). 
NOTES 
1. Daniel Dennett, "The Interpretation of Texts, People and 
Other Artifacts,'' Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
(L, Supplement, 177-94, Fall 1990), 189-190. 
2. Daniel Dennett, Elbow Room (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1984), 149-50. 
3. Jacques Monod, Chance and Necessity (New York: Knopf, 
1971), 115. 
4. Michael Behe, Darwin 's Black Box (New York: Free Press, 
1996). 
5. See, for example, Sean B. Carroll, "Evolution: God as Genetic 
Engineer,'' Science (2007, June 8), 1427-1428; P. z. Myers, 
http://scienceblogs.com/pharyngula/2007/06/behes_edge_ 
of_evolution_part_i.php. 
6. See New Scientist (2006, December 16), 9-11. 

TRUTHS THAT Miss ThEm MARK 
37 
7. My arguments can be found in Daniel Dennett, The Intentional 
Stance (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987) and Darwin s 
Dangerous Idea (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995). Among 
the others who have offered arguments along these lines are 
Elliott Sober. From a Biological Point of View (Cambridge 
University Press, 1994); Peter Godfrey Smith, Complexity and 
the Function of Mind in .Va tu re (Cambridge Universtiy Press , 
1996); and Kim Sterelny, Thought in a Hostile World (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 2003). 


3 
Sl;PER:tvIA.N vs . Gon? 
Alvin Plantinga 
I'd like to say first that I strongly suspect there is something 
in what I said that Dennett disagrees with. I'm having a little 
difficulty, however, in seeing just what it was. I rather enjoyed 
his silly stories about Superman and the really nasty art critic, 
and the like, but I'm not clear as to exactly how those stories 
were supposed to bear on what I sai<l in my paper. 
The organizers of this symposium asked us to address 
the question of whether religion and science arc compati­
ble. I argued that they are. I am happy to note that Dennett 
seems to agree. This agreement does come as something of 
a surprise, however, and seems to me to mark a significant 
39 

40 
SCIENCE ANO RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
change from his book Darwin s Dangerous Idea.1 I'm 
delighted with the change; still, all is not yet sweetness 
and light. While he agrees that religion and science, theism 
and evolution, are compatible, Dennett goes on to point 
out that many pretty silly propositions-for example, his 
Supermanism-are also compatible with science. 
When I first read Dennett's comment, I thought what 
he had in mind is something like the following: Religion 
and science are indeed compatible, but many silly proposi­
tions or positions are compatible with science, for example, 
Supermanism. Theism, belief in God, is one of those silly 
propositions that are compatible with theism. He puts it 
like this: "I myself cannot see any rational grounds for pre­
ferring his [i.e., my] theism over my [i.e., his] Supermanism" 
(p. 29). 
On further thought, though, it struck me it wasn't 
really theism he was claiming to be silly, but a different 
proposition: 
1. God guided and orchestrated the course of evolution 
to produce the kind of creatures he wanted. 
I was arguing that God and evolution are possible, by 
pointing to another proposition that is clearly possible, and 
entails both the existence of God and the truth of evolu­
tion. That other proposition is 1; and I said that 1 was 
possible. I wasn't arguing that 1 was true, but only using 
it to show that the existence of God is compatible with the 
current scientific theocy of evolution. And 1 can do its job, 
even if it isn't true, even if it isn't plausible, and even if it is 
silly. All it has to be is possible. So Dennett's claim that 1 is 
silly, like Supermanism, is wholly beside the point. 
But maybe Dennett was thinking like this: If the only prop­
osition that can be used to show that God and evolution are 

SUPERMAN vs. GoD? 
41 
compatible is a silly proposition, then one can believe that 
God and evolution are compatible only by believing a silly 
proposition. And maybe he thinks further that 1 is the only 
proposition that can be used in this way, and further, that 1 
is silly-"Plantinga's particular Genesis-inspiredfantasy" he 
calls it (ooo), and he thinks we shouldn't respect it. 
Well, 1 is certainly not the only possible proposition that 
can be used in this way. But much more important, why 
does Dennett think 1 is silly? It doesn't seem even remotely 
silly to me; why does Dennett think it's silly? Apparently 
because he thinks it is relevantly like Supermanism, which 
we all agree is a foolish proposition. 
Premise 1 doesn't seem to me to be at all like 
Supermanism. Supermanism is indeed silly; it isn't any 
more sensible than Dennettism, the idea that Dennett was 
actually present 500 million years ago and interfered with 
the course of evolution, intervened in it, and brought it 
about that there should now be the kinds of creatures we 
actually find. But of course Supermanism and Dennettism 
are silly in ways 1 isn't. For one thing, humanlike crea­
tures like Superman and Dennett don't live nearly long 
enough; very few achieve an age of 500 million years. In 
fact Superman was brought up in the 1930s (in Kansas), 
and by now would be scarcely more than eighty years old. 
Dennett is even younger. And second, neither Superman 
nor Dennett is capable of relevantly intervening in the 
course of evolution. So Supermanism isn't at all relevantly 
like theism. Supermanism is a silly thesis; it doesn't in the 
least follow that theism is, or that the idea that God has 
guided and directed evolution is. 
A couple more points. Dennett claims that natural­
ism is tacitly assumed in all reputable courts of law and 
throughout scientific investigation. If he is using the term 

42 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
"naturalism" the way I defined it in my paper, this is 
clearly and obviously false. In physics, for example, it is 
not assumed that there is no such person as God. There 
are very many physicists (perhaps 40 percent) who are also 
believers in God. These physicists do not take it that in 
doing physics they have to assume that there is no such 
person as God. Rather1 what they think they are doing is 
exploring, explaining, and discovering how this world-a 
world that God has created-works. They believe that the 
world has been created by God; they take it that their job 
as physicists is to explore and understand God's handi­
work. The hypotheses they propose may not directly entail 
the existence of God, but of course that doesn't mean they 
are assuming naturalism. 
As for Michael Behe, let me say only that my recollection of 
his visit to Notre Dame is very different from Dennett's. Very 
different indeed. It does not seem to me that he was shown to 
be mistaken, let alone a charlatan. I thought he held his own 
very nicely with respect to Dennett and his friend. 
I tum now to Dennett's conunents on my evolutionary 
argument against naturalism (EAAN). First, he is right in sug­
gesting that the creed I want to discredit is naturalism, not 
evolution. EAAN (naturally enough) is an argument against 
naturalism. But I must say I was disappointed in Dennett's 
response to this argument. What he does, basically, is to sim­
ply announce that evolution has in fact produced us, and that 
our beliefs do in fact track the truth. But that isn't the issue at 
all. I do not mean for a moment to argue that evolution has 
not produced us, or that our beliefs do not track the truth. Let 
me be clear: Our cognitive faculties are in fact reliable (our 
beliefs do in fact track the truth), and I have no objection to 
the thought that we have been produced by evolution. That 
isn't the issue at all. 

SUPERMAN vs. Gan? 
43 
The basic question is rather about the conditional prob­
ability that our faculties should be reliable, given natural­
ism and evolution. My premise I says that this probability 
is low. Most of my exposition of EAAN was devoted to an 
argument for 1, an argument to show that this probability 
is low. Sadly enough, Dennett doesn't even mention that 
argument; hence there is nothing here to reply to. 
Dennett does propose an analogy, one I actually like 
very much. He likens us to calculators, which track the 
truth even though they are purely mechanical devices. This 
seems to me an unfortunate analogy from Dennett's point 
of view. Calculators. of course, are designed and created 
by intelligent beings, namely us human beings. Calculators 
track the truth, and do so precisely because they are 
designed to do so. This is iust how a theist would think of 
human beings: They, too.z track the truth because they were 
created and designed by an intelligent bäing. If we want to 
put EAA:r\ into the context of Dennett's analogy, we would 
suppose that calculators reproduce themselves with occa­
sional copy errors leading to different electronic deƣ. 
Some of these designs would be somehow adaplive with 
respect to their reproducing themselves. Furthermore, let's 
suppose these calculators produce shapes on a screen, as 
in fact they do, and finally, let's suppose these machines 
were not planned or designed by any intelligent beings at 
all. What would be the probability, on these suppositions, 
that the shapes on their screens are English sentences that 
express truths? 
NOTE 
1. Daniel Dennett, Darwin 's Dangerous Idea (New York: Si mon 
& Shuster, 1995). 


4 
HA.BITS OF IMAGINATION 
AX D THEIR EFFECT ON 
lXCREDU LITY 
Reply to Plantinga (Essay 2) 
Daniel C. Dennett 
Plantinga usefully draws attention to several points that I 
didn't emphasize in my first comments. 
I 
He finds my Superman story "silly," a "relatively foolish" prop­
osition. After all, he reminds us, "humanlike creatures . . .  like 
45 

46 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE Tusv COMPATIBLE? 
Superman don't live nearly long enough; very few achieve 
an age of 500 million years" (p. 41). Certainly it is foolish, 
on purpose. The question is this: Is it relatively foolish? 
Compared to his alternative? I would guess that the whole 
Superman scenario, with its kryptonite and x-ray vision, is 
probably at best only logically possible as philosophers so 
often like to insist-not self-contradictory, even though it 
violates sound scientific principles by the dozen. That was 
my point, since exactly the same verdict must be issued 
regarding virgin birth, walking on water, raising the dead, 
turning water into wine, and being resurrected from cru­
cifixion. To anybody but a devout Christian, these are just 
as silly, just as foolish as Supermanism. If Plantinga were 
to claim that he himself had performed any of these feats, 
he would thereby destroy his own credibility. We know 
perfectly well that human like creatures and human beings 
can't do any such things. 
He says he can't see why my Supermanism is "at all 
like" his proposition: "God guided and orchestrated the 
course of evolution to produce the kind of creatures he 
wanted." This is really interesting. It shows, I think, just 
how Plantinga's faith has, well, disciplined his imagination. 
He is so accustomed to imagining God as an intelligent 
agent without a body, and has so convinced himself that 
this makes some kind of sense, that he really can't see how 
similar the two stories are. God, like Superman, is intelli­
gent, on the side of good, capable of amazing feats, and 
deeply interested in Homo sapiens on planet Earth. The 
chief differences are that Superman wears a cape and is 
ripped. In the question session following our talks, I was 
asked if it counted against my argument that hundreds oJ 
millions of people have believed one or another version 
of Plantinga's story while probably there are no believer!! 

HABIT!> m· hlAGl\ATIOŗ .\\I> T m:m EFFECT ON INCHEllll LITY 
47 
of my Superman story. My answer is no. Plantinga's story 
was first assembled in an age of scientific ignorance, when 
almost nobody had the idea that the Earth was round, and 
no one had an inkling of its age, for instance. Today peo­
ple are much better informed, but give me a few billion 
dollars to invest in Industrial Light and Magic chicanery 
and a few thousand years to let the story mellow, and we'll 
see how many Supermanists I can generate. Those Jor-el 
golden plates would certainly convince a lot of people-if 
not the l\'ational Academy of Science, but you know how 
conspiratorial those skeptical scientists can be! Add to that 
a Spielberg-directed "documentary" and we might really 
get the ball rolling. After all, roughly half a million people 
say they believe in the Angel Moroni's golden tablets. I rest 
my case. 
Plantinga didn't hypothesize that Jesus guided and 
orchestrated the course of evolution; he hypothesized 
that God did. God is not Jesus, and maybe God can do 
things that Jesus can't do. I gather God wouldn't have to 
use hands and fingers and scientific inslruments to "cause 
the right mutations to arise"; He could just arrange this by 
fiat. (Oh, but jor-el could do that too, didn't I mention that? 
Jor-el's instructions were for his son Superman, who was 
more "humanlike" than his father.) It is dear, is it not, that 
whatever resources Plantinga uses to shore up his hypoth­
esis are available to me to shore up my rival Supermanism. 
This is a mug's game. 
I'm grateful to Plantinga for rising to the bait and crit­
icizing my Superman story because my purpose, in case 
this wasn't obvious before, is to expose the intellectual 
shallowness of all such attempts to salvage consistency 
between science and religion by tweaking the creed until 
it is logically consistent with science. This is intellectual 

48 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
tennis without a net, and the fact that it is an ancient tra­
dition with many eminent contributors does not make it 
more deserving of attention than any other mythology. It 
might be an amusing exercise to assign evolutionary roles 
to figures in the Greek or Roman pantheon-Poseidon 
could preside over the first 2 billion years, when life was 
restricted to the oceans; Aphrodite, with a wink, could pro­
voke the evolution of sexual reproduction; and so forth. 
Supernatural and unfathomable beings automatically "can 
do" whatever our hearts desire, whatever our imaginations 
conjure up. 
II 
Plantinga says my claim that naturalism is tacitly assumed 
in all courts of law and throughout scientific investigation is 
"obviously false." "In physics, for example, it is not assumed 
that there is no such person as God (p. 42)." Really? Not even 
tacitly? When a physicist "proves" that a stone dropped from 
a height will fall with acceleration 9.8 meters/sec, does this 
not tacitly assume that no person (e.g., God) will intervene 
to adjust the rate? Physicists don't routinely add an escape 
clause, "unless God chooses to intervene," because it is tacitly 
assumed that no such "possibilities" are taken seriously. Here 
is what the great biologist, J. B. S. Haldane, said directly on 
this subject back in 1934: 
My practice as a scientist is atheistic. That is to say, when I 
set up an experiment I assume that no god, angel, or devil 
is going to interfere with its course; and this assumption 
has been justified by such success as I have achieved in 
my professional career. I should therefore be intellectually 
dishonest if I were not also atheistic in the affairs of the 
world.1 

HABITS OF htAGt:-;ATIO:'l A5I> TllEIH EFFECT 0'1 INCHEl>l'l lTY 
49 
Courts of law follow the same naturalistic practice in 
their rules of evidence, and hence never confront issues 
like that posed in my little courtroom drama with Plantinga 
as expert witness. Naturalism is the null hypothesis. That 
means that it is always open to counsel to try to dem­
onstrate that a miracle-some violation of naturalism­
has occurred, but I wouldn't want my attorney to try the 
patience of a judge and jury with such a gambit. 
In any case, Plantinga still has to decide whether he 
wants to defend Michael Behe as a naturalist or acknowl­
edge, with Behe's critics, that he is a theological speculator, 
not an investigator playing by the rules of science. Behe 
claims to be a good naturalist, an investigator who uses 
the standard scientific methods to demonstrate irreducible 
complexity, and Plantinga's stout "defense" of Behe actu­
ally undermines him. It also supports a long-standing crit­
icism I have made of the late Stephen jay Gould's attempt 
at an ecumenical detente which Gould called NOMA: the 
doctrine of Non-Overlapping Magisteria that claims that 
science and religion deal with different, nonoverlapping 
issues, and hence can never properly be in conflict. l I don't 
buy it, and neither does Plantinga. He certainly sees the 
science of evolutionary biology as "overlapping" with his 
religjous beliefs, enough to oblige him to cast about for a 
presentable refutation of that science, and he surely speaks 
for very many Christians (and Muslims, and others) when 
he expresses his discomfort with Darwinism. I think that 
only a deep conviction that Christianity needs Bche's prop­
osition to be true could explain why as sophisticated a 
thinker as Plantinga would go out on such an unpromis­
ing limb. Even Kenneth Miller and Francis Collins, both 
practicing Catholics, have dismissed Behe as a crank. Can 

50 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE 1irnv COMPATIBLE? 
Plantinga find a single reputable biologist who agrees with 
his opinion that Behe should be taken seriously? 
When Gould, or more recently Michael Ruse, and Eugenie 
Scott of the National Center for Science Education, insist 
that there is really no necessary conflict between evolu­
tionary biology and religion (properly understood), they 
persuade few devout Christians and Muslims. Plantinga 
speaks for the unpersuaded who know full well there is a 
conflict. In fact my disapproval of the NOMA gambit grows 
out of the worry that these attempts by well-meaning sci­
entific diplomats do more harm than good, unwittingly 
convincing many laypeople that scientists will lie through 
their teeth to get evolution taught in the schools. Much 
better, in my opinion, is to say yes, there is a conflict, and 
once again, science wins (contra Plantinga). 
Some Intelligent Design advocates have mischievously 
argued that if Dawkins and I are right that there is a con­
flict between evolutionary biology and religion, then evo­
lutionary biology is a religion (in competition with other 
religions) and hence teaching it in schools is a violation of 
the First Amendment prohibition of government favorit­
ism of any religion! By the same reasoning, of course, we 
would have to prohibit the teaching of modern astronomy 
and cosmology (where's Heaven?), modern physics (walk­
ing on water?), and nutrition (the loaves and the fishes?). We 
would also have to forbid teaching archeology and ancient 
history, which quite conclusively shows that the story of 
Exodus is a complete fabrication; there is no evidence that 
the Jews were ever expelled from, or even in, Egypt. 
Christians had to abandon their earlier doctrines of 
Heaven when the Copernican revolution set in, and had to 
acknowledge that many of the stories in the Bible are not 
factual accounts but tall tales (more politely called myths) 

HAlllTS OF IMAGINATION AND THEIR EFFECT ON INCREDULITY 
51 
when historical and archeological research demonstrated 
their falsity. They now will have to abandon their doctrines 
of Creation. Some churches have long ago done just that, 
of course. 
III 
What about Plantinga's argument against naturalism? As 
he says, I ignore all but the first premise, which is, I think, 
obviously false, absolving me from considering the rest of 
the argument. Here is the first premise, in everyday words: 
The probability is low that our cognitive faculties are reli­
able, on the assumption of naturalism and current evo­
lutionary theory. He says he gives an argument for this 
premise, which I didn't mention. Let's see. The argument 
is that belief states (given N and E) will be neural states of 
some kind, and in addition to their neural properties they 
will have content: A belief will be a belief that p, which can 
be true or false. There are three ways, Plantinga observes, 
that these properties can be related: by supervenience, 
either logical or nomological, or by identity (reductive 
materialism). That there are these three distinct possibil­
ities for naturalism makes no difference to the argument 
since in each case, although (according to N and E) crea­
tures with beliefs will have evolved to behave adaptively, 
they needn't believe truly. According to Plantinga, "natu­
ral selection doesn't give a fig for true belief just as such" 
(p. 19). The key claim is that a belief's "falsehood in no 
way interferes with the adaptivity of the NP lneurophys­
iological] properties" (p. 19) that somehow contribute to 
its realization. I did mention this claim, and dismissed it, 
and explained why. It is precisely the truth-tracking com­
petence of belief-fixing mechanisms that explains their 

52 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE TuEY COMPATIBLE? 
"adaptivity" in the same way that it is the blood-pumping 
competence of hearts that explains theirs.Ţ Hearts are for 
circulating the blood and brains are for tracking the rele­
vant conditions of the environment and getting it right. 
IV 
Finally, I would like to address Plantinga's rhetorical ques­
tion about his imagined reproducing hand calculators. The 
thought experiment is too briefly sketched to evaluate, so 
let's put in a few details, so that we can see that Plantinga's 
imagination has let him down. Let's suppose that some 
calculators reproduce themselves, he says, with occasional 
copy errors leading to different electronic designs. "Some 
of these designs would be somehow adaptive with respect 
to their reproducing themselves" (p. 43). And, he goes on, 
suppose these calculators have screens on which sym­
bols appear, and "let's suppose these machines were not 
planned or designed by any intelligent beings at all" (p. 43). 
Now, Plantinga asks, what would be the probability that 
the shapes on the screen express truths in English? One 
gathers that he thinks the answer is obviously, laughably 
low. But it all depends, of course, on how these devices 
earn a living. These calculators are going to have to get 
their electric power from somewhere, and since we human 
beings are the only concentrated source of electricity on 
the planet, they will have to be given it by us, or steal it 
from us. In other words, the calculators will have to be 
synanthropic-evolved to thrive in human company, like 
mice and cockroaches and bedbugs-whether or not we 
go on to domesticate them. They might earn their keep by 
wandering into the Game Boy Kingdom and providing us 
with entertainment of one sort or another-in which case 

HABITS OF IMAGINATION AND THEIR EFFECT ON INCREDULITY 
53 
there would be no need for their symbols to express tmths 
(except within the fictions they depicted) but in mainly 
monoglot America there would be considerable selection 
pressure for the shapes on their screens to approximate 
English! If, on the other hand, they evolved to do serious 
informational work for us (competing with iPhones and 
Blackberries and the like), then whatever they do, they 
will have to get it right, in which case the probability that 
their symbols express truths will have to be about as high 
as (or higher than) a Blackberry running Wikipedia, for 
instance. That's a tall order, but is it flat out impossible? 
Plantinga apparently believes that such talented electronic 
agents simply could not evolve without a helping hand from 
intelligent design, but the plausibility of this conviction 
depends on historical happenstance, not on any known 
limitations on evolution. Given that intelligently designed 
devices of this ilk already exist in abundance, this would 
be a hard niche to invade, so it is no doubt highly unlikely 
that any such electronic devices could evolve now to com­
pete successfully with those iPhones and Blackberries. 
For similar reasons, flying cats are unlikely to evolve now, 
since bats have already l:!_andsomely cornered the market 
for flying mammals. But there was a time when flying cats 
might well have evolved, either in competition with bats, 
or preempting the evolution of bats altogether. And therগ· 
are several real-world instances of highly reliable indica­
tor species that have coevolved with human beings. An 
instructive example is the honeyguide, a passerine bird 
that is not domesticated but nevertheless makes a living 
by leading human beings to wild beehives. If these birds 
weren't highly reliable, human beings wouldn't devote 
time and energy to following them, and leaving some of 
the found honey as payment for the birds, which cannot 

54 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
on their own break into the hives. A similar symbiotic 
relationship exists between some fishermen and oceanic 
birds, who get to feed on the bycatch, if only they can lead 
the boats to the schools of fish. It is not hard to imagine 
an arms race between different species of indicator birds, 
adding various informational "killer apps" to their talents, 
vying for human patronage. (Imagine a species of homing 
pigeon that earned its keep on ships by providing a sort of 
avian global positioning system that would lead the ship 
to its home port.) The fact that their users were intelligent 
beings who demanded a lot of them would not show that 
their designer had to be an intelligent being. 
Anyone who has become familiar with any of the fruits 
of Artificial Life research, or genetic algorithms, knows 
that evolution in silico is not just a possibility; it is a practi­
cal reality But could evolution in silico home in on truth 
tracking? Yes, of course. I take Plantinga's rhetorical ques­
tion to be expressing a conviction that truth tracking simply 
could not evolve, in silico or in protein life forms, without 
a helping hand from intelligent designers, but if that is his 
view, it betrays a failure of imagination, not an insight into 
necessity, and of course it begs the question against our 
own evolution by natural selection, for surely we engage 
in truth tracking. To make an argument out of his example 
of the hand calculators, Plantinga would have to demon­
strate that they could not home in on truth-tracking talents 
without the aid of intelligent designers, and that is going to 
require more than his expression of personal incredulity. 
NOTES 
1. J. B .  S. Haldane, Fact and Faith (London: Watt's Thinker's 
Library, 1934). 

HABITS OF IMAGINATION AND TuEJR EPFECT ON INCREDULITY 
55 
2 .  Stephen Jay Gould , Rocks of Ages: Science and Religion in the 
Fullness of Life (New York: Ballanti ne . 1999). 
3. If a more detailed explanation is sought, it can he found in 
Daniel Dennett, "Darwin's 'Strange I nversion of Reasoning'," 
Proceedings of the .Vatioual Academy of Scimce, 106 (Suppl. 1), 
10061-65. 


5 
N.ATlTR.ALISM AGAINST 
SCIENCE 
Alvin Plantinga 
I. Supermanism Again 
According to Christopher Hite-hens, "religion should be 
treated with ridicule, hatred and contempt ."1 Those who 
think like him ordinarily don't propose serious arguments 
against the truth of religious belief-theism for example; 
they prefer sneering condescension and mockery. I'm happy 
to say Dennett doesn't go along with Hitchens's "hatred 
and contempt"; he does, however, lean in the direction of 
57 

58 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
ridicule. 2 For example, he and others like to try to discredit 
theism by comparing it with ideas everyone takes to be 
silly-Supermanism, or Flying Spaghetti Monsterism, or 
Tooth Fairyism, or Bertrand Russell's fantasy of an unde­
tectable china teapot orbiting the sun, and so on. They 
typically don't give us their reasons (if they have any) for 
thinking theism is like these ideas. But is theism like these 
silly ideas? Well, any two views resemble each other in 
some respects. Take atheism and solipsism, for example. 
You are a solipsist if you think you are the only thing that 
exists, everything else being a figment of your imagina­
tion. Atheism obviously resembles solipsism in many ways: 
Both involve the denial of the existence of personal beings 
(atheism denies God; solipsism denies other persons); both 
go contrary to beliefs most people have and that further­
more we seem to be hard-wired to have; both are exceed­
ingly hard to support by way of decent argument; etc. 
As a matter of fact, atheism is a lot more like solipsism 
than theism is like Supermanism. Superman is certainly 
an impressive young fellow, but clearly not much greater 
than Captain Marvel, or even the Green Lantern. God, on 
the other hand, is all-knowing, all-powerful, and wholly 
good; furthermore, God has these properties essentially; 
he could not have been ignorant or impotent, or evil. He 
has also created the world. 
Still further, according to classical theism, God is a neces­
sary being; he exists in all possible worlds; it's not even possi­
ble that he should fail to exist. And since he has the property 
of being omniscient essentially, his believing a proposition is 
logically equivalent to that proposition's being true. Further 
yet, many theists hold that God's will, what he approves and 
disapproves, is the standard for right and wrong, good and 
bad. Superman may be faster than a speeding bullet and 

NATURALISM AGAINST SCIENCE 
59 
more powerful than a locomotive, but he is pretty small 
potatoes when compared with God.-i (It's a little embarrass­
ing to have to point out these obvious difterences.) 
Now of course we can modify the Superman story to make 
Superman more like God. We can change the story. We can 
say, in our revised Superman story, that Superman existed 
long before those boyhood days in 1930s Kansas; we can 
even say, if we like, that he has always existed. We could go 
further: We could say that Superman created the world. And 
we could add to his x-ray vision that he is omniscient (after 
all, the difterence between x-ray vision and omniscience is 
only a matter of dP.gree, not kind). Furthermore, not only is 
he more powerful than a locomotive: He is omnipotent-but, 
fortunately enough, perfectly good. We could say still further 
that Superman has these properties essentially. We could go 
further yet: We can declare him a necessary being. Combined 
with our claim that Superman is essentially omniscient, this 
means that a proposition's being true is logically equivalent to 
its being believed by Superman: Necessarily, grass is green if 
and only if Superman believes that grass is green. 
If we did all this, then of course Dennett's claim that the­
ism is like Supermanism would be true. In fact Supermanism 
(thus modified) would just be theism: ''Supermanism" will 
be Dennett's idiosyncratic name for theism, and "Superman" 
will be his name for God. So theism is certainly like 
Supermanism, thus modified. And I guess we could do the 
same thing for the Flying Spaghetti Monster, the Invisible 
Pink Unicorn, Russell's teapot, the Tooth Fairy, and their 
ilk. Of course the problem for Dennett would then be that 
Supermanism and its relatives, now being identical with 
theism, would no longer be silly. 
Richard Dawkins once complained that opponents ot 
evolution sometimes resort to an argument from personal 

60 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE ThEY COMPATIBLE? 
incredulity: They claim that the theory of evolution is false 
because they personally find it very hard to believe. Dennett 
and others make that same kind of argument from personal 
incredulity against theism. They find theism incredible, 
fantastic, irrational, worthy of ridicule and mockery, and so 
on. They don't typically give reasons (or if, like Dawkins, 
they do, they are exceptionally bad reasons): They just find 
it incredible. Of course they are entirely within their rights 
to do so: It's a free country. But why should the rest of us, 
those who find theism perfectly sensible and in fact believe 
it, as well as those of us who are on the fence between the­
ism and atheism or naturalism-why should we be swayed 
by what Dennett and company do or don't find incredible? 
The vast bulk of the world's population find theism per­
fectly sensible; Dennett and his friends don't; why should 
the former be impressed by the latter? 
As for myself, I'm not impressed. In fact it works just the 
other way on me. I find it extremely hard to believe that 
all the wonderful diversity of life on earth, including the 
human brain, should have come to be (as Dennett and his 
friends think they have come to be) by way of unguided 
evolution. I don't find it especially hard to believe that 
life should have come to be by way of Darwinian evo­
lution-natural selection winnowing something like ran­
dom genetic mutation; as I argued earlier, God could 
certainly have created the living world by using such a 
process. What is incredible is that the wonders of the 
living world should have come to be by unguided evolu­
tion. Those who believe that, but then raise their hands 
in self-righteous epistemic horror at the alleged epistemic 
excesses of theists, are like a bawdyhouse proprietor who 
is scandalized by the R-rated film shown in the theater 
next door. 

NATIJRALISM AGAINST SCIENCE 
61 
I I .  Dennett's Dangerous Idea 
In Darwin s Dangerous Idea, Dennett claims there is 
conflict between theism and current evolutionary theo­
ry.4 Richard Dawkins concurs; indeed the subtitle of his 
The Blind Watchmaker is "How the Evidence of Evolution 
Reveals a Cniverse without Design."ক In this they are mis­
taken; as conservative Christian theologians going back to 
the nineteenth century have argued, there is no conflict 
here." Now it's bad enough to fall into serious intellectual 
error. This mistake, however, has important practical con­
sequences as well: It harms both religion and science. It 
harms the former because it arrays the prestige of science 
against belief in God. But it also harms the latter. As has 
often been noted, fewer than one half of Americans accept 
the theory of evolution-the figure may be as low as 25 per­
cent. l'\o other theories in science-even such revolutionary 
heavyweights as quantum mechanics and relativity-excite 
a fraction of the public interest in the theory of evolution. 
!'\ow why should this be the case? Americans don't ordi­
narily reject other basic scientific theses, such as relativity 
theory and quantum mechanics. True; they may not have 
heard much about these theories; but that just raises the 
question why evolution, as opposed to other central parts 
of science, is so much in the public conখciousness. 
The answer, of course, is obvious: It is because of the 
connection or entanglement of evolution with religion. 
Evolution is widely associated, in the popular mind, with 
naturalism, with a naturalistic, antireligious way of look­
-ing at the worlO; Americans tend to see e\'olution as me 
enemy 6t ret'1gtm.. Is this just due to fundamentalist confu­
sion and ignorance? Hardly. They have excellent reason to 
do so: that choir of distinguished experts led by Dawkins 

62 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE TuEY CoMPATIBLE? 
and Dennett who tell us that evolution shows that in fact 
the universe is not designed. This choir doesn't stop at 
singing the praises of Darwinian evolution: They tell us 
that according to the theory of evolution, neither God nor 
any other agent has designed or created the living world. 
But of course that clearly contradicts a central and nonne­
gotiable tenet of the theistic religions, according to which 
God has indeed designed and created the world, includ­
ing the living world. If indeed these experts are right (and 
since they are the experts, it is not wholly absurd to think 
they are right), then evolution is deeply incompatible with 
theistic religion, whether Christian, Jewish, or Muslim. 
Now a solid majority of Americans are Christians, and 
many more (some 88 or 90 percent, depending on the 
poll you favor) believe in God. Moreover many of these 
believers are much more strongly inclined to accept theis­
tic belief than the idea that all of the living world has come 
to be by unguided evolution. This latter idea isn't easy to 
stomach: According to Nobel Laureate Francis Crick, him­
self no believer in God, "Biologists must constantly keep 
in mind that what they see was not designed, but rather 
evolved."7 Insofar as people associate evolution with nat­
uralism, therefore, they are understandably suspicious of 
evolution-particularly since the scientific evidence for 
unguided evolution (as opposed to evolution simpliciter) 
seems to be scant to nonexistent. 
Given this alleged connection between evolution and 
naturalism, furthermore, many Americans are understand­
ably reluctant to have evolution taught to their children in 
the public schools, the schools they themselves pay taxes to 
support. Protestants don't want Catholic doctrine taught in 
the schools and Christians don't want Islam taught; but the 
distance between naturalism and theistic belief, whether 

NATURALISM AGAINST SCIENCE 
63 
Catholic or Protestant, or Muslim or Jewish, is vastly greater 
than the distance between Catholics and Protestants or, for 
that matter, between Christians and Muslims. Christians, 
Jews, and Muslims concur on belief in God; naturalism 
stands in absolute opposition to these theistic religions; 
and evolution is widely seen as a pillar in the temple of 
naturalism. This association of evolution with naturalism is 
the obvious root of the widespread antipathy, in the United 
States, to the theoryof evolution. Insofar as Dennett and 
others proda1m conflict between evolutionary theory and 
theistic belief, they exacerbate this distrust of evolution-a 
distrust that spills over to science itself, with a consequent 
cost in public support of science. The health and welfare 
of science is therefore damaged by promoting these myths 
to the effect that current evolutionary theory is in conflict 
with theistic religion. Of course that's not much of a reason 
for those who believe those myths to stop promoting them. 
What it does mean, though, is that there is very good rea­
son for exposing them for the myths they actually are: the 
damage they do to science. 
III. Naturalism 
The word naturalism is used in many different ways. In my 
original piece I defined it as follows: Naturalism is the view 
that there is no such person as God or anyone like God. It 
is naturalism so understood that I mean to argue against. 
Contrary to Dennett, furthennore, naturalism so taken is 
obviously not assumed either in science or in courts of law. 
In science, we assume that God won't capriciously inter­
fere with our experiments. The same goes in everyday life: 
I'm rock climbing and reach for a hold; I take it for granted 
that God won't turn that hold into Jell-0 just as I touch it. 

64 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
J. B. s. Haldane seems to think this assumption amounts to 
atheism. But why think a thing like that? Can't one believe 
in God, a God who can act in the world, and also assume 
that God won't arbitrarily interfere with experiments? Some 
40 percent of scientists believe in God and believe that he 
can act in the world; no doubt they also make the assump­
tion that God won't arbitrarily interfere with their experi­
ments. According to legend, Galileo dropped cannonballs 
of different weights off the Tower of Pisa to test Aristotle's 
theory that heavy objects fall faster than light objects. 
Historians tell us this legend is false: Perhaps Giambattista 
Benedetti performed that experiment. No matter; whoever 
performed it, no doubt he assumed that God would not 
capriciously adjust the rate of fall. 
But that's a very long way from atheism or naturalism. 8 
Haldane seems to think intellectual honesty requires him 
to be an atheist (given that he assumes God won't inter­
fere with his experiments); as far as I can see, that's like 
thinking intellectual honesty requires me to deny the exis­
tence of my children, given that I assume they won't set my 
house on fire. There is an enormous difference between 
atheism and assuming that God won't interfere with my 
experiments. (Or are we to suppose that what we have 
here is a shiny new argument for atheism? "If there were 
such a person as God, he could spoil my experiment; noth­
ing can spoil my experiment; therefore . . . .  
") 
Indeed, one of the ways in which Christian theism is 
hospitable to science, one of the reasons modern empirical 
science came to be and flourished in the Christian West, 
is this assump_tion that God is in control of nature and 
does not act arbitrarily. According to Christian, Jewish, 
and some varieties of Islamic theism, God has created us 
human beings in his image. For present purposes, we can 

NATURALISM AGAINST SCIENCE 
65 
take this to mean that he has created us as rational crea­
tures, creatures who resemble him in having the capacity 
to know important things about ourselves, our environ­
ment, and God himself. The divine image includes more: 
It includes a moral sense, a grasp of right and wrong, and 
the ability to know ana love God. But a central and crncial 
part of the divine image in us human beings fs our abil­
ity to have worthwhile and important knowledge aoout 
ourselves and our world. Obviously our ability to do sci­
ence is an extremely important part of the divine image, so 
taken. God has created both us and our world, and created 
them in such a way that the former can know much about 
the latter. But this implies that God would not arbitrarily 
stand in the way of our coming to such knowledge-by, for 
example, capriciously spoiling our experiments. And this 
shows, as against Dennett and Haldane, how far off the 
mark is the suggestion that science presupposes atheism 
or naturalism. 
Of course God's faithfulness and reliability along these 
lines doesn't mean that he never acts in ways outside of 
the normal course of things: It doesn't mean, for example, 
that miracles never occur. Some people seem to think 
that the occurrence of miracles, supposing they occurred, 
would somehow go against science-presumably because 
miracles would violate the laws promulgated by science. I 
don't have the space here to go into this matter properly,9 
but this too is error. The important point here is that 
the laws or m:incioles of scieru.:e a1:e ty.pica l ly stated for 
closed systems, systems that arc dosed to outside causal 
influence. Thus "This is the principle of conservation of 
linear momentum: When no resultant externalforce acts 
on a system, the total momentum of the system remains 
constant in magnitude and direction."10 And the principle 

66 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
of conservation of energy states that "the internal energy 
of an isolated system remains constant. This is the most 
general statement of the principle of conservation of 
energy."11 But now suppose God miraculously created a 
full-grown horse inside the headquarters of the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science: Any system 
containing that headquarters, obviously, would not be 
causally closed; hence the preceding principles would not 
apply to them. 
IV. EAAN 
Finally, I turn once more to EAAN. the evolutionary argu­
ment against naturalism. Dennett and other Brights seem 
to think the naturalists can refute this argument by basi­
cally ignoring it, announcing in an airy (or condescending) 
line or two that they don't believe the conclusion. No doubt 
they don't, but that's no way to refute an argument.12 We 
might perhaps expect Dims to carry on in this way; one 
expects better of Brights. 
A central premise of the argument (see earlier, pp. 17) 
is that the probability of our cognitive faculties' being reli­
able, given naturalism and evolution, is low: P(R/N&E) is 
low. I'll conclude by saying a bit more about the argument 
for this premise, which is perhaps the central premise of 
the argument. 
In the first place, of course, my claim is certainly not 
that our cognitive faculties are unreliable, or that it is prob­
able that they are. I believe, of course, that our cognitive 
faculties-memory perception, a priori insight, Reid's sym­
pathy, whereby we know what others are thinking and 
feeling-I believe that these faculties are indeed reliable. 
That is not to say that we never hold false beliefs: Obviously 

NATURALISM AGAINST SCIENCE 
67 
we often do. Nor is it to say that there are no areas where 
we are subject to cognitive illusions of one sort or another: 
Some have claimed, for example, that we very easily fall 
into error in making probability judgments. (Even there, 
of course, those who make this claim believe that they are 
able to make the relevantly correct probability judgments.) 
Moreover, on many topics, being able to hold accurate 
opinions isn't easy; it requires discipline and training. 
Second. I'm not denying that we and our cognitive facul­
ties have come to be by way of evolution-natural selec­
tion winnowing random genetic mutation, for e'Cample. 
Like any theist, I don't think we have come to be by way of 
unguided evolution; but that's a wholly different matter. 
What I do claim, however, in this crucial first premise, 
is that the conditional probability of our faculties being 
reliable, given naturalism and evolution, is low. (As I said 
earlier, I am including materialism with respect to human 
beings in naturalism.) The argument is straightforward. As 
I said in my initial statement, if materialism is true, a belief 
will be a neurophysiological structure of some kind-a 
group of neurons connected together in a certain way. This 
belief will have two kinds of properties: neurophysiologi­
cal properties (NP properties) and a content property: The 
belief will be the belief that p for some proposition p, in 
which case p will be the content of the belief. NP proper·­
ties are physical properties; the property of having such 
and such a content is a mental property. Materialists hold 
that mental properties are identical with physical proper­
ties (reductive materialism) or that mental properties are 
determined by physical properties, in that for every mental 
property M, there is a physical property P such that neces­
sarily, if a structure has P, it also has M. The necessity here 
can be either broadly logical or causal. 

68 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE TuEY COMPATIBLE? 
Now the NP properties of a belief can cause behavior­
adaptive or maladaptive as the case may be. Natural selec­
tion selects for adaptive behavior and against maladaptive 
behavior. In so doing, it also selects for adaptive neuro­
physiology: It selects for NP properties that cause adaptive 
belief and against NP properties that cause maladaptive 
behavior. Now the content of a belief is determined by 
these NP properties. In my initial statement I suggested we 
think about some other population of creatures for whom 
N and E hold: We may assume that the NP properties of 
their beliefs are adaptive. 
But what about the truth of those beliefs? We know that 
the content of their beliefs (and of course what makes a 
belief true [or false] is that it has true [or false] content) is 
determined by the NP properties of that belief. A given 
content is caused or determined by a given set of NP prop­
erties. What evolution selects for is adaptive behavior and 
adaptive NP properties; but as for the content, that is deter­
mined by a given set of adaptive NP properties, and evolu­
tion just has to take potluck (not that it minds). Evolution 
just has to put up with the content that is determined by 
the particular NP properties in question. And the point is, 
it doesn't matter to the adaptivity of those NP properties, 
whether the content they determine is true or false. Those 
NP properties cause adaptive behavior; they also deter­
mine belief content, but we have no reason to think the 
belief content true. If it's true, fine; but if it's false, that's 
equally fine. 
Here's an objection: Wouldn't the content have to be 
true for the organism to behave appropriately? Suppose 
the belief content associated with a given set of NP prop­
erties is false: Wouldn't that lead to maladaptive behavior? 

NATURALISM AGAINST SCIENCE 
69 
Suppose one of those creatures believes that amanitas 
mushrooms (which are poisonous) are good to eat: Won't 
that lead to behavior incompatible with survival? So don't 
we have to posit true beliefs on the part of those creatures 
to explain their adaptive action? 
Not at all. Think about a frog sitting on a lily pad: A 
fly buzzes past, the frog's tongue flicks out and nails the 
fly. Does it matter what the frog then believes, if indeed 
frogs have beliefs? Clearly not: What matters is the frog's 
behavior and the neurophysiology that causes that behav­
ior. Of course something in the frog registers or indicates 
the approach of the fly, the distance from fly to frog, the 
velocity of the fly, and so on; and those somethings are 
part of the cause of the frog's capturing the fly. Call those 
structures indicators. For the frog's behavior to be adap­
tive, for it to capture the fly, it is necessary that there be 
indicators, and necessary that they indicate accurately. But 
none of that need involve belief The frog doesn't have to 
believe that the fly is such and such a distance away, flying 
at such and such a velocity, and so forth; it doesn't so much 
as have to believe that there is a fly present. 
In the same way, there are also indicators in a human 
body, various structures that indicate or register various 
states of affairs in the body, and cause appropriate reac­
tions. Elements of the immune system may register the 
presence of foreign bodies, perhaps microbes involved in 
an infection; this will cause a response designed to destroy 
the invasive agents. But of course neither the immune sys­
tem, nor any part of it, nor the person whose body is in 
question need believe that the body has been invaded by 
infection-causing microbes. There are structures that regis­
ter the presence of infection and cause a fever (antibodies 

70 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATlllLE? 
can do their thing better at a higher temperature); again, 
nothing in the neighborhood-the immune system, the 
antibodies, the person sustaining the infection-need form 
any beliefs. Indeed, the person in question may believe 
that he or she doesn 't have an infection. 
Adaptive behavior requires accurate indicators: The frog 
will capture the fly only if the relevant indicators in the 
frog are indicating accurately. The explanation of the frog's 
adaptive behavior is that the relevant indicators accurately 
register the relevant states of affairs. But as we've just seen, 
of course, indication is not belief. And if indication is going 
properly, it doesn't matter what the organism in question 
believes. We don't need to posit true beliefs in the frog to 
account for its adaptive behavior: what is required is only 
accurate indication; and accurate indication need not be 
accompanied by true belief. As long as the ind1cauon 1s 
accurate, the behef content can be anything whatever. This 
objection to the argument therefore fails. 
By way of conclusion, there isn't any conflict between 
Christian belief and science in the area we've been investi­
gating. Christian belief and evolutionary science are entirely 
compatible. Perpetuating the myth that there is conflict, 
furthermore, is harmful both to religion and to science. 
The fact is theistic belief, with its teaching of God's creat­
ing human beings in his image, is eminently friendly and 
receptive to science. On the other hand, there is conflict 
between naturalioan and science, in that one can't ratio­
nally accept both naturalism and evolution. But evolution 
is one of the pillars of contemporary science; hence there is 
deep conflict between naturalism and science. Still further, 
there are no good reasons to accept or believe naturalism; 
and there are powerful reasons, including the evolutionary 

NATURALISM AGAINST SCIENCE 
71 
argument against naturalism, to reject it. Naturalism, there­
fore, is intellectually bankrupt. If this is the best Brights 
can do, I think I'll stick with the Dims. u 
NOTES 
1. Christopher Hit<.·hens (L1n iversity of Toronto lecture, 2009). 
2. For a particularly egregious example, s<.'C Daniel Dennett, 
Daru·in 's Dangerous Idea ('.'lew York : Touchstone, 1995), 164 . 
.3. These 
are 
ways 
in 
which 
Superman 
is 
unlike 
God. 
Supermanism is also unli ke theism , belief in God. For exam­
ple . there are a number of reasonably strong arguments for 
the existence of God; at last report there were none for the 
existence of Superman. '1any accept theism; hardly any 
accept Supermanism. 
4. "A n i mpersonal ,  u n reflective, robotic, mindless little scrap of 
molecular machi nery is the ultimate basis of all the agency, 
and hence meaning, and hence consciousness, in the uni­
verse." Dennett. Darwin 's Dangerous Idea, 203. 
5. Richard Dawk ins, The Blind Watchmaker (New York : W. W. 
Norton & Co., Inc., 1986). 
6. As Dennett seems to concede in his earl ier response (p. 26) 
to my original statement. 
7. Francis Crick, What Mad Pursuit: A Personal View of Scientific 
Discovery ( '.'Jew York : Basic Books , 1988), 1 38. 
8. It m ight be closer to what is often called methodological nat­
u ralism, but methodological nat uralism is certai nly not the 
naturalism under discussion here. 
9. But see Alvi n Plantinga, "What Is 'Intervention'?," Theology 
and Science, 6: 369-401 . 
10. Francis W. Scars and Mark W. Zemansky, l!n i11ersity Physics 
(Boston: Addison-Wesley, 196.3), 186 (emphasis added). 
11. Scars 
and Zemansky, 
l/11 i11ersily Physics, 
4 15 (emphasis 
added). 

72 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE TuEV CoMPATIBLE? 
12. For (by contrast) a serious and responsible response to 
EAAN by a nontheist, see Michael Tooley's reply in Alvin 
Plantinga and Michael Tooley, Knowledge of God (Oxford, 
UK: Blackwell, 2008) 184ff; see also the essays in James 
Beilby, Naturalism Defeated? (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 2002). 
13. My thanks to Brian Boeninger, Kenny Boyce, Nate King, 
Marcin Iwanicki, and Anne Peterson. 

6 
No MrR.ACLES NEEDED 
Daniel C. Dennett 
According to an oft-told story, an aeronautical engineer once 
proved from first principles that bumblebees simply can­
not fly. I was reminded of this legend1 by Plantinga's argu­
ment, purporting to prove that naturalism defeats itself: 
that epistemic agents who were the products of (mere) evo­
lution by natural selection would. by the very fact of their 
modest lineage, have no warrant to trust their own judg­
ment. I don't suppose the aeronautical engineer was trying 
to demonstrate that the flight of the bumblebee is a miracle 
(although of course it might be-it's logicalƢy possible, as 
some philosophers love to say!). I expect the intent was to 
73 

74 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
demonstrate the shortcomings in the aeronautical principles 
relied on: "Something must be wrong with my argument, 
since there goes the bumblebee!" Plantinga, in contrast, 
does want to use his argument to demonstrate that our 
manifest competence as truth trackers-our capacity to fly 
as scientists, you might say-is grounds for believing that 
a miracle must have happened. According to Plantinga's 
argument, an Intelligent Designer has had a hand (well, 
not literally a hand, but a divine nudge of some kind) in 
our evolution, since such a competence as we exhibit could 
not otherwise come to exist. This is apparently his attempt 
to shore up Michael Behe's forlorn argument from irreduc­
ible complexity with his own version, replacing the bacte­
rial flagellum with human cognitive competence. 
The argument is indirect. The last sentence of Plantinga's 
opening essay is "The real conflict is between evolution, 
that pillar of contemporary science, and naturalism" (p. 21). 
His idea is that if unguided natural selection could not give 
us grounds for trusting our cognitive competence, and 
our cognitive competem:e is just as obvious as the flight 
of the bumblebee, then we are supposedly constrained to 
abandon our naturalism and grant God a role in vouch­
safing this cognitive competence to us. There is no doubt 
in Plantinga's mind that we human beings can discern the 
truth, and know that we are doing so, and indeed, this is 
assumed on all sides by the very activity of engaging in rea­
soned inquiry. Why would we devote time and energy to it 
if we didn't think we were capable of doing it?2 So some­
thing must give: either naturalism or Plantinga's argument. 
Plantinga apparently thinks that he has shown first that 
there is room in evolutionary biology (minus naturalism) 
for the hypothesis that a theistic God intervened, and sec­
ond that God must have taken advantage of that room, 

No MIRACLES NEEDED 
75 
intervening at the appropriate moments in our evolution­
ary history and tweaking the processes that gave us the 
capacity to do science (and, of course, to worship our cre­
ator). A purposeless, unguided evolutionary process just 
could not achieve the same results. 
Plantinga wanted to show, in other words, that science 
and religion are not just compatible: Science depends on 
theism to underwrite its epistemic self.confidence. If the 
only creatures under consideration were, say, snails, frogs, 
and dolphins, the claim would be granted on all sides that 
the epistemic talents provided them by natural selel..tion 
are too crude and practical to grant them reliable visions 
of science. But unlike these simpler animals, we multiply 
our epistemic talents by orders of magnitude, thanks to 
cultural evolution and the sharing of methods, tools, and 
perspectives that it enables. As Bo Dahlbom once put it, 
''You can't do much carpentry with your bare hands and 
you can't do much thinking with your bare brain."ঔ Our 
brains are far from bare. We have developed and proven 
the reliability of dozens of prosthetic extensions of our 
native cognitive talents. Our capacity to discover the facts, 
and to have good reasons for believing that we have done 
so, is explicable without appeal to inexplicable or irreduc­
ible genius, immaterial minds, or a divine helping hand. 
The passagt: from intelligent hominid to language-using 
Homo sapiens to scientist is one that we are only begin­
ning to uncover, so we cannot yet prove that there are no 
miracles along the way, but the burden of proof lies on the 
other side. Let Plantinga, like Bebe, try to show us the irre­
ducible complexity in our minds that could not possibly 
have evolved (by genetic and cultural evolution). He will 
find, as Behe has, that his inability to imagine how this is 
possible is not the same as a proof that it is impossible.4 

76 
SCIENCE AND RELIGION: ARE THEY COMPATIBLE? 
Richard Dawkins calls this the Argument from Personal 
Incredulity, and it is an obvious fallacy. 
I have shown that Plantinga's argument depends on a 
false premise, so we can continue to pursue our natural­
istic evolutionary science without miracles. We no doubt 
have some limitations on what we can understand, and 
there are surely many facts forever beyond our ken, but 
this does not show that there is some fatal flaw, some epis­
temological original sin that cripples our attempts to know, 
but just that we are finite creatures with a finite evolution­
ary history. 
NOTES 
1 .  The story appears to have some foundation in fact, though it 
has been transformed through retelling, a meme with quite a 
distinguished history, dating back to the 1930s, when August 
Magnan, a famous French entomologist, and his lab assistant, 
M. Saint-Lague, did the engineering calculations, as reported 
in Magnan's book, Les Vols des Insects (Paris: Hermann, 1934). 
Of course Magnan realized that this was a reductio of cur­
rent thinking in aeronautical engineering. See also John 
McMasters, 1989, "The Flight of the Bumblebee and Related 
Myths of Entomological Engineering," American Scientist, 77: 
164-68. 
2. Roger Wertheimer developed this point in his The Significance 
of Sense (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1974), 1 10-1 1 .  
3. Bo Dahlbom (unpublished). 
4. In Bebe's account of the bombardier beetle (Darwin's Black 
Box, New York: Free Press 1996, 35-36), and in his specula­
tions about how flagella might have evolved (65-66), he raises 
interesting possibilities, and grants that "All we can conclude 
at this point is that Darwinian evolution might have occurred" 
(36). And as he himself admits, "The frustrating answer is that 

No MIRACLEJ NEEDED 
77 
we can't tell" (41). In the end, he says, he finds it "extremely 
implausible" that evolutionary accounts of these phenomena 
will be forthcoming. That is an autobiographical confession, 
not a scientific demonstration. (And as scientists have shown, 
Behe's incredulity is not shared, since there is a wealth of evi­
dence concerning how (and when, and why) these putatively 
"irreducibly complex" features did in fact evolve.) 


INDEX 
Adaptive behavior, 68-70 
American Philosophical 
Association Central Division 
Meeting, vii 
Ancient earth thesis, 3 
Aquinas, Thomas, 16 
Argument from design, 7, 8-9 
Argument from Personal 
Incredulity, 76 
Aristotle, 64 
Atheism, 8, 10, 58, 64, 65 
Behe, Michael, viii 
Dennett on, 31-33, 49-50, 74, 
75, 76-77n4 
Plantinga on, 8-9, 13, 42 
Benedetti, Giambattista, 64 
Bible, 50 
Big Bang cosmology, 16 
Biologic, 34 
Biology, molecular, 8-9 
Bltnd Watchmaker, Tbe 
(Dawkins), 61 
Brain, 13, 18, 35, 75 
Bumblebee, aeronautical 
principles on, 73-74, 76nl 
79 
Calvin, John, 9, 15 
Cell, complexity of, 8-9, 13, 
32-33 
Churchland, Patricia, 19, 35 
Closed systems, 65 
Collins, Francis, 49 
Common ancestry thesis, 3-4 
Content properties, 67-70 
Copernican revolution, 50 
Creation doctrine, 4 
Crick, Francis, 62 
Oahlbom, Bo, 75 
Darwinism 
Dennett on, 32, 36, 49 
Plantinga on, 3-7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 
60, 62 
Darwin's Black Box (Behe), 32 
Darwin 's Dangerous Idea 
(Dennett), 39, 61 
Dawkins, Richard, 4, 50, 59-60, 
61, 76 
Dennettism, 41 
Descartes, Rene, 36 
Descent with modification 
thesis, 3 

80 
INDEX 
Determinism, 30 
Discovery Institute, 34 
Dupre, John, 8 
Edge of Evolutton, The (Bebe), 
8-9 
Elbow Room (Dennett), 29 
Energy, principle of conservation 
of, 65-66 
Evil, problem of, 10-11 
Evolutionary theory. See also 
Darwinism; Natural selection 
anti-theistic arguments from, 
2-3, 7-16 
naturalism vs., 3, 16-21, 35-36, 
42-43, 66-71 
percentage of Americans 
accepting, 61 
teaching of, 50, 62-63 
theism compatibility with, 2, 
3-7, 25, 26-29 
Evolution In stllco, 54 
Evolution stmpltctter, 62 
Eye, evolution of, 12-13 
Faith, discipline of imagination 
by, 46 
Galileo, 64 
Genetic mutation. See Random 
genetic mutation 
Gould, Stephen Jay, 3, 5, 9, 
49, 50 
Haeckel, Ernst, 13 
Haldane, J. B. S., 48, 64, 65 
Hand calculator analogy, 35-36, 
43, 52-54 
Hitchens, Christopher, 57 
Hodge, Charles, 21n2 
Honeyguide, 53-54 
Imagination, discipline of by 
faith, 46 
Indeterminism, 30 
Indicator species, 53-54 
Intelligent design, 27, 50, 74 
Irreducible complexity, 33-34, 
49, 74, 75 
Jesus, 2, 47 
Johnson, Philip, 4 
Kitcher, Philip, 9-10 
Lewis, C. S., 2, 11 
Linear momentum, principle of 
conservation of, 65 
Logical nonreductive materialism 
(LNM), 19-20 
Logical supervenience, 18, 51 
nonreductive, 19 
Magnan, August, 76n1 
Martian biologists analogy, 
26-27 
Materialism, 17-18, 67 
logical nonreductive, 19:-20 
nonreductive, 18, 20 
reductive, 18, 20, 51, 67 
Mayr, Ernst, 6 
Mental properties, 18-21, 67 
Mere Christianity, 2 
Miller, Kenneth, 49 
Miracles 
Dennett on, 49, 73-76 
Plantinga on, 2, 65 
Mivart, St. George, 12 
Molecular biology, 8-9 
Monod, Jacques, 29 
Moroni, Angel, 47 
Mutation. See Random genetic 
mutation 

INDEX 
81 
National Center for Science 
Education, 50 
Naturalism 
Dennett on, 26, 30-36, 48-50, 
51-52, 73-74 
evolutionary theory vs., 3, 
16-21, 35-36, 42-43, 66-71 
as the null hypothesis, 49 
Plantinga on, 3, 6-7, 16-21, 
41-43, 61-71 
as a quasi-religion, 3, 17, 21 
against science, 61-71 
Natural selection. See also 
Random genetic mutation 
Bebe on, 8 
Dennett on, 34, 35, 51, 54, 73, 
74, 75 
Kitcher on, 10 
Plantinga on, 3, 6, 8, 10, 12-15, 
19, 60, 67, 68 
Neurophysiological (NP) proper­
ties, 18-21, 51, 67-70 
New Heaven and New Earth, 11 
NOMA (Non-Overlapping 
Magisteria doctrine), 49, 50 
Nomological supervenience, 18, 
20, 51 
Nonreductive logical superve­
nience, 19 
Nonreductive materialism, 18, 20 
logical, 19-20 
Notre Dame University, 32, 42 
Ockhamistic arguments, 7, 12-16 
"O Felix Culpa" response, 11 
Omnipotence, 59 
Omniscience, 58, 59 
Orbiting teapot fantasy, 58, 59 
Physical properties, 18-21, 67 
Physics, 15, 42, 48 
Plasmodium falctperum, 8 
Principle of conservation of 
energy, 65-66 
Principle of conservation of 
linear momentum, 65 
Probabilistic argument, 10 
Propositional evidence, 9, 16 
Quantum theory, 2, 61 
Random genetic mutation 
Dennett on, 25, 29-30 
Ockhamistic arguments on, 
12-13 
Plantinga on, 3, 5-6, 12-13, 
60, 67 
Reductive materialism, 18, 20, 
51. 67 
Relativity theory, 1-2, 15, 61 
Resurrection of Jesus, 2 
Ruse, Michael, 50 
Russell, Bertrand, 58, 59 
Satan, 11 
Scientific worldview, 2 
Scott, Eugenie, 50 
Sensus dtvinltatls, 9, 15 
Simpson, George Gaylord, 4, 5 
Sin, 10-11 
Sober, Elliott, 6 
Solipsism, 58 
Spaceship landing analogy, 13-14 
Structures indicators, 69-70 
Suffering, 7, 9-12 
Supermanism, viii 
Dennett's defense of, 45-47 
Dennett's description of, 
28-29 
Plantinga on, 39-43, 57-60 
Supervenience 
logical, 18, 51 
nomological, 18, 20, 51 
nonreductive logical, 19 

82 
INDEX 
Teleological argument, 9 
Tennyson, Alfred, 10 
Theism 
evolutionary theory arguments 
against, 2-3, 7-16 
evolutionary theory 
compatibility with, 2, 3-7, 
25, 26-29 
scientific worldview 
incompatibility with, 2 
Van lnwagen, Peter, 32 
Wa"anted Christian Belief 
(Plantinga), 9 

