Colors as explainers?
Andrew Botterell
Department of Philosophy, Sonoma State University, Rohnert Park, CA
94928. andrew.botterell@sonoma.edu
http://www.sonoma.edu/users/b/botterel/
Abstract: Byrne & Hilbert (B&H) argue that colors are reflectance prop-
erties of objects. They also claim that a necessary condition for something’s
being a color is that it causally explain – or be causally implicated in the
explanation of – our perceptions of color. I argue that these two positions
are in conflict.
Byrne & Hilbert (2003; henceforth B&H) argue for reflectance
physicalism, the view that colors are reflectance properties of ob-
jects. A necessary condition for something’s being a color, in their
opinion, is that it should causally explain – or be causally impli-
cated in the explanation of – our perceptions of color.1 Their view
is that “[a]ny plausible version of physicalism will identify the col-
ors with physical properties implicated in the causal process that
underlies the perception of color” (sect. 3.1). So, according to
B&H, if I come to believe that there is a red object in front of me,
the color of that object must causally explain my perceptual belief
that the object is red. Call this the Causal Explanation Condition.
The problem of metamerism is that quite different reflectance
properties, given suitable illumination, can match in color. This is
a problem for reflectance physicalism because it strongly suggests
that color cannot be identified with any specific reflectance prop-
erty. In response to this problem, B&H suggest that we would do
better to identify colors with “reflectance-types (or sets of re-
flectances) rather than with the specific reflectances themselves”
(sect. 3.1.1).2
Let us suppose that R1, R2, and R3 are reflectances that match
in color – say red – under some suitable illumination. Then, ac-
cording to B&H, the color red is to be identified with the set {R1,
R2, R3}. Let us also suppose that I am looking at an object O, the
surface of which has reflectance property R2, and that as a result
I come to believe that O is red. It might be thought that on B&H’s
view O’s color is what causally explains my perceptual belief that
O is red. But appearances can be deceiving. For what property
causally explains my perception of redness? Arguably R2. After all,
since that is the reflectance property that O has, on B&H’s view
that must be the property of O that causally explains my percep-
tion of red. But according to B&H, R2 is not the color red; rather,
the color red is the set {R1, R2, R3}. So it seems that if the color
red is identified with a set of reflectance properties, then the color
red cannot be what causally explains our perceptions of redness.
So given the Causal Explanation Condition, the color red cannot
be identified with a set of reflectances. Similar remarks apply to
the other colors.3
Objection: If O has the reflectance property R2, then trivially O
has either R1 or R2 or R3, and so trivially O is red. So if O has R2,
then the color red does causally explain my perceptual belief that
O is red. But this won’t do. For consider: If O has reflectance prop-
erty R2, then trivially it has either R2 or B1 or B3 – where B1 and
B3 are, we shall suppose, the unique reflectance properties that
match with respect to the color blue under suitable illumination –
and so trivially is red or blue. So, if O has R2, then the color red or
blue causally explains my perceptual belief that O is red. But this
is false. It is not O’s having the color red or blue that causally ex-
plains my perceptual belief that O is red; it’s O’s having the color
red. So the preceding argument for the claim that the color red
causally explains my perception of redness must be rejected.
Suppose, then, we opt instead for the view that colors are re-
flectance types rather than sets of reflectances. Then, if the color
red is identified with the property of having some reflectance
property that plays a certain specified role – call it the “R-role” –
in the production of perceptual beliefs about redness it might be
thought that the present objection fails. But again, suppose I am
looking at an object, the surface of which has reflectance property
R2, and I thereby come to believe that the object is red. What
property causally explains my perception of redness? Again, ar-
guably, it is R2. But on the present proposal we have:
1. The color red 5 the property of having some reflectance
property that plays the R-role.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2003) 26, 785–794
Printed in the United States of America
© 2004 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X/04 $12.50
785
Continuing Commentary
Commentary on Alex Byrne & David R. Hilbert (2003). Color realism and color science. BBS 26(1):3–21.
Abstract of the original article: The target article is an attempt to make some progress on the problem of color realism. Are objects
colored? And what is the nature of the color properties? We defend the view that physical objects (for instance, tomatoes, radishes,
and rubies) are colored, and that colors are physical properties, specifically, types of reflectance. This is probably a minority opinion,
at least among color scientists. Textbooks frequently claim that physical objects are not colored, and that the colors are “subjective” or
“in the mind.” The article has two other purposes: First, to introduce an interdisciplinary audience to some distinctively philosophi-
cal tools that are useful in tackling the problem of color realism and, second, to clarify the various positions and central arguments in
the debate.
The first part explains the problem of color realism and makes some useful distinctions. These distinctions are then used to expose
various confusions that often prevent people from seeing that the issues are genuine and difficult, and that the problem of color real-
ism ought to be of interest to anyone working in the field of color science. The second part explains the various leading answers to the
problem of color realism, and (briefly) argues that all views other than our own have serious difficulties or are unmotivated. The third
part explains and motivates our own view, that colors are types of reflectances, and defends it against objections made in the recent
literature that are often taken as fatal.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X03230181
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. SUNY Stony Brook, on 06 Nov 2019 at 09:25:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

2. R2 5 a reflectance property that plays the R-role
So again, R2 is not the color red. But if what causes my percep-
tions of redness is R2, then once more, the color red fails to cause
my perceptions of redness. So again, given the Causal Explanation
Condition, the color red cannot be identified with a reflectance
type.
It might be thought that there is an easy way around these ob-
jections. Say that an object O’s color causally explains our percep-
tion of color at a time t if, first, O has one of the properties in the
relevant set of reflectances – or a property playing the appropri-
ate role – and second, that this particular reflectance property
causally explains our perception of color at t. And take our object
O again. By hypothesis, O has the reflectance property R2. And
we are assuming that R2 causally explains our perception of red-
ness at t. So it might seem that O’s color – namely, red – causally
explains our perception of redness after all. What is wrong with
this view?
What is wrong is that whatever else R2 is, it isn’t the color red,
at least not on B&H’s view. So it is hard to see how it can be the
case both that R2 is what causally explains our perceptions of red-
ness at t, and that the color red is what causally explains our per-
ceptions of redness at t. We can certainly say, of course, that O ap-
pears to be red because it has the reflectance property R2, but this
is not the same as saying that O appears to be red because it is red.
The upshot is that B&H’s identification of colors with sets of re-
flectance properties, or types of reflectances, sits badly with the
Causal Explanation Condition. If B&H insist that colors are sets
of reflectance properties, then it isn’t clear that colors can causally
explain perceptual beliefs about color. And if B&H insist that col-
ors must causally explain perceptual beliefs about color, then it
isn’t clear that colors can be identified with sets of reflectance
properties.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Alex Byrne for his support and encouragement.
NOTES
1. There is clearly a difference between the concept of causal explana-
tion and that of causal implication. For while it is true that, if X causally
explains Y, then X is causally implicated in the explanation of Y, the con-
verse fails: X could be causally implicated in the explanation of Y without
causally explaining Y. For ease of exposition, however, I will simply talk
about causal explanation in what follows. What I say about causal expla-
nation applies to causal implication as well.
2. Although it is not clear to me whether B&H intend these to be dis-
tinct claims, for present purposes I will treat them separately.
3. This sort of worry is by no means unique to philosophical discussions
of color. To take a familiar example, some philosophers of mind hold the
view that the property of being in pain is a disjunctive property. In humans,
the property of being in pain is the physical property Ph; in dogs, the phys-
ical property Pd; in Martians, the physical property Pm; and so on. So pain
turns out to be the disjunctive property Ph or Pd or Pm, or the set {Ph, Pd,
Pm}. And the causal worry remains: It is not my being in pain that is caus-
ing my headache, but my having Ph. For more on this sort of worry see the
papers collected in Kim (1993).
Do opponent process theories help
physicalism about color?
Justin Broackes
Department of Philosophy, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912.
Justin_Broackes@brown.edu
Abstract: Byrne & Hilbert (B&H) give some excellent replies to the ob-
jections to realism about color. However, the particular form of realism
they propose, based on opponent processing, prompts several challenges.
Why characterize a color by its tendency to produce an intermediate brain
signal, rather than in terms of the final effect – either a perception or a
neural substrate for it? At the level of the retina, and even of the cortex,
there are processes that partly parallel the structure of color experience;
but the correspondence is not exact. Must we assume that there is any
place in the brain where an exact structural correspondence is found? At
the level of psychophysical functioning, there is indeed opponency; but it
is not clear that this gives us the kind of type-reduction that B&H want.
Byrne & Hilbert (2003; henceforth B&H) want to use opponent
process theory to provide an answer to the question “what is red-
ness?,” in such a way as to make it easy to respond to some stan-
dard challenges to physicalist reductions of color. One important
challenge is that these reductions cannot properly capture such
facts as “purple is more similar to blue than to green,” because the
physical correlate for purple might well not be physically more
similar to the physical correlate for blue than it is to the physical
correlate for green. Another challenge is that reductions do not
capture the structure of colors, or, for example, the fact that red is
a unique hue and orange is not; for there’s surely no sense in which
(the physical correlate for) orange is, in physical terms, compos-
ite, whereas (the correlate for) red is not.
B&H do excellent work, I think, in clearing the ground for a re-
alist view of color. But I am not sure that once the objections are
removed, the kind of physicalist reduction they propose is going
to work. My concerns are basically these: In the retina and beyond,
there is plenty of evidence of some kind of physiological opponent
processing. If we follow one recent report (Dacey & Lee 1999),
midget bipolar cells show something like (1R -G) opponency in
the form of an (L-M) signal; and the bistratified ganglion cells
show something like (1B -Y) opponency in the form of an S-
(L1M) signal. However, no one thinks that these cells constitute
the seat of visual consciousness; and only a little reflection shows
that the exact form of these signal functions does not correspond
at all exactly to the perception of redness versus greenness and the
perception of blueness versus yellowness. (In particular, a simple
(L-M) signal will never be significantly positive in the violet part
of the spectrum – whereas of course the violet hues are actually
seen as reddish. One solution would be to have some negative in-
put from S cones to the (1R -G) function; but this has not, I think,
been reported in the physiology of the retina.) What is more, it
would be more or less make-believe to suppose that the actual
weights on the L, M, and S inputs to the opponent processes in
post-retinal coding are such as to yield functions reaching their
maxima and minima at just the points where perceivers register
maximum degrees of redness and other unique hues.
There is a form of opponent process theory that is in much 
more direct correspondence with perceptual experience: The one
developed by Hurvich and Jameson (1955; cf. also Jameson &
Hurvich 1955). But their chromatic response functions are con-
tributions to psychophysics, not physiology; they describe the per-
formance of human subjects performing a hue-cancellation task –
mixing with sample lights varying quantities of standard lights (red
or green, yellow or blue), in order to cancel any appearance in the
sample of the complementary hue (i.e., green or red, blue or yel-
low).
The details of this theory are interesting. But it is questionable
whether it provides much help to the kind of physicalism B&H
seem to want to support. Suppose we take it that reddishness is
that kind of reflectivity which gives rise to “reddish” reactions (i.e.,
to a positive value of the (1R -G) function). Is this any better than
saying that reddishness is that kind of reflectivity which gives rise
to experiences of reddishness? After all, what Hurvich and Jame-
son effectively mean by saying that a light has a positive value on
the (1R -G) function is that it needs some green to be mixed with
it in order to lose its appearance of reddishness. The “chromatic
response functions” simply record where an appearance of red-
dishness (and so on) is found, and how much of a complementary
color is needed to cancel it; they don’t tell us what the reddishness,
or the experience of it, consists in.1 One might perhaps take the
Hurvich and Jameson chromatic response functions as actual de-
scriptions of the output of physiological processes somewhere in
the brain; but then one would be committed to finding, not
processes with an output something like (L-M) and (L1M)-S (as
is plausible), but instead processes with the outputs 1.6645L 2
Continuing Commentary
786
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2003) 26:6
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X03230181
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. SUNY Stony Brook, on 06 Nov 2019 at 09:25:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

2.2301M 1 0.3676S and 0.3410L 1 0.0615M 2 0.7130S.2 I don’t
think many people feel confident that such brain processes exist.
We can identify a number of different stages in the process of
vision. A red thing, illuminated by a standard illuminant will send
out, as a reflection,
(a) a certain kind of light, which, in turn, will cause changes in
(among other things):
(b) the cones of the retina,
(c) the bipolar and ganglion cells of the retina,
(d) the cells of the LGN, and
(e) the cells of the cortex, for example, in areas V1, V2, and (de-
pending on your guide), V4 or V8; and there will of course be
(f) an experience of the thing’s looking red.
No doubt the occurrence of (f) will in some sense be nothing
over and above the occurrence of the various physiological
changes in the organism – at any rate, I shall assume some such
physicalism as common ground. B&H propose that redness is a
certain kind of reflectivity, defined in terms of a certain kind of ef-
fect it produces. But what kind? B&H see the difficulty of finding
at level (a) or (b) a straightforward correlate – a common effect,
distinctive of all red or reddish things – such as would provide 
a quick reply to the objections they consider. They therefore 
look further along in the chain of processing and cite opponent 
processes, apparently encouraged by parallels between the struc-
ture of apparent color space and the structure of physiological pro-
cessing at certain levels. I worry, however, that the physiological
evidence suggests that there may well not be any exact structural
parallel at other physiological levels either; so the question arises,
whether a plausible physicalism should set its sights on finding
one. My own preference would be for a less simple physicalism
that does not expect exact or simple correlates in the first place.
In B&H’s proposal, reddishness is (approximately) a kind of re-
flectivity which, when present in a surface illuminated with equal-
energy light, leads to a particular kind of opponent signal, for ex-
ample, a positive (L-M) signal. (See target article, sect. 3.2.3: “an
object has some value of R if and only if, under an equal energy
illuminant, it would reflect light with a greater L-intensity than M-
intensity – the greater the difference, the higher the value of R.”)
This makes reddishness something like a kind of reflectivity char-
acterized by its disposition to cause a particular brain process. It
is unclear exactly which level of brain processing the authors are
talking of, but they seem to be interested in an L-M “signal” which
goes on to produce a “red response” (see sect. 3.2.2, paras. 2 and
3), so I presume they are talking of retinal and post-retinal pro-
cessing. But in that case, why do they characterize reddish type of
reflectivity by its tendency to produce the L-M signal, rather than
by its tendency to produce the “red response”? Why concentrate
on the intermediate, rather than the final product? Why not, in-
stead, characterize reddishness by its tendency to produce a par-
ticular experience (at level [f]); or at some substrate of the expe-
rience, for example, at the level of the cortex, (e)?
Why should we expect opponency at levels (c) or (d) to be im-
portant in the definition of color? Any process at the level of the
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), for example, which we single
out in a philosophical theory of what redness is, will surely be sin-
gled out precisely because of its significance at level (e) or (f); that
is, because it is a process that leads to the perception of redness.
Any structuring exhibited at that level will be interesting to us as
physiologists and neurologists, but it may or may not be preserved
in later processing, and it will surely not be crucial in telling us
what redness or reddishness consists in, or what is the basis for
whatever pattern and unity exists among red and reddish things.
For that, we would expect to look further on.
It would be certainly be nice to discover at level (e) a structure
of opponent processing that corresponded directly to the struc-
ture of color appearance. But in the cortex, there is a lot of evi-
dence of nonopponent processing. (See, e.g., Lennie 1999, p. 240:
“The chromatic preferences among V1 neurons plainly do not fall
into four neat classes of the sorts postulated to account for psy-
chophysical observations.” Krauskopf 1999, p. 308, talks of “mul-
tiple mechanisms and . . . at least partially, independent mecha-
nisms”. See also, e.g., Webster & Mollon 1991.) And suppose it
turned out that in the cortex there were some processes (let us put
them in class [e1]) that were opponent (and specially tuned to Red
vs. Green, Blue vs. Yellow), and other processes (in class [e2]) that
were not; would we then want a philosophical theory that linked
reddishness definitively with the production of responses of type
(e1), and ignored the nonopponent responses of type (e2)? Op-
ponent processing may seem to solve easily the particular prob-
lems of a simple identity theory of color, but at a price – of po-
tentially ignoring a large part of what constitutes the experience
of color.
We should ask what really underlies the belief in a form of phys-
iological opponency exactly corresponding to the structure of
color space manifested in different ways in psychophysics and or-
dinary experience. It is, I think, the assumption that the structure
of experience has to be simply parallel to the structure of brain
processing. I find it hard to see that this is necessary to any good
physicalism. It is rather as if we expected to find a little picture in
the brain where the image we experience appeared, only in a very
simple code. We would surely be sceptical of that idea, as we
would be of an argument that claimed, for example, that, because
there is a central unity of consciousness, brain processing can
therefore not be distributed over an area. No doubt B&H would
be sceptical of such views too when put so baldly; but then the
question arises, was it necessary for them to link physicalism with
opponency in the way they do?3
It is worth recognizing that B&H distinguish their “magnitude
proposal” (namely, that “visual experience represents objects as
having proportions of hue-magnitudes,” sect. 3.2.1) from oppo-
nent process theory: “there is nothing in the magnitude proposal
that requires the truth of opponent-process theory, let alone the
simplified version of it we will use for the purposes of illustration”
(sect. 3.2.2). I agree with this, and count myself a supporter of
something like their magnitude proposal. However, while the two
doctrines are separate, some variety of both seems to be required
for B&H’s rejoinder to the two key objections to physicalism. They
say “we must show” that there is “a physicalist account of the hue-
magnitudes” (sect. 3.2.3), and it is opponent process theory that is
supposed to provide that physicalist account. They are, of course,
well aware of shortcomings in the simple opponent-process model
they describe; but they clearly believe that if that model fails, then
a more complex model can simply be put in its place. And that is
where I have my doubts. No doubt there is some revised physio-
logical story to be told. But as far as I can see, there is no need for
the structure of color experience to be exactly mapped in the phys-
iology: It might well be, for example, that the lines joining unique
red to unique green, and unique blue to unique yellow were car-
dinal directions in phenomenal experience, but that slightly dif-
ferent lines formed the cardinal directions in physiological space.
Perhaps B&H would accept even this possibility. It is unclear
exactly what is essential and what accidental in their use of the sim-
plified opponent process model. Does the claim “purple is more
similar to blue than to green” count as true simply because of the
phenomenal structure of color space? Or do the authors count it
as true because they believe that that phenomenal structure is also
mimicked at the physiological level? (In which case the “purple
response” – if captured at the “right level” – really is more simi-
lar to the “blue response” than to the “green response.”) Perhaps
they intend only the first point. If so, then the opponent theory is,
I think, an unnecessary detour. It is also unclear that what really
“joins together” the various reflectances which all count as reddish
is their production of degrees of some physiological response,
rather than their production of the experience of reddishness in
various degrees. Any physiological responses we fix upon will be
singled out, after all, solely because of their role in producing or
underlying the experiences. If, as I suspect, B&H really want to
maintain the second point as well – and claim a precise parallelism
between the structure of phenomenal color space and that of the
physiological processes underlying it – then I think this is a dan-
Continuing Commentary
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2003) 26:6
787
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X03230181
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. SUNY Stony Brook, on 06 Nov 2019 at 09:25:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

gerous dogma, unsupported by the present empirical evidence.
Either way, the idea of opponent processing, though it has some
virtues in physiology and other virtues in psychophysics, is not the
solution to the problems of physicalism.
NOTES
1. One could raise further questions about the psychophysical oppo-
nent theory. It is all too easy to suppose that it provides ready measures,
for example, for the degree of reddishness or greenishness. But is the
amount of red light needed to cancel the greenness of a stimulus really an
accurate measure of its degree of greenness? There may also be a dispar-
ity between the results of cancellation and direct matching methods (see,
e.g., Ingling et al. 1978; Wyszecki & Styles 1982, pp. 652–54). Further, a
quick look at the Hurvich and Jameson color response functions tells us
that the non-unique spectral stimuli often have higher values on those
functions than the unique stimuli do. A yellowish green of 525 nm would
count as “greener” than a unique green of 498 nm – because, indeed, it
needs more red to desaturate it and cancel any apparent greenness. We
might well decide to adopt amount of red for cancellation as our criterion
in the future for degree of greenness; but then it would be unclear that we
were talking of the same old property as when we judged degree of green-
ness by our ordinary standards. Of course, there is no requirement for op-
ponent process theorists to identify degree of redness, and so on, with val-
ues of these particular functions. But B&H are indeed attracted by a fairly
direct identification, linking R (for reddishness) with the value of the (L-
M) function, for example (sect. 3.2.3).
2. Hurvich and Jameson define chromatic response functions for the
CIE 1931 standard observer as 1.0x(l)-1.0y(l) and 0.4y(l)-0.4z(l). Re-ex-
pressing these functions in terms of the König cone response fundamen-
tals (here called L, M, and S), we get the functions I specify here. (These
are my own calculations from the standard definitions of the König fun-
damentals in Wyszecki & Styles 1982, pp. 604–608; see also pp. 457–58,
643–44.) Of course, the CIE data have their own problems, and the König
fundamentals inherit them; using newer and better cone fundamentals, we
could calculate corresponding hue cancellation functions; they would be
equally unlikely to give the output of particular brain processes.
3. As evidence of B&H’s drive to find a parallelism, one might cite their
rejection of the CIE system, because CIE coordinates “do not capture per-
ceived similarity relations” (target article, sect. 3.1.1). I would submit,
however, that to suppose we will find a couple of parameters of brain rep-
resentations in, say, V4, that capture perceived similarity relations better
than the CIE coordinates do, is quite unnecessary. There are indeed di-
vergences between the CIE spaces and perceptual color space; but we
should not expect a simple relation between brain representation and per-
ceptual color space either.
Forestalling a food fight over color1
Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155.
ddennett@tufts.edu
http://ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/
Abstract: The disagreement between “color realists” and “color elimina-
tivists” is better seen as a disagreement over pedagogical policies, about
how best to satisfy lay curiosity about “what color is,” than as a clash of sub-
stantive theories. To suppose otherwise is to endow the ordinary language
term “color” with more authority than it can bear.
Byrne & Hilbert (2003; henceforth B&H) provide valuable clari-
fication of the complexities – undreamt of by the layman – that
make it hard to answer the question of what color is, and that of-
ten lead color scientists to say such remarkable and extravagant
things. They emphasize at the outset that their issue is not just how
to define the ordinary language term “color”: “The problem of
color realism is like the investigation of what humans can digest,
not the investigation of the folk category of food.” (target article,
sect. 1.1, para. 4), but then I am puzzled by a tension in the target
article regarding the weight the authors put on our ordinary intu-
itions about color. The very setting of the issue as a disagreement
between “color realists” and “color eliminativists” endows the
everyday concept with somewhat more authority than it deserves
– comparable to an imaginary debate between biologists who
were “food realists” and “food eliminativists”!
On the one hand, the authors have no problem with gathering
together types of reflectances that “will seem a motley jumble”
(sect. 3.1.1) and they find the proposal that there are different
types of colors (surface colors, volume colors, source colors) “quite
unacceptable” because these different kinds of objects “can look
the same in respect of color” (sect. 3.1.2, emphasis mine) – which
they take as trumping all other considerations. They go on:
“Therefore, the natural inference is that there is a single property
that vision represents all these objects as having” (sect. 3.1.2, em-
phasis mine). They insist, then, on “a single property” because
common intuition demands it, but that property can nevertheless
be a motley jumble of types of reflectances. Are disjunctive prop-
erties good, real properties? My own metaphysical intuitions are
not finely enough tuned to permit me to adjudicate the soundness
of this proposal, but I don’t think the issue needs to arise.
Like many philosophical projects, the target article is an exer-
cise in definition. Is there a way to escape the dread counterex-
amples by adroitly adjusting the definition to meet all cases?
Maybe there’s always a bullet-proof definition at the end of such
a quest, but only a few hardy philosophers will persist long enough
to tolerate its multiple clauses. It seems to me that a better ques-
tion, a more scientifically useful one, is somewhat less ambitious,
more relaxed: Is there a way of defining the property of color so
that it is
1. scientifically sound
2. largely consonant with everyday usage, our starting point
3. compact enough to be wieldable, teachable, explicable, us-
able?
There really is a use for such a definition if it can be found: as a
curiosity-satisfier. It would solve what might be only pedagogical
or public-relations problems, but these can be severe. We start out
wondering about colors, using the everyday word as we find it, and
using our everyday experience as anchor. What, we wonder, can
science tell us about all that? A good workaday definition of color
that people could agree on could be used to answer the naive
question “What, if anything, is color?” in a way that is scientifically
defensible, informative, and readily shown to be a satisfier of that
innocent and admirable curiosity, not just the answer to some
wildly different substitute question. And if it turns out that no def-
inition of color can meet these contingently imposed require-
ments, then we can explain why the ordinary “folk category” of
color doesn’t happen to pick out anything real, and be “realists”
about whatever we put in its stead. (There is no need for biologists
to form realist and anti-realist camps about what is digestible, af-
ter all.)
B&H show that various color scientists are not “color realists”
by finding telling quotations which invite or demand that inter-
pretation. I wonder if these scientists would be better described
as just a little too impatient with this pedagogical task, willing to
strike a compromise bargain, oversimplifying or exaggerating in
order to fend off the most serious and ubiquitous confusions about
color. In other words, I suspect that these killer quotations should
be viewed as less than successful stabs at public education, not ex-
pressions of considered “theories” of the ontological status of col-
ors. But perhaps I am overusing the principle of charity.
Vision involving spectral differences (not just luminance differ-
ences) turns out to be wonderfully strange, and I think there has
been enough astute canvassing of the prospects so that we can be
pretty sure that any theory “of color” will have some counterintu-
itive bite-the-bullet implications in one corner or another; but I
am surprised at one particular bullet B&H decide to bite: un-
knowable color facts about, for instance, which chip is (really)
unique green. For this to be a fact, there has to be some standard
of correctness which isn’t just majority rule or something like it.
But it isn’t just that we don’t yet know any such standard; we have
good reason to believe that there couldn’t be one, any more than
there could be an unknowable fact about the correct pronuncia-
tion of the word “controversy” (who really has it right, the Brits or
the Americans?). B&H have a clear understanding, it seems, of
the coevolutionary coordination of color vision and reflectance
Continuing Commentary
788
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2003) 26:6
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X03230181
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. SUNY Stony Brook, on 06 Nov 2019 at 09:25:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

properties, and it would seem to follow from this that the “ideal”
of a unique green independent of (human) physiology is as inde-
finable as the ideal of a correct pronunciation of a word indepen-
dent of human social practices. Color isn’t like distance or hori-
zontality, for the simple reason that distance and horizontality
properties didn’t co-evolve with spatial vision. Yes, people can
make mistakes about unique green, and about how “controversy”
is pronounced, but that doesn’t mean that there is a people-inde-
pendent way of fixing what is right in these cases.
NOTE
1. The Editor apologizes to the author for mislaying this commentary
(submitted June 27, 2002) and thanks him for taking the trouble to resub-
mit it for continuing commentary.
Physicalism without unknowable colors
Peter W. Ross
Department of Philosophy, California State Polytechnic University, Pomona,
CA 91768. pwross@csupomona.edu
http://www.csupomona.edu/~pwross
Abstract: Byrne & Hilbert (2003; henceforth B&H) do not adequately ex-
plain how it is that phenomenal colors are physical colors, as their physi-
calism claims. This explanation requires more characterization of the re-
lationship between the epistemology and nature of color than B&H
provide. With this characterization, we can see that a physicalist need not
accept unknowable color facts, as B&H do.
Byrne & Hilbert’s (B&H’s) physicalism relies on drawing a sharp
distinction between the epistemology of color and the nature of
color, in particular between conditions of perceptual access to
color (including properties of visual experiences and viewing con-
ditions), and the physical properties of objects, which constitutes
color (target article, sect. 1.3.3, para. 2). Also, B&H distinguish
physical color from phenomenal color (“colors-as-we-see-them”)
(sect. 1.3.4, para. 4). Furthermore, according to their physicalism,
phenomenal colors are physical properties (sect. 1.3.4, para. 5).
However, having distinguished between physical color and phe-
nomenal color, they do not adequately explain how it is that phe-
nomenal colors are physical colors. This explanation requires
more characterization of the relationship between the epistemol-
ogy and the nature of color than B&H provide. While I am in
broad agreement with B&H’s physicalism, filling in this charac-
terization allows us to see how a physicalist need not accept un-
knowable color facts the way B&H do.
Drawing a distinction between phenomenal color and physical
colors seems to invite identifying phenomenal colors with some
property other than the physical properties of objects. This prob-
lem for physicalism is made plain by the fact that phenomenal col-
ors are relative to the perceiver and viewing conditions in a way
that physical properties of objects are not. Physicalism generally
cannot account for differences in an object’s phenomenal colors in
terms of differences in physical properties of the object, because
most differences in an object’s phenomenal color – such as those
due to differences in perceiver type, for example, color blind as
opposed to standard human perceivers – are not due to differ-
ences in these physical properties. Since an object’s phenomenal
color can vary while its physical properties remain unchanged, it
seems that phenomenal colors are not physical properties. Rather,
the physical properties of objects seem to be merely the stimulus
for the visual experience of color, and the nature of color must in-
volve properties apart from this physical stimulus. Relying on this
point, dispositionalists and subjectivists hold that the properties of
visual experiences are constitutive of phenomenal color.
However, the physicalist accounts for differences in an object’s
phenomenal color, such as those due to differences in perceiver
type, in terms of differences in perceptual access to the same phys-
ical color (e.g., a surface reflectance property). The sharp distinc-
tion between the epistemology and the nature of color indicates
that such access conditions are not part of the nature of color.
However, the physicalist can positively characterize the relation-
ship between the epistemology and the nature of color as follows.
The physicalist can claim that a description of the conditions of
perceptual access is a reference fixer – that is, this description
picks out the physical properties which constitute colors in terms
of nonconstitutive properties. Since conditions of perceptual ac-
cess include properties of visual experiences of color as well as
viewing conditions, this description includes a description of prop-
erties of visual experiences (in terms of cone activation and later
stage gauging of cone activation by opponent processes) as well as
lighting, visual distance and angle, and other perceptual access
conditions. The physicalist can, in turn, use this characterization
of the relationship between epistemology and nature to explain
how phenomenal colors are physical colors despite the relativity
of color to perceptual access. Given any phenomenal color, we can
describe conditions of perceptual access and take this description
to be a reference fixer for a physical color.
In sum, dispositionalists and subjectivists propose that we ac-
count for differences in phenomenal color in terms of differences
in perceptual access and incorporate properties of perceptual ac-
cess – in particular, properties of visual experiences – into the na-
ture of color. Physicalism, by contrast, rejects this incorporation of
the epistemology into the nature of color, and draws a sharp dis-
tinction between conditions of perceptual access and the physical
properties of objects which constitute colors.
The physicalist can support this sharp distinction by pointing to
phenomenal spatial properties. As B&H note (sect. 3.4, paras. 8–
9), there are cases where it is clear that we must account for dif-
ferences in phenomenal spatial properties in terms of differences
in perceptual access – and, in particular, in terms of the proper-
ties of visual experiences. Nevertheless, it is plausible that any
phenomenal spatial property is a physical spatial property. Fur-
thermore, we can characterize the relationship between the epis-
temology and the nature of spatial properties in terms of reference
fixing descriptions. Given any phenomenal spatial property, we
can – as with phenomenal colors – describe conditions of per-
ceptual access and take this description to be a reference fixer for
a physical property.
Moreover, with the reference fixing characterization of the re-
lationship between the epistemology and the nature of color, a
physicalist can avoid B&H’s acceptance of unknowable color facts
(target article, Note 50). The relativity of phenomenal color to
perceiver and viewing condition raises the question of what any
given object’s true or veridical color is. Because there is no test
which is independent of perceptual access for determining an an-
swer, this amounts to asking: What perceptual conditions provide
access to the object’s veridical color? For B&H, the fact that there
is no independent test, along with their assertion that the object
has a single true determinate color, leads them to accept that there
are unknowable color facts.
Yet physicalism is consistent with a pragmatic account of veridi-
cal color, in particular an account holding that an object’s veridi-
cal color is relative to favored conditions of perceptual access (e.g.,
standard perceivers in standard viewing conditions). All that is re-
quired for physicalism is that, given any phenomenal color, we can
describe conditions of perceptual access and take this description
to be a reference fixer for a physical color. It is open to the physi-
calist to hold that the perceptual conditions that provide access to
an object’s veridical color are determined pragmatically (see Ross
2000 for an extended discussion). This alternative pragmatic ac-
count of veridical color does entail the consequence that an object
may have different veridical colors, depending on what perceptual
access conditions are favored. But the pragmatic account, by char-
acterizing veridical color in terms of favored conditions of per-
ceptual access, has the advantage of avoiding unknowable color
facts.
Continuing Commentary
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2003) 26:6
789
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X03230181
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. SUNY Stony Brook, on 06 Nov 2019 at 09:25:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

The right kind of content for a physicalist
about color
Paul Skokowski
Symbolic Systems and Philosophy Department, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305-2155. paulsko@stanford.edu
http://www-csli.stanford.edu/~paulsko
Abstract: Color experiences have representational content. But this con-
tent need not include a propositional component, particularly for re-
flectance physicalists such as Byrne & Hilbert (B&H). Insisting on such
content gives primacy to language where it is not required, and makes the
extension of the argument to nonhuman animals suspect.
As a materialist and a color realist, I find much in Byrne &
Hilbert’s (2003; henceforth B&H) article to agree with. I do find
one issue to be unsatisfying, however. This is their view of the rep-
resentational content of color experience.
The particular problem with B&H’s view is that part of the con-
tent of color visual experience is a proposition. For example, ac-
cording to the authors, when I reach to pick a lemon from the tree
in daylight, part of the content of my visual experience is a propo-
sition something to the effect that “there is a yellow object hang-
ing from the branch.” The problem is that there is no need of such
content for a reflectance-based view of physicalism about color.
Indeed, insisting on such content gives primacy to language where
it is not required, and makes the extension of the argument to non-
human animals suspect.
A physicalist about color does not need propositional content in
order to account for the content of experience. When experienc-
ing a color, the physical property which is identified with the color
– reflectance – is all that is needed for the content of an experi-
ence of that color (Dretske 1995; Tye 1995). Stripped to its most
basic form, when I experience the yellow of the lemon, I experi-
ence the physical property yellow (the reflectance). The content
of my experience is this property. There are thus only two physi-
cal properties in play here: the experience in my head, and the
property yellow. I experience yellow; yellow is the content of my
experience (Skokowski 2002). No propositional content is called
for, since the property of yellow reflectance exemplified by the
lemon is the content of the experience.
Later in their article (sect. 3.3), the authors argue for the plau-
sibility of color vision in other animals. But surely we cannot at-
tribute propositional content to the representational content of
the color experience of other organisms. Assuming that such ani-
mals do not have language, how could propositional content ever
be a part of their experiences of color? The most satisfying expla-
nation for a reflectance physicalist surely must be that the contents
of color experiences for nonhuman animals are real, physical col-
ors (reflectances) in the world, not abstract objects such as propo-
sitions, which in any case are not accessible to beings without lan-
guage. In my view, the authors should embrace their physicalism
wholeheartedly, and accept that color contents, and experiences,
are real properties of the world in their own rights. They should
reject the appeal to propositional contents as a part of the content
of color experience, much as they rejected the sense data view, and
for similar reasons: both are epiphenomena that serve no causal
or explanatory purpose for a physicalist.
Physicalism plus intentionalism
equals error theory
Daniel Stoljar
Philosophy Program, RSSS, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT
0200, Australia. Daniel.Stoljar@anu.edu.au
http://philrsss.anu.edu.au/~dstoljar/
Abstract: Byrne & Hilbert (B&H) combine physicalism about color with
intentionalism about color experience. I argue that this combination leads
to an “error theory” about color experience, that is, the doctrine that color
experience is systematically illusory. But this conflicts with another aspect
of B&H’s position, namely, the denial of error theory.
Part of what is appealing and distinctive about the position ad-
vanced by Byrne & Hilbert (2003; henceforth B&H) is the com-
bination of a certain sort of physicalism about color with inten-
tionalism about color experience. But one can argue that this
combination leads naturally to an “error theory” about color ex-
perience! If this argument is sound, we may conclude, contrary to
the main thrust of B&H’s article, that there is an element of truth
– I do not say it is the whole truth – in the Gallillean view that
color is an illusion.
Suppose I am looking at a tomato in good light. In that case, as
B&H make clear, the world seems to me to be a certain way. And,
as they also point out, I may go on to ask whether the world is in
fact the way that my experience presents it as being. This question
implicitly distinguishes two possible worlds, without prejudicing
whether we may ultimately identify or differentiate between
them: (1) the visual world, the world that is presented to me in vi-
sual experience, and (2) the actual world, the world as it really is.
From this point of view, the error theory about color experience
says that, in a certain systematic sense having to do with color, the
visual world is different from the actual world. So when I say that
intentionalism and physicalism combine to yield the error theory,
I mean that, if these positions are both true, the visual and actual
worlds are different in this sense – that is, in relation to color
(rather than, e.g., shape) and the difference is systematic (rather
than haphazard).
But what is the argument for this conclusion? Well, to say that
physicalism about color is true, is to say that it is true in the actual
world. This gives us our (truistic) first premise:
P1. If physicalism is true, physicalism is true at the actual world.
Of course, to say that physicalism is true in the actual world is not
to say that it is true in the visual world, in view of the possibility
that the two worlds diverge. This then raises the question: What
theory of color is true for/in the visual world? From the perspec-
tive of intentionalism, this last question is about which theory of
color is best suited to tell the truth, not about the nature of col-
ored objects, but about the phenomenology of color experience.
There would seem to be three possibilities here, corresponding
to the three (realist) theories of color distinguished by B&H. (I re-
gard the ecological view as a version of dispositionalism and so will
not discuss it explicitly.) The first possibility is that physicalism is
true for the visual world. But this is extremely implausible. To say
that physicalism is true for or in the visual world is to say that the
physical nature of colors – assuming them to have a physical na-
ture – is evident to one simply on the basis of experience; or, at
any rate, that it could become evident given only experience and
sufficient reflection and suggestion. But even physicalists – those
who think physicalism is true in the actual world – don’t think that
the physical nature of colors is evident in this sense. So physical-
ism is not true at/for/in the visual world.
The second possibility is that dispositionalism is true for/in the
visual world. But this too is implausible, for related reasons. To say
that dispositionalism is true for/in the visual world is to say that
the dispositional nature of colors – assuming them to have a dis-
positional nature – is evident to one simply on the basis of expe-
rience, or that it could become evident given only experience and
sufficient reflection and suggestion. But even dispositionalists –
Continuing Commentary
790
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2003) 26:6
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X03230181
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. SUNY Stony Brook, on 06 Nov 2019 at 09:25:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

those who think dispositionalism is true at the actual world – don’t
think, in general, that the dispostional is evident in this sense.
(Langsam 2000 is a counterexample to this generalization; but see
Byrne 2001 for criticism.) So dispositionalism too is not true for/
in the visual world.
The third possibility is that primitivism is true for/in the visual
world. This is in fact an extremely plausible thesis. Even physical-
ists about color often say things which suggest – in our terms –
that primitivism is true at the visual world:
[it] is surely right that, for example, the sensible quality of redness looks
to be an intrinsic (non-relational) property of certain surfaces. Phe-
nomenally, the primary and secondary cannot be separated . . . [T]he
secondary qualities appear as lacking in “grain” . . . So much for the way
it seems. (Armstrong 1987 in Byrne & Hilbert 1997, pp. 36–37)
If we suppose that primitivism is true at the visual world, we
now have our second premise, which is intended to be true on the
basis of phenomenology:
P2. If intentionalism is true, primitivism is true in/for the visual world.
If we assume in addition that the truth of primitivism in a world
excludes the truth of physicalism in that world (and vice versa), it
follows from P1 and P2 that the visual world does not coincide
with the actual world. But that is simply to say that the error the-
ory is true.
This argument refutes neither physicalism about color nor in-
tentionalism about color experience, or their conjunction. It is
open to physicalists and intentionalists to say that color experience
is misleading in various ways (e.g., Thau 2002). But B&H are in-
tentionalists and physicalists who say that color experience is not
misleading; indeed, for them, color realism is true for that very rea-
son. In sum, their color realism stands in conflict with their physi-
calism about color and their intentionalism about color experience.
Authors’ Response
Color realism revisited
Alex Byrnea and David R. Hilbertb
aDepartment of Linguistics and Philosophy, 32-D808, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; bDepartment of Philosophy and
Laboratory of Integrative Neuroscience (M/C 267), University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607. abyrne@mit.edu
hilbert@uic.edu
www.mit.edu/~abyrne
www.uic.edu/~hilbert
Abstract: Our reply is in four parts. The first part, R1, addresses
objections to our claim that there might be “unknowable” color
facts. The second part, R2, discusses the use we make of opponent
process theory. The third part, R3, examines the question of
whether colors are causes. The fourth part, R4, takes up some is-
sues concerning the content of visual experience.
Our target article had three aims: (1) to explain clearly the
structure of the debate about color realism; (2) to introduce
an interdisciplinary audience to the way philosophers have
thought about the issue; (3) to argue that colors are certain
sorts of physical properties (“productances”).
We are very grateful to the commentators in this contin-
uing commentary for their criticism and constructive sug-
gestions.
R1. Ordinary intuitions and unknowable
color facts
As Dennett notes, the target article emphasizes that the
problem of color realism is not about color words, or the
folk category of color. As we conceive it, the problem con-
cerns certain properties that are represented by the human
visual system and those of a variety of other animals. How-
ever, Dennett thinks that our methodology does not fit hap-
pily with the touted “scientific” nature of the problem: We
place too much weight, he claims, on “ordinary intuitions
about color.”
But, in fact, we do not place any weight on ordinary in-
tuitions about color. (Dennett himself seems to think that
ordinary intuitions should be accorded some weight: An ac-
count of color should be “largely consonant with everyday
usage.” We disagree.) Dennett’s one example of our alleged
reliance on ordinary intuitions is our rejection of the idea
that there are different kinds of colors: surface, volume, and
illuminant (see sect. 3.1.2 of the target article). Although
the ordinary person might well find this idea odd – toma-
toes, glasses of Burgundy, and stoplights are all red! – this
was not our reason for rejecting it. Rather, our objection
was that surfaces, volumes, and illuminants can all look the
same in respect of color – a fact which might be revealed
by training an animal to press a bar in the presence of a type
of light, and then noting that the animal generalizes the rule
to certain surfaces and volumes. This fact is best explained,
we said, by supposing that there is a common property vi-
sually represented. Whether or not we are right about this,
the argument certainly does not make any appeal to ordi-
nary intuitions.
Dennett suggests that our claim that it may be unknow-
able whether a chip is unique green is “counterintuitive.”
He might mean by this that ordinary intuition rules out such
a possibility (thus implicitly accusing us of arbitrarily pick-
ing and choosing between intuitions), but we doubt it, be-
cause surely ordinary intuition has no clear opinion on the
matter. In any case, whether or not Dennett himself is rest-
ing any weight on ordinary intuition here, he offers another
consideration entirely. Dennett claims that the conclusion
that there are no unknowable color facts follows from the
“coevolutionary coordination of color vision and reflectance
properties,” and obviously this argument does not appeal to
everyday usage or the opinions of the folk.
Dennett does not spell out his argument in any detail;
still, it is instructive to set out an argument that is naturally
suggested by his remarks. (We emphasize that we are not
attributing this argument to Dennett. See also Dennett
1991, pp. 375–83, which we lack space to discuss.) (1) Evo-
lution fine-tuned the colors of certain fruits so they were
readily visible to certain fruit eaters, and evolution also fine-
tuned the fruit eaters’ color vision (in particular, the spec-
tral sensitivities of their cone pigments) to detect the colors
of the fruits (see Regan et al. 2001). Hence: (2) in normal
conditions the fruit eaters will correctly perceive the colors
of fruits. Hence: (3) in normal conditions the fruit eaters
will correctly perceive the colors of things generally. Hence:
(4) our claim that most people misperceive unique green
chips in normal conditions is incorrect.
There are three main problems with this argument, apart
from the fact that the coevolution hypothesis is not an es-
tablished fact. First, and perhaps most seriously, on any re-
motely defensible elaboration of (1), it does not imply (2).
The most (1) could imply is that the fruit eaters are by and
large correct: any evolutionary fine-tuning of fruits and
cone pigments would leave plenty of room for minor mis-
perceptions of determinate shades, and minor variations
between individuals (see sect. R2.6 of our Response to the
Continuing Commentary
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2003) 26:6
791
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X03230181
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. SUNY Stony Brook, on 06 Nov 2019 at 09:25:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

first round of commentaries, Byrne & Hilbert 2003). Sec-
ond, (2) does not imply (3). A system specialized for infalli-
ble detection of the colors of ripe fruits might well make
mistakes with other colors. (In this connection, it is worth
pointing out that the coevolution hypothesis just concerns
the red-green opponent system, not the yellow-blue sys-
tem.) Third, (3) does not imply (4). The main empirical ev-
idence for coevolution concerns certain species of Old
World monkeys, not humans. Granting for the sake of the
argument that some remote trichromatic ancestor of hu-
mans never misperceived colors in normal conditions, it by
no means follows that humans have retained this capacity.
Ross offers a “pragmatic account of veridical color”
which, he claims, has the “advantage” of avoiding “un-
knowable color facts.” As explained in our first Response,
we think this is no advantage at all. But, in any case, we do
not think Ross’s account is of the right sort. Ross holds that
“an object’s veridical color is relative to favored conditions
of perceptual access” – these favored conditions being a
matter of our interests and purposes (Ross 2000). This form
of relativism is inconsistent, however, with our commitment
to intentionalism (see sect. R4 below). To apply his theory
to visual experience, Ross needs to assume that the phe-
nomenal character of color experiences is independent of
their content. Without such an assumption his theory, if it
can be applied at all, results either in the conclusion that the
apparent colors of things vary with the choice of pragmatic
standards, or that we never see the true color of anything.
Ross’s pragmatic physicalism may be adequate as an ac-
count of some parts of color language, but it is inadequate
as an account of what we see.
R2. Opponent-process theory
In his interesting commentary, Broackes raises a number
of issues concerning opponent-process theory and its rela-
tion to our thesis that colors are represented in visual expe-
rience as proportions of hue magnitudes (sect. 3.2 of the
target article). He points out – as did the previous com-
mentators Kuehni, Jakab & McLaughlin, and Pautz in BBS
26(1), 2003 – that the very simple physiological model we
use for illustration is empirically inadequate. As Broackes
recognizes, however, we do not endorse this model; our dis-
cussion of it was merely intended to show how the hue
magnitudes might be given a rough-and-ready characteri-
zation in physical terms.
Broackes thinks that our theory presupposes some ver-
sion of opponent-process theory. In particular, he thinks
that we “claim a precise parallelism between the structure
of phenomenal color space and that of the physiological
processes underlying it.” There are two questions here. (1)
Does our theory require the kind of straightforward map-
ping that Broackes describes? (2) Is there reason to doubt
the existence of such mappings? Broackes rightly holds that
the answer to the second question is “yes.” There seems to
be no evidence at present for the existence of distinct pop-
ulations of cortical neurons with the characteristics re-
quired to support the various psychophysically identified
color processes. In particular, there are no identified popu-
lations of cortical neurons that have the tuning required by
a simple implementation of the psychophysically deter-
mined chromatic response curves (Lennie 1999).
So everything hangs on the first question, and fortunately
for us this has a negative answer. Broackes may have been
misled by the details of the last paragraph of sect. 3.2 of the
target article. We chose to give an approximate specifica-
tion of the magnitudes in terms of physiology, partly to
make vivid the compatibility between our theory and the
physiology, not because we require the connection to be
made at this level. Our claim that colors are represented as
proportions of hue magnitudes is simply a claim about the
content of color experience, not about physiology.
R3. Color and causation
It has seemed obvious to many philosophers that color per-
ception involves some sort of causal transaction between
the colors and our visual systems. We agree – otherwise it
is difficult to explain how visual systems could recover color
information. (This widely held causal claim, according to us,
is simply a plausible empirical assumption, not a conceptual
truth about perception.) Botterell argues that this as-
sumption is inconsistent with our view that the perceivable
colors are to be identified with reflectance-types rather
than determinate reflectances. According to Botterell, it is
the determinate reflectances that are causally efficacious,
not the perceivable colors themselves.
We have two points to make about Botterell’s argument.
First, we often do in practice give causal explanations that
appeal to determinables rather than determinates, even
though the determinates are individually sufficient for the
effect. Why did the bridge collapse? Because a truck weigh-
ing more than 10 tons was driven across it. This explanation
appeals to a determinable, weighing more than 10 tons,
rather than to its determinates, like weighing 10.13 tons. Ac-
cording to Botterell, this “explanation” must be understood
as gesturing towards the genuine explanation that appeals
to the precise weight of the truck. But – and this is our sec-
ond point – Botterell’s insistence that only the determinate
property is causally efficacious is not well motivated. What
matters is that the weight of the truck was too large, not
which determinate weight the truck possessed (Yablo
1992). Any weight greater than 10 tons would have pro-
duced the same effect. Similarly, in the case of color, it is
the type which is causally relevant to the visual effect rather
than the determinate reflectance (Jackson 1996; Jackson &
Pargetter 1987; Smart 1975).
R4. The content of visual experience
In the target article we used the philosophical apparatus of
propositions to elaborate on the fact that color experiences
can be accurate or inaccurate, depending on whether ob-
jects have the colors they visually appear to have. For ex-
ample, it might visually appear to someone that there is an
orange sphere on top of a blue cube. The subject’s experi-
ence represents that there is an orange sphere on top of a
blue cube, and this representation can be assessed for truth
or falsity. In other words, the experience has propositional
content – namely, the proposition that there is an orange
sphere on top of a blue cube.
Skokowski challenges our claim that color experiences
have propositional content, on the ground that nonlinguis-
tic animals have color experiences but not experiences with
propositional content. But we see no reason to accept
Skokowski’s unargued assumption that possession of a lan-
Continuing Commentary
792
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2003) 26:6
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X03230181
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. SUNY Stony Brook, on 06 Nov 2019 at 09:25:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

guage is a necessary condition for undergoing experiences
with propositional content, or for being in mental states
with propositional content. (As we read Tye & Dretske –
whom Skokowski cites as fellow-travellers – they do not ac-
cept this assumption either [Dretske 1995, pp. 25–27; Tye
2000].)
Skokowski’s positive view is that the color properties,
not propositions, will serve as the contents of color experi-
ences: “when I experience the yellow of the lemon, I expe-
rience the physical property yellow (reflectance).” But what
is the content of the experience described two paragraphs
back? According to us, it is the proposition that there is 
an orange sphere on top of a blue cube; according to
Skokowski (apparently) the content is a set of properties
and relations: {the property orange, the property blue, the
property of being a sphere, . . .}. If that is right, then
Skokowski cannot distinguish the experience of an orange
sphere on top of blue cube from the experience of a blue
sphere on top of an orange cube: both experiences have the
same Skokowski-content. And since the experiences evi-
dently do differ representationally, Skokowski’s alternative
account of content is inadequate.
Stoljar agrees with us that experiences have proposi-
tional content, and uses this fact as part of his ingenious ar-
gument that we have an unstable position. We endorse
physicalism, intentionalism (or representationalism: see
sect. 3.5 of the target article), and deny, as Stoljar puts it,
“that color experience is systematically illusory.” Stoljar ar-
gues that these first two claims imply that color experience
is systematically illusory.
Intentionalism is the thesis that the phenomenology of
color experience cannot vary independently of its content:
If two experiences are alike in their representational con-
tent, they are alike in their phenomenology. Thus, accord-
ing to the intentionalist, if you and I are “spectrally in-
verted” with respect to each other, the representational
contents of our experiences must differ; according to the
anti-intentionalist (notably Block 1990) this is not so. Al-
though intentionalism was to a large extent left on the side-
lines in the target article, it is in our view an important com-
ponent of our overall theory, not least because many
erroneous accounts of color are motivated by anti-inten-
tionalism (see our discussion of Ross in section R1 above).
The crucial step of Stoljar’s argument is from intention-
alism to the claim that color experience purports to inform
us that colors are sui generis properties (a fortiori not re-
flectances or productances). Granted this step, the rest of
the argument goes through: If intentionalism is true, then
color experience represents that physicalism is false; hence,
if intentionalism and physicalism are true, then “color ex-
perience is systematically illusory.”
How troubling is this conclusion? Perhaps not very, a fact
that is slightly obscured by Stoljar’s use of the expression
“error theory” to characterize the conclusion. The error
theory is usually taken to be the view that objects do not
have the colors that they appear to have (see sect. 2.1 of the
target article). But on this way of speaking, the error theory
is not the conclusion of the argument: the “error” is that
physicalism is false, not that lemons are yellow. We could
live with the view that experience misleads us as to the true
nature of color.
In any event, we question the crucial step: We don’t see
how intentionalism supports the view that color experience
represents that the colors are sui generis, and so, that phys-
icalism is false. In order for experience to represent this, it
would have to represent the color properties themselves as
having properties (in particular the property of being un-
analysable or sui generis), and we don’t think experience
has this sort of content: lemons look yellow, but yellowness
does not look any way at all (Byrne 2003).
There is a distinction between not representing F and
representing not-F, which Armstrong illustrates by the
“headless woman illusion” (Armstrong 1968; 1987). (The
“headless woman” merely does not look to have a head, as
opposed to looking to have no head.) The important ques-
tion Stoljar raises is whether experience tells us that phys-
icalism is false, as opposed to not telling us that it is true
(Hilbert 1987, p. 37). Color experience, we think, is in this
respect like the headless woman illusion.
References
[Note: The letter ‘r’ before author’s initials stand for CC Response Article
references.]
Armstrong, D. M. (1968) The headless woman illusion and the defence of
materialism. Analysis 29:48–49.
[rABy]
(1987) Smart and the secondary qualities. In: Metaphysics and morality: Essays
in honour of J. J. C. Smart, pp. 1–15, ed. P. Pettit, R. Sylvan & R. Norman.
Blackwell.
[rABy] Reprinted in: Readings on color, vol. 1: The philosophy of
color, ed. A. Byrne & D. R. Hilbert. MIT Press, 1997. (Page numbers in
Stoljar text refer to the 1997 Reprint.)
[DS]
Block, N. (1990) Inverted earth. In: Philosophical perspectives, vol. 4, pp. 53–79,
ed. J. Tomberlin. Ridgeview.
[rABy]
Byrne, A. (2001) Do colors look like dispositions? Philosophical Quarterly 51.
[DS]
(2003) Color and similarity. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 66:641–
65.
[rABy]
Byrne, A. & Hilbert, D. R., eds. (1997) Readings on color, vol. 1: The philosophy of
color. MIT Press.
[DS]
Byrne, A. & Hilbert, D. R. (2003) Color realism and color science. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 26(1):3–21.
[ABo, JB, rABy, DCD, PWR, PS, DS]
Dacey, D. M. & Lee, B. B. (1999) Functional architecture of cone signal pathways
in the primate retina. In: Color vision: From genes to perception, ed. K. R.
Gegenfurtner & L. T. Sharpe. Cambridge University Press.
[JB]
Dennett, D. C. (1991) Consciousness explained. Little, Brown.
[rABy]
Dretske, F. (1995) Naturalizing the mind. MIT Press.
[rABy, PS]
Hilbert, D. R. (1987) Color and color perception: A study in anthropocentric
realism. CSLI (Center for the Study of Language and Information, Stanford
University).
[rABy]
Hurvich, L. M. & Jameson, D. (1955) Some quantitative aspects of an opponent-
colors theory. II. Brightness, saturation, and hue in normal and dichromatic
vision. Journal of the Optical Society of America 45:602.
[JB]
Ingling, C. R., Jr., Russell, P. W., Rea, M. S. & Tsou, B. H. (1978) Red-green
opponent spectral sensitivity: Disparity between cancellation and direct
matching methods. Science 201:1221–23.
[JB]
Jackson, F. (1996) The primary quality view of color. In: Philosophical perspectives,
vol. 10, ed. J. Tomberlin. Blackwell.
[rABy]
Jackson, F. & Pargetter, R. (1987) An objectivist’s guide to subjectivism about
colour. Revue Internationale de Philosophie 41:127–41.
[rABy]
Jameson, D. & Hurvich, L. M. (1955) Some quantitative aspects of an opponent-
colors theory. I. Chromatic responses and spectral saturation. Journal of the
Optical Society of America 45:546–52.
[JB]
Kim, J. (1993) Supervenience and mind. Cambridge University Press.
[AB]
Krauskopf, J. (1999) Higher order color mechanisms. In: Color vision: From genes
to perception, ed. K. R. Gegenfurtner & L. T. Sharpe. Cambridge University
Press.
[JB]
Langsam, H. (2000) Why colors do look like dispositions. Philosophical Quarterly
50:68–75.
[DS]
Lennie, P. (1999) Color coding in the cortex. In: Color vision: From genes to
perception, pp. 235–47, ed. K. R. Gegenfurtner & L. T. Sharpe. Cambridge
University Press.
[JB, rABy]
Regan, B. C., Julliot, C., Simmen, B., Vienot, F., Charles-Dominique, P. & Mollon,
J. D. (2001) Fruits, foliage and the evolution of primate colour vision.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological
Sciences 356(1407):229–83.
[rABy]
Continuing Commentary
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2003) 26:6
793
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X03230181
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. SUNY Stony Brook, on 06 Nov 2019 at 09:25:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

Ross, P. W. (2000) The relativity of color. Synthese 123:105–29.
[rABy, PWR]
Skokowski, P. (2002) I, Zombie. Consciousness and Cognition 11:1–9.
[PS]
Smart, J. J. C. (1975) On some criticisms of a physicalist theory of colors. In:
Philosophical aspects of the mind-body problem, pp. 54–63, ed. C.-Y. Cheng.
University of Hawaii Press.
[rABy]
Thau, M. A. (2002) Consciousness and cognition. Oxford University Press.
[DS]
Tye, M. (1995) Ten problems of consciousness. MIT Press.
[PS]
(2000) Consciousness, color, and content. MIT Press.
[rABy]
Webster, M. A. & Mollon, J. D. (1991) Changes in colour appearance following
post-receptoral adaptation. Nature 349:234–38.
[JB]
Wyszecki, G. & Stiles, W. S. (1982) Color science – Concepts and methods;
Quantitative data and formulas. 2nd edition. Wiley.
[JB]
Yablo, S. (1992) Mental causation. Philosophical Review 101:245–80.
[rABy]
Continuing Commentary
794
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2003) 26:6
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X03230181
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. SUNY Stony Brook, on 06 Nov 2019 at 09:25:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

