BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15, 1-74
Printed in the United States of America
vision as a case
for cognitive science
Ewan Thompson
Department of Philosophy, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
M5S1A1
Adrian Palacios
Department of Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511; Institut des
Neurosciences (CNRS-Paris VI), 75005 Paris, France
Electronic mail: apalac@yalevm.hitnet
Francisco J. Varela
Institut des Neurosciences (CNRS-Paris VI) and CREA, Ecole
Polytechnique, 75005 Paris, France
Electronic mail: fv@frunip62.hitnet
Abstract; Different explanations of color vision favor different philosophical positions: Computational vision is more compatible with
objectivism (the color is in the object), psychophysics and neurophysiology with subjectivism (the color is in the head). Comparative
research suggests that an explanation of color must be both experientialist (unlike objectivism) and ecological (unlike subjectivism).
Computational vision's emphasis on optimally "recovering" prespecified features of the environment (i.e., distal properties,
independent of the sensory-motor capacities of the animal) is unsatisfactory. Conceiving of visual perception instead as the visual
guidance of activity in an environment that is determined largely by that very activity suggests new directions for research.
Keywords: adaptation; color vision; comparative vision; computation; ecological optics; evolution; objectivism; ontology; qualia;
sensory physiology; subjectivism
The study of color vision provides a microcosm of re-
search in cognitive science: Each of the disciplines that
compose cognitive science has made significant contribu-
tions to our understanding of color. Neuroscientists have
had some success in uncovering the anatomical and physi-
ological correlates of color vision in the visual system,
primarily in primates (DeValois & DeValois 1975;
Livingstone & Hubel 1984; Zeki 1983); cellular biologists
have characterized the retinal basis of sensitivity (Brown
& Wald 1964; Dartnall et al. 1983; Svaetichin & Mac-
Nichol 1958); molecular biologists have isolated and se-
quenced the genes for the three different types of color-
sensitive photopigments in the human eye (Nathans et al.
1986); psychophysicists have contributed quantitative
models for human visual performance (Hurvich 1985;
Hurvich & Jameson 1957; Jameson 1985); cognitive psy-
chologists have provided models of the structure of
human color categories (Heider 1972; Rosch 1973); lin-
guists have shown that human languages contain a limited
number of "basic" color terms (Berlin & Kay 1969) and
have provided models to derive these semantic universals
from properties of the visual system (Kay & McDaniel
1978); researchers in computational vision and artificial
intelligence have devised computational models and al-
gorithms for color constancy (Gershon 1987; Hurlbert
1986; Land 1983; Maloney 1985; Maloney & Wandell
1986); and finally, philosophers have discussed the on-
tological status of color and its implications for theories
of mind and perception (Hardin 1988; Hilbert 1987;
Thompson 1989).
This target article is intended as a contribution to this
ongoing interdisciplinary effort. We propose to offer here
a new empirical and philosophical perspective on color
vision, one based on recent experimental research in
comparative color vision - studies of color vision in
various animal species. We do not intend to provide a
detailed scientific review of current research on this topic
(see Goldsmith, 1990; Jacobs 1981; and Nuboer 1986).
Rather, we wish to draw on this material, especially
recent research on fishes, birds, and insects, to cast new
light on some fundamental questions in visual percep-
tion, cognitive science, and the philosophy of mind.
Our presentation has three stages. In the first, we
provide an overview of various types of explanation for
color vision in contemporary visual science, showing how
particular types of explanation have been used to moti-
vate various views about what color is, that is, about the
ontology of color. As we shall see, those who favor objec-
tivism about color, the view that colors are perceiver-
independent physical properties (Hilbert 1987; Matthen
1988), rely on computational vision, whereas those who
favor subjectivism, the view that colors are internal sen-
1 1992 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X192 $5.00+.00
1

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
sory qualities (Hardin 1988), rely on psychophysics and
neurophysiology. In the second stage, we propose a
broader comparative and evolutionary perspective on
color vision. We present what we call "the comparative
argument," which purports to show that an adequate
account of color must be experientialist (unlike objec-
tivism) and ecological (unlike subjectivism). In the third
stage, we explore the implications of the comparative
argument for vision research. We argue that the typical
emphasis in computational vision on optimally "recover-
ing" prespecified features of the environment (i.e., distal
properties whose specification is thought to be indepen-
dent of the seesory-motor capacities of the animal) is
unsatisfactory. Instead, visual perception is better con-
ceived as the visual guidance of activity in an environ-
ment that is constituted largely by that very activity.
Here we present what we call an "enactive" approach to
perception (proposed originally by Varela 1979; 1984;
1989; 1991a; and developed subsequently by Varela et al.
1991b). We then suggest some directions for further
research that follow from our discussion.
1. Explanation In visual science
and the ontology of color
1.1. l@w®l§ of explanation: A brief owerwiew
A central concern in contemporary visual science (indeed
throughout all cognitive science) is the relation among
various levels of generalization and explanation. Follow-
ing Churchland and Sejnowski (1988), we can distinguish
several notions of "level" at work in cognitive science:
levels of analysis, of organization, and of operation ("pro-
cessing"). Because these notions will prove to be of use in
our discussion of color vision, we review them briefly
here.
In vision research, the notion of levels of analysis is
most familiar from the work of Marr and Poggio (1977). In
their framework, vision requires analysis and explanation
at three different levels: (i) the level of computational
theory; (ii) the level of algorithm; and (iii) the level of
physical implementation. The computational level is an
abstract analysis of the problem or task, which for early
vision, according to Marr and Poggio, is the recovery
of three-dimensional scenes from ambiguous two-
dimensional projections, otherwise known as "inverse
optics" (Marr 1982; Poggio et al. 1985). For color vision,
the inverse optics problem is to recover the invariant
surface spectral reflectances of objects in a scene. The
algorithmic level is concerned with the specific formal
procedures required to perform a given computational
task. Finally, the level of physical implementation is
concerned with how the algorithms are physically real-
ized in biological or artificial systems.
It is well known that Marr (1982) claimed that these
three levels of analysis were largely independent. In the
study of biological vision, Marr also supposed that the
algorithmic level corresponds to psychophysics and to
parts of neurophysiology, whereas the implementational
level corresponds to most of neurophysiology and neu-
roaeatomy (1982, p. 26). This conception of explanation in
visual science, especially as applied to the study of natural
vision, has generated considerable discussion and de-
bate. Among other things, many dispute Marr?s (1982)
claim that the three levels of analysis are largely indepen-
dent. Some favor a more "bottom up" approach to the
explanation of visual processes, and some criticize Marr's
assumption of optimality at the computational level, that
is, that "what is being computed is optimal in some sense
or is guaranteed to function correctly" (1982, p. 19) [see
also Schoemaker, "The Quest for Optimality: A Positive
Heuristic of Science?" BBS 14(2) 1991; and Anderson, "Is
Human Cognition Adaptive?" BBS 14(3) 1991.] We do
not intend to review all of these controversies here.1 We
mention them, rather, as pointers toward some of the
issues that will arise shortly when we discuss models of
color vision, and when we present our alternative "enac-
tive" approach to visual perception in section 3.
In contrast to the notion of levels of analysis, the notion
of levels of organization is relatively straightforward. In
the nervous system, we find highly organized structures
at many different scales from molecules to synapses,
neurons, neuronal ensembles, neural networks, maps,
systems, and so on. Each level has properties specific to
it, which in turn require different techniques for their
investigation. Such organizational complexity is certainly
evident in color vision, ranging from the chemical proper-
ties of receptor photopigments to the network properties
of retinal and cortical cells.
Finally, in addition to these levels of organization, we
find many levels of operation in the nervous system. How
these levels are to be assigned, however, is considerably
less clear than it is for levels of organization. The typical
procedure is to order the levels hierarchically from pe-
ripheral (lower) to central (higher) areas (measured in
terms of synaptic distance from sensory stimulation),
thereby suggesting that "processing" in the nervous sys-
tem proceeds sequentially. We wish, however, to dissoci-
ate the notion of levels of operation from the idea that
processing among the levels is sequential. If (as we and
many others believe) "higher" levels can significantly
affect the processing in "lower" levels, then the notion of
sequential processing will be of limited application, or at
least will have to be modified considerably. To cite just
one example that is relevant for our discussion here:
Although the visual system is typically described as carry-
ing out sequential processing from retina to lateral geni-
culate nucleus (LGN) to visual cortex, it is also well
known that there are massive back-projections from all
areas of the cortex to the thalamic nuclei (Steriade &
Deschenes 1985). In the case of the visual system, there
are actually more fibers going down from the visual cortex
to the LGN than go in the reverse direction (Robson
1983). This organization suggests that neuronal activity in
central levels may considerably modulate the activity at
peripheral levels, an idea that is also supported by some
recent experiments (e.g., Varela & Singer 1987). We set
this issue aside here. However the relations among levels
of operation must ultimately be conceptualized, it is
obvious that there are various levels to be distinguished.
For example, in primate color vision, we need to under-
stand at the very least the two-way interactions between
operations in the retina, thalamus, striate (VI) and peri-
striate (V4) visual cortex.
With these three notions of "level" in hand we can now
turn specifically to color vision. In the remainder of
section 1 we give a brief overview of the types of explana-
tion offered for color vision, showing how they have been
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
used to motivate contrasting philosophical positions on
the ontology of color.
1.2. Color space: Psychophysics and neurophysiology
In general, psychophysics and neurophysiology have
taken as their point of departure what is known as "color
space." This is the closed space formed by the three semi-
independent dimensions of color known as hue, chroma
or saturation, and value or brightness (Figure I).2 Hue
obviously refers to the redness, greenness, yellowness, or
blueness of a given color. Saturation refers to the propor-
tion of hue in a given color relative to the achromatic
(white-black) dimension: Saturated colors have a com-
paratively greater degree of hue, whereas desaturated
colors are comparatively closer to gray. Brightness refers
Whit*
Block
V@ry light
purple
Very pel©
purple
sWh.te263
.Purplish
white 231
Light gray 264
Light purplish gray 232
Medium gray 265
Purplish gray 233
Dark ^ray 266
Dark purplish gray 234
Dark grayish purpl« 229
Black 2S7
Purplish black 235
Blackish purpl« 230
Figure 1. The phenomenal structure of human color space, (a)
The three-dimensional space of hue, saturation or chroma, and
brightness. We use here the standard Munsell color space, (b) A
slice in color space for the purple sector (Munsell values 3P-9P),
using the ISCC-NBS color names (or equivalent centroid
numbers).
to the achromatic or white-black dimension. In this
space, colors can be seen to exhibit certain relations
among themselves, such as the hue-opponency of red and
green, and yellow and blue. These kind of relations
compose what we call the phenomenal structure of color
space, or simply the phenomenal structure of color.
How are we to explain the generation of this phe-
nomenal structure? Why does (our) color space have this
phenomenal structure and not some other? It is primarily
this question that has motivated the psychophysical and
neurophysiological study of color vision. Rather than
review this enormous field, we present merely a few
points that are relevant for our purposes in this paper.3
The basic idea is to provide a mapping from the phe-
nomenal color space of Figure 1 into a new color space
whose coordinates correspond to psychophysical and/or
neurophysiological processes relevant for color vision.
We call the axes of these new color spaces "color chan-
nels." Strictly speaking, channels are specified psycho-
physically and so are not isomorphic with unique neu-
ronal pathways (Boynton 1988, p. 77), but we intend to
use the term "channel" both in this psychophysical sense
and somewhat more loosely to refer to underlying neu-
rophysiological processes (such as color opponent recep-
tive field properties) that can be studied at various levels
of analysis, organization, and operation.
We should note that the following maps of color space
are idealized. We do not intend to suggest that they
provide full-fledged "linking propositions" needed to
identify chromatic perceptual states and states of the
visual substrate (see Teller 1984; 1990; Teller & Pugh
1983). Visual science is still far from being able to provide
the full story of how the activity in multiple neuronal
areas becomes integrated to form our experience of color.
Our intention, however, is simply to provide some il-
lustrations of the kinds of covariance that have been
established between aspects of the phenomenal and the
biological.
We begin with the three kinds of retinal cones, short-
wave (S1 = S), medium-wave (S2 = M), and long-wave (S3
= L), which respond with a differential sensitivity to
wavelength according to the photopigment they carry in
their outer segments (Figure 2a, bottom). At this level,
we can construct a rudimentary map of color space whose
coordinates correspond to the relative activity of the
cones, which are present (in various proportions) at each
point of the visual field. This map corresponds to a vector
sr = (S2,S2,S3)((f), where f is the surface coordinate. A
convenient representation is a (Maxwell) triangle (Figure
2b) instead of a 3-D graph to depict the spectral loci of
monochromatic lights: The three kinds of cone receptor
appropriately adjusted in activation are required to match
a test-light of any spectral composition and intensity. This
property corresponds to the trichromacy of normal
human color vision.
We refer to this mapping of color space as "rudimen-
tary" because it takes into account only the relative
absorptions of the cone photopigments. Postreceptor
cells, however, both combine and compare (substract)
cone signals, thereby giving rise'to three new types of
color channels: two opponent chromatic channels (R-G,
Y-B) and one nonopponent achromatic channel (Wh-Bk),
which can be found in primates at the retinal and thalamic
levels (Figure 2c). These new channels result, then, from
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
iogSA
4.0 T
I09I/&A
1.0
1.0-
300
500
SOP 
700
ACnm)
Figure 2. 
Biological mappings of human color space at various
levels, (a) The spectral absorption of human cone pigments and
the overall photopic sensitivity curve for humans (in discon-
tinuous lines). In the upper part a plot of the wavelength
discrimination curve (reciprocal of the just noticeable difference
in wavelength necessary for wavelength discrimination). Modi-
fied from Nuboer (1986). (b) For any light, the relative
Long/Medium/Short wave length absorptions (L, M, S) can be
plotted as relative activity on a Maxwell triangle with orthogonal
axes I, m, s of unit length. The loci of pure spectral colors are
shown calculated by normalizing the pigment spectra for equal
areas and computing the quantum catch. Equal absorption for
all three areas is labelled as to. From Goldsmith (1990). (c) On
the left, opponent neural system obtained by the weighted
excitatory and inhibitory responses between retinal elements.
On the right, a diagram showing how each of these channels can
be used to provide a set of axes for color space. The Wh-Bk
(White-Black) channel receives excitatory input mostly from L
and M cones, whereas the two antagonistic channels receive
both excitatory and inhibitory inputs: + L — M for the R-G (Red-
Green) channel, and (M + L) - S for the Y-B (Yellow-Blue)
channel. From Hurvich (1981), and Ingling and Tsou (1977).
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

1.0K
m Spectrum
locus
Imaginary colors'
I 
I I I
02
(U 
0.6
x
OB
10
Figure 2(d) Chromaticity diagram computed from the three
CIE (Commission Internationale de FEclairage) 1931 color
matching functions. As in (b) the relative activities have been
normalized so that two values suffice to locate all points in this
modified triangle.
linear combinations of the receptor activations, which can
be written vectorially as cr = M • sr, cr = (Ci,C2,C3)(f),
with C1 = Wh-Bk, C2 = R-G, C3 = Y-B. The matrix M for
constructing the channels is at the core of various color
vision theories (Wyszecki & Stiles 1982); we return to
provide an algorithm for its determination below in sec-
tion 2. These three color channels proper can be used to
provide a set of axes for color space (Figure 2c). This
diagram thus displays the trivariance of human color
vision mapped onto the three dimensions of color space at
the physiological level.
This mapping, too, has limitations, for it relies on an
analogy between the existence of opponent colors and the
existence of chromatically opponent cells, which though
obviously promising nonetheless neglects many details of
the fit between properties of color perception and the
properties of these peripheral cells (Hood & Finklestein
1983; Teller 1990). It also does not take into account the
multilevel neuronal interactions in the visual pathway
that somehow constitute our entire experience of color
(Livingstone & Hubel 1984; Zeki 1983).
To obtain axes more appropriate for this level we need
to use psychophysical global response functions. The
functions chosen will depend on which aspect of color
experience we are interested in quantifying more pre-
cisely, for example, chromatic sensitivity, discrimination,
or color mixing (see Wyszecki & Stiles 1982). For our
purposes here, one useful standard set comprises the
empirically determined CIE (Commission Internationale
de 1'Eclairage) color-matching functions (x,y,z)(A), which
specify the well-known human chromaticity diagram
(Figure 2d). To project our three-dimensional color space
into this two-dimensional plane we equalize for bright-
ness. At the center is the achromatic neutral (white/gray)
point; movements away from the point indicate an in-
crease in saturation, with the maximally saturated hues
along the periphery. In this chromaticity diagram, we
find complementary colors at the opposite ends of the
Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
space, the pure spectral locus at the outermost boundary,
and the purple range as "nonspectral" loci. Thus any
color we perceive can be matched in this space by an
appropriate value of the underlying channels (global
response functions). It should be made clear that al-
though strictly speaking the CIE diagram is a stimulus
space, the stimuli are useful in characterizing color expe-
rience by mapping its extent, and so the CIE diagram can
be read as a mapping of one aspect of color experience.
(This point will also apply to the relation between the
stimulus spaces and color perception in other animals as
discussed below).
These color-matching functions were derived mostly for
purely psychophysical and industrial purposes and so are not
particularly useful as a guide to underlying neuronal pro-
cesses. Nevertheless, they do provide a more precise and
quantitative way of mapping some aspects of the phe-
nomenal structure of color space. It should be noted that
alternative color channels motivated by computational
algorithms (Land 1983) and perceptual and neurobiologi-
cal data (Zeki 1980; 1983; 1985) have been proposed by
taking into account the global integration properties of
visual mechanisms, because a local description (i.e., inde-
pendent of the rest of the visual field) violates perceptual
evidence and neurophysiological data. For example, Land
(1983) proposes three lightness "indicators," which result
from discarding the illuminant from the receptor activity
after long-range integration of local values.
We have now provided enough illustrations of the
various neurophysiological and psychophysical mappings
of color space for this target article. Henceforth, we will
use the term "color space" to refer to this kind of com-
posite representation in which the phenomenal structure
of color and the structure of the visual system covary. For
our purposes here, then, color space refers to the follow-
ing multilevel description:
(i) receptor space: the raw array of local activity under
given illumination conditions in a scene;
(ii) "lightness" indicator space: the globally integrated
activity at various levels after discarding the illuminant
from the receptor space via lateral interactions;
(iii) physiological channels space: the local activity of
subtraction and addition of integrated values to conform to
antagonistic mechanisms obtained from indicator values;
(iv) psychophysical channel space: the perceptual,
high-level integration into separable mechanisms, ob-
tained on the basis of the underlying physiological activity
relevant to color channels;
(v) phenomenal space: the color appearance space of
hue, saturation, and brightness.
The main task fo the psychophysical and neurophys-
iological study of color vision is to uncover the appropri-
ate biological processes underlying all these levels and to
formulate, test, and establish the "linking propositions"
needed to relate the various levels (Teller 1984; 1990;
Teller & Pugh 1983). As a matter of general principle,
however, it is clear that the phenomenal structure of color
covaries with the structure (and, as we shall see later, the
ecological interactions) of the perceiver. If we wish to
explore this fact, we should determine whether and how
changes in the structure (and ecological interactions) of
the perceiver can be correlated with changes in the
phenomenal structure that color exemplifies. This is the
main task of this target article.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
13a Computational color wision
A full explanation of color vision requires that we also
understand how color appearances remain relatively sta-
ble or constant in natural light environments — a phe-
nomenon known as color constancy. Computational color
vision Is particularly concerned with this phenomenon.
Because the retinal activity from a given point hopelessly
confounds the Illumination with the reflectance proper-
ties of surfaces, the core problem is to disentangle these
variables and assign colors that correlate with surface
properties.
In what follows, the Ideas we present naturally take a
mathematical form, which cannot be simplified without
losing some important features. The nonmathematical
reader can skip the formulae, however, without losing the
basic points we need for our argument here. (Our presen-
tation throughout this section is indebted to the more
detailed treatment in Hurlbert 1989, ch. 3).
Most computational models simplify the overall situa-
tion by considering only the surface reflectance (or al-
bedo), which depends on object properties, not on view-
ing geometry, as in [1]:
span the entire diversity of actual lights and reflectances.
Formally expressed this becomes:
Z(A,r) = c?(A,r)E(2,r) 
[1]
where 1 Is the irradiance, A is wavelength, E is the surface
Illumination, and p is the reflectance, and f, as before, is
the surface coordinate. The irradiance affects an array of
sensors which have a specific nonlinear response function
fi*(A), i = 1, . . . , nrecep, comprising a number of differ-
ent cone classes (e.g., for primates nrecep = 3). Under
these conditions the raw receptor response correspond-
ing to a point f from a surface Is the integral:
dX R}(X)Q(k,T)E(X,r)
visible windo
[2]
We have written "visible window" simply to Indicate the
extent of the wavelength sensitivity depending on the
species being considered. For primates, this "visible"
range Is approximately 400-700 nm; for insects it shifts
down to approximately 310—590 nm; In birds It broadens
to approximately 350-720 nm.
As we mentioned above, the computational approach
to color constancy Is a prime example of inverse optics -
the recovery of what are taken to be objective attributes of
three-dimensional scenes from ambiguous two-dimen-
sional projections. In the case of color vision, the problem
Is to discard the source illuminant E and retain the
Invariant spectral reflectances p of object surfaces given
only the retinal activity S. This problem - like Inverse
optics problems generally - Is underscored or Ill-posed.
(Pogglo et al. 1985). To solve an ill-posed problem one
must restrict the class of admissible solutions by introduc-
ing constraints; these constraints are said to "regularize"
the problem. In the case of color vision, a combination of
empirical evidence and task-level analysis has shown that
these constraints are basically of three kinds: (I) low-
dimensional models of lights and reflectance; (II) global
computations; and (III) spatial segmentation.
|fe Naturally occurring illumi-
nants and object reflectances can be described as lying
within a low-dimensloeal space: A few basis functions,
when added together In the correct proportions, suffice to
E(X,f) =
3 = i
nreflec
[3]
where Ej and gk are basis functions, and €j and t,k are
spatially varying coefficients. On the basis of empirical
evidence from measurements of typical ambient condi-
tions and object reflectances, niUum and nrejjec are usually
taken to be 3 or at most 6 (Maloney 1985). It Is typically
further assumed that Illumination Is quite uniform over
space,
£(A,r) = E(X\ £j(f) = E. 
[4]
and that reflectance Is Invariant under changes In viewing
geometry (i.e., a Lambertian reflection model). Thus,
computational color vision Is fundamentally constrained
by the low dimensionality of both the stimuli and the
receptor types, because these are known to come In small
numbers.
Under these conditions the irradiance equation [2]
takes the general form:
)£*(?) 
[5]
S'(r) =
where
%*> Tj* = /<"• R'WQkWEjW
[6]
The matrix, Tik(e) (which Maloney calls the "light trans-
formation matrix"), depends on the Illuminance and re-
flectance basis functions, the sensory sensitivities, which
are fixed, and the Illuminant, which is variable. Clearly,
since this matrix and the ^(r) are, In general, not entirely
known, the equations are underdetermined, and to find
solutions further constraints need to be introduced.
These take various forms. For example, Buchsbaum
(1980) requires that a weighted average of all reflectances
in a given scene be known. In contrast, Maloney and
Wandell (1986), and Yuille (1984), assume that there Is at
least one more sensor type than there are reflectance
components. This assumption obviates the need for the
previous ones, and exploits instead the various sensors at
each location. For Instance, using only photo receptors,
these algorithms would recover constant colors for mate-
rials that can be described using no more than two basis
functions. Finally, D'Zmura and Lennie (1986) Intro-
duce eye movements and light adaptations to recover
illuminants.
*Oe2o Global computations. The foregoing discussion
focused on the quality of the light signals and the number
of receptors, but It did not take Into account the way the
local activity of a photo receptor, S*(r), is not the most
significant variable. More relevant to account for color
constancy and chromatic induction Is the Interaction of
receptor activity over distant places in the visual scene,
which transforms luminance (a quantity which expresses
a local level of activity) Into "lightness," L*(r), a level of
activity closer to reflectance (and one that Is relative to
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
other levels of activity in the scene). These global interac-
tions can all be understood as a manifestation of the lateral
interactions and reentrant circuits typical of both the ret-
ina and parts of the visual system, which lead to internally
specified values rather than raw sensory values.
There are a number of equivalent "lightness" al-
gorithms (Hurlbert 1986). In general, though, lightness
algorithms proceed by (i) taking a differential of values of
the intensity over different locations of space; (ii) applying
a threshold operation that eliminates small values be-
cause of smooth changes in the illumination and retains
large values resulting from abrupt changes in reflectance
at the borders between patches; and (iii) integrating the
result of this operation back into reflectance values for
each position in space. For example, one of the first
algorithms, proposed by Horn (1974), obtains lightness
by simulating a diffusion of the activity of one receptor
over the entire layer. Mathematically, this is expressed as
a solution to the Poisson equation on the receptor activity:
V^U(f) = 0[^S*(r)] 
[7]
where 0[.] is a thresholding operation performed on the
Laplacian operator V2, which embodies the neural lateral
interactions. When the sensor array is finite, and sur-
rounded by a constant boundary condition, [7] can be
solved explicitly. More recently, global computations
have been approached by noticing that each sensory
receptive field has an excitatory center and an inhibitory
periphery that can be seen as a filter for the light signal. It
is also known that these receptive fields have various sizes
and degrees of steepness. Thus, a family of recent al-
gorithms assumes that the sensor array is convolved
through a center-periphery profile at each point of the
visual scene (Land 1986) and at various scales (Hurlbert
1986). In this case:
U(f) =
[8]
Scale range 
Region
where G is a Gaussian function, with a continuum of
parameters/*. The Laplacian of G is roughly equivalent to
a difference of Gaussians (DOG function), similar to
receptive fields. Expression [8] degrades when approxi-
mated in the discrete case, but sums over ten scales of/*
yield reasonable lightness values for so-called "Mon-
drian" scenes (displays consisting of about 100 different
colored papers arranged arbitrarily that resemble the
paintings of Piet Mondrian).
1.3.3. Spatial segmentation. Even with low-dimensional
constraints and network global computations, reflec-
tances are still underdetermined. One missing key ele-
ment is the way a scene is segmented into the relevant
patches on which the calculation of reflectance will be
performed. Some extra assumptions about surfaces
(abruptness of change, distributed averages, etc.) must
therefore be brought to bear. These assumptions in part
miss the purpose of color vision, which is presumably
important in object discrimination and identification
(D'Zmura & Lennie 1986), a point to which we return in
later sections. The overall effect of segmentation is to
make reflectance values correspond not to local scene
coordinates r, but to regions o> yielding lightness values
over regions, L^, oeZ. One of the better known segmen-
tation algorithms is the one from Rubin and Richards
(1982; 1988), which seeks to determine where material
changes occur in a scene using only spectral intensity
responses in separate points on the retina. For example,
we can state this idea by considering two different recep-
tors, which will have a spectral crosspoint on opposite
sides of an edge when:
If the product is negative, one channel increases while
the other decreases. Such a crosspoint will be produced
only by material changes, under such simplifying as-
sumptions as uniform illumination. In addition, one can
consider the signs of the slopes of each response function
(opposite slope sign condition). There are conditions in
which these algorithms will not segment a scene into
material discontinuities but will give false positives be-
cause of shadows, occlusions, or illummant variations.
Another model for segmentation is provided by
D'Zmura and Lennie (1986). In this model, mechanisms
of light adaptation ("a multiplicative change in sensitivity
in the independent cone mechanisms followed by an
adaptive linear transformation of scaled cone signals at
color-opponent sites" [p. 1670]), combined with eye
movements that expose the eyes to the average light
reflected from the field of view, are used to evaluate and
discount the illuminant, thereby recovering reflectance
designators. This scheme does not rely on a prior segmen-
tation of the scene. Instead, the designators are trans-
formed to yield estimates of hue, which is, compared to
saturation and lightness, relatively independent of object
shape and viewing geometry. These hue estimates can
then be used in the task of segmentation.
These three elements - low-dimensional constraints,
global integration, and scene segmentation - must come
together for artificial systems to regularize the ill-posed
problem of recovering reflectance. Since the assumptions
introduced are about the natural world, they can be
expected to fail when they are not satisfied in the world.
For example, with a few exceptions (e.g., D'Zmura &
Lennie 1986) most current computational algorithms do
not perform well in the presence of significant specular
components; the algorithms require a virtually uniform
illumination, and the collection of surface reflectances
must average to the same "gray" in every scene.
Our purpose is not to provide a comprehensive discus-
sion of computational color vision. Enough has been said
to indicate that there are at present different approaches
to color vision, which focus on different respective kinds
of color phenomena: On the one hand, we have computa-
tional theories of color constancy, on the other hand,
psychophysical and neurophysiological investigations of a
range of such chromatic phenomena as constancy, con-
trast, color matching, color blindness, and so on. At the
present stage of research, the question of how these
approaches to color vision might be related does not
admit of a clear and nonpartisan answer. Only a handful of
studies explore possible links among the various levels of
analysis and kinds of phenomena - for example, Zeki's
(1980; 1983; 1985) neurophysiological studies of the cor-
tical mechanisms underlying color constancy, or Buchs-
baum & Gottschalk's (1983) formal analysis of opponent
color mechanisms. This question does raise a number of
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
conceptual and empirical issues, however, which in turn
have considerable implications for the ontology of color.
ontologies
To discern these issues consider that human color vision
exhibits only approximate color constancy. Many factors
can affect constancy; among the best documented are the
effects of sensitivity to the spectral quality of the illumina-
tion (Helson 1938; Helson & Jeffers 1940; Judd 1940). As
Jameson and Hurvich (1989, p. 7) note in a recent review:
"Departures from perfect color constancy with changes in
the spectral quality of illumination . . . imply that per-
ceived contrast between objects of different surface re-
flectance varies with the level and kind of illumination in
which they are seen and to which the visual system is
adapted."
From the standpoint of the computational level of
analysis, the approximate constancy of human color vision
is not surprising. For example, in Maloney & Wandell's
(1986) model, surface reflectance can be completely re-
covered only if there are more sensor types than degrees
of freedom in reflectance. Since naturally occurring re-
flectances require 3 to 6 degrees of freedom for their full
specification (Maloney 1985) and human color vision is
trichromatic (3 receptor types), Maloney & Wandell's
model predicts that there are chromatic differences
among naturally occurring surface reflectances that can-
not be detected by a trichromatic system (assuming, of
course, that no other kind of disambiguation is available).
So far, then, we have an overall agreement between
psychophysics and computational vision. The problems
arise when we ask how the approximate constancy of
natural color vision is to be explained. It is in the kind of
answer given to this question that we find the motivation
for current views on the ontology of color.
Starting from the computational level of analysis as
outlined above, we assume that the function of color
vision is the achievement of color constancy, defined as
the recovery of the invariant surface spectral reflectances
in a scene. We then are led to explain approximate color
constancy as a departure from ideal or perfect color
constancy, the implication being that such a departure
constitutes a visual shortcoming or error (cf. Maloney &
Wandell 1986, p. 32). Obviously, once such a conceptual
framework is in place, it is natural to suppose that color is
simply the property of surface spectral reflectance. Thus,
consider the following passage from Maloney (1985):
The analyses of Chapter 2 [those presenting finite-
dimensional linear models of lights and reflectances]
used data appropriate to human environments and
suggested that what we call color corresponds to an
objective property of physical surfaces. Depending on
the lights and surfaces present in a scene, we succeed
or fail in estimating these properties. Failures of color
constancy, from this viewpoint, can be considered as
visual illusions. We misestimate true color as we might
misestimate true height in an Ames room (p. 119).4
We might wonder, however, whether this "top-down"
computational approach, although consistent with the
approximate constancy of natural color vision, should be
accorded the status of an explanation. If we wish to design
a visual system that exhibits complete constancy, and the
system exhibits only approximate constancy, then we are
justified in saying that the system does not perform
optimally, that it fails to achieve the task/or which it was
designed. But because natural color vision presumably
resulted from evolutionary tinkering involving "trade-
offs" rather than optimal design, why should the approxi-
mate constancy of natural color vision be explained by
appealing to such a strong, engineering notion of op-
timality? Furthermore, even if natural color vision is in
some sense optimal (relative to a given species and its
niche), it might exhibit approximate constancy for biolog-
ical and ecological reasons that preclude designating this
kind of constancy as involving visual error. For example,
most computational approaches seem to assume that
color vision is concerned primarily with the reflecting
properties of surfaces. As a result, illumination conditions
are treated merely as something to be "discounted" in the
task of recovering reflectance. Natural color vision ap-
pears to be concerned with illumination conditions in
their own right, however, for these provide indications
about weather conditions, time of day, and so forth
(Jameson & Hurvich 1989). To emphasize color constancy
at the expense of sensitivity to the illumination in its own
right would therefore seriously prejudge the behaviors
that natural color vision serves.
Consider, then, what happens if we proceed in a more
"bottom-up" direction by taking the performance of natu-
ral color vision and its biological embodiment as our
reference point. Here our point of departure is color
space and its dimensions. That color constancy is only
approximate provides an example of how these dimen-
sions (hue-saturation-brightness) can shift depending on
the state of the perceiver and the conditions of viewing.
We therefore give more attention to the local, context-
dependent features of perception than to the high-level,
physically invariant properties of the environment. Fur-
thermore, because our point of departure is color under-
stood phenomenally, we are less likely to play favorites
among the different ways colors can be encountered. For
example, afterimage colors as well as surface colors re-
quire explanation. These both count as genuine color
phenomena because they exhibit the three dimensions of
hue, saturation, and brightness. It therefore becomes
natural to identify color with this phenomenal structure.
And because this structure does not reduce to properties
of either light waves or surface reflectance (more on this
later), we will probably be led to embrace subjectivism.
Thus, consider the following passage from the conclusion
of Zeki's (1983) pioneering study of cortical cell responses
to both surface colors and after-image colors:
The results described here . . . suggest that the ner-
vous system, rather than analyze colors, takes what
information there is in the external environment,
namely, the reflectance of different surfaces for differ-
ent wavelengths of light, and transforms that informa-
tion to construct colors, using its own algorithms to do
so. In other words, it constructs something which is a
property of the brain, not the world outside. (Emphasis
in original, p. 764)
If we compare the above passage from Maloney (1985)
with this remark of Zeki's, we can see that despite the
considerable advances made in the study of color vision in
recent years, disagreement remains among vision re-
searchers on the ontology of color. Ontology is more the
specialty of philosophers, but they do not agree either. In
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
fact, the two positions just outlined, with their respective
links to computational vision and to neurophysiology,
correspond precisely to the most recent discussions by
philosophers: Hilbert (1987) and Matthen (1988) defend
objectivism largely on the basis of computational color
vision (Maloney & Wandell's model and Land's retinex
theory); Hardin (1988) defends subjectivism largely on
the basis of neurophysiology and psychophysics
(opponent-process theories).
Two basic claims constitute Hilbert's version of objec-
tivism. First, the centerpiece of his position is the typical
objectivist claim that we must distinguish between color
as an objective property of the world and color as we
perceive it. For Hilbert, each objective color is identical
with a distinct spectral reflectance. Objects that have
identical surface spectral reflectances have the same
color; objects that have different surface spectral reflec-
tances have different colors. Second, Hilbert claims that
since our color perception and color terms are indetermi-
nate with respect to surface reflectance, they give us only
"anthropocentrically defined colors and not colors them-
selves" (p. 27). For Hilbert, "red," "green," "yellow,"
and "blue" do not name determinate spectral reflec-
tances; rather, they name indeterminate kinds of spectral
reflectance whose specifications are arbitrary from a
purely physical standpoint, but nonetheless of interest in
relation to the structure of the human visual system.
Hilbert accordingly calls his position "anthropocentric
realism."
Matthen (1988) defends a similar view by first develop-
ing a theory of perceptual content. In his view, percep-
tual states have content because they have the function to
detect things of a certain type. Matthen then argues on
the basis of Land's retinex theory (Land 1977; 1983) that
the function of color vision is to detect surface reflectance.
Because Matthen identifies the contents of types of chro-
matic perceptual states with the distal property they
supposedly have the function to detect, he is naturally led
to claim that color simply is that distal property, namely,
surface reflectance.
Hardin (1988), on the other hand, develops an exten-
sive argument against objectivism, which consists of two
basic points: First, surface spectral reflectance is only one
of the many kinds of stimuli that can give rise to color
experience; second, the properties of color - for example,
the uniqueness and binariness of hue and hue-opponency
- cannot be found in properties of the (distal or proximal)
physical stimuli for color vision. The second is the more
important point, for it consists in the claim that there is no
mapping from physical stimuli to phenomenal color space
that is sufficient to ground objectivism. As we saw above,
however, there are mappings from color space to the
visual system at various levels of organization and opera-
tion. Hardin relies precisely on these kinds of mappings,
especially opponent-process theories, to support his sub-
jectivist view that there are no "extradermal" colored
objects; there are only chromatic perceptual states. In his
words: "Colored objects are illusions, but not unfounded
illusions. We are normally in chromatic perceptual states,
and these are neural states . . . We are to be elira-
inativists with respect to color as a property of objects, but
reductivists with respect to color experiences" (pp. I l l -
12).
We refer to these two positions as "computational
objectivism" and "neurophysiological subjectivism," re-
spectively, thus highlighting the link between current
color ontologies and explanation in visual science. The
debate between these two positions has so far proceeded
with 
computational 
objectivists 
downplaying 
the
phenomenal structure of color and neurophysiological
subjectivists responding by emphasizing the context-
dependent, approximate constancy of human surface
color perception.
Our intention in the remainder of this target article is to
move beyond this debate by offering a broader empirical
and philosophical perspective grounded in comparative
color vision. Before we proceed, let us lay our cards on
the table. With respect to the debate as outlined so far,
we are fundamentally in agreement with Hardin's claim
that "every attempt . . . to type-identify chromatic sen-
sory states in terms of their stimuli is fundamentally
misguided" (1989, p. 3). Nonetheless, we believe that
Hardin's neurophysiological subjectivism is far too re-
strictive, for there are dimensions of color vision that do
not yield to analysis purely in terms of the neu-
rophysiological structure of the perceiver. These dimen-
sions are, we argue, ecological. Hardin (1990) has re-
cently begun to emphasize some of these dimensions, but
we believe he has not gone far enough. On the other
hand, although computational objectivism does empha-
size the environmental context of color vision, it usually
does so in a profoundly unbiological and unecological way
by making animal-independent, distal properties the
ultimate point of reference.
eonnparatiwe argument
Two pervasive phenomena of natural color vision form
the basis for the comparative argument:
1. Animals whose neural apparatuses have little in
common beyond the peripheral photoreceptor level
(e.g., insects, fishes, birds, and primates), and that inhab-
it considerably diverse environmental contexts, nonethe-
less possess color vision.
2. Despite this commonality, color vision varies across
species and animal groups. Among the most salient varia-
tions are the type (dimensionality) and amount (sen-
sitivity) of color vision and its neural substrates. These
variations imply different phenomenal color spaces, some
of which are incommensurable.
These two phenomena constrain any attempt to explain
color vision and the ontology of color. Our claim is that
they constrain such a theory to be experientialist and
ecological: Color can be understood only in relation to the
visual perception of a given individual or species (con-
trary to objectivism); but such visual experience can be
understood only in the context of its ecological embodi-
ment (contrary to subjectivism).
Consider (1) first. Why do so many species of inverte-
brates, nonmammalian vertebrates, and mammals pos-
sess color vision? To answer we must appeal not only to
comparative physiology, but also to the evolutionary
histories of seeing animals (probably at several levels of
selection), to common features among the diverse en-
vironmental contexts of color vision, and to changes in the
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
9

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
environment that are a function of animal-environment
coevolution (we mention examples later).
These ecological dimensions of color vision have gener-
ally been taken to support computational objectivism.
Among computational visual scientists, the argument
(which usually goes unstated) is that because color vision
is biologically pervasive, the evolution of color vision
must consist in various species devising their own unique
"solutions" to the information-processing problem of re-
covering surface reflectance in their respective environ-
ments. Among philosophers, this argument takes the
form we reviewed above: The contents of perceptual
states are to be type-identified by the (distal) properties
they have the function to detect; the function of color
vision is to detect surface reflectance; therefore color can
be identified with surface reflectance (Matthen 1988).
In this section, we argue at some length against this
view on the basis of (2) above, which develops into three
related points:
(i) The properties of color, especially of different and
sometimes incommensurable color spaces, cannot be
modelled on the basis of properties of physical stimuli like
surface reflectance. Hence color cannot be identified
with surface spectral reflectance.
(ii) Given considerable variation in the dimensionality
and sensitivity of color vision, and given a role for color
vision In determining the boundaries of surfaces, the
segmentation of the visual scene and therefore of what
counts as a distinct surface to be perceived may in fact be
relative to the structure of the perceiving animal. Thus
surfaces may themselves be relational like color, provid-
ing no animal-independent anchor for objective color as
surface spectral reflectance.
(iii) Natural color vision is concerned not just with
detecting surfaces but also with a variety of other tasks in
various terrestrial, aquatic, and aerial contexts. Among
these are the discrimination of illumination conditions
and the generation of a set of perceptual categories that
have "cognitive significance" for animals in a variety of
interactions. For these reasons, it is a mistake to suppose
that the one and only (or even primary) function of color
vision is the recovery of surface spectral reflectance.
Because each of these points rests on the idea of
differences in color space, we begin by discussing the
evidence for the existence of different kinds of color space
among perceiving animals.
space of oilier animals
It is tempting to assume that our visual abilities provide
the norm for understanding color vision. This assumption
might be justifiable if humans - or our primate relatives -
were unique in possessing color vision. In reality, how-
ever, color vision is widespread throughout the animal
world. Indeed, it seems that virtually every animal class
has some species with trichromatic vision (Jacobs 1981, p.
153). But it would also be a mistake to take trichromacy as
the norm. Many animals are dichromats (e.g., squirrels,
rabbits, tree shrews, some fishes, possibly cats and dogs,
some New World monkeys); others appear to be
tetrachromats (e.g., goldfish, the Japanese dace, turtles),
perhaps even pentachromats (pigeons, ducks).
Before discussing the evidence for higher dimensional
color spaces, it is important to consider how color vision
also varies considerably in its amount or sensitivity as
determined by the spectral sensitivity, wavelength dis-
crimination, and colorimetric purity functions. By mea-
suring these functions for various animals, one can com-
pare their overall sensitivities to spectral stimuli, their
abilities to discriminate on the basis of wavelength, and
whether spectral stimuli appear more or less saturated.
Each of these functions will differ for color vision of
different dimensionality. The wavelength discrimination
curve is of particular interest here, for it can also be taken
as an indication of the type of color vision system: A
maximum or minimum is expected where there is a
crossover between two primary responses. For example,
our three primaries are revealed in our wavelength dis-
crimination curve, which has two maxima (Figure 2a,
top). These maxima correspond to the two regions in the
spectrum where our hue discrimination is finest (580nm
and 470nm). The curve for the goldfish, however, shows
three regions of best hue discrimination at 610nm,
500nm, and 400nm (Neumeyer 1985; 1986). This finding
suggests that the goldfish has four active primaries and so
Is potentially a tetrachromat (Crawford et al. 1990; Neu-
meyer 1988). In contrast, the wavelength discrimination
curve for the pigeon shows four regions of best hue
discrimination at 390nm, 450nm, 540nm, and 600nm
(Emmerton & Delius 1980), suggesting that the pigeon
has five active primary mechanisms, and so Is potentially
a pentachromat. Three of the minima not including the
one at 390nm in the UV region are shown in Figure 4c
(Palacios et al. 1990a).
The three functions also differ among animals that have
color vision of the same dimensionality, among "normal"
and "anomalous" individuals, and even among "normal"
individuals. To cite examples of each kind of variation: (i)
Humans and forager honey bees are both trichromats,
but bee color vision is shifted toward the ultraviolet, with
the points of best hue discrimination at about 400nm and
490nm (Menzel 1979; 1989), as can be seen in Figure 3,
which also shows the receptor-level and the opponent
channel color space for these insects, (ii) For normal
human trichromats, spectral sensitivity peaks at about
555nm; the spectral sensitivity of deuteranomalous tri-
chromats, however, is shifted toward longer wave-
lengths, whereas that of protanomalous trichromats is
shifted toward shorter wavelengths, (iii) Finally, each of
the three functions can differ slightly among "normal"
individuals: For example, men and women appear to
differ in their color mixtures (Neitz & Jacobs 1986).
Now that we have introduced the idea of variations in
the dimensionality and sensitivity of color vision, we can
turn to what these variations tell us about color space. We
focus first on color vision in birds, for as J. K. Bowmaker
remarked some years ago: "The true culmination of the
evolution of color vision in vertebrates is probably to be
found in the highly evolved diurnal animals, perhaps best
represented by diurnal birds, and it is within these
species that we should look for color vision significantly
more complex than our own and utilizing more of the
available spectrum" (1980b, p. 196).
As we mentioned above, evidence that is now being
accumulated indicates that such diurnal birds as the
pigeon and the duck are at least tetrachromats, perhaps
even pentachromats (Jane & Bowmaker 1988; Burkhardt
1989; Chen et al. 1984; Goldsmith 1990; Palacios 1991;
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
a
logSA
3.0-
2.0-
1.0-
0-
3m
log 1/A A
P1.0
500
600
ACmn)
500
550
Figure 3. The honey bee: an alternative trichromatic color
space, (a) Spectral sensitivities of the three pigments present in
the forager honey bee's retina (Apis meUifera), with the overall
sensitivity curve (discontinuous line) and the two-peaked wave-
length discrimination function. Modified from Nuboer (1986).
(b) Maxwell triangle for photoreceptor activities, indicating the
spectral loci. Compare with Figure 2b. From Goldsmith (1990).
(c) Chromaticity diagram for constant brightness, calculated on
the basis of two antagonistic channels postulated for the bee
from physiological findings: A = + UV - B - G; B = UV - B +
G. From Menzel (1989).
Palacios & Varela, in press; Palacios et al. 1990b; Varela et
al. 1991a). This evidence is derived from a variety of
experiments with species ranging over various families
within each order. The evidence also pertains to several
levels, from the photoreceptor and retinal constitution, to
trie neurophysiological, and psychophysical or behavioral
levels.
To begin at the retinal level, five different types of
cone-oil droplet combinations have been described in the
retinas of various birds such as pigeons, ducks, and
penguins; passerines have at least four such combinations
(Bowmaker 1977; Chen & Goldsmith 1986; Chen et al.
1984; Jane & Bowmaker 1988). As can be seen from
Figure 4a, the "visible" spectral range available to diurnal
birds includes that available to humans, but it also ex-
tends considerably further into the short-wave region.
Indeed, it is now generally agreed that many birds have
color vision in the near-ultraviolet region. For example,
Wright (1972) found that the removal of an ultraviolet
component changes the color of certain stimuli for the
pigeon; and Goldsmith (1980) found that hummingbirds
can distinguish near-ultraviolet light (370nm) from
darkness, and from white light lacking wavelengths below
400nm. Humans cannot perform either of these tasks.5
The cones in the avian retina, unlike those in mammals
and insects, also possess oil droplet inclusions, which
appear to act as cut-off filters, thereby increasing in
number the combination of receptor sensitivities (Bow-
maker 1980b). Oil droplets are also found in the retinas of
some fishes, amphibians, and reptiles. In the pigeon
retina, for example, there are up to four types of colored
oil droplets in combination with three types of cone
photopigment for the long-wave region alone (Figure 4b)
(Bowmaker 1977). Furthermore, this information about
retinal organization is regional, because in birds like the
pigeon there are two foveal regions that mediate different
behavioral roles (Bloch & Martinoya 1983; Maldonado et
al. 1988); evidence indicates that sensitivity and discrimi-
nation are different in these two visual regions (Nuboer &
Wortel 1987; Remy & Emmerton 1989). These regional
differences increase even more the complexity of pigeon
color vision, for the color perceived depends on the visual
field being attended.
Turning now to psychophysics, wavelength discrimina-
tion curves, as we have already mentioned, show four
distinct minima (Emmerton & Delius 1980; Palacios et al.
1990a). Color-mixture experiments for the pigeon pro-
vide direct evidence for tetrachromacy (Palacios & Varela
1991; Palacios et al. 1990b). A definitive proof of pen-
tachromacy would require five-way color-mixture experi-
ments, which have yet to be performed.
There is unfortunately little evidence at present about
the neural basis for avian chromatic channels in general
(see Maturana & Varela 1982; Varela et al. 1983). It is
nevertheless possible to form an educated guess about
the possible shape of the pigeon's color channels, com-
parable to those shown in Figures 2c and 3c for humans
and bees, respectively. The basic idea, introduced by
Buchsbaum and Gottschalk (1983), is to obtain the
weighted combination of mutual excitation and inhibition
that maximally decorrelates the primary photoreceptor
responses (see Appendix A). In their original calcula-
tions, Buchsbaum and Gottschalk (1983) used the Vos-
Walraven primary responses for humans, which are psy-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
11

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
4S0 
550
WAVELENGTH in NM
650
rang®
Figure 4. The color hyper space of diurnal birds, (a) Relative
spectral sensitivities of the five major cone classes of the mallard
duck (Anas platyrhynchos L.), calculated by taking into account
both oil droplet and ocular media absorption. The fifth curve has
been shifted up one log unit arbitrarily for clarity. From Jane
and Bowmaker (1988). (b) The cone photopigments (maxima at
460nm, 514nm, and 567nm) and oil droplet (50% cutoff trans-
mission at 476nm, 476nm, 554nm, 610nm, and 570nm, respec-
tively) combinations actually present in the pigeon's retinal
"red" field. The sector designated "range," the long-wave
window 580-640nm, is compatible with trichromacy according
to color-mixture data. From Palacios, Martinoya, Bloch and
Waweiengtii
Varela (1990), based on data from Bowmaker (1977). (c) A
behavioral determination of the wavelength discrimination
function for the pigeon (Columbia livia) not including the UV
region, showing three conspicuous minima. Data from Palacios,
Bonnardel & Varela (1990a). (d) Proposed chromatic opponent
channels for the pigeon, based on weighted subtractions and
additions that maximally decorrelate primary responses (see
text). The primary responses considered were maxima at
360nm, 415nm, 520nm, 580nm, and 620nm. These channels
can adequately predict the known photopic sensitivity, wave-
length discrimination curve, and color mixture in pigeons.
From Palacios (1991).
chophysically derived. The resulting channels corre-
spond remarkably well with the Wh-Bk (White-Black), R-
G (Red-Green), and Y-B (Yellow-Blue) channels known to
the psychophysicist, and to color-opponent profiles at the
retinal or geniculate level known to the neuro-
physiologist
We have applied this same procedure to other species,
as explained in Appendix A. Unlike the human data, the
animal data are incomplete; at present, the best one has to
work with are raw microspectrophotometric data. The
proposed channels can be validated by their capacity to
predict known behavioral evidence, such as sensitivity,
discrimination, and color mixture. In Figure 4d we show
the result of the decorrelation of the primary responses of
the pigeon, thereby giving a set of putative channels.
These channels adequately predict the known data on
sensitivity, wavelength discrimination, and color mixture
(Palacios 1991). We typically find that we need five
12
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

channels to account for the available data: one achromatic
luminance channel (Cl) and four color-opponent chan-
nels (C2, C3, C4, C5) with different zero crossings (Fig-
ure 4d).6
It is important to realize that such an increase in
chromatic dimensionality does not mean that pigeons
exhibit greater sensitivity to the monochromatic hues
that we see. For example, we should not suppose that
since the hue discrimination of the pigeon is best around
600nm, and since we see a 600nm stimulus as orange,
pigeons are better at discriminating spectral hues of
orange than we are. Indeed, we have reason to believe
that such a mapping of our hue terms onto the pigeon
would be an error: In an experiment designed to deter-
mine whether and how pigeons group spectral stimuli
into hue categories, Wright and Cummings (1971) found
that pigeons treat wavelengths to either side of 540nm as
falling into different hue categories, whereas humans do
not. As Jacobs (1981, p. 118) notes in his discussion of this
experiment: "Among other things, this result strongly
emphasizes how misleading it may be to use human hue
designations to describe color vision in non-human
species."
This point can be made even more forcefully, however,
when it is a difference in the dimensionality of color vision
that we are considering. An increase in the dimension-
ality of color vision indicates a fundamentally different
kind of color space. We are familiar with trichromatic
color spaces such as our own, which require three inde-
pendent axes for their specification, given either as recep-
tor activation or as color channels (Figure 2). A
tetrachromatic color space obviously requires four di-
mensions for its specification. It is thus an example of
what can be called a color hyperspace.
The difference between a tetrachromatic and a tri-
chromatic color space is therefore not like the difference
between two trichromatic color spaces: The former two
color spaces are incommensurable in a precise mathe-
matical sense, for there is no way to map the kinds of
distinctions available in four dimensions into the kinds of
distinctions available in three dimensions without re-
mainder. One might object that such incommensurability
does not prevent one from "projecting" the higher-
dimensional space onto the lower; hence the difference in
dimensionality simply means that the higher space con-
tains more perceptual content than the lower. Such an
interpretation, however, begs the fundamental question
of how one is to choose to "project" the higher space onto
the lower. Because the spaces are not isomorphic, there is
no unique projection relation. Furthermore, to pass from
one space to another, one needs to specify the appropri-
ate axes (color channels), which differ according to the
animal (even for animals that have color vision of the same
dimensionality).
To mark this kind of difference in color space, consider
the color space of the forager honey bee, which we
presented in Figure 3 above. If bees are able to enjoy the
experience of hue, the hues they perceive are likely to be
different from ours, because they match wavelengths to
which we are also sensitive with lights drawn from the
near-ultraviolet region of the spectrum, which we cannot
see. In spite of this difference, there is a sense in which
bee color space and human color space can be said to be
commensurable, for the dimensionalities of the spaces
Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
are the same, and so a precise correspondence can be
provided between these two perceptual spaces. In the
case of tetrachromats or pentachromats such a correspon-
dence is not possible.
This incommensurability can be more easily envi-
sioned with the help of the evidence for tetrachromacy in
teleost fishes, especially the goldfish (Neumeyer 1988).
In Figure 5a, we present the pigment triangle for the
goldfish, which should be compared with the previously
presented triangles for humans (Figure 2b) and the bee
(Figure 3b). Here the familiar Maxwell triangle has been
doubled to accommodate the additional coordinate
needed to map spectral loci. This representation was first
" proposed by Neumeyer (1988) for goldfish and indepen-
dently by Burkhardt (1989) for the color vision of birds.
We also reproduce here Goldsmith's (1990) suggestive
rendering of the same idea as a pigment tetrahedron for
an "imaginary" turtle with a retina whose photoreceptors
have no oil droplets (Figure 5b).
To generate these kinds of color hyperspaces at the
physiological and psychophysical levels, we need at least
four channels. For teleost fish, these channels can be
obtained in a manner similar to those for the pigeon - by
maximally decorrelating the primary responses as known
from microspectrophotometric and physiological data
(Harosi & Hashimoto 1983; Neumeyer 1988). In this case,
the transformation matrix from primary responses to
channels is explicitly given in Appendix A. Here again the
putative channels can correctly predict the known behav-
ioral evidence for sensitivity, wavelength discrimination,
and color mixture for the goldfish (Palacios 1991). It is
interesting to note that Neumeyer and Arnold (1989) have
recently shown that the goldfish switches from tri-
chromatic to tetrachromatic modes depending on light
conditions - an indication that the ecological embedded-
ness of the animal is quite pertinent even at this level of
description.
This complex of issues can also be approached from a
frequency analysis of color signals and responses that
could provide a way to ascertain the dimensionality of
color space directly. The basic idea was first proposed by
Barlow (1982; see also Bowmaker 1983), but since it is
rather novel, we have relegated our treatment to an
appendix (see Appendix B).
In this section, we have presented an array of evidence
for the existence of different kinds of color space among
perceiving animals. The evidence includes the diversity
of kinds of photopigments and sensitivity functions,
wavelength discrimination and categorical perception,
color mixture, physiological processes, and ethology.
Although each form of evidence taken in isolation might
be unconvincing, taken as a whole it makes a strong case
for the existence of significant variations in the dimen-
sionalities of color space among perceiving animals. We
must now wonder what these differences might mean in
experiential or phenomenal terms. What do these com-
parative variations in color space imply for our under-
standing of color experience?
23- NoweS hues and diversify in color experience
Since some readers may be sceptical about attributing
color experience to creatures other than ourselves (or our
primate relatives), let us first attempt to distinguish more
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
13

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
C1 = Wh
6 0 0
7 0 0
Wavelength
Figure 5. Tetrachromatic color hyperspaces. (a) Pigment color
space for the goldfish, requiring four relative values to span the
entire space. In contrast to Figures 2 and 3, the representation
demands an extra dimension, which is obtained by doubling the
color triangle. The spectral loci thus obtained from pigment
absorption data no longer fall on the boundaries of the space, but
inside them. From Neumeyer (1988). (b) Pigment tetrahedron
for an "imaginary" turtle with no oil droplets in its cones, with
visual pigment maxima at 370nm, 450nm, 520nm, and 620nm.
In this format it is easy to see that the animal is likely to have
three nonspectral stimulus regions (see Figure 2) which would
fall along the dashed lines. From Goldsmith (1990). (c) Proposed
chromatic opponent channels for the goldfish, by maximal
decorrelation of the pigment data from Harosi and Hashimoto
(1983). An achromatic channel and three opponent channels are
found. These four channels adequately predict sensitivity,
wavelength discrimination, and color-mixture data, as well as
physiological data from the fish retina. From Palacios (1991).
To the right, the putative channels are used as axes of a color
hyperspace of four dimensions, with opponencies between
three sets of dimensions (labelled here simply as + Cl — Cl, +
C2 — C2, etc.), plus the achromatic or brightness axis (Cl =
Wh). Compare with Figure 2c and 3c for the trichromatic spaces
of humans and the bee respectively.
precisely between color vision and color experience.
Although it is difficult to draw a principled distinction
between mere wavelength-specific behavior and color
vision (Menzel 1979), color vision is sometimes defined as
the ability to discriminate wavelengths independent of
their relative intensities. This ability would not seem to
entail the enjoyment of color experience, however, for it
seems possible to imagine the former without the latter.
Unfortunately, it is also not clear how to draw a principled
distinction between color vision as wavelength discrimi-
nation and the full-fledged perceptual experience of
color.
A more satisfactory approach to this problem is to hold
that color perception involves at least three important
phenomena: additive color mixture (hue, saturation, and
brightness matches for spectral stimuli), color contrast
(simultaneous and successive) and color constancy. In
particular, it seems reasonable to suppose that color
contrast and color constancy are necessary for color expe-
rience.7 It is therefore interesting to note that these
14
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Thompson, et al.: Ways of coloring
chromatic phenomena have now been demonstrated for a
variety of species. Color constancy and color induction
have been found in bees (Neumeyer 1980; 1981), goldfish
(Ingle 1985), and pigeons (Varela et al. 1991a). In the case
of pigeons, we have also seen that these animals group
adjacent wavelengths into categories, which though dif-
ferent from the groupings humans perform, nonetheless
seem to be categories of hue (Wright & Cummings 1971).
Given these psychophysical results, then, it does not
seem unreasonable to suppose that these animals, es-
pecially birds and fishes, experience color.
Let us now consider color vision of higher dimension-
ality than our own. When they hear of the evidence for
tetrachromacy or pentachromacy many people respond
by asking: "Well, what are the extra colors that these
perceivers see?" This question is understandable, but
somewhat naive, for, as pointed out above, we should not
suppose that tetrachromats or pentachromats are simply
better at seeing the colors that we see. On the contrary, to
see in four or five dimensions, as it were, is not to
discriminate more finely in three dimensions. In other
words, tetrachromats and pentachromats should not be
conceived as perceivers who simply make finer hue-
saturation-brightness discriminations among, say, blue
and green or red and yellow (like perceivers who simply
see finer shades of our colors). Such an ability would not
amount to an increase in the dimensionality of color
space; it would consist only in a relative increase in hue-
saturation-brightness sensitivity within the dimensions of
our trichromatic color space. If we wish to understand
what tetrachromacy and pentachromacy imply for color
experience, we must instead ask what the possession of
additional dimensions to make chromatic distinctions
could mean in experiential or phenomenal terms.
At this point, we can offer only imaginative specula-
tion, for we still lack knowledge of the post-retinal neu-
ronal processes involved in tetrachromatic and pen-
tachromatic perception and we obviously do not know
what such perception is like from the point of view of the
goldfish or the pigeon.8 By returning to consider our color
space, however, and by asking how this space would be
transformed by the addition of a new dimension, we can
perhaps achieve an indirect appreciation of what a
tetrachromatic color hyperspace might be like. Recall,
then, that because our visual system has two chromat-
ically opponent channels, we are able to experience four
unique hues (red, green, yellow, and blue) and their
binary combinations (orange, purple, etc.). A tetravariant
visual system, however, like that suggested for the gold-
fish (Figure 5), would contain three chromatically oppo-
nent channels. We are therefore entitled to speculate that
these three channels (call them r-g, y-b, and p-q) would
enable a tetrachromat to experience six basic hue compo-
nents (r, g, y, b, p, q), binary combinations of these hues
(e.g., r + y, y + p, etc.), and ternary combinations as well
(e.g., r + y + p, g + y + p). Thus the color hyperspace of
a tetrachromat might reflect a phenomenal structure
composed not only of two new basic hue components,
which would combine to form novel binaries, but also an
entirely new kind of hue not found in the phenomenal
structure of our color space, namely, ternary hues.9
These ternary hues would correspond to the additional
kind of chromatic distinction available to a tetrachromat,
but not to a trichromat.
This point about novel colors can be made more ac-
cessible with the help of the diagrams presented in
Figures 2, 4, and 5. To represent tetrachromatic stimulus
mixtures we found that we had to add an additional axis to
the plane so that it became a volume (Figure 5). There-
fore, as Burkhardt (1989) notes: "While in man's chroma-
ticity diagram there is only one intermediate color which
does not occur in the daylight spectrum, namely, purple,
in tetrachromatic vision there would be three intermedi-
ate colors which are not present in the daylight spectrum,
namely, mixtures of red and blue (purple), of green and
UV, and of red and UV . . . "(pp. 794-95). Similar kinds
of novel, nonspectral stimulus mixtures are indicated by
the dashed lines in Goldsmith's (1990) pigment tetra-
hedron for an imaginary turtle (Figure 5b). If such novel,
nonspectral stimulus mixtures can be shown to be treated
as colors by the animal through its behavior, then the
existence of color hyperspace as a domain of behaviorally
significant distinctions would be strongly reinforced.
2Aa Computational objectiwism rewisited
We now pursue the implications of our comparative
discussion, beginning with the view that we call "com-
putational objectivism." Our first task is to determine
whether some sufficient subset of the properties of color
can be identified with such physical properties as surface
spectral reflectance. If these properties of color cannot
be so identified then we have reason to reject the ob-
jectivist's claim that color is simply surface spectral
reflectance.
The obvious place to begin is color space. For some-
thing to be a color it must have a location in some color
space; that is, it must be specifiable in terms of hue,
saturation, and brightness. By taking these three proper-
ties as our reference point, we can construct an argument
against the identification of color with surface spectral
reflectance, which we will call the "argument from exter-
nal irreducibility." (The main features of this argument
were originally proposed by Hardin [1984; 1988, pp. 66-
67].)
The argument from external irreducibility
1. For something to be a (chromatic) color it must be a
hue.
2. For something to be a hue it must be either unique
or binary (or ternary).
3. Therefore, if hues are to be reductively identified
with physical properties, these physical properties must
admit of corresponding unique, binary (or ternary) di-
visions.
4. Organism-independent, external properties such as
light-waves and spectral reflectances do not admit of such
divisions.
5. Therefore, color cannot be reductively identified
with such organism-independent, external properties.
Although this argument has conceptual components,
we do not intend it to be primarily conceptual. We are
interested not in conceptual analysis, (i.e., in making
claims about the essential features of the concept of
color), but in determining what color is, given the con-
cept of color as it figures in visual science, especially in
psychophysical explanation. Thus (1) and (2) should be
read as consequences that follow from how color is con-
ceptually and empirically specified in visual science.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
15

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
The main empirical claim in the argument is obviously
(4). To put the point another way: Given only light
wavelengths or the spectral reflectance profiles for sur-
faces, we cannot model or state generalizations about
hue. Light waves or surface spectral reflectances do not
stand in relations to each other that can be described as
unique or binary, or for that matter opponent or nonop-
ponent, balanced or unbalanced, saturated or desatu-
rated, and so forth. There is simply no mapping from such
physical properties to the properties of color that is
sufficient to establish the objectivist identification.10
This argument obviously depends on considerations
about what properties a mapping must have to be suffi-
cient to establish objectivism. We are supposing that such
a mapping must enable us to state generalizations about
features of color such as the unique /binary structure of
hue and the opponent relations. The objectivist might
deny this point. Such a denial would be tantamount to
claiming, contrary to (l)-(3) above, that we should re-
place our current understanding of color in visual science
with a new concept of physical color as surface spectral
reflectance. It is tempting to dismiss this conceptual
replacement idea out of hand: It is one thing to argue for a
distinction between physical color and perceived color,
but it is quite another to uphold the distinction by
divesting hue, and thereby color, of those properties used
in its conceptual and empirical specification in visual
science. If the properties of hue, such as being unique or
binary, and the opponent relations, could be successfully
identified with some set of physical properties such as
surface spectral reflectances, then statements about these
physical properties would provide us with an alternative
theoretical access to the properties of color that figure in
psychophysical explanation. We would then have reason
for accepting a new notion of physical color. But because
we have no physical model for these properties of color,
what is to motivate such a notion?
The argument from external irreducibility could be and
indeed has been advanced without taking into consider-
ation comparative color spaces (Hardin 1984; 1988). We
present the argument here because it becomes even
stronger when we place it in the context of comparative
color vision. Consider hue as it varies across dichromatic,
trichromatic, and tetrachromatic (to say nothing of pen-
tachromatic) color spaces. As we know from studies of
human color blindness (see Hurvich, 1981, for an over-
view), a dichromat has only one opponent-hue pair
(yellow-blue or more rarely red-green). Therefore, unlike
a trichromatic color space, a purely dichromatic color
space contains no binary hues. Similarly, a tetrachromatic
color hyperspace would contain ternary hues not found in
a trichromatic color space. There are thus different kinds
of hue to be found in each of these color spaces. The
unique, binary, and ternary structures that compose
these different kinds of hue do not map onto properties of
surface spectral reflectance. Neither the unity among the
phenomena (color qua hue-saturation-brightness rela-
tions) nor the relevant diversity (different dimension-
alities and hence kinds of hue) is to be found at the purely
physical level of spectral reflectance.
At this point, the objectivist will no doubt appeal to the
idea that the contents of (types) of perceptual states
should be identified according to the distal properties
they have the function to detect, that the function of color
vision is to detect surface spectral reflectance, and that
this functionalist type-identification is sufficient to estab-
lish the claim that color is surface spectral reflectance
(Matthen 1988).
Even if the function of color vision is to detect surface
reflectance, it does not follow that color is surface reflec-
tance. In fact, computational objectivists often simply beg
the question about the status of color by building objec-
tivism Into their representationist theories of perception.
But there is an even more fundamental problem we wish
to stress: The claim that the function of color vision Is to
detect surface reflectance is at best considerably mislead-
ing and at worst seriously flawed. It is misleading because
a comparative ecological examination of color vision re-
veals that color vision has many other biological functions
besides those Involved in the detection of surfaces. Most
notably, color vision is concerned with illumination con-
ditions in their own right and with the perceptual signifi-
cance of color in guiding behavioral Interactions (we
provide examples shortly). It is flawed because It is not at
all clear that surfaces are themselves perceiver-indepen-
dent In the way the objectivist supposes. Let us begin
with this point, because It Is the more controversial.11
In the top-down functional decomposition charac-
teristic of the computational level of analysis (such as
inverse optics), vision Is decomposed into various more-
or-less modular tasks. In the case of color vision, the task
Is to recover Information about surface spectral reflec-
tance given a collection of objects. This statement of the
"problem" of color vision assumes that the visual scene
has already been segmented into areas that correspond to
distinct objects and their surfaces. But this assumption
begs the question of the purposes that color vision may
serve. As D'Zmura and Lennle (1986, p. 1666) note: "To
find the loci of responses that correspond to different
objects, one must already have segmented the scene to
establish which lights come from which objects. This begs
the question of the purpose of color vision, which we
believe plays an important role In the discrimination
among objects and In their Identification."
Consider the regularization constraints that we dis-
cussed above. Among these is the fact that naturally
occurring illuminants and reflectances can be adequately
modelled in a low-dimensional space. What, we might
ask, constitutes a "naturally occurring reflectance"? If we
examine these models, we see that so-called natural
reflectances correspond to the surface reflectances of
typical objects from our human environment (e.g.,
bricks, grass, buildings, etc.). Given a class of such
objects, one measures their surface spectral reflectances
and then determines which finite set of basis reflectance
functions best models the variance in the class. The visual
system, however, is never simply presented with such
prespecified objects. On the contrary, the determination
of what and where an object is, as well as its surface
texture and orientation (hence the overall context in
which color Is perceived), Is a complex process that the
visual system must achieve.
In fact, we have already seen that color vision contrib-
utes to this process of spatial segmentation. For example,
we reviewed Rubin & Richards's (1982; 1988) idea that an
early goal of biological color vision is to determine where
material changes occur In a scene using spectral cross-
points and opposite slope signs. Another example comes
16
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
from D'Zmura and Lennie (1986), who propose an al-
gorithm for color constancy in which the geometric sta-
bility of hue contributes to segmenting a scene whereas
variations in lightness and saturation contribute to estab-
lishing an object's shape and position. Finally, at the
neurophysiological level, it is generally held that distinct
retinal-geniculate-cortical pathways are involved in
color, form, and movement perception (De Yoe & Van
Essen 1988; Lennie 1984; Livingstone & Hubel 1988),
but there is disagreement over the properties of these
pathways and their relations (Lennie et al. 1990; Log-
othetis et al. 1990; Mollon 1990; Schiller et al. 1990).
Nonetheless, it seems safe to say that not only the
achromatic process involving the lightness dimension of
surface color, but also the chromatically opponent pro-
cesses play a role in spatial segmentation (e.g., color
contrasts can be used to determine borders), to say
nothing of how the specification of color and shape may be
combined in, say, V4 (Heywood & Cowey 1987).
This interdependency between color vision and spatial
segmentation is downplayed by computational objec-
tivism. This view simply assumes that the surfaces of
objects provide a perceiver-independent peg on which to
hang objective color as spectral reflectance. The objec-
tivist presumably thinks that the assumption needs no
defence, since surface spectral reflectances can be spec-
ified in physical terms. But although the reflectance at
any point in the scene can be specified in physical terms,
what counts as a surface may in fact involve tacit refer-
ence to a type of perceiver. This point has not been
evident for several reasons which we need to explore.
First, it is usually simply assumed that surfaces are
properties of the world found at a purely physical level of
description. At the level of description found in percep-
tual theory, however, surfaces also figure as properties of
the perceptual object, that is, the object as construed in
relation to the sensory-motor capacities of perceiving
animals. Here surfaces are treated in relation to the body-
scaling of the animal, and, in the case of vision, to
properties like visual shape, texture, orientation, light-
ness, and color. How surfaces at this perceptual level are
to be linked to the purely physical level is precisely the
issue. Simply to assume that this link can be made
without implicating the sensory-motor capacities of the
animal is to beg the question. For example, the visual
system responds to singularities at many scales that char-
acterize apparent contours in edges, yet these scales are
integrated into a unified behavioral designation. This
integration, however, is not implicit in the singularities
themselves: it depends on how the neuronal processes
treat them (DeValois & DeValois 1988).12
Second, such issues often remain hidden because many
theories of perception focus on tasks (e.g., recovering
reflectance) in an already well-specified or easily seg-
mented context (e.g., Mondrian displays). Uncritical at-
tention to visual tasks in such artificially simplified con-
texts makes one forget the complexities involved in
spatial segmentation itself.
Third, virtually all theories of perception focus on our
familiar human environment rather than the considerably
different environments of, say, birds, fishes, or insects.
For example, the prespecified objects in low-dimensional
^models of reflectance are typically middle-sized, frontally
viewed, "human" objects, such as bricks, grass, build-
ings, Munsell color chips, Mondrian displays, and so
forth. They are not, for example, silhouettes against the
background sky, as seen frontally and laterally by birds,
ultraviolet reflectance patterns of flowers, as seen by
birds and bees, aquatic objects that contrast with the
volume colors of the downwelling or background space
light as viewed by fishes, and so on. Because of this
attention to prespecified human objects, the issue of how
the world comes to be segmented into a given collection
of surfaces by different perceiving animals is hardly ever
empirically raised, or explored philosophically (but see
Stroll 1986).
Finally, if, as Gouras and Zrenner (1981, p. 172) claim,
"it is impossible to separate the object sensed from its
color because it is the color contrast itself that forms the
object," then what counts as the perceptual object may
vary considerably depending on the type of color vision
system involved.13 Gouras and Zrenner are referring
here to the perceptual object. Nonetheless, the interde-
pendency between color and surface perception is
enough to show that at the level of description revelant to
perception, it is not at all evident, as computational
objectivism assumes, that the specification of surfaces is
not relative to the perceiver. In other words, the kinds of
surfaces that populate the world as visually perceived by a
given animal may depend for their specification on the
processes by which that animal segments its visual scene.
Let us summarize this line of argument, which we call
the "argument from perceiver-relativity":
The argument from perceiver-relativity
1. Color vision contributes to the task of segmenting
the visual scene into regions of distinct surfaces and/or
objects.
2. Color vision varies considerably throughout the
animal world.
3. We may accordingly expect spatial segmentation to
vary as well.
4. What counts as the surface of an object (for percep-
tion theory) therefore has to be specified in relation to the
perceiving animal.
We take this argument to be conditional, based on a
reasoned hypothesis or conjecture that requires further
empirical investigation in a comparative neurophysio-
logical and ecological context. Nonetheless, we believe
its plausibility undermines much of the computational
objectivisms assumption that surfaces provide a per-
ceiver-independent anchor for color.
The comparative ecology of color vision reveals several
other points where computational objectivism is inade-
quate. The computational objectivist typically assumes
that the sole or genuine function of color vision is object
detection. Matthen (1988), for example, argues that the
"biological function" of color vision is object detection via
the recovery of surface reflectance. He claims that non-
surface modes of color appearance, such as the blue of the
sky, should be explained as the result of "normal misper-
ception," that is, as cases of visual representation that are
nonveridical, but do not result from the malfunction or
maladaptation of the visual system. Thus Matthen tries to
ground the philosophical claim that only surfaces are
genuinely colored by relying on a notion of "biological
function." The irony of this proposal is that Matthen's
claim about the biological function of color vision is
advanced on the basis of a rather controversial computa-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
17

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
tional model (Land's retinex theory) and is undermined
by the actual biological and ecological operation of color
vision. Color vision is not limited to the perception of
surfaces; it includes the perception of the ambient light-
ing conditions in their own right (not merely as "informa-
tion to be discounted"), for these are relevant to a variety
of environmental conditions, such as weather and time of
day (Jameson & Hurvich 1989). Nonsurface modes of
color vision also serve to heighten contrast between aerial
or aquatic backgrounds (volume colors) and foreground
objects (surface colors) (Levine & MacNichol 1982;
Lythgoe 1979).
Although we still lack extensive knowledge of the
ecological function of color vision in various animal spe-
cies, the evidence we do have is sufficient to demonstrate
that speculations about color vision should not be dictated
by top-down computational models that rely on a consid-
erably simplified human perceptual context. Instead, as
the following examples will illustrate, color vision must
be understood within the context of the quite different
behavioral repertoires available to perceiving animals.
Consider first the link in chromatic ecology between
visual pigments and animal niches. Studies of aquatic
visual ecologies have shown that the retinas of deep sea
fishes have been reduced to one rhodopsin pigment, with
a sensitivity maxima around 470-490nm (Levine & Mac-
Nichol 1979; Loew & Lythgoe 1978; Partridge et al.
1989). According to one interpretation, this range would
permit the maximum of contrast sensitivity for movement
(Crescitelli et al. 1985; Muntz 1975). In contrast, for
species that have a bioluminescent organ, a different
pigment of the porphyropsin family, whose sensitivity
maximum (513-539nm) coincides with the main lumi-
nous emission of the organ, has been described (Bow-
maker et al. 1988; Partridge et al. 1989). As one moves
upward toward more illuminated depths, all species have
a larger diversity of photopigments and retinal arrange-
ments, from which one may conclude that different visual
objects are pertinent for each species (Lythgoe 1979).
This ecological link between photopigments and environ-
ments becomes even more striking in migratory fishes,
which go from river to sea: Here the relative amounts of
rhodopsin and porphyropsin change according to the
time of day and season (Beatty 1969; 1984; Bridges 1972;
Muetz & McFarland 1977; Muntz & Mouat 1984; Whit-
more & Bowmaker 1989). Such polymorphism is also
present among other nonmigratory species (Archer &
Lythgoe 1990; Archer et al. 1987; Whitmore &
Bowmaker 1989). Neumeyer and Arnold (1989) have also
recently shown, as we mentioned above, that the goldfish
is tetrachromatic for an ambient illumination of 251ux, but
trichromatic for a lower illumination around 1.51ux. They
suggest that this capacity for a dimensional shift is likely to
have an ecological interpretation. This evidence for
aquatic ecologies is admittedly fragmentary, yet it serves
to indicate the need to link chromatic performance to the
ecological setting of the animal (Muntz 1975; Wheeler
1982).
Among birds, the retinal oil droplets vary considerably
even for species with similar global living conditions
(Budnik et al. 1984; Jane & Bowmaker 1988; Martin 1977;
Martin & Lett 1985). For example, the common tern, a
predator bird, has a significant amount of red and yellow
droplets in the dorsal retina, while the barn swallow,
which catches insects, has a large quantity of translucent
droplets (Goldsmith et al. 1984). In fact, Partridge (1989)
has shown by means of cluster analysis that the ecological
niche (herbivore, fishing, etc.) is more important in
predicting the kinds and distribution of oil droplets than
strict phylogenic kinship. The presence of ultraviolet
pigments in birds also provides an example. These pig-
ments can be linked to bird-fruit coevolution, including
the dissemination of kernels (Snow 1971; Burkhardt
1982), and to ethological factors involving animal recogni-
tion, for bird plumages have been shown to have high
frequency content, and so might require higher-dimen-
sional color spaces for their recognition (Brush 1990;
Burkhardt 1989; Durrer 1986; Hudon & Brash 1989;
Weedon 1963).
Ultraviolet sensitivity in birds may also be used in
aerial navigation. As we have seen, pigeons have excel-
lent short-wave and near-ultraviolet discrimination. It is
possible that, in Nuboer's (1986, pp. 370-71) words, "the
excellent spectral discrimination within this range
. . . represents an adaptation to the coloration of an
unclouded sky. This property enables the pigeon to
evaluate short-wave gradients in the sky, ranging from
white at the sun's locus to highly saturated (ultra) violet at
angles of 90° to the axis between observer and sun."
Furthermore, since pigeon navigation is based on orien-
tation with respect to the sun's azimuth, "the perception
of colour gradients in the sky may control navigation
indirectly when the sun is hidden by clouds."
A different, but perhaps even more important feature
of the ecological function of color vision is to yield a set of
perceptual categories that have "cognitive significance"
for perceiving animals in a variety of behavioral interac-
tions (Jacobs 1981, pp. 170-71). A color category can
guide behavior in various ways depending on the things
which exemplify it: In the case of fruits, it guides feeding;
in the case of animal coloration, it may guide various
social interactions, such as mating. Pigeons have been
shown to group spectral stimuli into hue categories, and
the brightly colored feathers of birds must have cognitive
significance for behavior, especially behavior involving
sexual recognition. Finally, although object discrimina-
tion is obviously important for these kinds of behavior,
the cognitive significance of color may have an affective
dimension (perhaps related to the overall hormon-
al/motivational level of the animal) that cannot be ex-
plained simply as a function of object discrimination
(Varela et al. 1983).
Much research remains to be done on the relations
among color vision, perceptual color categories, and
animal behavior (Burtt 1979; Mailman 1977). Although
color as a perceptual category with cognitive significance
obviously plays a great role In human life, there is still
little evidence about this dimension of color perception in
nonhuman animals, especially nonprimates. In the case
of birds, however, it seems safe to conclude that this kind
of color experience does exist, as we have been arguing
here. In any case, the evidence that we have presented in
the previous paragraphs serves to demonstrate our point
that the functions of color vision should be understood in
the context of the actual behavioral repertoires and visual
ecologies of perceiving animals.
18
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
2.5. Neurophysiological 
sufojectiwism rewisited
To emphasize the active role that color vision plays in
tasks such as spatial segmentation and in guiding the
interactions of perceiving animals implies an approach to
color perception that is also different from neu-
rophysiological subjectivism. To demonstrate this point,
we need to consider Hardin's (1988; 1990) defense of
neurophysiological subjectivism.
Hardin's strategy is to offer what we can call an "argu-
ment from internal reductibility" whose main claim is that
the properties of hue (e.g., uniqueness, brightness) can
be reductively identified with psychophysical and even-
tually neural properties of the visual system. This argu-
ment, coupled with the "argument from external irre-
ducibility," leads Hardin to the position that there are no
"extradermal" colored objects; there are only chromatic
neural states. Hardin's defense of this idea is worth
quoting:
We have no good reasons for thinking that such a
replacement of the one [phenomenal] description by
the other [neural] description would leave anything
out, with a consequent loss of information. On the
contrary, we have reason to expect that a proper-neural
description would be richer, more complete, and, in
principle, more penetrable by the intellect. Problems
that are intractable at the extradermal physical level or
at the phenomenal level promise to yield analysis in
neurological terms (1988, p. 111).
Two points appear to be contained in this remark, one
ontological, the other methodological. The onto logical
claim is that color, or rather chromatic experience, is a
type of neural state or process. The methodological claim
is that color phenomena can be analyzed in neurological
terms. These two claims obviously support each other: If
colors are really neural states, then we have reason to
pursue a neurological analysis of color phenomena; on the
other hand, if we can give a neurological analysis of color
phenomena (and we cannot give a comparable physical
analysis), then we have reason to believe colors are neural
states. We make this distinction not to be pedantic, but
because it is primarily the methodological issue that we
wish to address here, not the ontological one. In other
words, we do not intend to evaluate Hardin's position by
embarking upon a discussion of the mind-body problem
for visual experience. It is, rather, the scope and limits of
a purely neurological approach to color phenomena that
interests us.
Our aim in this final section of the comparative argu-
ment will be to show that there are indeed phenomena
that, intractable as they are at the extradermal and
organism-independent physical level as well as the phe-
nomenal level, nonetheless fail to yield to analysis in
purely neurological terms. These phenomena are ecolog-
ical in the broadest sense; that is, they encompass not
only the extradermal world as an animal environment,
but also perceiving animals as both assemblies of sensory-
motor networks and as organismic unities that shape the
extradermal world into an environment in their
interactions.
Consider first the polymorphism in the color vision of
the squirrel monkey and the spider monkey (Jacobs
1986). In these species, all males are dichromats, whereas
three-quarters of the females are trichromats. Several
explanations have been proposed for this polymorphism
(Mollon et al. 1984; Nuboer 1986). According to one, it
has resulted from adaptation to the spatial heterogeneity
of the environment: It is possible that different phe-
notypes inhabit regions of the jungle that differ in the
spectral composition of their ambient light. A second
proposal appeals to the hypothesis of group selection: It
might be advantageous for the animal community to have
members with several forms of color vision. A third
proposal appeals to frequency dependent selection:
There may be an ecological balance between the avail-
ability of certain fruits and the number of phenotypes that
can detect them. Finally, another hypothesis holds that
the colors of local fruits coevolved with the differences in
color vision (Snodderly 1979).
Our second example comes from the color vision of
bees. We have seen that bees have trichromatic vision
that is shifted towards the ultraviolet. It has been argued
that this distinctive form of trichromacy coevolved with
the colors of flowers, which often have contrasting pat-
terns in ultraviolet light (Barth 1985; Lythgoe 1979;
Menzel 1989; Nuboer 1986). On the one hand, flowers
attract pollinators by their food content, and so must be
conspicuous and yet different from flowers of other spe-
cies. On the other hand, bees gather food from flowers,
and so need to recognize flowers from a distance. This
mutual advantage seems to have determined a coevo-
lution of plant features and sensory-neural capacities in
the bee.
Finally, consider that the colored "objects" that ani-
mals discriminate are often (perhaps typically) other ani-
mals. Therefore, within an ecological framework our
inquiry should be concerned just as much with animal
coloration - indeed with the coloration of living things in
general - as with animal color vision (see Burkhardt 1989;
Burtt 1979; Hailman 1977; Lythgoe 1979). Coloration
obviously affects an animal's visibility, both to con-
specifics and to members of other species in its environ-
ment. It is therefore not surprising to find coloration
involved in camouflage and in many kinds of visual
recognition (e.g., species recognition, sexual recognition,
individual recognition, recognition of motivational state,
etc.; Baylis 1979; Rowland 1979). Indeed, the ecological
entanglement of color vision and animal coloration is truly
astounding. Consider, for example, the variations in color
vision and coloration among fishes in a tropical coral reef,
perhaps one of the richest of color environments.
These kinds of phenomena indicate that a purely neural
explanation for color vision is incomplete. To explain the
polymorphism in spider and squirrel monkey color vi-
sion, and hence the differences in the perceptual experi-
ences of these animals, we must appeal not simply to the
neurophysiological constitution of these animals, but also
to the evolutionary histories of their environmental in-
teractions, perhaps at several levels of selection.14 Simi-
larly, to understand why bee color vision is shifted toward
the ultraviolet, and hence why the color space of the bee
might comprise novel hues, we must appeal to animal-
environment coevolution. Finally, to understand the
relations among color vision, animal coloration, visual
recognition, and animal communication, we must appeal
to a broad range of physiological, ecological, and evolu-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
19

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
tionary considerations, ranging from the physiological
functions of pigmentation, to coordinated inter- and in-
traspecific animal interactions, to the coevolution of the
various behavioral partners (Burtt 1979).
We expect that Hardin would not deny any of these
points. Indeed, Hardin has recently drawn on evolution-
ary - or more broadly, ecological - considerations to
defend his view that although chromatic categories (red,
green, yellow, and blue) have no counterparts in the
extradermal world, such categories confer evolutionary
advantages on perceiving organisms (Hardin 1990).
Hardin argues that color vision does not represent the
world as it really is, but rather "encodes information"
about light, reflectance, and so forth, in a subjectively
generated form that is salient, vivid, and of great practical
value for the perceiver. The salience and vividness are to
be explained neurophysiologically, whereas the practical
value is to be explained ecologically.
We believe, however, that Hardin has not yet appreci-
ated the moral that evolutionary and ecological consider-
ations have for his neurophysiological subjectivism. Color
vision does not merely provide practical knowledge of the
environment; it also participates in the codetermination
of perceiving animals and their environments. By co-
determination we mean both (1) that animals select prop-
erties in the physical world relevant to their structure
(body-scaling, sensory-motor capacities, etc.), shaping
these properties into environments that have behavioral
significance; and (2) that environments select sensory-
motor capacities in the animal and thereby constrain
animal activity (Levins & Lewontin 1983; 1985). Consider
once again the coevolution of plant features and sensory-
neural capacities in the bee (and other invertebrates).
This coevolution implies not only that bee color vision is
sensitive to ultraviolet because it is advantageous for bees
to detect flowers that have ultraviolet reflectances, but
also that flowers have ultraviolet reflectances because it is
advantageous for them to be seen by bees. Thus, the
evolution of bee color vision did not simply provide the
bee with a practical knowledge of its environment; it also
contributed to the very determination of that environ-
ment. As Barth (1985) says in his wonderful study of
insects and flowers: "The colorful field of flowers is an
insect environment that reflects the insects themselves
(p. vii) . . . the plants and their pollinators are environ-
ment and reflection of one another" (p. 266). Such
sensory-neural and environment coevolution provides,
then, a particularly dramatic example of how the visual
environment is not only relative to the animal, but also
partly determined by the visually guided activity of the
animal itself.
Such animal-environment code termination is not lim-
ited to invertebrates. As Humphrey (1984) has observed,
most of the world's colors are organic colors carried by the
pigments of plants and animals — for example, the colors
of flowers and fruits, of plumages, of tropical fishes, and so
on. Such organic colors have been selected because of
their biological significance to those who can see them. It
is interesting to note that some pigments, for example,
carotenoids, play a key role both on the side of the
discriminated object (plants, fruits, feathers), and on the
side of the primary processes in the retina (visual pig-
ments, oil droplets). Thus the presence of carotenoids is
emblematic of the evolutionary codetermination of per-
ceiving animals and their environments (Rothschild
1975).
Hardin's subjectivism neglects this role that visual
perception plays in animal-environment codetermina-
tion. The neglect derives, we believe, from Hardin's
implicit acceptance of the subjectivist-objectivist frame-
work for evaluating perception derived from Galileo,
Newton, and Locke. Thus although Hardin has empha-
sized the role that color vision plays in generating chro-
matic categories that have intersubjective, cognitive sig-
nificance for perceiving animals in their interactions, he
nonetheless wishes to drive a principled wedge between,
on the one hand, color construed as a subjective encoding
of information about the world, and on the other hand,
surface reflectances construed as objective properties of
the world. He claims, for example, that colors are subjec-
tive because he supposes that if there were no perceiving
animals in the world, there would be no colors; since
objects and their surfaces would remain, however, these
are objective (Hardin 1990). (This same argument was in
fact given by Galileo in 1623: " . . . Colors and so on are
no more than mere names so far as the object in which we
place them is concerned, and . . . they reside only in the
consciousness. Hence if the living creatures were re-
moved, all these qualities would be wiped away and
annihilated" [Drake 1957, p. 274].)
This line of argument not only overlooks but actually
does violence to virtually every aspect of the ecologically
entangled relations of perceiving animals and their en-
vironments. First, it overlooks the fact just mentioned
that most of the world's colors are organic colors. The
evolution of color vision is inextricably linked to the
evolution of organic coloration - so much so that "in a
world without animals that possessed colour vision there
would be very little colour" (Humphrey 1984, p. 146). It
is therefore irrelevant - perhaps even somewhat per-
verse - to appeal to metaphysical intuitions about what
the world would be like "if the living creatures were
removed" when one's concern is to provide a naturalistic
explanation of perceiving animals and their environ-
ments.
Second, Hardin's argument overlooks the role that
color vision plays in spatial segmentation and hence the
relational nature of the surfaces of perceptual objects,
which we reviewed above. Elsewhere Hardin (1988, pp.
111-12) has himself drawn attention to a similar point:
"Because perceptions of color differences and percep-
tions of boundaries are closely intertwined neural pro-
cesses, we see colors and shapes together. Roughly
speaking, as color goes, so goes visual shape." For Har-
din, however, there is an important difference between
color and shape; thus he continues: "Consequently, there
are no visual shapes in the ultimate sense, just as there are
no colors. But visual shapes have their structural ana-
logues in the physical world, namely, shapes simpliciter,
and colors do not."15 We find this point unclear, for
Hardin does not tell us exactly what he means by "struc-
turally analogous" and "shapes simpliciter." We ob-
viously agree with Hardin that colors do not have struc-
tural analogues in the physical world in the way that
objectivists have supposed - that is, analogues that do not
depend in any way upon the existence of perceivers. This
point, however, does not prevent our specifying context-
dependent and interest-relative structural analogues of
20
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
color, as the science of colorimetry and its associated color
technologies clearly indicate (see Hurvich 1981, Chap-
ters 20-21). This point might strike some as unfair, since
Hardin's claim might be that there are no context-
independent and non-interest-relative structural ana-
logues for color, whereas there are for visual shape. But if
this is Hardin's point, then we are not at all convinced it is
true. Unlike Newton and Locke, we no longer take shape
to be among the fundamental, microscopic properties of
matter (cf. Priest 1989). And, as a macroscopic property,
what gets picked out as a given shape may depend on the
interests and capacities of those performing the specifica-
tion. In this sense, surfaces as specified in terms of shapes
and boundaries might be more properly thought to be-
long not to the physical world per se (the world at a purely
physical level of description), but rather to what Gibson
(1979) calls the "ecological environment," that is, the
world as construed in relation to certain animal capacities
(cf. Stroll 1986).
The moral of these considerations, we believe, is that
the empirical study of color vision - indeed, of perception
in general - should not be saddled with some a priori
subjective/objective distinction. There is nothing wrong
with drawing a distinction between subjective and objec-
tive, or internal and external, relative to the framework of
a given neurophysiological, psychophysical, or behav-
ioral experiment. The problems arise, rather, when we
attempt to force perception theory as a whole into some
absolute, subjective/objective straitjacket derived from
the empiricist tradition. Hardin (1988) has already im-
pressively demolished many of the dogmas about color
in this tradition. He has rightly built his case from bio-
logical evidence, but this evidence demands a more so-
phisticated interactionist approach to color vision than
neurophysiological subjectivism delivers. We now turn
to the more constructive task of outlining such an
approach.
3.- Toward an enactiwe wiew of color wision
Although the shortcomings of computational objectivism
and neurophysiological subjectivism are different, they
are related. Computational objectivism conceives of color
vision as the "recovery" of animal-independent, distal
properties; neurophysiological subjectivism conceives of
color vision as the "projection" of subjectively generated
qualities onto a distal world of objects and their surfaces.
In either case, the role that vision plays in the codeter-
mination of animal and environment is neglected.
Consider the question: "Which came first, the world or
the image?" The answer of inverse optics is given ambigu-
ously by the names of the tasks investigated - to recover
shape from shading, surface reflectance from varying
illuminants, and so on. We call this stance the "chicken
position":
Chicken position: The distal world can be specified
independently of the animal; it casts images on the
perceptual system whose task is to recover the world
appropriately from them.
This position is so ingrained that we tend to think the only
alternative is the "egg position":
Egg position: The perceptual system projects its own
world and the apparent reality of this world is merely a
reflection of internal laws of the system.
Our discussion of color vision, however, indicates that
neither position is satisfactory. We have seen that colors
are not already labelled properties in the world which the
perceiving animal must simply recover (objectivism). On
the other hand, we have seen that they are not internally
generated qualities that the animal simply projects onto
the world (subjectivism). Rather, colors are properties of
the world that result from animal-environment codeter-
mination. Our case study of color vision suggests that the
world and the perceiving animal determine each other,
like chicken and egg.
To situate our discussion of vision within the context of
animal-environment code termination, it is worth repeat-
ing the summary provided by Levins and Lewontin
(1983; 1985) of how organisms "construct" their environ-
ments: (1) Organisms determine in and through their
interactions what in the physical environment constitutes
their relative environments; (2) organisms alter the world
external to them as they interact with it; (3) organisms
transduce the physical signals that reach them, and so the
significance of these signals depends on the structure of
the organism; (4) organisms transform the statistical pat-
tern of environmental variation in the world external to
them; and (5) the organism-environment relationship
defines the "traits" selected for in evolution (cf. Oyama
1985). These five kinds of phenomena involve circular
and reciprocal (though not symmetrical) processes of
interaction in which the structure of the environment
constrains the activity of the organism, but the activity of
the organism shapes the environment, and so contributes
to the constitution of the environmental constraints (cf.
Odling-Smee 1988). It is on the basis of these interactive
processes that Levins and Lewontin claim that "the
environment and. the organism actively co-determine
each other" (1985, p. 89).
The implications of this codetermination of animals and
their environments have been mostly neglected in per-
ceptual theory, not only by the computational research
program of inverse optics, but even by proponents of the
so-called "ecological" approach to visual perception (Gib-
son 1979; Turvey et al. 1981). We will comment on the
ecological approach presently; at the moment, we wish to
delve further into the reasons for the neglect of animal-
environment codetermination in the research program of
inverse optics (Man* 1982; Poggio et al. 1985).
Simplifying for the purposes of brevity, inverse optics
claims that the animal visually perceives by instantiating
various functions that map from two-dimensional images
on the receptor array (input) to perceptions of the three-
dimensional world (output) via intermediate representa-
tions (and given various independent physical con-
straints). So stated, this account of perception has at least
three important consequences that run counter to the
idea that visual perception participates in animal-en-
vironment codetermination.
First, animal and environment are treated as funda-
mentally separate systems: The distal environment (ob-
jects, surfaces, etc.) is specified in advance; it provides a
source of input that is independent of the animal. The
perceiving animal, on the other hand, is treated as an
input-output system whose function is to solve the ill-
posed problem of recovering this prespecified environ-
ment. Second, perceptual and motor mechanisms are
treated as fundamentally distinct subsystems of the ani-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
21

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
mal. Since the "outputs" of perceptual systems are con-
sidered to be perceptual beliefs about the distal scene,
perceptual systems form a mechanism for the fixation of
belief. On the basis of its perceptual beliefs, the animal
may adjust its activity, but the adjustment of activity per
se is not treated as part of the perceptual process. Third,
perception does not in any way shape the environment; it
merely recovers the environment. It might be admitted
that animal activity can perturb, select, or construct the
environment, but since perception is considered to be
fundamentally distinct from action, perception per se
does not participate in animal-environment codeter-
mination.
This account of perception is based in a well-
established empirical research program and so should not
be dismissed either on conceptual grounds or simply by
adducing counterexamples. It can be challenged, how-
ever, by offering an alternative theoretical and empirical
framework as a rival research program. At this point in
our target article we obviously do not intend to embark on
a detailed defense of such an alternative research pro-
gram.16 Our intention here is simply to outline briefly a
framework for understanding visual perception in which
we take seriously the role of vision in the codetermination
of animal and environment.
The first step for perceptual theory is to refuse to
separate perception from action, or, more generally, from
perceptually guided activity. This refusal is in fact com-
mon to a number of different research programs, such as
the "ecological approach" of Gibson (1979) and his fol-
lowers (Turvey et al. 1981), the biological approach to
cognition of Maturanaand Varela (1980; 1987), Freeman's
view of brain processes (Freeman 1975; Freeman &
Skarda 1985; Skarda & Freeman 1987), and the recent
work in Al and robotics of Brooks (1986; 1987; 1989). All of
these research programs take as central the fact that
perception and action have evolved together - that per-
ception is always perceptually guided activity. But
whereas the first research program (Gibson's) chooses to
focus on properties of the animal environment and optical
properties of the ambient light, the others focus on the
sensory-motor structure of the animal, either as neuronal
networks that link sensory and motor surfaces or as
"layers" of "activity producing systems" in artificial
robotic "creatures."
We must encompass both the extradermal world con-
ceived as the animal's environment and the sensory-
motor structure of the animal in any adequate theory of
perception. We believe that the original Gibsonian pro-
gram exaggerated the role of in variances in the receptor
array activity and their hypothesized specification of the
environment. That program neglected not only the com-
plex neural processes that are required to guide activity,
but also how those processes contribute to shaping differ-
ent environments depending on the animal. The original
Gibsonian program remains unsatisfactory precisely be-
cause it does not take this further step, namely that of
shifting the reference point for understanding perception
from the environment to the structure of the perceiving
animal, understood as the kinds of self-organizing neu-
ronal networks that couple sensory and motor surfaces,
which determine both how the animal can be modulated
by environmental events and how sensory-motor activity
participates in animal-environment codetermination.
[See also Oilman: "Against Direct Perception" BBS 3(3)
1980. ] Elsewhere one of us has argued that a consistent
application of this shift in perspective is tantamount to
treating the animal as an autonomous self-organizing
system rather than as a heteronomous input-output sys-
tem (Varela 1979; 1984; 1989; see also Freeman & Skarda
1985; Skarda & Freeman 1987). We do not intend to
repeat these arguments here; we mention the point
because it is primarily this second step - emphasizing the
autonomous organization of the animal - that marks the
difference between our emphasis on perceptually guided
activity and Gibson's. In contrast, many Gibsonians con-
tinue to treat perception in largely optical terms, and so
attempt to build up the theory of perception almost
entirely from the side of the environment. We believe
this tendency is largely the result of Gibson's belief that
the only alternative to the mistaken sense-data view of
perception is direct realism (see Gibson 1967; Turvey
1977). Our approach, however, like that of some more
recent Gibsonians (e.g., Kelso & Kay 1987), takes from
Gibson the deep insight that perception must be under-
stood within the ecological context of guided activity, but
we develop this insight in two important ways: (1) by
focusing on the self-organizing properties of neural net-
works as the proper substrate of animal activity; and (2) by
treating the environment not simply as the ecological
setting for animal activity, but also as something deter-
mined by that very activity. To label this concern with
perceptually guided activity thus understood, we will use
the term enactive as proposed by Varela (1989; 1991a),
and as subsequently developed by Varela et al. (1991b).
The point of departure for an enactive approach to
vision, then, is not the problem of recovering a pre-
specified distal world. Rather, it is to specify the sensory-
motor patterns that underlie the visual guidance of animal
activity in its local situation. Our examination of dif-
ferences in color vision led us to hypothesize that animals
with different sensory-motor capacities would segment
the world in different ways. As a corollary, we claim that
the prespecified world we find in, say, low-dimensional
models of surface reflectance is actually the world as
described in relation to the sensory-motor capacities of
the higher primates. It is perhaps a legitimate simplifica-
tion to specify or label the world in advance when study-
ing our own visual capacities (or those of animals very
much like us). It is not legitimate, however, when study-
ing perception in animals that differ considerably from us.
To make this point clearer, consider again the visual
system of birds, which provides such a stark contrast to
the visual systems of the more familiar mammals. As we
mentioned above, the avian retina has two regions of high
neuronal density (foveas), which give rise to distinct
frontal and lateral visual fields that in turn correspond
roughly to further anatomical projections in the brain -
the parallel thalamo-fugal and tecto-fugal pathways. Ex-
periments reveal interesting differences between these
two visual fields: Frontal fixation is used for static and
slow stimuli, and lateral fixation for fast-moving stimuli
(Maldonado et al. 1988). There are also differences in
accommodation, depth of focus (Bloch & Martinoya
1983), spectral sensitivity (Nuboer & Wortel 1987; Remy
& Emmerton 1989), and probably chromatic vision
(Varela et al. 1983). Thus, visual discrimination for birds
is not a cyclopean image reconstruction but a con-
22
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
textualized specification according to avian sensory-
motor activity - a visual world-to-the-front and a visual
world-to-the-side are enacted by the animal. It is the
visuomotor behavior that actually reveals what con-
stitutes a relevant world for the animal, not a reconstruc-
tion of the world as it appears visually to us.
This emphasis on sensory-motor patterns of activity is
not, of course, incompatible with abstract task-analyses
for vision per se. Our objection, rather, is to the biolog-
ically implausible idea of a prespecified or already la-
belled world that the perceiving animal must recover
appropriately. Although this assumption is built into
Marr's conception of the computational level of analysis
and of vision as inverse optics, it need not be accepted by
those who wish to provide abstract task-analyses for vision
and to build artificial visual systems. Indeed, there are
models that considerably relax this assumption, such as
Grossberg's (1984; Carpenter & Grossberg 1987) adap-
tive resonant neuronal networks and Edelman's selective
recognition automata (Reeke & Edelman 1988). Similar-
ly, in Brooks's (1986; 1987; 1989) recent works in robotics,
the ongoing updating of sensory-motor activity is the key
for successful design, rather than the representation of
prespecified features of the world. By construing visual
perception not as recovery or re-presentation, but as
guided activity, these models implicitly embody the shift
in perspective that we are calling "enaction."
This enactive orientation also implies an understanding
of the relationship between the physical and the percep-
tual different from the usual one in the computational
level of analysis. Inverse optics typically assumes that the
task of perception is simply to recover properties of the
physical world. The enactive approach suggests that per-
ception is not about the physical world in this way. The
world that a given animal perceives cannot be given a
purely physical-level specification, for what an animal
perceives depends on three kinds of factors: (1) physical-
level constraints; (2) sensory-motor activity as constituted
by neuronal processes and developmental constraints;
and (3) evolutionary history. For example, such physical-
level constraints as spectral reflectances and light signals
are certainly ingredients of what the animal sees. They
are not sufficient to determine the perceptual object,
however, for, as we have seen, color spaces of different
dimensionalities can be constructed on the basis of the
same physical signals. To account for these differences
and hence for the differences in color among the relevant
perceptual objects, we must in addition appeal to
sensory-motor activity and evolutionary history. Each of
these three factors is necessary to determine the percep-
tual object; in the absence of any one of them, therefore,
the perceptual object cannot be properly explained.
This claim about the status of the perceptual object also
serves to mark the difference between enaction and
subjectivism. Hardin's subjectivism implies that the per-
ceptual object is simply "in the head," and so can be
reconstructed in entirely neural terms. As he says: "The
tactic that suggests itself is to show how phenomena of the
visual field are represented in the visual cortex and then
to show how descriptions of the visual field may be
replaced by descriptions of neural processes" (Hardin
1988, p. 111). Our critique of neurophysiological subjec-
tivism in the previous section implies that the perceptual
object, though experiential, is also ineliminably ecologi-
cal, and so, contrary to Hardin, is not simply "in the
head."
The enactive view of perceptual content is also differ-
ent from both the "externalist" view that perceptual
content is provided by distal physical properties and the
"internalist" view that perceptual content is provided by
subjective qualities (qualia). According to the enactive
view, the contents of perceptual states are to be type-
identified by way of the ecological properties perceived,
and these ecological properties are to be type-identified
by way of the states that perceive them. One should not
be put off by this circularity, for it is informative. To
specify perceptual content for a given animal we must
investigate the relevant environmental properties, and to
determine the relevant environmental properties we
must investigate the sensory-motor patterns of activity
that constitute the animal's perceptual states. This cir-
cularity is also empirically well-founded: Recall the dis-
cussion of how color vision and the ecological properties
detected by color vision (e.g., plant and animal colora-
tion) have in the course of evolution been selected for
each other. The enactive view of perceptual content thus
follows from animal-environment codetermination.
Now that we have provided an idea of the kind of
conceptual space in which an enactive approach to vision
could grow, let us return specifically to color vision.
According to enactivism, color is neither a perceiver-
independent property, as in objectivism nor is it merely a
projection or property of the brain, as in subjectivism.
Rather, it is a property of the enacted perceptual environ-
ments experienced by animals in their visually guided
interactions. Unlike computational objectivism and neu-
rophysiological subjectivism, this does not lead to an
eliminativist position regarding color: color is not divested
of its phenomenal or experiential structure in favor of
spectral reflectance; nor is it divested of its extradermal
locus in favor of neural states. Instead, color is a property of
the extradermal world understood as an animal's
environment, a world that is enacted by animal-
environment codetermination. Thus we arrive at the view
announced at the beginning of this paper, according to
which color is both ecological and experiential.
Our view might in some respects recall Locke's
(1690/1975) concept of color as a relational property, but
there are significant differences. Locke held that color is
relational because it is a "secondary quality," a disposi-
tion of objects to cause color sensations in a perceiver.
According to the Lockean view, then, color is not merely
relational, but also dispositional and subjective (see Ben-
nett 1971). Ecological experientialism, however, does not
imply that color is dispositional and subjective. We have
not tried to explicate the relational nature of color by
attempting to link dispositional properties of an
organism-independent physical world, and private sensa-
tions, qualia, or sense-data. This is not feasible, we feel,
despite repeated empiricist attempts (Westphal 1987;
Thompson 1989). Nor does ecological experientialism
rest on the distinction between primary and secondary
qualities. On the contrary, our argument that not only
color but also other high-level, spatial properties of the
scene (object surfaces as determined by shapes and
boundaries) are relational runs directly counter to the
Lockean and Newtonian attempt to draw a principled
distinction between color as a secondary quality, and size,
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
23

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
shape, and so forth, as primary qualities. Rather, we have
emphasized the relational nature of the perceptual en-
vironment as a whole resulting from the enactive dimen-
sions of visually guided activity.
Our Intention In this target article has been to offer a
broad, comparative framework for the ongoing, Inter-
disciplinary effort to understand color vision and visual
perception In cognitive science. This framework suggests
specific directions for further research.
(i) The first concern of our comparative approach Is to
determine more precisely the kinds of color space there
are in the animal world. For tetrachromacy, we need
further evidence of four-way color mixture; to establish
pentachromacy, we need evidence of five-way color mix-
ture. Frequency modulation In the study of color vision
(as described In Appendix B) might be useful in this area.
(II) A related question concerns how the relevant color
vision mechanisms and the dimensionalities of color
space are related to perceptual phenomena such as con-
stancy and segmentation of the visual scene. Of particular
Interest here Is how color and other visual phenomena
such as visual shape, texture, and space, Interact to
constitute different perceptual objects for various per-
ceiving animals.
(III) A third research objective Is to determine (at least
to a degree comparable to what Is known of primates) the
neuronal mechanisms underlying the variety of color
spaces of different animal groups, especially fishes and
birds. This Is the key to understanding how color vision
figures in the larger context of animal life and behavior.
(Iv) Finally, the ecological aspects of the perceptual
environment need to be Investigated, for example, local
Illuminance and reflectance conditions, animal colora-
tion, and animal communication. The task here Is to
develop further the means to describe the perceptual
environment from a given animal's point of view, rather
than Imposing anthropocentric assumptions about such
environments.
These questions have hardly begun to be addressed in
detail in visual science, but we can expect their Investiga-
tion to reveal even further the splendor of color as a
naturalized aesthetic, or, in the words of Cezanne, "the
place where our brain and the universe meet" (Merleau-
Ponty 1964, p. 67).
APPENDIX A
Decorrelation procedure for calculating chromatic channels
(Buchsbaum & Gottschalk 1983; Palacios, In press)
Consider responses r{ to an arbitrary illuminant belonging to a
set {/(A)},
r, = \dX -,
where the wi are weighting factors for each primary response
(as explained below). Next construct a covariance matrix F be-
tween the receptor response as follows:
Yu
Yin
with
' nrecepL 
' 
' 
' 
' nrecepnrecep
ij = Ex{rirj\ - Ex{ri} • Ex{rj} 
[11]
where Ex is the expectation operator. To achieve optimal de-
correlation the obvious step Is to obtain the eigenvalues q)t and
eigenvectors for F, and the new matrix A constituted of the
eigenvectors and their transpose AT so that:
[>i. 
0 
0 
1
\° 
• 
° \
AT o p o A =
The eigenvector transformation Is now well defined by:
c r = AT • sr 
[12]
and the postulated chromatic channels (C1, . . . , CnreceP) thus
calculated can be compared with the available experimental
evidence. As Buchsbaum and Gottschalk (1983) emphasize, the
covariance matrix depends not only on the shape of the primary
responses, but also on the ensemble properties of the Illumi-
nants {1(X}}. In fact, to arrive at an explicit expression for the
correlations, we need to make some assumptions about the
expectations Ex{l(k)} of the ensemble. A correlation R(X,fi) and a
covariance K{k,f£) function can be defined as follows:
[13]
= R(X,/u) -
If the choice is K(A,JA) = d(X — jx) where d Is the Dirac delta
function, this amounts to using monochromatic illuminants.
Inserting [13] into [11] finally yields an explicit form for the
entries in the covariance matrix [11]:
ij = \dl
[14]
Thus the relative contributions from each class of retinal
receptors need to be filled In by weighting factors previously
mentioned. These are the only unknowns in our calculations; we
have adjusted them so that the resulting channels have a good fit
with experiments. These values should not be seen as ad hoc,
however, but as proportions that should covary with neural
characteristics.
For example, in the case of the goldfish this procedure yields:
c1
C2
C 3
C4
0.11
0.83
0.26
-0.48
0.37
-0.5
0.68
-0.4
0.72
0.23
0.15
0.64
0.58
-0.12
-0.67
-0.44
R1
R2
R3
R4
For the putative color channels of the pigeon, see Figure 4d.
APPENDIX B
Frequency analysis of color vision (Barlow 1982; Bonnardel &
Varela 1989).
The basic strategy is to consider an Illuminant (or a response
capacity of the visual system) in the frequency domain, that is, to
examine the spectral power distribution of the signal (or the
response mechanism) in terms of cycles over "visible" window.
For example, we can consider the frequency response of the
three chromatic channels required for human vision. The chan-
nels proposed by Hurvich and Jameson, when studied under
Fourier analysis, predict that beyond 2-3 cycles/300nm there
should be little response, with a peak of sensitivity for signals
around 1.7 cycles/300nm. These predictions correspond well
with the first measurements of such a modulation sensitivity
function (MSF) obtained with a specially built apparatus that
can produce sinusoidally modulated illuminants with controlled
contrast, frequency, and phase (Bonnardel & Varela 1989). The
conclusion is that the signals for color vision are hand-limited,
that is, bounded in both the variable ("visible" window) and the
frequency (cycles per "visible" window) domain. Now a
nontrivial relationship exists between a collection of such band-
limited signals and the number of significant Independent sam-
ples required to reconstruct with sufficient accuracy any func-
24
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
tion in the collection (Buchsbaum & Gottschalk 1983; Dym &
McKean 1975). Specifically, it can be shown that:
Sample = &[BT] + 1 
[15]
where <P[x] stands for the highest integer smaller than x; and
nsample *s ^ n e number of independent channels required to
sample the space of signals limited by B (in the frequency
domain) and by T (in the wavelength domain).17 For example, if
we take nsa 
le = 3, and T = 300nm, as in the human tri-
chromatic system, a band-limitation B = 1.5 cycle/300nm is
predicted. This limitation is within the range of the measured
band-limitation of human natural scenes, which contain about
98% of all reflectances within the 1.5 cyc/300nm limit (Maloney
1985) but falls a little short of the observed MTF in humans
which peaks at this value. In contrast, if nsample = 4 and T =
330nm, as is the case in birds, one would predict a band-limit of
B = 0.001 cyc/nm. This result is due in part to the avian
sensitivity window being large into 370nm, and on the other
hand, to the pigment sensitivities being narrower: the combina-
tion of these two allows for less demodulation of the MSF at
higher frequencies and corresponds to the higher frequency
content directly visible in the putative channels discussed
before.
Briefly stated, then, different chromatic dimensions will satis-
fy the sampling theorem with different combinations of the
three quantities involved (nsa 
le, B and T), thus permitting
quantitative comparisons of diverse color vision mechanisms. In
particular, the measurements of MSF might represent a way to
ascertain directly the dimensionality of a color space. On the
basis of such a determination of color space, one could then
undertake a comparison of the frequency-limitations of color
vision mechanisms with the frequency-limitations of the reflec-
tances of the relevant objects in the animal's environment. As
we mentioned above, data have been collected concerning the
frequency-limitations of human natural scenes (Maloney 1985);
in the case of birds, some data have been collected about the
reflectance properties of objects such as feathers, which, not
surprisingly, have higher frequency contents than those of
human natural objects (Burkhardt 1989). Obviously, work in
this area is just beginning.
A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
We have discussed the material presented in this paper with a
number of people. In particular we wish to thank: Mark An-
sprach, Ronald deSousa, Daniel Dennett, Lynd Forguson,
Timothy Goldsmith, C. L. Hardin, David R. Hilbert, Andre
Kukla, Jim McGilvray, Christa Neumeyer, William Seager, and
Mark Thornton.
During the preparation of this paper ET was supported by a
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada
Postdoctoral Fellowship (#456-89-0236). AP was supported by
the Simone et Cino del Duca, and the Philippe Foundations.
The financial support to FV from Fondation de France (Chaire
Scientifique), CNRS, Ministere de la Recherche et la Tech-
nologie, and the Prince Trust Fund is gratefully acknowledged.
NOTES
1. For further discussion, see Churchland and Sejnowski
(1988), Sejnowski et al. (1988), and Boden (1988). Marr's op-
timality assumption has been criticized by Kitcher (1988); for
some related points see Ramachandran (1985).
2. In visual science there is confusion and some disagree-
ment over the use of the terms "brightness" and "lightness."
According to Wyszecki and Stiles (1982, pp. 493-500), bright-
ness is the "attribute of a visual sensation according to which a
given visual stimulus appears to be more or less intense" (p.
493), whereas lightness is the "attribute of a visual sensation
according to which the area in which the visual stimulus is
presented appears to emit more or less light in proportion to that
emitted by a similarly illuminated area perceived as a 'white'
stimulus" (p. 494). Strictly speaking, then, "brightness" refers
to a dim-to-dazzling scale, whereas "lightness" refers to the gray
scale of black and white. Nevertheless, many visual scientists, a
large number of whom we cite in this paper, use "brightness" to
refer to the white-black dimension. Furthermore, "lightness"
has also been used in a related, but somewhat different sense by
Land (1977; 1983), and by other researchers in computational
color vision (Hurlbert 1986), to mean the psychophysical corre-
late of average relative reflectance (Land 1983) or scaled inte-
grated reflectance (McCann et al. 1976). To avoid confusion,
then, we use "brightness" for the achromatic dimension.
3. The material on which we are drawing here can be found in
Boynton (1979), Hurvich (1981), Wyszecki and Stiles (1982),
Mollon and Sharpe (1983), and Ottoson and Zeki (1985).
4. Our point in citing this passage is not that computational
color vision commits one to objectivism about color - Land
(1978; 1983), for example, holds distinctly nonobjectivist views.
It is, rather, that the computational conception of color vision as
concerned almost exclusively with the task of recovering surface
reflectance suggests a form of objectivism.
5o For additional studies of near-ultraviolet sensitivity in bird
vision, see Wright (1979), Delius and Emmerton (1979), Em-
merton and Delius (1980), Emmerton (1983), Burkhardt (1982;
1989), and Burkhardt and Maier (1989). Cones with peak sen-
sitivity in the near-ultraviolet have also been found in fishes:
Harosi and Hashimoto (1983); Neumeyer (1985); Bowmaker and
Kunz (1987).
6. Notice that channel C2 in Figure 4d has the appearance of
an achromatic channel because of very small negative contribu-
tions from the long-wave primaries. This issue, as well as the
general problem of the relative merits of a tetrachromatic or
pentachromatic model for explaining the empirical data on
pigeon color vision, require more elaborate discussion than we
can provide here (see Palacios 1991).
7. This point is made clearly by Gouras (1.985, p; 386), though
it is a familiar theme in the history of color science. See
Wasserman (1979) for a historical survey.
8. Some philosophers would no doubt go even further and
argue that we cannot know what tetrachromatic or pen-
tachromatic perception is like because the revelant facts
(tetrachromatic or pentachromatic experience) are accessible
only from the point of view of tetrachromatic and pen-
tachromatic perceivers (cf. Nagel 1974). Although this claim is
certainly relevant to our discussion, space constraints do not
allow us to consider the various arguments here. We will
therefore reserve discussion of this matter for another occasion
(see Akins 1990; P. M. Churchland 1985; and Jackson 1982).
9o Hardin (1988, p. 146) notes this possibility of ternary hues
by imagining a hypothetical tetrachromatic "visual super-
woman," but does not extend his discussion to actual tetra-
chromacy among vertebrates such as birds and fishes.
10. Several objectives ts (P. M. Churchland 1985; 1986; Hil-
bert 1987, pp. 111-18; Matthen 1988) have argued that such a
mapping can be found in Edwin Land's (1977; 1983) retinex
color space in which colors correspond to points in a three-
dimensional space whose axes correspond to values of lightness
calculated independently in each of three long-, middle-, and
short-wave bands based on the sensitivities of the human (cone)
photoreceptors. These arguments overlook two features of
Land's model: (i) The axes of Land's color space are usually given
as axes of lightness, not (average relative) reflectance. This is
important because lightness is a sensation that can be measured
only by a visual system, and problems arise for the straightfor-
ward identification of lightness with reflectance just as they do
for color, (ii) Since the retinex color space attempts to specify
colors purely in terms of lightness values it does not model the
opponent relations and unique/binary structure of hue. In fact,
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
25

Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
we cannot at present be said to understand how (chromatic)
color could be generated purely from (achromatic) lightness
comparisons.
11. It should also be noted that computational objectlvist
arguments such as Matthen's (1988) rely on a very strong notion
of adaptive biological functions. We believe there are serious
problems with this notion, but we will not pursue this point
here. See Varela (1984); Maturana and Varela (1980).
12. We intend to investigate this issue in greater detail In
another essay.
13o This claim is similar to one made by Berkeley (1710, Part
I, para. 10). See also Wilson (1987).
14. A similar claim could be made for polymorphism In the
evolution of human color vision, for example, red-green color
blindness in human males.
15. This line of argument corresponds closely to one of
Locke's (1690/1975) formulations of the primary/secondary
quality distinction. Locke held that in the case of shape, our
Ideas (visual shapes) resemble (are structurally analogous to)
their physical causes (shapes simpliciter), whereas in the case of
color, they do not. Our criticism of this view as espoused by
Hardin Is similar to Berkeley's rejection of the view as espoused
by Locke (see note 13).
16. For extensive elaboration of a research program for
neuroscience in which the perceiving animal is treated not as an
Input-output system specified in terms of external mechanisms
of control, but rather as an autonomous self-organizing system,
see Maturana and Varela (1980; 1987), and Varela (1979; 1984;
1989; 1991a; 1991b), and Varela et al. (1991b).
17. This so-called sampling theorem requires, however, that
the ensemble of band-limited functions have stringent averages
(Brill & Benzschawel 1985).
Commentary submitted by the qualified professional readership of this
journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as Continuing
Commentary on this article. Integrative overviews and syntheses are
especially encouraged.
mere coloring:
wision
Kathleen A. Akins and John Lamping
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, Palo Alto, CA 94304
Efleetronic mail: akins@parc.xerox.com
Suppose you were God, with a month of free Sundays, and you
decided to design a visual system for a small creature. What
would you do with the abundance of spectral information avail-
able from the world? How would you make use of the fact that
sunlight ranges in wavelength from about 320 nm. in the
ultraviolet on out past 800 nm. in the Infrared (NASA 1977), or of
the fact that the refraction, absorption, and reflection of light
by various media alters the composition of those spectral
frequencies?
The right answer, we think (as Thompson et al. would agree),
Is just this - It all depends. First, you would (as a less than
omnipotent god) be subject to the standard "materials" con-
straints. These are the various facts about the way the physical
world Is - the amount of energy It takes to break chemical
bonds, what wavelengths of light would be absorbed by poten-
tial materials for the eye, the abundance or paucity of particular
wavelengths in the atmosphere, and so on. Then there are
questions about the organism Itself: Where does It live and
what does It do? Exactly how you would draw on spectral
Information would depend on what visual tasks are appropriate
to the organisms tempered by the spectral Information locally
available.
Consider an actual example - the visual/spectral problems
confronting the fish (Levine & MacNichol 1979; Munz & Mac-
Farland 1977). First, water absorbs light - the deeper the water
the less light - but exactly which wavelengths are absorbed
depends on the types of suspended organic particles. So, for
example, clear water with little organic matter (such as in
tropical oceans) will most easily absorb red and violet light. At
depths below 25 meters, essentially all red and violet light has
been filtered out, leaving only the Intermediate "blue" wave-
lengths. Hence the "Mediterranean blue" appearance of such
water to us. Marshes and swamps, but contrast, contain decom-
posing plants, tannins, lignins, and yellow-green plankton that
effectively filter out almost all light at the depth of only three
meters. The light that does survive, however, is In the red-
orange region of the spectrum and gives the water its dark red-
brown appearance. In addition, water molecules (and the
suspended particles In water) scatter light - the medium of
transport Is itself "colored." So, assuming that one visual task of
the fish is to spot objects underwater, this detection must be
done against a background of colored light.
One current hypothesis is that the rods and cones of some fish
have evolved to function as filters that serve to highlight the
contours of objects against the background space light. If the
photopigment is "matched" (maximally sensitive) to the spectral
range of the background light, then a dark object will be
highlighted against the brighter background; If the photopig-
ment is "offset" from the dominant wavelengths of the back-
ground light, then a bright object will be outlined against a
poorly Illuminated background. In fact, this scheme seems to be
used In many species of fish. For example, the skipjack tuna,
which spots its prey from below (dark object against a bright
surface), has only one photopigment that is matched to the
background light. The guppy's retina is divided Into two re-
gions. In the lower region, which looks upward and Is used to
spot prey, there is one photopigment that Is matched to the
background space light. The upper region, which looks down on
the colorful mating display of the male guppy, has three spec-
trally diverse cone types. Finally, the walleye, bluegill, and
piranha, which Inhabit dark, particle-laden (hence, red-shifted)
waters, are each dichromats, with one cone type matched to the
near-Infrared - a wavelength common to their "black" water
habitat during the dusk and dawn hours of feeding.
What the above examples illustrate, we think, is that the use
of spectral information could take many forms. It could be used
to recover the Invariant surface reflectances of opaque objects;
then again, it might be used for the delineation of object from
ground, to discern shape, monitor motion (Dobkins & Albright
1990), as a cue for eye movement (Ballard, forthcoming), and so
on. There Is, In other words, no a priori answer to the question,
"What role does spectral Information play In a visual system?"
What are the Implications of this fact for color vision? Ques-
tions of consciousness aside, color vision, as defined behav-
lorally, Is a certain kind of chromatic visual function — a selective
response to light stimuli of different wavelengths regardless of
Intensity. (There seems no need to second guess the kinds of
visual function that are necessary for our color experience
Insofar as questions of ontology hinge on the facts about func-
tion. If the ontological conclusions can be reached for any kind of
color vision, then they will hold for conscious color experience
as well.) Here, the form of such discriminations can vary Im-
mensely between species - the type of color vision a creature
has will depend on the number of Its color receptors, the
response profiles of those receptors, and the additional "wiring"
farther up the line. One can think of the Initial "choice" of
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
receptors, the number and their response profiles, as providing
a first filter on the spectral information available to the organ-
ism. For example, the kinds of receptors clearly restrict the
range of spectral information that will be available (think of us
and the bees). The wiring, on the other hand, is necessary to
make accessible (or causally effective) certain kinds of informa-
tion - to calculate hue (by disentangling intensity versus wave-
length information for a monochromatic light source) or to
disambiguate the spectral information from polychromatic
sources. Wiring can also subserve computations that, although
clearly useful, result in information loss, for example, by the
categorization of spectral information (see Thompson et al.'s
example of pigeon color categories) or by providing color con-
stancy. Again, the "choices" made will depend on the uses to
which that information is put.
Several points follow. First, what makes interspecies com-
parisons interesting is not their dimensionality, hence formal
incommensurability, per se. (Consider that, in this sense, the
color space of any tetrachromat would be "commensurate" with
the gustatory space of man, or of any organism with four taste
receptors). Rather, a comparison of color systems points to the
"subjectivity" of color vision because each species represents a
different informational "cut," constrained only by utility and
possibility, on the objective spectral world.
Second, as Thompson et al. claim, the scientific explanations
of color vision (and other visual tasks that use spectral informa-
tion) will advert to the environment of the organism, the organ-
ism's other visual functions, and its behavioral repertoire. It will
include events both internal and external to the organism. For
example, in explaining why one species offish, the sea raven is a
trichromat, Levine and MacNichol (1982) say:
Sea ravens possess three pigments . . . which cover a much broader
spectral range than one would expect in a fish that spends most of its
life at depths of more than 100 meters. . . . In the sea raven's
breeding season, which is in late fall, the fish moves to shallow and
thus to brighter and spectrally broader light. The bodies of reproduc-
tive individuals turn bright yellow, orange and scarlet, and after
fertilizations the eggs are deposited on a species of sponge that is
colored bright orange or yellow.
Note, however, that, contrary to Thompson et al.'s view of
codetermination, such functional explanations rely on a certain
fixed explanatory ontology - of light frequencies and intensities,
and even of sponges and "bodies." We explain the categories of
fish color vision by first adopting a certain "scientific" vocabu-
lary that will allow us to show how those categories came about.
(In any explanation of a color system, we will use new terms and
concepts as we discover and name new color categories and
functions. But these terms will be part of what is to be explained,
not part of the explanation itself.) This is so even in cases of
coevolution - if, say, one were to explain the breeding colora-
tion of the sea raven and the yellow color of the sponges in
conjunction with the development of the sea raven color system.
Of course, the trick in offering a legitimate explanation, we
believe, will lie in not importing our own a priori biases,
engendered by our conscious experience, into the initial vocab-
ulary of explanation. But to say this is not to endorse the authors'
view of ontological codetermination.
A limited objectiwistn defended
Edward Wilson Averill
Philosophy Department, Texas Tech University, Lubhock, TX 79409
Electronic mail: avewa@ttacs1 .bitnet
Statements of natural laws (e.g., the Newtonian law of gravity)
mention properties (e.g., mass) and relations (e.g., distance),
and these laws govern objects in so far as objects have these
properties and relations. A physical property of an object is any
property of the object in virtue of which it is governed by natural
laws; or, as some prefer, in virtue of which the object can enter
into causal interactions. (Physical relation is similarly defined.)
Objectivism is the thesis that colors are either physical proper-
ties or logical constructions from physical properties (e.g.,
disjunctions or conjunctions of physical properties). One form of
objectivism, call it "SR," holds that the color of a nonradiating
object is its surface spectral reflectance, and the color of a
radiating object is its spectral radiance. (As Thompson et al. say,
an objectivist must give an account of the color of radiating
objects.)
Thompson et al. write: "Color is a property of the extradermal
world understood as an animal's environment, a world that is
enacted by animal-environment codetermination" (sect. 3). So
colors (and surfaces) are nonphysical properties of objects. It
follows that light striking an object is not effected by the object's
color (or surface), although that color is a property of the object.
This raises questions about color and light: Does light carry
information about an object's color? If so, how does light do this?
If not, how can one tell the color of an object by seeing it? (On a
projectionist view, the light from an object does not carry
information about the color of the object. This is all right, given
projectionism, because the colors attributed to objects are not
properties of those objects [contrary to what Thompson et al.
hold].) If colors (and surfaces) are nonphysical properties, then
these properties are causally disconnected from the rest of the
world, and so the perception of color is causally disconnected
from the interactions between light and objects, and light and
the retina. Such a consequence makes the positive views of
Thompson et al. implausible.
Just as the above criticism of Thompson et al. is a "mechanism
of perception" criticism, so they make a mechanism of percep-
tion criticism of SR. They claim that, given SR, a surface must be
perceived as opaque before it can be assigned a color by SR; but
this is impossible, because part of perceiving a surface as an
opaque surface involves identifying its color. Suppose that
perceptual identification takes place in stages. In a preliminary
stage an opaque surface is identified as having edges, corners,
and some color features (such as being light, or being some color
or other, or being somewhat reddish), although a determinate
color is not attributed to it. This stage identifies an opaque
surface as the sort of thing that can be colored, which it must be
to be an opaque surface. (Presumably this is what seems impos-
sible to Thompson et al., but I do not understand why this
should be impossible.) At a later stage a more complete percep-
tual identification of the surface is made, as a surface having a
determinate color, and this latter identification reconfirms the
initial identification. So I see no problem for SR in all of this.
Consider two opaque nonradiating surfaces (which scatter all
the light they reflect, i.e., they are not mirrors) that share the
same lighting conditions. If the reflected light from the surfaces
is different in wavelength composition, intensity, or polarization
we would see this difference (if we could see it at all) as
a difference in color. This would be true even if we saw the
difference with the aid of special goggles designed, say, to react
differently to some forms of polarized light. Furthermore, if the
two surfaces looked different in color to anyone this would result
from an objective difference in the surfaces (i.e., they reflect
light differently), because to hold otherwise is to hold that in
some cases the same cause can have different effects. So a
perceived color distinction, under these conditions, is a percep-
tion of a physical difference between surfaces. (For more on this
point see Averill 1985.) To capture this idea, let LO (limited
objectivism) be the view that two opaque nonradiating surfaces
(scattering all the light they reflect) are different in color if and
only if, under some lighting condition, the surfaces reflect light
differently. Given LO, there is more to color distinctions than
SR allows, for example, differences in polarization - just as
Thompson et al. claim. Furthermore, different animals can see
different color distinctions -just as Thompson et al. claim. More
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
27

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
important, LO is consistent with the thesis that animals of
different sorts could perceive the same color distinction in
different ways. For example, an animal might see some color
distinction we see but see it in terms of hues that we do not see -
just as Thompson et al. claim. It follows that LO is consistent
with the claim that the content of the color distinctions we see
depends on the nature of our nervous systems in an analytic way
(a way that goes beyond the mechanics of fixing the reference of
our color terms), so that, for example, redness is not a physical
property of objects. The possibility of hue inversion suggests
this, as do Thompson et al.'s considerations of perceptual dif-
ferences between animals. (Here LO cannot be fleshed out with
an account of redness, but see Averill 1985.)
If color distinctions are an objective feature of the world (and
thus independent of our nervous systems), but redness is de-
pendent on the human nervous system, then the ontological
question is not, "Are colors physical properties?" but rather,
"What features of colors are physical properties?"
wisfon of insects
Werner Backhaus and Randolf Menzel
Institut fur Neurohiologie, Freie Universitat Berlin, 1000 Berlin 33, Germany
Electronic mail: 9991 @dbotuZ01 .hitnet
Contribution of philosophy to color science. The discussion of
the philosophical conflicts between objectivism and subjec-
tivism as presented throughout the target article appears, in the
context of evolutionary and ecological aspects of color vision, to
be confusing rather than providing coordinates for orientation.
What Thompson et al. call objectivism with respect to color
("color is objective insofar as the colors of objects do not depend
on how they appear to observers, or even whether or not there
are any observers," Hilbert, 1987, p. 119) appears to be more or
less the view of "naive" realism ("the simplest form of the view
that sense perception is direct awareness of external things: that
we do actually perceive objects in the 'external world'," Flew,
1984, p. 240). The philosophical conflict Thompson et al. de-
scribe occurs because we experience our sensations not as
located inside ourselves but as located at the positions of the
objects outside that emit or reflect light (phenomenology of
color, e.g., Bergson, 1982, p. 1). On the other hand, we know
from psychophysical and neurophysiological investigations that
color is created somewhere in the brain, although the exact
location of this process is still unknown, and we even have no
idea what entities the sensations called color are. Because the
scientific and philosophical discussion of color should not go
beyond our actual knowledge (see also Hardin, 1988, p. 60) it is
not at all a matter of taste or philosophical viewpoint where
colors can be thought to be located. In short, colors appear only
at a first (naive) glance to be located in objects; closer inspection
shows that colors are produced in the brain (see Cornman, 1975,
for remaining possible philosophical positions compatible with
scientific results, pp. 217-46 for falsification of naive realism).
Color vision is well described as a causal structure (the
physical stimuli cause the sensations called colors). This allows a
unique indication of colors and a unique description of the
relations between colors occurring on different levels by mea-
surable quantities: (1) physically by spectral reflectances and
illumination spectra (or functions of those) or by (functions of)
light intensity (e.g., chromaticity and color designation dia-
grams) or (2) physiologically in terms of absorbed photon fluxes
(chromaticity diagrams), (3) physiologically by describing the
neuronal coding system (e.g., color opponent coding), (4) psy-
chophysically by describing the relations between colors (sub-
jective color spaces and color order systems) and the relation of
those (e.g., color differences) to the physical dimensions of the
stimuli (e.g., intensity, wavelength), and (5) psychologically and
linguistically by describing colors verbally (e.g., color names).
Thus, color indication systems are based either on terms de-
scribing the outer world (the aim of science) or on terms
describing sensations (the aim of psychology) or on a combina-
tion of both. Whether a color vision system is better described
simultaneously on all these "levels" or only on one does not
appear to be a philosophical matter; rather it is dictated by
appropriateness to the scientific (or practical) problem to be
solved. So there appears to be no need to give the well-defined
term "color" (see e.g., Halsey 1969) an additional meaning
("colour, in this account, is the disposition objects have to reflect
varying percentages of the incident light," Hilbert, 1987, p.
119), which only gives rise to confusion of scientific terms, as
shown in the target article.
Phototransductlon and color coding: Thompson et al. give the
impression that opponent coding would be directly related to
photon fluxes absorbed in the photoreceptors rather than to
photoreceptor cell potentials. To adequately describe color
vision systems physiologically, it is necessary to take the mea-
sured nonlinear transduction process of the photoreceptors into
account (e.g., humans, Rodieck 1973; macaques, Valberg et al.
1986; honeybees, Backhaus & Menzel 1987; Backhaus 1991).
Otherwise, color vision models will be oversimplified because
they do not describe color coding for stimuli at different inten-
sities (Bezold-Briicke effect).
Color opponent coding in the bee. Figure 3c in the target
article was derived from a figure that was provided as a courtesy
from W. B. to R. M. for a short report (Menzel 1989). The full
treatment of the color opponent coding (COC) system of the bee
is presented in Backhaus (1988; 1991; reviews: Backhaus et al.
1987; Menzel & Backhaus 1989; 1991). The example in Figure 1
shows how to derive the color difference measure between two
stimuli graphically from the diagram according to the city-block
metric of the color space that gives the same results as the
calculation by the color difference formula. The description of
color vision and color choice behavior of the bee, of which the
opponent coding system is an essential part, has been confirmed
by comparison with data from independent experiments, and
thus has the status of a theory (Backhaus, in press).
The relationship of opponent coding to unique colors.
Whether color opponent coding "channels" are isomorphic to
unique (opponent) colors cannot be assumed a priori as sug-
gested in the target article; it has to be shown empirically.
Provided that the color similarity judgment (decision behavior)
of the bee does in fact rely on opponent colors, the empirical
data about the color vision system of the bee suggest that the
amounts of these opponent colors must be linearly related to the
neuronal opponent coding system. This results from the very
good fit of the several predictions based on the excitations of the
color opponent coding system to measured data (Backhaus, in
press; Menzel & Backhaus 1991). A nonlinear relation between
the coding system and the unique colors can be excluded,
because an additional step in the linear part of the processing
chain of color information must be linear to maintain the fits.
Waweiength discrimination. The form of the wavelength dis-
crimination function depends on the steepness of the poten-
tial/wavelength function of the photoreceptors, showing regions
of best discrimination for wavelengths at which the changes in
potential caused by changes in wavelength are greatest (Back-
haus 1991; Backhaus & Menzel 1987). The crossing points of the
receptors' spectral sensitivities have no physiological meaning,
although they are suggestive from a graphical point of view
(Figure 2a;b). The wavelength discrimination functions for tri-
chromatic color vision systems, for example, can have more than
two regions for best discrimination because the poten-
tial/wavelength functions can in general have several regions of
greatest steepness (honeybee, Figure 2c; see also Menzel &
Backhaus 1991, Figure 14.6a-e; human, e.g., Wright & Pitt
1934). The minima shift in location on the wavelength scale and
in value as shown in Figure 2c. So it is not possible to conclude
from the measured number of ranges of best wavelength dis-
28
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
4 5 0
8(A)
1 i
UV
1:1
5 5 0
Figure 1 (Backhaus and Menzel). 
Geometry of the color oppo-
nent coding (COC) diagram presenting chromaticity (hue and
saturation) of color stimuli (from Backhaus 1991). The excita-
tions of the two opponent coding systems A,B caused by a color
stimulus are linearly related to the respective cell excitations E
in the three photoreceptor.cell types (u,b,g): A = —9.86EU +
7.70Eb + 2.16Eg, B = -5.17EU + 20.25Eb - 15.08Eg. Present-
ed are the loci of equally bright monochromatic lights in lOnm
steps and the mixtures of the lights of the ends of the visible
spectrum (300nm and 550nm), the purple line in 10% steps,
which closes the spectral curve. The example shows how the
subjective color difference (d = 2) between two stimuli S1 and S2
is derived graphically from the diagram according to the city-
block metric of the color space by counting the concentric
squares around Sl when approaching S2 on a straight line or by
calculation from the color difference formula: d(S1,S2) = |AX —
A2| + |BX - B2|.
crimination how many photoreceptors are actually involved in
color vision (nor can one conclude this from the form of the
behavioral spectral threshold function). To answer the question
about the number of photoreceptors involved in color vision, a
detailed analysis of behavioral data is necessary (Backhaus,
submitted).
The ethological approach to color vision. We are very sym-
pathetic to the ethological approach exemplified in Thompson et
al.'s last section, although the replacement of "ethological" by
"enactive" appears superfluous and is unnecessarily dogmatic.
It is also disturbing that an important distinction for any evolu-
tionary argument is neglected, namely, that between ultimate
and proximate mechanisms. The first one refers to evolutionary
processes based on genetic variability and natural selection, and
works over evolutionarily relevant periods of time. In the case of
color vision, ultimate mechanisms have led the sensory-neural
systems to incorporate the information about the spectral (and
other physical) properties of relevant objects. As a result, the
proximate mechanisms appear as the genetically controlled
design principles of the whole visual system from the spectral
sensitivities of the receptors to the specific neural motor com-
mands. Because relevant objects are often but not always biolog-
ical systems themselves, with their own potential of ultimate
mechanisms, the mutual relationship may be described in part
as a codetermining relationship. It is an exaggeration, how-
ever, to argue that all environmental factors are evolutionarily
shaped by the organism (e.g., the spectral reflection of green
leaves has certainly not coevolved with the visual system but
0.5 -
300
AA/nm
40
400 
500 
600 
700
400
—• 
A/nm
600
' 1 0
k/nm
300
400
500
700
Figure 2 (Backhaus and Menzel). 
Relationship between pho-
toreceptor spectral sensitivity and wavelength discrimination.
(a) Spectral sensitivity functions of honeybee photoreceptors
(best estimate functions, from Menzel & Backhaus 1989). (b)
Comparison of the measured spectral discrimination curve
(dashed, crosses) of von Helversen (1972) with the spectral
discrimination curve (solid, stars) derived by simulation of this
experiment with the color opponent coding (COC) model for the
measured range (from Backhaus 1991). (c) Spectral discrimina-
tion (one over color difference D per lOnm, adaptation to
daylight normfunction D65) as predicted from the color oppo-
nent coding (COC) model for the honeybee (from Backhaus
1991) for equally bright monochromatic lights at different levels
of relative brightness Q. Q = 0.1: •••, Q = 0.5: ---, equally
bright to the adaptation light Q = 1: 
, Q = 5: 
, Q = 10:
•-•-). The third minimum in the UV-region becomes dominant
over the second around 400nm at higher intensities (Q = 10).
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
29

Commentary'/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
results from the ultimate mechanisms of the photosynthetic
machinery).
Ethology, and in particular neuroethology, have a long stand-
ing and productive history in providing compelling evidence for
the processes involved in coadaptive mechanisms (e.g., Erber
et al. 1989). Unfortunately, Thompson et al. do not present any
in-depth analysis or any convincing example for this concept as
applied to color vision. In essence, it should be possible to
derive the informational processes in the sensory-neural system
from the physical properties of the biologically relevant signals
that have to be best discriminated; and, in reverse, the proper-
ties of good discriminable signals (e.g., the spectral reflection)
must be derivable from the properties of the sensory-neural
system. It is true that the approach of Barlow (1982) and
Buchsbaum and Gottschalk (1983) is of little help here, because
their analysis does not allow specific predictions. If their general
engineering attitude is replaced by the neuroethological ap-
proach, however, the results should be rewarding.
Such a strategy was recently used successfully in an attempt to
understand the adaptive value of the color vision system of
flower visiting hymenopteran species. We measured the spec-
tral reflection functions of flowers and leaves in more than 500
insect-pollinated plant species of Israel (Menzel & Shmida, in
preparation), and used the spectra to search for the optimal
triple set of spectral input functions on the basis of rhodopsin
norm-functions, which apply well to hymenopteran pho-
toreceptors. The criterion for optimal color information is based
on the color discrimination between each flower and its natural
background under daylight illumination. The measure for color
discrimination is derived from the COG model developed for
the honeybee (Figure 1). We find that the positions of the
maxima of the sensitivities of the three spectral receptor types
on the wavelength scale can indeed be predicted from the floral
spectral reflectances (Chittka et al. 1990; Chittka & Menzel,
submitted) and that these agree very well with the positions of
the maxima found in more than 40 flower visiting hymenopteran
species (Peitsch et al. 1989). It is now possible to examine basic
questions such as: (1) Why (on the basis of ultimate mechanisms)
is there mostly only one longwave receptor type (max. > 500
nm) if the eye contains a UV-receptor? (2) Why are the maxima
of the two longwave receptors very close together on the
wavelength scale if there is no UV-receptor? (3) What con-
straints are imposed by the absolute and the spectral distribu-
tion of the illuminating light flux? (4) How does the spectral
matching between the predominant background and one of the
receptor types (Lythgoe 1979) influence the color vision system?
(5) What is gained by tetrachromatic color vision (Chittka &
Menzel, in preparation)?
In conclusion, we believe that the neuroethological approach
is indeed most promising if it is possible to define what the
evolutionarily relevant environment might have been (ultimate
mechanisms), and if the assumptions necessary for the model
calculations can be well supported by an understanding of the
proximate mechanisms of color vision.
with explaining the
enwironroent
Aaron Ben-Ze'ev
Department of Philosophy, University of Haifa, Haifa 31999, Israei
Electron!© mail: rhph301 @haifauvrn.bitnet
Moses led the people of Israel for 40 years through the desert
and ended up viewing the promised land from a distance.
Thompson, Palacios and Varela, in their Ways of coloring, lead
us through 40 interesting pages (manuscript size) and end up
viewing the promised perceptual environment from a distance;
they do not really present a positive philosophical account of
their proposed approach. Let me say at the outset that I
sympathize with their view and find the target article valuable
and informative. Despite the controversial character of the
topics discussed by the authors, I have hardly any criticism of
what they say. On the contrary, their excellent target article
deserves considerable praise for its clarity, logical reasoning,
and the plausible position it presents. To reiterate the points on
which I agree with the authors would exceed the thousand
words allocated for this commentary. My criticism then con-
cerns what they omit. The authors discuss various advantages
and flaws of subjective and objective approaches to perception
in a very elegant and convincing manner, leading us to believe
that the presentation of a better approach will follow. No such
thing happens. The authors' positive account is very short and
hardly goes beyond the statement that the perceptual environ-
ment is largely determined by the perceiver's activity.
Thompson et al. place their view in relation to subjective and
objective views of perception. Put crudely, subjectivism con-
ceives of colors (and perceptual qualities in general) as a proper-
ty of the subject, whereas objectivism conceives of them as the
property of an independent object. The authors refer to recent,
sophisticated versions of these views and demonstrate their
shortcomings convincingly. Once the difficulties at the two
poles are presented, the road is open for an alternative. Gibson's
ecological approach is a good example of such an alternative.
Despite its affinity to Gibson's, the authors wish to place their
approach closer to the subjective pole, arguing that a novel tenet
of their view - in comparison with that of Gibson and others - is
that they treat the perceptual environment "not simply as the
ecological setting for animal activity, but also as something
determined by that very activity" (sect. 3).
Although I agree that the perceptual environment is to a
certain extent determined by the perceiver's activity, I do not
think this is a novel position. Gibson himself holds this view,
arguing that an affordance (which is what we perceive) is "nei-
ther an objective property nor a subjective property; or it is both
if you like. . . . It is equally a fact of the environment and a fact
of behavior. It is both physical and psychical, yet neither"
(Gibson 1979, p. 129). I admit that Gibson does not sufficiently
elaborate this position and sometimes even contradicts himself
precisely because he does not wish to drift too much toward the
subjective pole (see Ben-Ze'ev 1984; 1989). Hence Thompson et
al. are justified in claiming that with regard to Gibson's view we
need to shift the reference point for understanding perception
"from the environment to the structure of the perceiving ani-
mal" (sect. 3; see also Ben-Ze'ev 1988). The authors' own
presentation, however, although more consistent than Gib-
son's, also lacks the requisite conceptual elaboration of such a
problematic position. Nor is the authors' position novel in
philosophy. Aristotle already claimed that "the activity of the
sensible object and that of the sense is one and the same activity,
and yet the distinction between their being remains" (On the
soul, 425b26). Kant also thought that the perceiver's structure
determines the perceptual content. Both Aristotle and Kant
held this position without assuming (as the subjective position
does) that the perceptual environment is in the head. They also
realized that the great complexity introduced by their position
has to be faced by a complex conceptual framework. Thompson
et al. have not attempted to outline such a framework.
The lack of a positive philosophical account for the authors'
own approach surfaces in other ontological and epistemological
issues. Thus, they rightly claim that the perceptual environ-
ment is neither in our head nor is it a. property of the physical
world, but there is no account of the alternative. It seems to me
that the most promising alternative - used by Gibson and others
- is the one that takes the notion of different levels of organiza-
tion into account. To put it briefly: The perceptual environment
exists on a psychological level of explanation that presupposes
the physical existence of both the perceiver and the world (Ben-
Ze'ev 1984; 1991; 1992). Various formulations are possible in
30
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
this respect. Aristotle, for example, says that in actual percep-
tion the perceiver and the object are one and the same despite
the difference between their modes of being. This difference is
demonstrated in the fact that as potentialities one of them may
exist without the other (see On the soul, III, 2). Gibson also
considers the distinction between the physical and perceptual
level of description to be crucial for understanding the percep-
tual environment. Although Thompson et al. begin by discuss-
ing this notion, they hardly make any use of it in their brief
ontological discussion. Accordingly, one may doubt whether
their approach consists of more than a few plausible pro-
nouncements.
On another related issue the authors-say that the perceptual
environment cannot be given a purely physical-level specifica-
tion, as it depends on three kinds of factors: (1) physical-level
constraints; (2) sensory-motor activity; (3) evolutionary history. I
would add another factor (which may be more dominant in
human beings than in other animals): (4) personal history. This
factor, which expresses a psychological-level specification, re-
flects the fact that perceptual content is shaped by the per-
ceiver's personal background, anticipation, moods, emotions,
and similar psychological variables. I do not know whether the
authors' neglect of the psychological-level specification is acci-
dental. I do know that admitting its presence would make the
ontological status of the perceptual environment more subjec-
tive. Precisely because of this implication Gibson denies that
this factor determines meaningful perceptual content. Thus, he
argues that "the affordance of something does not change as the
need of the observer changes"; the affordance "is always there to
be perceived" (Gibson 1979, p. 139). This contention, however,
contradicts the relational nature of the perceptual environment
assumed by Gibson (see Ben-Ze'ev 1984; Heft 1989). Limiting
the description of the perceiver to neurophysiological and bio-
logical factors is justified neither in Gibson's approach nor in
Thompson et al.'s.
The authors also neglect some important epistemological
issues. They rightly reject the assumption that the perceiving
animal must recover a prespecified or already labelled world.
They also say, however, that the prespecified world (or at least
part of it) "is actually the world as described in relation to the
sensory-motor capacities of the higher primates" (sect. 3). As-
suming the existence of a prespecified world is natural if we do
not wish to revert to idealism. There are difficulties in claiming
that we know this world, however. If we assume that all of our
cognitive capacities are shaped (as perception is) by the agent's
structure and activity, then it will be hard (though perhaps not
impossible) to know something about the prespecified world.
Because the authors do not refer to such issues, I do not know
whether their approach can cope with them.
In summary, Thompson et al. are on the right track and
should be praised for explaining its necessity; the philosophical
value of their view has yet to be demonstrated, however.
j content and
ewoiutionarf explanation
Justin Broackes
Oriel College, Oxford 0X1 4EW, England
Electronic mail: broackes@vax.oxford.ac.uk
In their impressive target article, Thompson, Palacios & Varela
argue for an "enactive view of content" and for an evolutionary
"animal-environment codetermination," suggesting that the
first "follows from" the second, (sect. 3, para. 19) I am attracted
by the first; I am persuaded by the second; but I am unsure that
the two issues connect as the authors claim. There is a form of
codetermination in both domains, but it is different in the two
cases, and I fear that the nonreductionism appropriate in the
theory of content would, if applied in evolutionary explanation,
tie the hands of scientists with whom Thompson et al. would
rather remain friends. Thompson et al. are arguing that com-
putational objectivism and neurophysiological subjectivism lead
not just to bad ontology but to bad science. For the most part, I
agree; but I should like to suggest ways in which the explanation
of colour-phenomena needs to make more use of noncolour
notions, and even the notion of a "given" physical world, than
they seem happy to allow.
The "enactive view of content" is that the content of percep-
tual states is to be identified by way of the ecological properties
perceived, and these ecological properties are in turn to be
identified by way of perceptual states. This seems attractive: A
perception of red will be identified in terms of the property of
redness, and redness will in turn be identified by way of
perceptions of red.
The case of evolutionary "animal-environment codetermina-
tion" is rather different. The evolution of animal and environ-
ment are intertwined - the colouration of flowers and the colour
vision of bees, for example, have evolved together, (sect. 2.5,
para. 7) My first point is a simple one: Evolutional codetermina-
tion is a very different phenomenon from codetermination in the
theory of content. The former is causal, the latter is constitutive.
The former necessarily takes time; the latter need only involve
one time. (The perception and the redness may, for example, be
those present in a certain group of animals in a certain environ-
ment at a certain point in April 1991.) The "determination" in
the theory of content is genuinely symmetrical - the content of
experiences of red both (constitutively) determines and is deter-
mined by the nature of the property of redness. In evolutionary
codetermination, on the other hand, the parties on each side
change. The flowers of one time influence which genes survive
into the next generation of bees; that generation of bees in turn
influences the flowers of a later time. It isn't as though there is
one state of the flowers that both (causally) determines and is
(causally) determined by a single state of the bees. My second
point is that evolutionary codetermination of this kind is not
obviously a good reason to hold codetermination in the theory of
content. If evolutionary theory told us that organisms "con-
stituted" their environment, then this would be a reason - and
sometimes it looks as though this is Thompson et al. 's claim. But
I am not sure that evolutionary theory tells us any more than that
organisms causally affect their environment and the environ-
ment causally affects organisms: The further claim would be
plausible only for someone who already accepted the kind of
theory of content that evolutionary theory was meant to be
establishing here.
There is a more important general issue, although I am not
sure whether it involves a real disagreement. Thompson et al.
do not specify the appropriate terms in which to give a scientific
explanation of colour phenomena, but their objections to the
methods of computational optics might suggest that they would
resist using "physical" terms in preference to colour terms. If
they did, then they would rob themselves of many of the
explanations they themselves cite: Fish have different kinds of
colour vision because of the physically different character of
light in their niche; pigeons may benefit from sensitivity to UV
light because it enables them to "evaluate short-wave gradients
in the sky," which aids navigation (sect. 2.4). It is the wave-
length of the light that is cited, not the colour. In the case of the
bees and flowers, it is the fact that the flowers show a contrast
pattern in UV light and that some bees are sensitive to UV light
that explains the survival of that type of bee. If, on the other
hand, Thompson et al. do allow such physical evolutionary
descriptions, then the points of the previous paragraph are
strengthened: It becomes even harder to see how the existence
of such evolutionary explanations serves as a ground for a
nonreductive theory of content.
We need more empirical information on the evolution of
colour vision and of coloration to know exactly in what areas the
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
31

Commentary /Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
claim of coevolution is correct. Thompson et al. resist the idea of
a determinant physical world that poses for different species the
single problem of how to become aware of its "given" physical
properties. I am sure they are right to resist the idea in its full
generality. But at each point in evolutionary history there are
some features of the environment that are both (relatively) given
and (relatively) physical, and these may serve to explain evolu-
tionary changes that result in these features (or phenomenal
counterparts of them) becoming part of the "life-world" of
members of the species. There will no doubt be some features of
the environment that have hardly changed at all with the
evolution of sentient organisms (chlorophyll perhaps). There
may be some features of the visual system that could hardly (for
engineering reasons!) change, however great the evolutionary
advantages. (The green of most animals absorbs more infrared
light than does the chlorophyll green of plants; but vision,
sensitive in the infrared, which would enable an animal easily to
distinguish them, has not been found.) For a given species in a
certain kind of environment there will be limits to how far the
former can affect the latter and vice-versa; and to that extent,
there will be features that are simply "given." It would be good
to know where exactly the limits have lain in the case of animals
in their actual historical environment.
I say this not to question Thompson et al.'s nonreductive
theory of content, which on the contrary I find extremely
attractive, nor to disparage the evolutionary explanations that
they actually cite. I say it to defend the view that there will be
scientific explanations of the genesis of colour vision that use
concepts from outside the life-world of the species. In some
cases, it may be precisely because a feature lies outside the life-
world of the species but correlates with, or has consequences
for, features within the life-world, that there is pressure for the
species after all to develop an awareness of it. On this view,
there will be some evolutionary explanations that invoke rela-
tively objective features of the environment - the kinds of
features, either physical or physiological, which, when used
exclusively, gave rise, as Thompson et al. rightly show, to the
excesses of computational objectivism and physiological subjec-
tivism. There is a place, I am sure, for nonreductive colour
science (I give some examples myself in Broackes 1992); but
there are other cases where explanations of colour phenomena,
including evolutionary phenomena, will necessarily involve
noncolour notions.
Surfaces and colour wision. In their critique of "computational
objectivism," Thompson et al. use an "argument from
perceiver-relativity" to show that what counts as the surface of
an object will vary with the perceiving animal's colour vision.
They present the argument as "conditional" on an empirical
"conjecture," that colour vision contributes to the individuation
of surfaces. The conclusion seems rather implausible - col-
ourblind humans do not in fact disagree with their coloursighted
fellows on the existence of surfaces - and this in turn casts doubt
on the conjecture the way the authors intend it. The surfaces
that figure in the life-world of an animal are determined among
other things by the needs, environment, and perceptual abili-
ties of the animal. Colour vision certainly plays a part in inform-
ing the animal of these surfaces; but, in the context of the other
ways an animal has of perceiving and thinking of surfaces, it
hardly seems to define which surfaces exist. If one of the tasks of
colour vision is the "recovery" of surfaces, then this is a task in
which success is defined in terms independent of colour vision,
although not independent of the broader life of the organism.
Color and science. The main claim of the target article is that
computational objectivism and neurophysiological subjectivism
lead not just to bad ontology but also to bad science. In both
cases, the main objection is that there are generalizations that
cannot be expressed in the language of the chosen approach.
Computational objectivism can find no physicalist equivalent
for, for example, "orange is a binary hue"; neurophysiological
subjectivism has no place for explanations of colour vision in
evolutionary terms. In both cases I wonder if the arguments are
too quick. Some physicalists would regard "orange is a binary
hue" as attributing to a strictly physical property the higher-
level property of "looking to ordinary perceivers to be com-
posed of two hues." The latter is an obviously psychological
property (like "reminds me of Jack Nicholson"), which they will
reduce later when they get round to it, but which can be applied
to genuinely physical first-level properties. There is no question
of saying that the colour is binary but the physical property is
not; both are binary, and there is no objection to the physicalist
identification. A reply to this might, I think, build on a distinc-
tion between colours and colour properties: Maybe the latter
can be identified with physical properties, but the former are a
different kind of thing. But developing that goes well beyond
the present commentary.
On the subjectivist side: Thompson et al. actually recognize
that Hardin (1990) himself wants to use evolutionary explana-
tions. Their reply is that he has nonetheless not appreciated how
colour vision "contributes to the very selection and constitution
of animal environments." But it is not clear that this is an
objection to Hardin's subjectivism: He could allow, for example,
that bee vision has causally contributed to the selection of
certain flowers without compromising his views if (1) he said that
what was contributing was in fact a mechanism that produced
mere illusions of colour, and (2) he didn't in his own explanations
attribute real colours to the flowers. There are other ways to put
pressure on Hardin's subjectivism, but I suspect that they need
to consider more broadly either or both of the assumptions (a)
that only what science tells us exists really does, and (b) that
colour is not a scientifically respectable property.
IRlsductionism and sufbjeotiwism
defined and defended!
Austen Clark
Department of Philosophy, University of Tulsa, Tulsa, OK 74104
Electronic mail: aclark@tulsa.bitnet; phii—.agc@vax1 .utulsa.edu
As a reductionist and a subjectivist I find little to dispute, and
much to cheer, in the use of the comparative argument against
objectivism. The best available form of objectivism is anthropo-
centric realism, and at the very least the comparative argument
dispels much of the motivation for that position. But I have
qualms with the arguments arrayed against "neurophysiological
subjectivism." I do not think they demonstrate failures either in
neurophysiological reductionism or in subjectivism.
Thompson, Palacios & Varela clearly deny neurophysiological
reductionism. They write that chromatic experiences "do not
yield to analysis purely in terms of the neurophysiological
structure of the perceiver" (sect. 1.4, final para.); that "a purely
neural explanation for color vision is incomplete" (sect. 2.5,
para. 8); that color "experience can be understood only in the
context of its ecological embodiment" (sect. 2.1, para. 2) and
that any "adequate account" of color must be ecological. Fur-
thermore, the embrace of the preferred ecological and "enac-
tive" perspective is claimed in several places to be contrary to
subjectivism, presumably meaning that they cannot both be
true.
In outline the argument against neurophysiological subjec-
tivism proceeds as follows:
(1) Animal capacities for color vision in many cases coevolved
with the very colors that those capacities enable the animal to
discriminate.
(2) Hence color vision contributes to the determination of the
environment of an animal.
(3) Hence the qualities perceived in color vision are not
purely internal and "in the head," as subjectivism claims, but
ecological.
32
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Commentary /Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
A neurophysiological reductionist will happily agree to (1),
dispute the terms in (2), and steadfastly deny the inference to
(3). As examples of (1) the authors cite polymorphism in the color
vision of squirrel monkeys, the coevolution of honey bee color
vision and flower colors, and the evolution of animal coloration
for camouflage and signal purposes. None are inconsistent with
neurophysiological reductionism. The neurophysiological re-
ductionist claims that the chromatic experiences a species has
today can be explained without remainder in terms of the visual
nervous system that species has today (Clark 1980; 1992).
Curious humans can go on to ask: Why do these various species
have the visual systems they have? One hopes evolutionary
theory will someday provide an answer. But whatever the
answer is, it will not contradict neurophysiological reductionism
as described. The neurophysiological story is, admittedly, "in-
complete," but only in the sense that it does not ask - and so
does not answer - the question of the origins of the systems to
which it refers. Presumably no one thinks that evolutionary
history affected color vision independently of its effects on
nervous systems!
In the second stage of the argument the authors shift from
claims of animal-environment coevolution to what they call
"codetermination." The term is paradoxical. At least in the
ordinary sense of "environment," animals with distinct percep-
tual capacities can share the same environment. Which animals
determined its features? Flowering plants are parts of the
environment of many different animals. According to Thompson
et al., some have incommensurable color spaces. If the color of
flowers were determined by animal-environment coevolution
with one of those species, it could not have been determined by
the history of its interactions with other species. Contrary
properties cannot both be determinative. If the bees did it, it
cannot have been the pigeons.
At some points the authors use the words "environment" and
"perceptual object" in ways that would lead them to deny that
environments or perceptual objects are (or even could be)
shared by species with different perceptual capacities. Such
usages are salient in the third stage of the argument, where it is
urged that we adopt an "ecological" and "enactive" approach to
color vision. The gaps left in neurophysiological accounts are to
be plugged by treating perception always as perceptually
guided activity. Colors are "properties of the world that result
from animal-environment codetermination" (sect. 3, para. 4).
There is much in this talk that I do not understand or that seems
open to immediate and devastating counterexamples. Try star
gazing. On a moonless night, find a dark field, sit still, and you
will see the colors of the stars. Although there are those who
believe the stars determine the fate of humans, the stirring
history of our species could not have affected any feature of the
light entering one's eyes. It is also unclear what sort of "percep-
tually guided activity" is going on in our motionless star-gazer.
Perhaps the "ecological" perspective on the flower in my
garden is as follows: That flower is part of my environment, and
by hypothesis its colors are in part determined by the interac-
tions its ancestors had with mine. That same flower is not part of
the environment of honey bees; instead, they perceive a differ-
ent object, with different colors, determined in part by the
history of interactions between that object and the ancestors of
the bee.
One problem with talking this way is that evolutionary theory
could not corroborate any claims about that kind of "environ-
ment." For purposes of evolutionary theory we must be able to
talk about the one flower out there in the garden, the one with
genes, and so on, that can interact with many different species.
A subjectivist and reductionist description of the situation
seems much more straightforward. The one flower out in the
garden has various properties. When suitably illuminated it
causes in me various kinds of chromatic experiences, and other
kinds, perhaps incommensurable kinds, in the honey bees and
local pigeons. The character of those experiences can in princi-
ple be entirely explained by - reduced to - the neurophysiology
of our various visual systems. We happily turn to evolution for
hints as to why the species have the different systems that they
do. The same account accommodates star-gazing most ele-
gantly. Our visual system evolved, and we can admit it may have
coevolved with a panoply of animal and plant colors in biological
environments. Nevertheless, it now gives us certain capacities,
and we can exercise those capacities even when confronted
with stimuli (such as starlight) remote from biological environ-
ments and for which a codetermination story is completely
implausible.
Finally, only straw-man versions of subjectivism are contrary
to claims of animal-environment coevolution. Subjectivists
need not define colors as "internally generated qualities that the
animal simply projects onto the world," (sect. 3, para. 4) and
they do not endorse the view that colors are simply "in the
head." (sect. 3, para. 16) We can admit the existence of stimuli.
The point is rather that the "collecting principles" - or that in
virtue of which two stimuli are perceived to be the same color -
cannot be framed in extradermal terms. The stimuli are indeed
out there in the world - note that they must be, if genes can ever
control them. But the principles that collect those stimuli into
color classes can be found only in the innards of visual nervous
systems. That different species operate in such radically differ-
ent ways is just sauce for our (putatively pentachromatic) goose.
Color is as color does
James L. Dannemiller
Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wl 53706
Electronic mail: dannemiller@waisman.wisc.edu
Thompson, Palacios & Varela object tt> computational models of
color vision that emphasize the recovery of spectral reflectances
of surfaces because these models do not capture the subjective
experience of color. This is certainly true, and I think there is a
very good reason for this omission in computational models. The
kinds of tasks these computational models address do not re-
quire access to the kinds of information carried by an organism's
subjective experience of color. Because color may do many
things for us, and presumably for other animals, we should not
be surprised if some tasks result in models that take into account
the phenomenal structure of the animal's color experience while
others do not. What you think color is (your model) depends on
what you think color does for you (the task).
Computational models of color vision, or what Thompson et
al. refer to as objectivist theories, generally address a very
delimited task, that of computing descriptors of the spectral
reflectance of a surface that are independent of the illumination
under which the surface is encountered, of the surrounding
spatial context, and of the viewing geometry of the situation. In
other words, these are models of how a visual system in a
particular environment with a particular complement of pho-
toreceptors and postreceptoral elements could achieve some
degree of invariance in its representation of the material proper-
ties of a surface in the face of varying viewing conditions. This is
the classic problem of color constancy. The question of interest
here concerns what kinds of mechanisms one must propose to
achieve a desired degree of constancy. What kinds of pro-
cedures are necessary to perform this task?
We now know from numerous attempts to solve this problem
computationally (Brill 1978; Buchsbaum 1980; Dannemiller
1989; Gershon & Jepson 1989; Land & McCann 1971; Maloney
& Wandell 1986; Sallstrom 1973) that the kinds of algorithms
that will solve this problem all involve very low-level processes
in the visual system, such as adaptation (Helson 1938), spatial
averaging (Hurlbert & Poggio 1988), and subtractive combina-
tions across classes of photoreceptors (D'Zmura & Lennie 1986).
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
33

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
It is not necessary to know anything about the phenomenal
structure of an animal's color space to achieve a reasonable
degree of color constancy with these models. The low dimen-
sionality constraints to which Thompson et al. refer capture
statistical aspects of the environment; as such, they place
boundary conditions on these algorithms. These constraints tell
us that in some environments these procedures will accomplish
this limited task reasonably well, whereas in others they will fail.
The point of this example is that if the task calls for the
computation of color constant surface descriptors then these
models can perform this task reasonably well without postulat-
ing anything about the animal's subjective experience of color.
It is at least reasonable to suppose that the visual systems of
humans and animals could also accomplish this task using such
low-level mechanisms. The absence of any mention of the
experiential aspects of color vision in these computational mod-
els is a result of theoretical economy; such information is not
necessary to solve the problem.
Consider another task - that of determining the shapes and
material characteristics of various objects in a complex visual
environment. The presence of illumination gradients, shadows
and the shading produced by smooth changes in the orientation
of a surface with respect to the direction of an illuminant all
complicate this task. But color can play a potentially useful role
in disambiguating the many factors that contribute to the local
luminance of a point in the scene (Gershon et al. 1986; Rubin &
Richards 1982). Why is it necessary to postulate anything about
the phenomenal structure of an animal's color experience to
understand the role that color plays in this task? It is certainly
true that in this task and the previous one what constitutes a
surface should be made sensitive to the animal's scale at some
point in processing, as Thompson et al. point out. But this
segmentation problem may initially depend more on the struc-
ture of the environment as captured at a particular station point
in an optic array than on the scale of the animal. Gershon and
Jepson (1989) have a computational model of color constancy
that contains a regional segmentation algorithm that is driven by
the chromatic structure of the image and some fairly simple
merge and split rules.
Next consider a different task - searching for a particular
object in a cluttered environment, for example. This object may
be located visually by its shape, texture, relative size or color.
Suppose that color is used to aid the search. Here it is reasonable
to propose that if one were to model this task, one would almost
certainly want to know something about the phenomenal struc-
ture of the animal's color experience. Are reds and greens
opposed to one another? How does the animal partition the
spectrum into color categories? Are there unique hues for this
animal, and if so what are they? How good is the animal at
discriminating saturation when hue is constant? The answers to
these questions would be very useful if one were trying to model
visual search using color as one of the variables over which the
search could be executed. The efficiency with which this task
could be performed probably depends on how salient certain
chromatic distinctions are for the animal. This in turn probably
depends on the categorical nature of the animal's color experi-
ence. In such a top-down task, prototypical colors function as
particularly efficient symbolic descriptors with which to guide
the search (Treisman & Gormican 1988). The prototypicality of a
color depends on the structure of the animal's color space. So
here is a task for which it would be useful to understand the
animal's subjective experience of color. Color, when used as a
descriptor in such a task, may be embedded in a symbolic
structure subject to constraints very different from those gov-
erning computational models of color constancy (Kuehni 1989).
The way chromatic information participates in various tasks
will determine whether or not it is necessary to include an
animal's subjective experience of color in one's model. Some
tasks can be performed without recourse to such information
because they are determined by the optical properties and
statistics of environments. These statistics are in turn deter-
mined by the animal's ecological niche. Such tasks require fairly
simple mechanisms. Other tasks are more complex, requiring
color to be used to guide attention, modulate activity or make
judgments. The procedures involved in these tasks may require
the theoretician or model builder to be cognizant of the ways
colors are experienced by the animal. When viewed in this way,
the distinction between objectivist and subjectivist approaches
may be more amenable to a theoretical rapprochement than
Thompson et al. believe is possible.
colour space?
What Ii
Jules Davidoff
National Hospital's College of Speech Sciences, London WC1N 1PG,
England
Electronic mail: ucjtrjd@pyr.ucl.ac.uk
Thompson et al. have tried to resolve the mind-body problem
for colour by resorting to their new principle of ecological
enaction. The extent to which their study of comparative colour
vision will resolve time-honoured conceptual difficulties is left
to other commentators. They will need to understand how,
apart from the effects of Darwinian selection, one can conclude
that "colors are properties of the world that result from animal-
environment code termination" (sect. 3). Nor do I consider here
the alternative roles proposed for colour, although its use in
object discrimination (sect. 2.4) certainly requires qualification
(Davidoff 1991). The issue my commentary addresses is differ-
ent; it concerns Thompson et al.'s version of subjective colour
space. The question asked (sect. 1.2) is, "Why does (our) color
space have this phenomenal structure and not some other?"
We might first consider whether colour space really exists in
the modular (Fodor 1983) form traditionally proposed for it. The
independent processing procedures required for a colour mod-
ule are denied, to a limited extent, because colour matching is
marginally affected by the shape (Egeth & Pachella 1969; Over-
myer & Simon 1985; Williams 1974) and meaning (Menaud-
Buteau & Cavanagh 1984) of the boundaries that contain the
colours. Although these effects are small, they reveal an impor-
tant aspect of colour. To be modular, colour needs to be
dissociated from its containing boundary; generally, it is not.
Thus, we do not usually talk of seeing a green but of seeing green
(objects). Colour is therefore a concrete property of an object
that is made abstract by locating it within a colour space. The
concrete and abstract aspects are easily confused because when
seeing an apple (or any other object) we apply the same term
(e.g., red) to the (concrete) recovery of distal information as to
the part of our internal colour space at which the term applies to
an infinity (or a very large number) of different locations.
Whatever the limitations on the modularity of colour space, it
has regularities that result from the output of neurophys-
iologically defined channels. These regularities can be derived
from wavelength discrimination functions without the need for
the emphasis (sect. 1.3) on colour constancy mechanisms.
Mullen and Kulikowski (1990) showed that at threshold detec-
tion, wavelength discrimination was not continuous but cate-
gorical, with four, or perhaps five, colour regions. If, as is
reasonable to suppose, these regions result from opponent-
process output, species with different numbers of cone types
might well show different numbers of colour regions in their
colour space (sect. 2.3). There is no one-to-one mapping of cone
types to the division of colour space, however. In particular, it is
not necessary for the colour space of humans to be tripartite, as
in the Munsell system. Although aspects of surface appearance
related to hue, lightness, and saturation may be highly corre-
lated with the output of cells in the visual system, the efficient
use of these three categories is not achieved without consider-
34
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
able experience. The Munsell components of colour interact in
categorisation tasks (Felfoldy & Garner 1971; Garner & Felfoldy
1970) and, for that reason, Garner (1974) calls them integral. To
the observer it would seem that a coloured surface is first seen as
a whole or, as Lockhead (1972) puts it, a blob. Thus, even
though it is possible to break down colours into subcomponents,
they resist separation. The separation of surface colour into its
components (hue, saturation, and lightness) can be achieved,
with more or less success, according to task demands (Garner
1988), individual differences (Stalmeier & De Weert 1988;
Ward et al. 1986) and training (Foard & Kemler-Nelson 1984),
but it is difficult even for colour experts (Burns & Shepp 1988).
Amateurs, in particular, often confuse brightness with satura-
tion (Davidoff 1974).
The organisation of colour space does not correspond directly
to the output from opponent-process mechanisms even though
it is, In part, derived from them: In the internal colour space,
red is not necessarily paired with green, or yellow with blue;
DIxon (1960) also argues this for the unconscious use of colour.
Individual items (locations) in the colour space represent com-
binations of wavelength and intensity differences. These loca-
tions could be compared (see Davidoff 1991) to stored descrip-
tions of objects that are viewer-centred (Marr 1982). The
individual items are organised into regions (categories) of colour
(red, green, etc.); these could correspond to stored descriptions
of objects that are object-centred. Neuropsychological evidence
shows that an impaired ability to categorise colours may coexist
with intact "viewer-centred" mechanisms (De Renzi et al. 1972;
Sittig 1921).
on the head
Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155
This target article is a valuable antidote to several different Ill-
examined preconceptions, but I don't think It has quite suc-
ceeded in unmasking and neutralizing the bogey that motivates
them all. This commentary attempts to do this by reinforcing,
with minor caveats, some of the authors' main points.
In defense of their "enactive" account, Thompson et al.
occasionally protest too much. For example, the trouble with
(external) objectivism is not that it makes the mistake of hold-
ing the external environment constant, setting a problem for the
organism. Following Levins and Lewontin (1983; 1985),
Thompson et al. Insist on the role of the organism in creating its
visual environment, but this is a process that occurs almost
entirely on an evolutionary time scale. It is true, as Lewontin
has often pointed out, that the chemical composition of the
atmosphere, for Instance, is as much a product of the activity of
living organisms as a precondition of their life, but it is also true
that It can be safely treated as a constant, because its changes in
response to local organismic activity are usually Insignificant as
variables in interaction with the variables under scrutiny. The
same Is true of the colors of objects: They have indeed coevolved
with the color-vision systems of the organisms, but, except on an
evolutionary time scale, they are in the main imperturbable by
organisms' perceptual activity.
The fact of their coevolution is as important as the authors
Insist, however, when It comes to answering the why questions
of color vision (and we do want scientific answers to why
questions). One of the flaws in (external) objectivism Is that it
discourages the exploration of a large class of empirically prom-
ising hypotheses. For example, why does a certain fruit turn a
particular shade of red when it ripens? It might be that the
availability of a certain photopigment for exploitation in the eyes
of the target fructivores had a larger role to play In the answer
than, say, the constraints on byproducts of sugar formation In
the fruit. The work cited on coevolution of organism coloration
and color vision strongly suggests that color-coding (to reduce
the cognitive load on the target perceiver) is at the basis of at
least much if not all color vision (Dennett 1991). Things are the
colors they are because we (or other creatures) have the sorts of
color-vision systems we have, and we have the systems we have
because they enable us to see the colors things are.
But still the traditional appeal of the idea that colors must be
objective, independently existing properties of surfaces asserts
itself. Consider the chameleon. We accept that the chameleon
actually changes color (as opposed to merely seeming to change
color) because we understand that it has a way of changing the
relevant microphysical structure of its surface, the structure that
determined "surface spectral reflectance." In contrast, we
would be more disinclined to say that some other organism
changed color (as opposed to merely seeming to change color) if
it accomplished this by merely moving into different illumina-
tion without changing its surface microstructure. But this might
be just as valuable a countermeasure, and hence should be
viewed as just as sturdy a candidate to anchor the biological
category of color.
Consider the well-known mimicry by nonpoisonous species of
brightly colored poisonous species in the vicinity. I do not know
if there are any actual cases, but it could be that a mimic species
had discovered a microphysically different "way of being bright
red" - at least in the normal illumination environments of the
relevant predators. Would we say that these mimics were the
same color as the poisonous species? They might not be seen to
be the same color by us, or even by their predators under
abnormal conditions, and yet such a case should count as
different ways of being the same color. The two species would
"match," for instance, in the same way the color of the drapes
matches the color of the woodwork - the way that matters (to us)
- even if they don't match under all conditions.
But what, then, are colors? Doesn't this Imply that only a
circular definition of color Is possible? Yes, but as the authors
say, "one should not be put off by the circularity" (sect. 3, para.
16). The real bogey Is the fear that If we cannot give a founda-
tional, objective definition - either In the form of an external
objective definition (e.g., Hilbert 1987) or in the form of an
equally objective internal or neurophysiological definition - we
will be stuck with "intrinsic, Ineffable, unknowable" qualia. The
true value of the enactive view is that it explains why neither of
these sorts of objective account is necessary to avoid the extreme
subjectivism of Nagel (1974). Both these varieties of reduction
are embarrassed by the specter of having to deal with all the
counterexamples by brute force enumeration of exceptions - a
telltale sign, presumably, that they have failed to capture the
"essence" of color. An enactive account, however, can explain,
objectively and scientifically, everything that needs explaining
- Including the fact that no compact, noncircular definition of
color Is possible - with no leftovers conceded to mystery.
Enactiwist wision
Jerome A. Feldman
International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, CA 94704
Electronic mall: jfeldman@icsi.berkeley.edu
Thompson et al. attempt to establish that an animal's capabilities
and goals are the fundamental determiners of how it perceives
the world. They certainly convince us that this holds for their
own treatment of the vision literature. Computational vision has
a reconstructionist branch, but also an older and equally produc-
tive group of researchers studying active vision. And the recon-
structionists are keenly aware of segmentation issues and have
never considered inverse optics as the end product. More
generally, the target article includes a (very nice) detailed
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
35

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
review of some aspects of vision research but totally ignores
several others - for example, attention (Posner & Hubel 1990),
adaptation and priming (Livingstone & Hubel 1988) - that bear
on the relation between internal and external aspects of color.
It is hard to believe that visual scientists will find much to
quarrel with in the conclusions that vision is interactive and
ecologically determined. What does need to be challenged is
the appeal late in the paper (sect. 3) to the "self-organizing
properties of neural networks." Having refuted pure recon-
struction, Thompson et al. gratuitously identify this with all
forms of internal representation and promote pure sensory-
motor activity as the basis for vision. There are mechanisms of
this sort even in primates (the subcortical mechanisms such as
the vestibular-ocular and other reflexes) but these elaborate
innate neural structures could hardly be called self-organizing.
More important, denying the existence of representation in the
vision of higher animals flies in the face of everything that has
been learned about cortical maps, spatial cognition, and, in fact,
all but the simplest behavior (Livingstone & Hubel 1988). Like
the Gibsonian perspective, enactivism can provide a useful
corrective to excessively mechanistic views of perception, but to
actually believe it would be crippling for visual and other
cognitive scientists.
modeling: The Sink between
TO and subjectiwism
Marcia A. Finkelstein
Department of Psychology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620
Electronic mail: dlndiaa@cfrvm.bitnet
To the extent that they develop computational models that are
physiologically plausible, psychophysicists bridge the gap be-
tween objectivism and subjectivism. One weakness of the objec-
tive position is the implication that if we conducted enough
experiments, varying enough stimulus parameters, we would
eventually explain color vision. Models are inevitably over-
simplified, often suggesting that an experiment isolates specific
psychophysical channels (e.g., long-wavelength cone pathway)
or cell types (e.g., red/green opponent cells). In reality, a model
that describes one set of data will fail to account for other
findings.
In any case, the goal is not only to find a series of equations
that describe some data; the theory should be consistent with
visual physiology. Yet as Thompson et al. note (sect. 1.2),
comparing psychophysics and physiology is precarious, even
when the connections seem obvious (Hood 1981; Teller & Pugh
1983). The need to specify explicitly one's psychophysical as-
sumptions, physiological assumptions, and linking hypotheses
was demonstrated by a series of experiments examining the
detection of small, brief lights (Finkelstein 1988a; b; Finkelstein
& Hood 1981; 1982; Hood & Finkelstein 1983). The studies
measured, not color appearance per se, but relative sensitivity
to lights of different wavelengths.
The open circles in Figure 1 show a spectral sensitivity for a
large, long-duration foveal flash (49 minute diameter, 500 msec
duration). The peaks in the data are narrower than receptor
absorption spectra, and they are shifted relative to the cone
sensitivities. The solid and dashed curves are the red/green and
yellow/blue functions, respectively (from Ingling & Tsou 1977).
The data are well fit by an envelope of the opponent spectral
sensitivities. The results suggest that large foveal flashes are
detected by pathways consisting of spectrally opponent cells
(e.g., Finkelstein & Hood 1984; King-Smith & Garden 1976;
Sperling & Harwerth 1971). This conclusion was supported by
cancellation experiments in which bichromatic test mixtures
were found to be less detectable than either component pre-
sented alone (e.g., Guth & Lodge 1973; Stromeyer et al. 1978).
t
EJJ
WAVELENGTH (nm)
Figure 1 (Finkelstein). Spectral sensitivities for foveal test
lights 49 minutes in diameter and 500 msec in duration (open
circles) or 10 minutes in diameter and 40 msec in duration (filled
circles). Stimuli were presented on a 4.0 log td unfiltered
tungsten steady background. The log reciprocal intensity re-
quired for detection is plotted. The solid and dashed curves
through the large-test data are the relative spectral sensitivities
of the red/green and yellow/blue systems, respectively (from
Ingling & Tsou 1977). The curve through the small-spot results
is the CIE photopic luminosity function. [Reprinted from Vision
Research (1984) 24: 175-81, Figure L]
Color naming experiments showed further that the hues of these
lights are discriminable at detection threshold (e.g., Ingling et
al. 1977; Krauskopf 1978). The consensus in the color literature
was that large, long-duration lights are detected by spectrally
opponent cells or opponent channels.
Complications arose when the same assumptions about the
properties of neurons and psychophysical channels were ap-
plied to measurements made with small, brief lights. The filled
circles in Figure 1 are spectral sensitivity data for a 10 minute,
40 msec target. The curve through these data is the photopic
luminosity function. The broadband luminosity function is at-
tributed to the activity of nonopponent cells (e.g., DeValois et
al. 1966). Its fit to the small-spot data suggested that these lights
are detected via a nonopponent pathway consisting of spectrally
nonopponent cells (e.g., King-Smith & Garden 1976).
Subsequent field sensitivity, test mixture, and color naming
data, however, implicated red/green cells in the detection of
small, brief lights (Finkelstein & Hood 1982; 1984). Figure 2
shows the field sensitivity for 49 minute, 500 msec fields of
monochromatic light. The procedure measures the relative
ability of fields of different wavelengths to reduce sensitivity to a
10 minute, 40 msec, 580nm test (see figure caption for details).
Note the narrow peaks in sensitivity around 540nm and 600nm
and the notch at 580nm; the data resemble the red/green
spectral sensitivity.
The prevailing assumptions about the properties of opponent
and nonopponent cells and psychophysical pathways made rec-
onciling the small-spot test and field sensitivity data difficult. A
partial solution was provided by physiological data showing that
opponent cells can become nonopponent with decreased stim-
ulus size or duration (e.g., Gouras & Zrenner 1979; Wiesel &
Hubel, 1966). The changes in spectral tuning are a consequence
of the spatial opponency of the cells' receptive fields. The
physiology suggested a "variable tuning" model in which small
foveal flashes are detected by a red/green channel with a
nonopponent spectral sensitivity (cf. Finkelstein et al. 1990;
Finkelstein & Hood 1982; 1984; Ingling 1978; Wandell & Pugh
36
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
>
HJC0 
2
<
0
500
600
FIELD WAVELENGTH (nm)
Figure 2 (Finkelstein). Field sensitivity for 49 minute, 500
msec monochromatic fields. The test was a 10-minute diameter,
40 msec, 580nm light. Test and field were presented on a 4.0 log
td "white" (unfiltered tungsten) adapting background. The
figure shows the log reciprocal field intensities required to raise
threshold for the test 0.3 log units above the threshold obtained
on the adapting background alone. The solid curve is the CIE
photopic luminosity function pinned to the field sensitivity at
540nm. [Data reprinted from Vision Research (1982) 22: 89-95,
Figure 3A.]
1.980). In this model, the differences between large- and small-
spot test sensitivities do not imply a change either in the type of
cell involved or in its properties. Rather, the data reflect vari-
ability in the way individual receptive fields are stimulated.
Yet the "variable tuning" solution itself produces new ques-
tions. How do we explain our ability to discriminate the hues of
small spots? Answering this requires revising the traditional
view that hue is signaled in the response polarity of two classes of
opponent cells (red/green and yellow/blue). One alternative is a
model in which hue is coded in the pattern of activity across cell
types (Finkelstein & Hood 1984). This approach, if developed,
will undoubtedly produce other problems for traditional models
of opponent pathways.
Despite the obvious limitations of the computational ap-
proach, quantitative models have led to significant advances
in our understanding of color vision. One contribution of
Thompson et al. 's target article is the recognition that computa-
tional and neurophysiological approaches are both integral to
the development of a unified theory of color vision.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by NEI grant R01-EY-08654.
Multivariant color wision
Peter Gouras
Columbia University, Edward S. Harkness Eye Institute, New York, NY
10032
Ways of coloring is an interesting essay that attempts to empha-
size the importance of the integration of motor and sensory
modalities in visual perception. The authors contend that this
idea can have significant heuristic value in advancing our under-
standing of color vision. I tend to agree with this hypothesis.
They call this approach an "enactive" one, a somewhat dys-
phonic neologism, which may impede rather than further their
There are several levels at which this "enactive" approach can
work. The most obvious involves visual interactions between
cooperative organisms, especially interactions influencing re-
production, such as those between bees and flowers and
monkeys and fruit trees. Here visuomotor interaction actually
alters the physical environment.
A second level involves a fixed physical environment which is
perceived differently by organisms with different visuomotor
systems. Color vision is a good example because color is the
most illusory of visual perceptions. Thompson et al. emphasize
different effects that the dimensionality of color vision can have
on visual perception. As humans we have good insights into
what these changes can be. We can compare monovariant
nocturnal rod vision or better black and white TV vision with
trivariant daylight vision. We can also communicate with di-
variant human subjects who have lost one dimension. The
overall changes in our visual universe are not great, however,
because it is so structured by form. Form vision must be
significantly altered to have a major impact on our perception of
the external world. The authors raise a good point in using
comparative biology to implement their hypothesis. Organisms
that fly or swim and consequently are very active in three rather
than two dimensions encounter many different perspectives
of the external world. When this motor activity is coupled to
tetra- or penta- variant color vision, views of the external world
other than those encountered by horizon-oriented species are
possible.
A point not made in this target article concerns the limitations
of multivariant color vision in high resolution achromatic con-
trast. The greater the variety of spectrally different photorecep-
tors, the greater is the problem of chromatic aberration. Pho-
toreceptors of different spectral selectivity respond best to
different image planes. Such a factor must be responsible for
making our foveolas di- and not tri-variant. Multivariant color
vision compromises high resolution achromatic vision.
The most intriguing problem about imagining the visual
universe of organisms with smaller brains is knowing whether
the high degree of chromatic contrast detection they have leads
to a greater palette of perceived colors. The visual universe we
experience depends on the memory of multiple changing views
that our oculomotor system generates in our visual system.
Determining how movement-generated visual signals are as-
sembled in the brains of flying or swimming organisms is an
intriguing and important challenge for scientists of vision, even
those most mobile in color vision. In highlighting this idea,
Thompson et al. should be complimented.
Color for pigeons and
C. L. Hardin
Department of Philosophy, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244
Electronic mail: clhardin@suvm.hitnet
To study color is, in a narrower sense of the word, to study black,
white, red, yellow, green, and blue. But in a broader sense of
that term, it is to study the qualitative visual states of animals,
human and nonhuman alike, as well as the environmental
intensity and wavelength modulations of a certain band of
electromagnetic radiation. There is everything to be said for
taking the proper domain of scientific investigation to include
color in the broader sense. Indeed, we will gain a full under-
standing of red, green, and the like only by locating them in this
wider context, although in so doing we must avoid such prac-
tices as identifying hues with spectral reflectances or uncritically
assigning hue labels to the qualitative visual states of
nonprimates.
In Color for philosophers (Hardin 1988) I chose to focus on
color in the narrower sense because this is what I took to be one
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
37

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
locus of philosophical perplexities about the relationship be-
tween mind and body. I did not Intend to advance a more
sweeping "methodological claim" that, in the broader sense of
color, "color phenomena can be analyzed in neurological
terms/' Instead, I applaud the efforts of Thompson, Varela &
Palacios to draw us Into worlds of alien color (or, perhaps,
"color") vision, worlds that I find much more stimulating to the
Imagination than the fantasies about Martian experiences be-
loved of some philosophers. When the authors wish to charac-
terize the manner In which their views differ from mine, how-
ever, they sometimes state their views misleadingly, and this
makes It seem that we disagree more than we really do.
For example, Thompson et al. assert (sect. 2.5) that "Hardln
neglects [the] role that visual perception plays in animal-
environment codetermination." My neglect is said to consist in
my overlooking (1) "the fact . . . that most of the world's colors
are organic colors" and (2) "the role that color vision plays in
spatial segmentation and hence the relational nature of the
surface of perceptual objects." But all that (1) comes to Is the
uncontroversial claim that the activities of perceiving animals
(e.g., bees) have selected many of the reflectances of plants
(e.g., flowers) and of other animals in their environments. The
reflectances of flowers are "colors" in one of the broader senses,
but - as the authors themselves are at pains to argue - certainly
not colors In that narrower sense of the term in which one can
contrast the color space of one species with that of another.
Furthermore, the selection of environmental reflectances Is
the work of populations of animals Interacting with populations
of plants and other animals. It would be misleading to urge that
we have here a case of Individual animals making the colors in
their surroundings. By contrast, in case (2), which I am also said
to have overlooked, the individual animal Is using Its color
perception to segment its visual scene Into visual surfaces. Here
the colors of surfaces are the product of the animal's perceptual
activity, and those colors are not, In Thompson et al.'s opinion or
mine, reflectances. But then the object In question isn't a
physical object either, but a "perceptual object," an object as
experienced by the animal (to the extent that we are entitled to
speak of the animal as having perceptual experiences). The
upshot Is that populations of animals generate colors (spectral
reflectances) as constituents of their physical environments,
whereas Individual animals generate colors (visual states) as
constituents of their perceptual environments. The "enactivist"
view of perception, Insofar as it Is supposed to represent an
alternative distinct from "subjectivism," thus seems to Involve
equivocating between perceivers as Individuals and perceivers
as species, as well as between representations and physical
objects. Once the equivocations are removed, I can find little In
enactlvism with which to disagree.
Thompson et al. seem to find problematic my distinction
between visual shape, which Is always bound up with color
(narrowly construed) and dependent on the animal, and shape
simpliciter, which is not. Perhaps the following words will be of
some help In positioning my view with respect to theirs: I use
the term "shape simpliciter" to refer to the physical structure
that is, In the first Instance, picked out by both visual and
tactual-kinesthetic sensing, and Is capable of being studied by
various physical instruments. Visual shape is a certain projec-
tlve transforieation of physical shape simpliciter that is en-
tangled, as shape simpliciter is not, with color qualities. Al-
though physical shape thus described Is not organism-relative, it
Is certainly relative to our scale and level of resolution. It may
then in turn be assimilated to a more general, and physically
basic, notion, that of spatial configuration (or, If one wishes to
generalize still further, spatlotemporal configuration).
The vocabulary of spatial configuration surely gives us a
species-neutral way to describe the characteristics of any animal
we like, as well as the environment that it Inhabits. This basic
vocabulary - think of It as the terminology of analytic geometry
- Is indifferent to scale and resolution, although the effective
description of a phenomenon at a particular scale and level of
resolution for a particular purpose typically demands a spatial-
configuration vocabulary appropriate to that scale, level, and
purpose. (The planetary astronomer, for example, will consider
Saturn's oblately spherical shape rather than the spatial arrange-
ment of its constituent atoms.) Because we human beings are
doing the Investigating of other species, we are inevitably the
ones who must abstract those configurations that we find explan-
atorily valuable for the purpose at hand, but they need not be
the same configurations to which we would have attended had
the object of our investigation been some other animal. To
examine the life-world of an animal we must attend to what is
significant to that animal. The Important point, however, is that
whatever spatial configuration is attended to, and for whatever
reason, attending to it only selects It from a background but does
not generate it. The same can be said of spectral reflectances.
But In the sense of "color" that Thompson, Varela, Palacios, and
I use to speak of the dimensionality of the color spaces of pigeons
and people, the animal nervous system does not select color, but
rather generates it.
Coinparatiwe color wision and
the objectiwity of color
David Hilbert
Division of Humanities and Social Sciences, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125
Electronic mail: hilbert@hss.caltech.edu
To be an objectivist about color is to hold that color is a property
that objects can have independently of whether or not they are
perceived by human beings or other sentient creatures. If we
are to restrict ourselves to physical properties then there are
compelling reasons for supposing that color must be somehow
connected to the reflecting properties of surfaces. Within this
rather minimal framework, objectivist views of color can take a
variety of different forms and be supported using a number of
different arguments. To establish the untenability of objec-
tivism It is not enough to show that some variants within this
framework are inadequate; the framework Itself must be chal-
lenged. Although the target article establishes the untenability
of some versions of objectivism, the framework itself remains
untouched and in fact much of the evidence Thompson et al.
offer in favor of their enactivist point of view can be comfortably
accommodated within the objectivist framework.
One way the authors attempt to use the considerable variation
In color vision among different kinds of animals relies on the role
color vision may play In the visual segmentation of a scene into
distinct surfaces. Thus variation in color vision may lead to
variation In scene segmentation. The strategy of the argument Is
to attempt to undermine objectivism about color by undermin-
ing objectivism about surfaces, leaving the objectivist with
nothing to which objective colors can be attached. This argu-
ment can be taken two different ways. As a refutation of color
objectivism the argument is clearly question-begging. The mere
fact that color vision plays a role In the segmentation of scenes
into distinct surfaces shows nothing directly about the objec-
tivity or relational character of either surfaces or colors. The
argument merely establishes that the processes that contribute
to the perception of color also contribute to the perception of
form. Objectivists distinguish between perceptual states and
objective states, and establishing a dependence between two
perceptual states does not establish a similar dependence be-
tween the objective properties with which the perceptions are
associated.
Although the argument from perceiver-relativity does not
constitute a direct refutation of color objectivism, It does point
out an Important fact that any objectivism has to take into
38
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
account. The properties of the physical world that an organism
has perceptual access to may not be the same ones that human
beings are able to perceive, and which properties these are
depends importantly on the perceptual apparatus (and ecologi-
cal needs) of the organism in question. Any view of color that
entails that the physical facts completely determine what color is
perceived, even in ideal conditions, is clearly inadequate.
Thompson et al.'s discussion of comparative color vision drives
this point home quite forcefully, although It can also be made
simply by considering the variability in human color perception.
To address this variety of perceiver-relativlty an objectivist
must give up any commitment to there being exactly one correct
description of the world of colored objects (although there may
be a unique complete description). Suppose that color is surface
spectral reflectance. What perception gives access to for a given
kind of organism is not the determinate reflectances themselves
but rather that a given surface has a reflectance of a particular
kind. Which kinds the organism has perceptual access to will
depend in part on the characteristics of Its perceptual system.
Different organisms may perceptually use different categoriza-
tions, but they will all be classifications of the same reality. The
fundamental point is that perception gives us only partial infor-
mation about the color properties of objects and that once this is
recognized many of the facts drawn from comparative studies of
color vision can be seen to be compatible with color objectivism.
A similar account can be given of variations in the way different
organisms segment the visual world Into scenes. We need to
acknowledge a relativity to the characteristics of the organism In
the kind of information It Is able to obtain about the spatial
properties of the world but this does not imply that these
characteristics determine the character of the world the organ-
Ism occupies.
If the comparative study of color vision is to pose difficulties
for objectivist views of color then It will be for different reasons
from those given In the argument from perceiver-relativity.
Computational objectivism, as characterized by Thompson et
al., has at its heart the claim that color is whatever physical
property it is the biological function of the color vision system to
detect. It may be plausible to think that in the case of human
beings and our near relatives this property is reflectance. But
there is no a priori reason to rule out, and according to the
authors some empirical reason to rule In, the possibility that for
some organisms color vision serves to detect quite different
properties. If this possibility Is realized then there is no single
physical property that it is the function of color vision to detect.
This would seem to preclude any objectivist theory of color.
(The argument also raises difficulties for any non-subjectivist
theory of color, including the authors' enactivist theory, for the
very same reasons.)
There is at least one response to this argument open to the
objectivist, however, and that is to make a virtue out of what
the authors paint as objectivism's greatest sin, its parochialism.
Discussions of the ontology of color, as well as a large part of
color science, are, after all, primarily concerned with a property
that human beings perceive, reflect on, and talk about. If It turns
out that this property Is not perceived by some other kinds of
organisms that is neither surprising nor a challenge to the
adequacy of our accounts of this property of particularly human
interest. Seen in this light the comparative considerations mere-
ly show that not all organisms are capable of perceiving color;
and given the diversity in ecological circumstances and needs
found In the animal world It is scarcely surprising that a property
that is perceptually important for one kind of organism plays no
role in the perceptual life of some other kinds of organisms.
Although I am inclined to think this response is along the right
lines, there Is one glaring difficulty with upholding such a
human-centered defense of the objectivity of color. The original
problem was raised by the possibility of there being organisms
In which color vision has a function different from the one it has
In human beings, but the point of view just sketched implies that
there is no literal sense in which such organisms possess color
vision at all. They do not, by hypothesis, perceive color, al-
though they may use somewhat similar visual machinery to
perceive a different property. Attributions of color vision to
nonhuman organisms have traditionally not been made on the
basis of the function their visual processes play in detecting
distal properties (those functions are usually not known) but
rather on the basis of other less ideological characteristics, such
as the ability to distinguish wavelengths independent of relative
Intensity. Thus, there Is a mismatch between the objectivist
account of the nature of color and the kinds of considerations
that are involved in attributing the presence or absence of color
vision to nonhuman organisms.
If this argument is correct then something has to give. Space
considerations preclude a more extended discussion of these
points, and it may be that this argument establishes nothing
more than the fact that although the Interests of philosophers
and visual scientists may overlap at places, they also diverge at
others. Those interested in ontology and those Interested in the
uniformities of visual systems may be led to cross-clarify the
same phenomena in the pursuit of the best theory in their
respective domains.
The wiew of a computational animal
Anya Hurlbert
Department of Physiology, Oxford University, Oxford 0X1 3PT, England
Electronic mail: ach@physiology.oxford.ac.uk
Thompson et al. argue that the computational approach to color
vision is both limited and conceptually wrong in assuming that
color vision's goal Is to recover surface spectral reflectance:
limited, because color vision serves diverse purposes across the
animal kingdom, not just to discern the reflectance properties of
surfaces, and wrong, because "recovery" implies that the thing
exists before It Is recovered, yet neither surfaces nor colors exist
except in that animals perceive them.
First, the statement of computational vision's view of color is
misleading. A more accurate statement would be that computa-
tional vision assumes one goal of color vision to be to label
surfaces (I justify the use of this blighted word below) with
invariant descriptors that thereby aid in object recognition (see,
e.g., the introductory comments in Lee, 1986, and Hurlbert
1989). The ideal candidate for such a descriptor Is an estimate of
surface reflectance.
Although It would be limiting to state that the only goal of
color vision Is to recover Invariant surface descriptors,
Thompson et al. must agree that this is at least one goal of human
color vision: They argue that an essential ingredient In the
experience of color vision is color constancy. Yet color constancy
means surface color constancy. In their definition (sect. 1.3),
Thompson et al. leave "color appearance" dangling, evidently
refusing to tie it to an anthropocentrically defined surface. Their
point seems to be that we must talk about color constancy in
animals and that surfaces are not the same to different animals.
Yet for an animal to have color constancy it must perceive
surfaces whose colors tend to remain constant, even if the
surfaces are themselves partly or wholly defined by their color,
and even if one animal's surface is another's volume. Among
humans, we have a clear notion of what we mean by a surface
and what surface color constancy is. Trying to agree with a bee
on where a surface begins and ends might be more difficult.
Still, Thompson et al. would seem to object to the notion that
color vision might serve to recover Invariant surface descriptors
because "recover" implies that the thing is "out there," whereas
color is not. Thompson et al. admit that it is logically possible to
recover spectral reflectance at a location in the scene because
reflectance can be physically measured. The Illogical leap is in
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
39

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
equating color with spectral reflectance. This is what the com-
putational objectivist does, but this man seems to have been
created from straw the better to be burned, and his view of color
probably has as much in common with that of a computational-
vision scientist as the latter's does with a bee's. Most investiga-
tors of computational vision heed the distinction between the
physical stimulus (light, of which reflectance is a determinant)
and the perception (color) to which it gives rise.
To say that computational vision limits its view of color to the
recovery of invariant surface descriptors grossly downplays the
significant work done on segmentation algorithms using color
(see Brill, 1990, for an analytical review). Far from ignoring the
role that color plays in segmenting the world, computational
theories assume that a central goal of color vision-is to aid in
discriminating object boundaries. It is also wrong that computa-
tional models of color constancy discard information about the
iliuminant: All algorithms implicitly or explicitly recover an
estimate of the illuminant together with reflectance.
The question of how color interacts with other percepts to
define surfaces is, as Thompson et al. conclude, a fascinating
one, calling for hard scrutiny in the study of both human and
machine vision. Several machine vision algorithms incorporate
interaction between visual modules to segment the image - for
example, color, motion, texture, depth - explicitly assuming
that distinct modules working in isolation may segment the
image in distinct ways (see, e.g., Poggio et al. 1988). Investiga-
tors of computational vision who evaluate the success of these
segmentation algorithms typically use their own perception of
objects as the criterion, in effect assuming that the robots
equipped with these algorithms should be "animals very much
like us" (sect. 3). This too contradicts the notion that computa-
tional vision is concerned only with the recovery of "animal-
independent" properties of the world.
To say that "colors are properties of the world that result from
animal-environment codetermination" (sect. 3) raises tricky
questions. Thompson et al. suggest that "animal-environment
codetermination" acts on the time-scale of evolution. A muta-
tion occurs in a fruit color. A mutation occurs in a bird's visual
pigment. This enables the bird to pick out the fruit; he eats it,
and he, his visual pigment, and the fruit seed survive. But when
the bird picks out the fruit he apprehends some property of the
way it reflects light - and perceives this as color. That evolution
plays a role in determining perception is not inconsistent with
the idea that at any given moment perception involves recover-
ing the environment, if the environment is considered to consist
of such physical properties as reflectance; indeed, it seems to
require it. Or do Thompson et al., in suggesting that "organisms
alter the world external to them as they interact with it" (sect. 3),
mean that organisms continuously change the very nature of
light, rewriting the physics of reflection?
Computational models founded on inverse optics do not
prespecify the environment, nor do they imply that perception
cannot shape the environment, if the environment is defined as
something created by the animal in the act of perceiving.
Rather, they are attempts to discover what can be perceived,
given such physical constraints as the nature of light, and such
sensorymotor constraints as photoreceptor spectral sensitiv-
ities. The claim that computational vision treats "perceptual and
motor mechanisms . . . as fundamentally distinct" (sect. 3)
downplays not only the more recent work mentioned as coun-
terexamples but also such earlier, seminal work as the Re-
ichardt-Poggio theory (1976) of how visual stimuli make flies fly.
The intriguing possibility Thompson et al. raise is that our
approximate color constancy is the result not of a failed attempt
to recover surface reflectance but of a successful attempt to
apprehend another feature of the physical environment. This
computational-vision scientist welcomes the views of other
animals on that possibility.
Data and interpretation in comparatiwe
wision
Gerald H. Jacobs
Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA
93106
Electronic mail: ghjacohs@ucshuxa.bitnet
In their engaging target article, Thompson, Palacios & Varela
profess no small ambition. Their goal (para. 2) is no less than "to
offer . . . a new empirical . . . perspective on color vision, one
which is based on recent experimental research in comparative
color vision." Why is this new perspective required, and what
are its proscriptions with respect to comparative color vision?
The authors portray the contemporary study of color vision as
preoccupied with the debate (principally promulgated by pro-
fessional philosophers) as to whether colors are perceiver-
independent physical properties (the objectivist view) or inter-
nal sensory qualities (the subjectivist view). The current resur-
rection of this ancient argument is characterized as representing
alternative viewpoints drawn from the respective wisdoms of
computational vision and neurophysiology/psychophysics. Al-
though they come down on the subjectivist side of this debate,
Thompson et al. find this position wanting because it does not
sufficiently credit the interactive role between the visual en-
vironment and the perceiving animal. They propose what they
term an "enactive" view of color vision based on the notion that
there is animal/environment codetermination. Trotted out as
support for this position are the familiar (but, startlingly undocu-
mented) examples of the coevolution of organic pigmentation
and animal color vision. Although the arguments are eventually
allowed to go off in several directions, this view seems best
encapsulated in section 2.5 where it is argued that an under-
standing of color vision requires, in addition to data from
neurophysiology and psychophysics, (a) attention to the evolu-
tionary histories of the animal's environmental interactions, (b)
an understanding of animal/environment coevolution, and (c)
appeal to a broad range of other physiological, evolutionary, and
ecological considerations. I think the authors are mistaken if
they imagine that anyone with concern for the problems of
comparative color vision would find this viewpoint heretical or
generally objectionable.
It is suggested that the enactive view of vision provides a
framework for understanding color vision. With respect to
comparative color vision, four specific research directions are
encouraged (sect. 3). Although these hardly represent a novel
call to arms (e.g., readers are urged to study neuronal mecha-
nisms for color vision in other species and to explore the
ecological aspects of the relevant viewing environments), they
clearly represent worthwhile research directions. What is less
clear is whether it will be sufficiently appreciated just how
difficult it often is to reasonably interpret the data from studies
of color vision and its mechanisms. Because this problem is
central to much of Thompson et al.'s target article, and seems
particularly acute in the study of comparative color vision, it is
worth illustrating.
It is argued that the "first concern" of the enactive view of
color vision is to determine more precisely the dimensionality of
the color vision of different animals because variations in dimen-
sionality hold cues as to the color world of the animal. But in
doing so the authors show an eager readiness to accept all kinds
of indicators that can be far less than compelling. For example, it
is concluded (sect. 2.2) that the shape of the wavelength discrim-
ination function can be taken to indicate the type of color vision
system - trichromatic systems have two minima, tetrachromatic
systems have four minima, and so on. Yet, many wavelength
discrimination functions reported for trichromatic humans (in-
cluding Figure 2a, target article) show three minima. What
implication does this hold for dimensionality? And probably the
classical collection of wavelength discrimination functions for
40
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
known human anomalous trichromats show either one or two
minima (Wright 1946). On this ground are some to be judged
dichromatic, others trichromatic? Whereas we can probably
explain these differences on the basis of other facts about human
color vision, such results could be completely misleading if they
constituted the sole data base for some nonhuman subject from
which one was forced to infer the dimensionality of color vision.
To draw an example from comparative color vision, what are we
to make of the wavelength discrimination functions obtained for
the pigeon, a putative tetrachromat? Some of these functions
show three minima in the visible spectrum (Figure 4c), others
(e.g., Jacobs 1.981, p. 114) show only two.
Similar ambiguity surrounds the common practice of deriving
color vision dimensionality from a count of the number of
spectrally distinct, first-stage filters (e.g., Figure 4). Various
combinations of screening and cone pigments provide multiple
filter possibilities in various avian (e.g., six in the pigeon -
Bowmaker 1977) and reptilian (e.g., five in a freshwater turtle -
Liebman 1972) retinas. Whereas these provide the intriguing
possibility of color vision dimensionality that greatly exceeds
trichromacy, there is in most cases still a lack of consistently
compelling evidence that the visual systems of these animals
fully exploit this first-stage potential. For example, the pigeon
retina contains (at least) a total of four spectrally distinct receptor
types operative in the 580-640 nm portion of the spectrum
(Figure 4b); despite this, direct discrimination tests (Palacios et
al. 1990b) were unable to exclude the possibility that the pigeon
behaves dichromatically in this region of the spectrum (to be
fair, this experiment was also unable to exclude pigeon tri-
chromacy in this part of the spectrum). If all that is required to
determine color vision dimensionality is to count the number of
first-stage spectral filters, then we should stop lauding bird color
vision and award the title for the "most complex color vision
space" to the mantis shrimp whose 10 spectrally distinct types of
photoreceptors (Cronin & Marshall 1989) make it the first-
known decachromat.
It can probably be granted that counting spectral filters and
examining some aspects of visual discrimination that principally
reflect postreceptoral processing (wavelength discrimination,
spectral sensitivity) may provide only uncertain clues as to color
dimensionality. A more direct way (urged by the authors - sect.
3) is to carry out color mixture experiments. Whereas these
clearly get closer to the root of the problem, they need not be
the panacea the authors appear to believe them to be. For one
thing, with nonhuman subjects the outcome often has multiple
interpretations (as in the example of pigeon color mixing data
noted in the previous paragraph). Even in cases where we
believe we fully understand the issue of dimensionality, color
matching data may, by itself, prove ambiguous. No more clear
cut case of this exists than for classically defined human di-
chromats - protanopes and deuteranopes. Over a certain range
of test light intensities and for some spatial test configurations,
many of these subjects make color matches that must formally
classify them as having trichromatic color vision (Nagy 1980;
Smith & Pokorny 1977). In my view the moral is clear - although
it may be pleasant and satisfying to draw fanciful diagrams of
color space based on fragmentary evidence, one should not be
deluded into believing that these necessarily provide insight
into color experience.
Color enactiwism: A return to Kant?
Paul R. Kinnear
Department of Psychology, King's College, University of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen AB9 2UB, Scotland
Electronic mail: p.kinnear@aberdeen.ac.uk
As a psychologist with a background in physics I am torn
between what Thompson et al. call computational objectivism
and neurophysiological subjectivism when I wear my physics
hat, but I am most attracted by their view of color vision as an
enactive process when I wear my psychology hat. A typical
physicist's position is the one described by Wright (1988), who
supposed that there is a subjective color palette in the brain
waiting to be stimulated by the incredibly complex pattern of
neural signals. He acknowledged that these signals are not the
colours themselves. But the problem with this position is: How
does the palette develop in the first place?
Having spent many years studying normal and deficient color
vision in humans and speculating about the sensory mecha-
nisms, I was intrigued to read Thompson et al.'s target article
linking color vision with cognitive science. Their contrast be-
tween computational objectivism and neurophysiological sub-
jectivism, their assessment that neither provides a satisfactory
explanation of how we perceive color, and their proposal for the
enactive view of perceptual content gave me a deja-vu experi-
ence and sent me rummaging through my files for the British
Psychological Society's Presidential Address of 1961 given by
James Drever II.
The address was entitled "Perception and Action" and exam-
ined a much broader area than color vision, namely, how we
perceive objects in space. Drever (1961) reviewed Kant's Cri-
tique of pure reason and noted that Kant stressed the conative
nature of the self. Organisms do not behave in vacuo but act on
and in the environment. Brunswik (1956), too, viewed percep-
tion as an achievement made possible by the use of cues that
acquire ecological validity with time. The distal stimulus is what
is in the environment, the proximal stimulus is what is present
on the surface of the organism (e.g., the retinal image in the case
of vision), and the achievement of perception according to
Brunswik is being able to sense the distal stimulus despite all the
vagaries of the proximal stimulus. Piaget (1969) also cannot
accept that we are able to derive the spatial world from a
consideration of the proximal stimuli alone. He proposed that
awareness of space is based on action in space; a child learns to
perceive space by motor activity in space. So back to the present
authors.
Thompson et al. (sect. 3, para. 9) also state that "the first step
for perception is to refuse to separate perception from action, or
more generally from perceptually guided activity." They cite
Gibson's (1979) ecological approach in partial support, although
they share my worry that Gibson went too far in hypothesizing
that our ability to sense the environment is by being able to
detect affordances from the ongoing stimulation independent of
memory or any other cognitive function. They have reviewed
old ideas about the nature of perception and dressed them in
new clothes. They have specifically addressed the problem of
how we perceive color rather than the more general question of
how we perceive visual space. Their fascinating speculations
about tetrachromacy remind us to keep the other extreme in
mind, the limited colour world of the colour-vision defective
observer. This helps to confirm in my mind their thesis of an
animal and environment codetermination.
I still have an inner urge to posit an external physical world
existing independently from any living creature and to view
perception as the process of becoming aware of that external
world. But when one remembers that, physically, colour can be
measured only in spectrophotometric terms, and that our per-
ception is based on the nature of our sensory equipment as well
as more subtle mechanisms such as colour constancy, one is
forced to conclude that Kant, and now Thompson et al. are right:
Perception (and color) have to be achieved through action
(enaction) with the environment. The authors have re-
discovered the wheel, and in the process have provided a useful
summary of the state of the art in color vision research, as well as
some intriguing speculations regarding the color vision of other
animals.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
41

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
@f color wSsi@n
Serges L Kondrashev
Institute of Marine Biology, Far East Branch, USSR Academy of Sciences,
Vladivostok 690032, USSR
Behavioral studies can be useful In testing hypotheses about
mechanisms of color discrimination derived from data on pho-
tosensitive retinal elements or aspects of the dimensions of color
space. Alternatively color discrimination, expressed as a behav-
ioral response, cannot always be convincingly attributed to any
biological feature of a species. For example, In the breeding
season, male common toads, Bufo bufo, prefer blue "female
dummies" and other blue objects, exhibiting color discrimina-
tion and constancy of color perception (Gnjubkin et al. 1975). In
contrast, male common frogs, Rana tetnporaria, prefer red
objects and reject blue ones, exhibiting a real color choice
(Kondrashev et al. 1976). The mating response in frogs can be
accounted for by very marked sexual dimorphism In color (males
have a blue throat and a bluish-grey body, whereas females have
a reddish-orange throat and belly). This explanation is not valid
for toads, however, as they have no such dimorphism and,
moreover, female toads are reddish-brown.
It should be emphasized that behavioral responses can differ
even when the same peripheral sensory mechanisms of the
retina are Involved (they are very similar in frog and in toad;
Reuter & Virtanen 1976). Besides, such color preferences are
only displayed during mating and are not characteristic of other
types of amphibian behavior. This is evidence for an important
role for central nervous system mechanisms that modulate
messages from peripheral inputs.
Determining the dimensionality of color space can prove to
be complicated. The target article gives an example of a change
in dimension when, with a decrease in Illumination, the goldfish
turns into a trichromat from a tetrachromat. In contrast, a
decrease in dimensionality with an Increase in illumination can
be expected In more than 100 fish species possessing a unique
corneal light filter system: Within 40 to 60 minutes the cornea
becomes Intense yellow-orange In light and colorless again In
darkness. Such a change in the color of the cornea is caused by
special chromatophores with carothenoid pigments that In
daylight produce a filter with an optical density of 3-4 log. units
for a spectrum with Xmax < 520 nm. Evidently, with such cut-off
filters, characteristics of the color space change reversibly and
depend on the ambient Illumination within a broad range (10—
3000 lux; Gnjubkin 1989; Heinerman 1984; Kondrashev et al.
1986; Orlov & Gamburtzeva 1976).
In connection with the presence of colored light filters a
question arises about color constancy mechanisms In fish (Di-
mentman et al. 1972). Changeable corneal light filters cause,
along with the change in the absolute amount of light reaching
the retina, a change in Its spectral composition. The appearance
of yellow or red pigment in the cornea leads to changes in the
Image color on the retina. From the physical point of view, this
Is analogous to the transition from one overall Illumination to
another, for example, from white to more yellow.
Could constancy of color perception be realized in the pres-
ence of colored light filters? Calculations Indicate (Gnjubkin
1989) that In fish with yellow filters of medium density (1-1.5
log. units) changes in the excitation of cones are comparable to
those observed In the absence of filters when there Is distortion
of color temperature from natural light sources, for example, at
the transition from twilight to midday sunlight. It appears that
color constancy can be still maintained under these conditions.
In some species from families Hexagrammidae and Tetraodon-
tidae, very densely colored filters should probably Interfere
with normal color discrimination In bright light, unless some
stronger mechanisms of color constancy are Involved. Thus, the
case Is fairly unusual, when at the transition to bright daylight
color discrimination worsens and other biological goals prevail
(e.g., Improvement of apparent contrast and protection of pho-
toreceptors against the excess light in shallow waters where
these fishes are predominantly found).
The situation with color filters of the cornea, together with
other examples of narrow-band spectrum light conditions for
deep-sea fishes show that findings on ecological aspects of the
perceptual environment outlined in Thompson et al.'s conclu-
sions do not necessarily lead to an adequate description of
mechanisms of color discrimination. There are real situations In
which particular characteristics of color space and Illumination
conditions may be such that a particular biological task (selection
of prey or shelter, protection of young, etc.) is accomplished
with the aid of vision but excluding color as a key stimulus or
significant feature.
Qbjectivism-subjectivi:
false dilemma?
Joseph Levine
Department of Philosophy & Religion, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC 27695-8103
Electronic mail: n51H501@ncsuvm.hitnet
The authors of the target article argue that the objec-
tivist/subjectivist dichotomy on the question of color must be
rejected in favor of what they call an "enactive" approach to
color vision. Although I am not prepared to take a stand here on
the objectivlst/subjectivist controversy itself (though I lean
toward subjectivism), I am not convinced by the arguments for
abandoning the framework of that debate or adopting the
positive alternative the authors propose. In general, my com-
plaint is that whereas the authors provide us with a wealth of
empirical data to bolster their case, they fail to demonstrate
adequately the bearing of this data on the central questions at
issue.
Thompson et al.'s principal argument against objectivism
derives from the comparative study of color vision, which
reveals wide variation in the nature of this capacity across the
animal kingdom. Species differ in their sensitivities to various
wave lengths, in the dimensionality of their color spaces, in the
neurophysiological processes subserving color vision, and even
In the ways they segment the visual field Into surfaces and
objects. According to the authors, this variation shows that the
properties with which color experiences are correlated can only
be characterized relative to the perceiver, and are therefore not
objective properties of external objects. Where the objectivist
attempts to Identify color with the spectral reflectance of a
surface, the authors respond that even the notion of a surface
Itself must be relativized to the perceiving subject.
The nonobjectivity of color, however, does not follow from
the variability of color experience across the animal kingdom.
There are many different ways of carving the world into objects
and properties, but that does not make any one way nonobjec-
tive. So long as a certain perceptual state in humans is found to
track some external property, the objectivity of that property is
not impugned by the fact that bees or fish track a different
property. A genuine problem for the objectivist position can
indeed be raised (as it is by Hardin) by calling Into doubt the
claim that chromatic perceptual states In fact track an objective
physical property, such as spectral reflectance. But comparative
studies of color vision do no work for this argument.
Thompson et al. also criticize Hardin's "neurophysiological
subjectivism." Their argument Is that Hardin does not pay
sufficient attention to the extent to which color vision and
coloration in the environment are "codetermined," and that he
Is therefore wrong to Identify colors with properties of the
Internal states of organisms. Again, the authors' conclusion
doesn't follow. It may indeed be true that flowers, for example,
42
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Commentary /Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
have the coloration they have partly as a consequence of the
visual properties of the bees that aid the flowers' reproductive
capacities. But that does not mean that the properties of the
flower are thereby ontologically determined in part by the visual
capacities of the bees. The authors seem to be confusing causal
or genetic determination with ontological determination.
In general, Thompson et al.'s conception of the goal of a
theory of color seems to be infected with an equivocation
between causal and ontological determination. In presenting
their argument against Hardin's subjectivist position, they say:
"To explain the polymorphism in spider and squirrel monkey
color vision . . . we must appeal not simply to the neu-
rophysiological constitution of these animals, but also to the
evolutionary histories of their environmental interactions . . . "
(sect. 2.5, para. 8), and again: "It is therefore irrelevant . . . to
appeal to metaphysical intuitions about what the world would be
like 'if the living creatures were removed' when one's concern is
to provide a naturalistic explanation of perceiving animals and
their environments." (sect. 2.5, para. 13)
If the object of inquiry is to explain how it is that organisms
came to have the type of color vision they have, then an appeal to
their evolutionary histories is necessary. But if the object of
inquiry is to explain what color is, then it takes additional
argument - more than merely citing the phenomenon of co-
evolution - to establish the relevance of evolutionary history.
Using the phrase "explaining color vision" to cover both sorts of
inquiry only muddies the waters.
As for the authors' alternative "enactive" approach to color
vision, I find it difficult to get a clear sense of what this means.
For example, take the following claim: "In any case, the evi-
dence that we have presented in the previous paragraphs serves
to demonstrate our point that the operation of color vision
should be understood in the context of the actual behavioral
repertoires and visual ecologies of perceiving animals." (sect.
2.4, para. 25) What is it to "understand in the context of"? It
might mean that the context in question plays a causal role, in
which case there is little to argue about. Or it might mean that
the context in question plays an ontologically determinative
role, in which case the concerns raised above apply. But if it is
neither of these, then I fail to grasp what it does mean.
Finally, a word about color constancy. The authors point out
that objectivists tend to lean on the phenomenon of color
constancy, as this lends support to the view that the visual
system is computing the value of an external property on the
basis of proximal inputs. Deviations from perfect color constan-
cy, from changes in illumination and the like, are then treated as
illusions. Subjectivists, on the other hand, lean heavily on these
deviations to support the claim that there is no objective proper-
ty of the distal stimulus that the visual system is tracking. This is
an interesting case study for theories of content, given that the
question of what counts as error is crucial to the debate. In
essence, we have the disjunction problem here. One might try
applying Fodor's (1987) asymmetric dependency condition here
to determine whether, with the subjectivists, we should assign
the "disjunctive content," or with the objectivists, we should
assign the spectral reflectance as the content. It would be
interesting to see whether his theory, or any other theory of
content, could shed light on this problem.
Ontogeny and ontology: Ontophyietics
and enactiwe focal wision
Barry Lia
Department of Ophthalmology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195
Electronic mail: rodieck@uwashington.edu
War' nicht das Auge sonnenhaft,
Wie konnten wir das Licht erblicken?
[Were not the eye akin to the sun,
How could we behold the light?]
- Goethe, Zur Farhenlehre (1810)
Casting new light on ecological optics (Gibson 1961; 1979) and
the adaptive radiation of the vertebrate eye (Polyak 1957; Walls
1942), this target article reminds us once again that the sun has
brought forth a variety of eyes other than our own, a multitude of
other ways of beholding the world. The central ideas in this
treatise, the "codetermination" of the perceiving animal and its
environment and the "enactive" nature of perception, are remi-
niscent of the "Umwelt" concept of von Uexkiill (1926; 1957) and
the notion of perception as "implicit preparation to respond"
(Sperry 1952, p. 302).
These central themes should not be taken as arcane depar-
tures from the common paradigms of perception critiqued in the
target article. Rather, eschewing the usual theoretical focus on
"our familiar human environment," (sect. 2.4) this comparative
view of perception is somewhat like a biological "theory of
relativity" for cognitive science. As with Einstein's theories, we
are once again called on to abandon our familiar notion of The
Physical World, this time to conceive of a multitude of biological
perceiver-relative worlds, a multitude of "enacted perceptual
environments experienced by animals in their visually guided
interactions." (sect. 3) In this way each species has its own
metaphysics, its own ontology.
Departing from the usual reliance on our familiar concepts of
the physical world, Thompson et al. point out that, "the world
that a given animal perceives cannot be given a purely physical-
level specification, for what an animal perceives depends on
three kinds of factors: (i) physical-level constraints; (ii) sen-
sorimotor activity as constituted by neuronal processes and
developmental constraints; and (iii) evolutionary history." (sect.
3, para. 14) These developmental constraints and the evolution-
ary history whereby an organism attains its sensory-motor con-
stitution are intimately related (Gould 1977; Katz 1983; North-
cutt 1990). Ontophyletic processes ultimately give form to an
animal's ontology.
Although it is easier perhaps to make the departure from our
usual conceptions advocated here in the consideration of more
exotic perceptual worlds, I aim to maintain the perspectives
thus gained in reconsidering "the world as described in relation
to the sensory-motor capacities of the higher primates" (sect. 3),
and to point to what may represent an ontophyletic develop-
ment instrumental to the evolution of enactive focal vision.
Focal vision is an exemplary enactive process (Lia 1989).
Surveying mammals, it is apparent that focal visual behavior,
and concomitant focal retinal topography, frontal position of the
eyes, and wide binocular field, is correlated with visually guided
use of the forelimbs in the exploitation of what has been termed
"praxic space" (Hughes 1977; Trevarthen 1968). The raccoon
may surpass the cat in manipulatory behavior, but the felidae
surpass all other nonprimate mammals in visually guided de-
ployment of the forelimbs in praxic visual space. Through
convergent evolution of focal vision, both the felidae and the
primates are animals that reach with their eyes as well as with
their hands. In an enactive sense, it may be argued that we move
our eyes not so much because of the focal sensitivity of our
retina, but rather that we have focal retinal topography in order
better to move our eyes (Lia 1989; Walls 1962). "Or, putting it in
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
43

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
another way, perhaps we cannot understand how the retina
works unless we understand how the eye works" (Gibson 1961,
p. 259). Regarding Thompson et al.'s contention that "animals
with different sensorimotor capacities would segment the world
in different ways" (sect. 3), focal vision has long been associated
with a superior cognitive "grasp" of the visual world (Elliot
Smith 1932).
This parallel development of visually guided manipulative
praxis and focal vision is apparent in comparing prosimian and
simian primates. One may wonder then why focal vision has not
developed as least among the diurnal felidae to the degree it has
among the primates? The area centralis of the feline retina
seems to fall just short of the development of a fovea centralis
(Rowe & Dreher 1982). Of course, a variety of contingencies can
be imagined, among them somato-motor developments limited
by the specialized retractable feline claw. I would like to point
out, however, a possible ontogenetic constraint related to the
partial decussation of the visual system that may have limited
the evolution of binocular vision in nonprimate mammals gener-
ally. The nasotemporal division is another feature of retinal
specialization accompanying focal topography that is also funda-
mental to enactive binocular focal vision.
The strict hemiretinal nasotemporal division of the primate
retina is unique among mammals (Allman 1977; Pettigrew
1986). Specialized for frontal, binocular vision, the retinogen-
iculostriate pathway obeys a more straightforward nasotemporal
division in relation to the frontality of the eyes even among
nonprimate mammals. In nonprimates, however, crossed pro-
jections arise from the temporal as well as the nasal hemiretina,
so that there is a panoramic representation of the entire con-
tralateral retina in the superior colliculus. The presence of such
a complex of decussation patterns in the nonprimate may be
related to their capacity for two modes of vision, frontal and
panoramic (Lia 1989). This is exemplified by the two discrete
eye postures of the rabbit and the "two-state" organization of its
cortical system for forward vision (Hughes & Vaney 1982). It
may also be evident in the ungulate's tolerance for disjunctive
eye movement (Pettigrew 1986), and in the differing habits of
vergence behavior observed between laboratory and barnyard
cats (Hughes 1972). Primates exhibit obligate frontal vision.
We have recently shown that the unique primate nasotem-
poral division is not sculpted during development by selective
ganglion cell death from a decussation pattern characteristic of
other mammals (Chalupa & Lia 1991). In nonprimate mammals,
on the other hand, even the retinogeniculate decussation pat-
tern arises as such a secondary refinement of the original
projection pattern, as has been shown in the cat (Leventhal et al.
1988) and ferret 0effery 1990). Moreover, the extremely precise
specification of both the crossed and uncrossed projections in
the macaque may result from the lack of intermingling projec-
tions from the developing temporal hemiretina, so that posi-
tional determinants operate more effectively (Chalupa & Lia
1991).
I suggest here that the complexities of the developing nonpri-
mate decussation pattern may present an ontogenetic constraint
on the evolution of binocular vision. The straightforward on-
togenetic pattern of the primate nasotemporal division may in
some way simplify the development of a binocular visual system
and set the stage for the expression of the high degree of
precision evident in developing retinogeniculostriate projec-
tions in the macaque monkey (Chalupa & Dreher 1991; Chalupa
& Lia 1991; Lia et al. 1989). A highly specified visual substrate
seems to be required for precise, praxic eye movement given
highly focal topography. The primate plan for nasotemporal
ontogenesis may represent a key exaptation (Gould & Vrba
1982) for the further adaptive evolution of enactive focal vision.
We have found that both of these regional specializations for
enactive focal vision, focal topography (Lia & Chalupa 1988; Lia
et al. 1987) and the primate nasotemporal division (Chalupa &
Lia 1991), arise in the course of retinal morphogenesis. Unlike
in nonprimate mammals, they are virtually independent of
regressive developmental events governed by interactions of
optic projections within central structures. Thus, as in other
sensory modalities, peripheral changes may remodel the central
nervous system (Killackey 1990; Van der Loos 1979; Volman
1990). Indeed, we have proposed that the lack of exuberance of
the uniquely defined pattern of striate callosal development in
the macaque (Chalupa et al. 1989; Dehay et al. 1988) may have
underpinnings in the ontogenesis of its nasotemporal division
(Chalupa & Lia 1991). Similarly, more information about on-
tophyletic processes may even help us some day to understand
the differing plans among various mammals for the further
connectivity of the visual cortical areas (Killackey 1990; O'Leary
1989; Rakic 1988; Sereno & Allman 1991).
Clearly, comparative studies of visual system ontogenesis
with appropriate out-group comparisons will be needed to
support such speculations (Northcutt 1990; Sereno & Allman
1991). As a first step, it may prove instructive to compare the
ontogenetic specificity of the diurnal macaque with that of
the nocturnal simian owl monkey, whose visual capacities match
those of the domestic cat. In any event, the perspectives out-
lined in this target article serve to enhance not only the under-
standing of our own ontology, of our own niche, but also its
evolution. Cognition is not merely "in the head," but is a
"codetermined" process with a long ontophyletic history be-
hind it.
es @f animals5
@ constraints
irch of common
wision systems
of enwironroent
Erhard Maier and Dietrich Burkhardt
Department of Zoology, University of Regenshurg, D-8400 Regensburg,
Germany
In their elaborate target article Thompson et al. offer a broad
overview on the two main approaches, objectivism and subjec-
tivism, to explain the ontology of color. Their suggestion of a
new approach, the enactive view of comparative color vision, is
developed on a spectrum of relevant examples of the color vision
of various animals. Their approach seems most striking and
fertile for examining and discussing an animal's color vision only
in the context of the animal's environment. Nevertheless, there
are some problems implicitly addressed in their paper but not
cited enough in their importance for an understanding of color
vision.
First, color vision is but one of the various tasks a visual
sensory organ has to fulfill. Depending on this multifunctional
organization, color vision may play a more or less dominant role,
depending on the relative importance of other essential percep-
tual tasks for an animal (e.g., nocturnal vision; specialization of
certain retinal regions for movement detection, etc.). Hence
color vision should always be examined and discussed as one
facet of the whole visual sensory organ.
Second, it is definitely necessary to examine and explain the
color vision of a given animal in the context of its environment.
The color vision of various animals should be tested this way.
But then the comparative argument should be emphasized
more strongly. Where are there differences in color vision?
What are the reasons for those differences? And most of all, are
there common features of color vision among different animals?
To our mind, Thompson et al. concentrate too much on
searching for and pointing out differences (sect. 3) in the color
vision of various animals, whereas the search for common
features seems especially to offer the possibility of a better
understanding of the ontology of color. Where could such
common features be found?
Using recent results, we present some possible target do-
44
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
mains for examining and comparing color vision. Despite differ-
ent levels of chromaticity (di-, tri- and tetrachromaticity) and
different phylogenetic classifications (such insects as honeybees;
such vertebrates as fishes, birds or mammals), there seems to be
a clustering of spectral regions of best wavelength discrimina-
tion in different animals (at about 400 nm, 500 nm, 600 nm;
Neumeyer 1988). This could be a hint that in the respective
spectral regions acute hue discrimination is necessary for vari-
ous animals; the question of the biological significance of this
accordingly arises.
Another target domain for further investigation could be the
fact that so far only partially known ecological factors seem to
cause similar adaptations of color vision among various animals.
The spectral properties of the cone types of a penguin
(Spheniscus humholdti) resemble those of certain fishes more
than those of many other birds (Bowmaker & Martin 1985).
Another example seems to occur in animals active at twilight;
these all tend to be dichromats. This tendency even holds in
such phylogenetic classes with highly evolved color vision as the
birds: The tawny owl, Strix aluco, possesses a dichromatic color
vision (Martin & Gordon 1974).
Evolutionary constraints must be strong to build up such
analogous features. What are the forces in animals and in the
environment that give rise to the evolution of common features
of color vision? Searching for such convergent characteristics
seems to be more promising than concentrating on the many
differences of color vision systems, necessary as this is (Maier
1990).
Another problem arises in the comparison of recent forms of
color vision of various animals: How is one to compare different
levels of evolutionary adaptation? There is no "steady state" of
color vision, but a permanent adaptation to environmental
conditions. Perhaps this problem can be best explained in
mammals. Why do mammals, including man, have such re-
stricted color vision compared to those of many fishes, reptiles,
and especially birds? Most mammals are dichromats. Even the
trichromacy in primates is relatively poor, compared to those of
other animals. The following hypothesis has been offered by way
of explanation: During early states of evolution mammals may
have been nocturnal. An elaborate color vision system was
unnecessary, compared with other needs the visual system had
to fulfill (e.g., a good scotopic system). Their color vision could
therefore be reduced (Bowmaker 1980a). From an evolutionary
viewpoint, only recently have various mammals became diur-
nal, with their color vision re-evolving. Contemporary mam-
malian color vision, even that of the primates, hence still seems
to be limited compared to its possible culmination in birds.
Comparing "just evolving" and highly evolved color vision
systems under their natural conditions seems to be another
rather fertile way of examining the evolution and adaptation of
color vision, thus clarifying the ontology of color.
The fact that color vision has evolved (independently)
throughout the animal kingdom, combined with the knowledge
of the animals' colored environment, points to the importance of
this form of perceptual experience. Thompson et al.'s com-
parative approach, combined with the above suggestions, could
present a new and promising way to emphasize some new
aspects of the biological ontology of color.
A mathematical framework
for biological color wision
Laurence T. Maloney
Department of Psychology, Center for Neural Science, New York
University, New York, NY 10003
Electronic mall: ltm@cns.nyu.edu
Thompson et al. propose an explanation of color vision in-
tended as an alternative to what they term computational vi-
sion. Summarized here is what I perceive to be the relation
between one computational vision approach, the linear models
framework, and the experimental study of comparative color
vision. It is intended to be the "alternative theoretical and
empirical framework" and "rival research program" that the
authors invite.
The linear models framework serves two functions: to provide
a mathematical framework for the careful, analysis of biological
and computational color vision, and to generate hypotheses to
guide experimentation. It assigns a special role in color vision to
surface spectral reflectance (SSR) as defined in Wyszecki &
Stiles (1982, p. 234). It provides a clear hypothesis about the
nature of the physical properties corresponding to intrinsic
colors. It is intended to describe color vision systems that can
assign approximately constant intrinsic colors to objects despite
changes in illumination.
The associated algorithms by Brill (1978; 1979), Buchsbaum
(1980), Maloney and Wandell (1986), and others do not simply
predict "approximate color constancy" when the assumptions of
the algorithms are not satisfied. They provide explicit predic-
tions of the direction and degree of color nonconstancy for a
given choice of linear models of light and surface and of al-
gorithm. On the other hand, if any of the algorithms of Brill,
Buchsbaum, or Maloney and Wandell are used across a range
where their assumptions are satisfied, then they provide per-
fectly stable estimates of surface properties despite changes in
the illuminant. The existence of such privileged spaces of lights
and surfaces where color constancy is essentially perfect is
perhaps the most significant prediction of the linear models for
the study of human color vision or any color vision system that
exhibits some degree of color constancy. The lights and surfaces
across such a range, described by linear models, may be mark-
edly different in their physical properties and still permit per-
fect color constancy. Large changes in the physical light are
consistent with perfect color constancy for these models. Brain-
ard and Wandell (1991; Brainard 1989) measured chromatic
adaptation in response to illuminant changes simulated on a
CRT display. Their results were consistent with hypotheses
concerning chromatic adaptation and "privileged spaces" pre-
dicted by the linear models framework.
The framework and associated algorithms are not dependent
on the choice of a particular visible spectrum or choice of
photoreceptor spectral sensitivities. They are general. For any
specified portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, it is possible
to estimate linear models of SSR, across that portion of the
spectrum and to determine how many different classes of pho-
toreceptors are needed to achieve a desired level of constancy.
Thompson et al. comment that "color-spaces of different dimen-
sionalities can be constructed on the basis of the same physical
signals." The linear-models framework allows an analysis of the
consequences for visual performance of choice of dimension-
ality. Similarly, it is possible to estimate certain consequences of
extending the visible spectrum for human color vision or other
biological vision systems.
It is also possible to estimate the best choice of photoreceptor
for the purpose of estimating intrinsic colors anywhere in the
visible spectrum (Brainard et al. 1989; Maloney 1984; 1986;
1990). These analyses are potentially valuable for comparing
color vision across species.
The framework lends itself to analyses of the circumstances
under which it is and is not possible to reliably assign intrinsic
colors to objects and to the analysis of models of visual process-
ing not based on linear models. Brainard and Wandell (1986), for
example, using the linear model, have analyzed the conditions
under which variants of Land's retinex theory (Land 1983; Land
& McCann 1971) can assign colors to objects that are approx-
imately independent of changes in the illuminant. West and
Brill (1982) analyze the circumstances under which other light-
ness algorithms (reviewed in Hurlbert 1986) can be color con-
stant. The net outcome of these analyses is that lightness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
45

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
algorithms, including Land's retinex theory, do not reliably
assign constant colors to surfaces. The deviations from color
constancy are large, predictable, and characteristic of lightness
algorithms. Hence, any attempt to assess the validity of such
algorithms for color vision in other species should consider these
analyses.
The linear-models framework is precise. It permits careful
analyses of the relationship between color vision performance
and associated environmental factors. It is extendable, notably
to a consideration of surface specularity (D'Zmura & Lennie
1986; Lee 1986) and nonuniform illumination (Funt & Drew
1988).
The linear-models approach is falsifiable. To falsify it in favor
of Thompson et al.'s central concern ("perceptually-guided
activity"), we need only find a species that represents as color
some component of its environment not associated with SSR.
We could imagine a species, Homo aviator, that encodes the
threat-index of any object as a large, additive color shift in
normal vision. Dangerous objects are coded by shifts in a
particular direction in color space. So long as the threat is
associated with the interior and not the surface of the object,
linear models could be rejected by color matching experiments
involving objects more or less threatening. A less dramatic but
equally compelling rejection of the linear approach could come
from any of several lines of research, notably failure to find a
"privileged subspace."
Thompson et al., in contrast, formulate a description of
biological color vision that is at once imprecise and scarcely
falsifiable. I cannot bring myself to disagree with the notion that
an organism is specialized to a particular ecological niche or to
read more than this claim into the authors' presentation. I
therefore suggest that the linear-models framework is the more
useful tool for modeling and analyzing the interplay of species
and environment. Maloney (1992) provides a brief review of the
framework and related work.
lion: Content wersus experience
Mohan Matthen
Department of Philosophy, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada T6G 2E5
Electronic maii^ cmpm@mts.ualberta.ca
The distinction between (a) the perceiver-centered, conscious,
or phenomenal, dimension of perception, and (b) its representa-
tional, content-bearing, or intentional role with respect to distal
properties is conceptually clear, but hard to apply empirically.
Following Hardin (1988), Thompson et al. argue that certain
perceiver-centered aspects of color vision show color vision to
have no objective content. The presuppositions of this bridging
inference are not entirely obvious.
I have argued (Matthen 1988) that perception is useless to
cognition without epistemic access to its output. [See also
Searle: "Consciousness, Explanatory Inversion, and Cognitive
Science" BBS 13(4) 1990] Suppose that phenomenal states of
perceptual awareness constitute this access - suppose, in other
words, that perceptual consciousness is a mechanism that makes
the content of perceptual states available to the perceiver for the
purposes of constructing a rational picture of the world. Then
there will be two quite distinct quality spaces relevant to such a
perceptual module as color vision - phenomenal space and the
quality space that constitutes the content of color vision.
Obviously there will be considerable correlation between
awareness and content. On the other hand, we have no reason to
expect the correlation to be perfect: A need for awareness of
content is not sufficient to ensure the evolution of a perfect
correlation between these two aspects of perception. This
makes it difficult to know whether certain features of phe-
nomenal color space carry over into the property space that
constitutes its content. For example, Berlin and Kay (1969)
showed a certain universality in color terms across languages
and cultures. This shows, presumably, that phenomenal color
space is nonhomogeneous, the metric becoming more dense
around certain focal points. But does it follow that the content
space is similarly lumpy? Not necessarily. In an exactly analo-
gous way, it is hard to know to what extent the features of
phenomenal color space referred to in the target article entitle
us to draw conclusions about the content of color vision.
The functional view of content is not committed to the kind of
smooth mapping from experience to distal property space that
Thompson et al. envisage. Phenomenal space might contain
structure that totally fails to correlate with anything in the
structure of content. Consequently, the objectivist need not
recommend that "we should replace our conception of color as
understood in visual science with a new concept of physical
color." Rather the objectivist would be well-advised to give
visual science its conception of color (especially given that most
color concepts are founded on the phenomenal structure of color
vision, which is what is directly available to us), and to maintain,
paradoxically perhaps, that it is not color that is the content of
color vision, but some other physical quantity. For that is the
clear consequence of distinguishing between content and expe-
rience and allowing each a role of its own. (This cleavage was not
clear in Matthen, 1988, I confess, especially in section 8, the
source of most of the views to which Thompson et al. object.)
In Matthen (1988) I was reasonably explicit about what I took
perceptual content to be: It is a presentation of some object
external to the state itself as possessing some feature - for
example, a presentation of some individual as moving along a
certain path in three-dimensional space. Such content is ex-
pressible by means of a linguistic description attributed to the
object of perception. The attribution of content explains (a) the
relationship of perception to the external world, (b) its computa-
tional aspects, and (c) perceptual error, particularly normal
misperception, which is what occurs when a probabilistic al-
gorithm is applied to an unusual situation - as in visual illusions,
for example. (It is compatible with this description of content
that some perceptions, color perceptions for example, should
fail to possess content.) It is certainly true that this notion of
content is considerably more restricted than the one to which
many contemporary philosophers subscribe. Nevertheless, its
role would be clear if one could pin it down in particular cases.
This way of understanding the work of a theory of content
implies that content cannot be individuated by correlation. It
may be that color experience does not fit very well with any
objective property space. However, suppose that the Horn-
Land type of algorithm embodied assumptions that were largely
true in a two-dimensional world of "Mondrian" type scenes, but
failed in the three-dimensional, multidirectionally illuminated,
real world. In these circumstances, color vision would correlate
poorly with such real properties as reflectances, and we should
constantly see surfaces and colors that simply have no objective
correlates. But it might still be true that reflectances and the like
are the content of such misperceptions. For suppose that the
Horn-Land algorithm gave us good predictions of what errors
we should make under real three-dimensional conditions. This
is just the sort of case in which I should want to say that color
vision has reflectance as its objective content, but because it is
full of error it fails to correlate well with reflectance or with real
surfaces. Now I no longer want to assert that reflectances do in
fact behave the way I have just outlined. But it is still possible,
despite the authors' protestations, that a task-oriented, al-
gorithmic analysis of color vision will ultimately provide objec-
tivists with some reasonable substitute for reflectances (see
Dannemiller 1989).
Having said this, I must now acknowledge the strength of
Thompson et al.'s "enactive" approach. Many realists treat
perceptual properties as if they were features of the world that
46
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Commentary /Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
existed before organisms got there, and of perceptual, systems as
if they were plopped into the environment to detect such
features, like a space probe sent to Venus. But this sort of
conception makes no evolutionary sense - an organism is likely
to record task-relevant aspects of its interaction with the en-
vironment, and these aspects might well be defined relative to
the organism. The enactive perspective encourages us not to
look always for discrete external correlates for our perceptual
states, but to allow them instead to assume a much more
complex relationship with environmental conditions - any rela-
tionship that would allow the organism to function would be
sufficient.
So it is important for the objectivist to understand that
although perceptual content always makes reference to some-
thing outside the perceptual state itself, distality is a matter of
degree. Perceptions of three-dimensional motion might be
distal to a maximal degree, for they purport to inform us of
perceiver-independent states of external objects. Acoustic and
olfactory perceptions have less distal content: They deal with
something independent of the perceiver, perhaps, but some-
thing in the medium rather than in the object. (This was indeed
how color perception was thought of by Newton, before color-
constancy was discovered, namely, as informing us only of light-
color, a property of the medium rather than the object.) Many
tactile perceptions are less distal still, telling us of interactions
between the perceiver and other objects. Finally, the sensations
of pleasure and pain that Berkeley characterized as tertiary
inform us of states of our own bodies, and of nothing outside,
even where these private states are clearly caused by something
external, such as a sound or sight.
The idea that distality comes in degrees allows the objectivist
to respond constructively to the challenge posed by the target
article. Color vision might not detect something "out there" - it
might just record a complex situation with several external
variables and some internal to the perceiver. This does not
necessarily show that it has no content. The objectivist is not
defeated merely by showing that color is not maximally distal.
Even if it is true that color vision is concerned with things other
than the detection of properties of surfaces, this might entail
only that color content will be demoted in the scale of distality.
(Incidentally, the observation that "color vision is concerned
with illumination conditions in their own right" does not suffice
for such a demotion, since detecting surface reflectance does
tend to leave illumination conditions as a residuum.)
Finally, a comment on the use of biological functions to
anchor objectivism. The authors treat this as if it were a commit-
ment to some small set of distal properties so that all perceptual
systems converge on their detection. Not at all. One could
imagine a plethora of closely related features of the world or of
the interactive perceiver-world complex, so that even neu-
rophysiologically similar systems might not converge on the
very same feature. Such an ontology, a natural basis for some-
thing like "anthropocentric realism" (Hilbert 1987), makes it
quite plausible that human color vision should have a very
different content from that of birds. Indeed, the "comparative
argument" could be taken as suggesting just such a picture.
Biological theories of content, then, need not be adaptationist in
an objectionable way. Once the degrees of distality have been
noted, such theories can appropriate many of the interesting
features of the "enactive" theory.
On possible perceptual worlds and how
they shape their environments
Rainer J. Mausfelda
5 Reinhard M. Niedereea,
and K. Dieter Heyerb
aPsychological Institute, University of Bonn, D-5300 Bonn 1, Germany;
bDepartment of Psychology, University of Kiel, D-2300 Kiel, Germany
Electronic mall: aups128@dbnrhrz1.bitnet; 
bgpo33@rz,uni-kiel.dhp.de
We are very sympathetic both to the broad perspective con-
veyed by Thompson, Palacios & Varela and to the many specific
ideas that counteract various constrictions found in research on
color perception. Regrettably, the exposition is often careless
and incoherent in detail and conflates conceptual and meth-
odological levels of analysis. We therefore believe that the
metaphor of a holistic "enactive approach" falls short of serving
the purposes claimed by the authors.
The inherent Janus-facedness of the concept of color. Un-
disputedly, the concept of human color vision involves both a
subjective component, as it refers to a perceptual phenomenon
and an objective one (imagine, by contrast, color experiences
where perceived objects were "colored" subjectively according
to emotional or intentional states). We take this subtle tension to
be the essential ingredient of research on color perception,
which cannot be disposed of by an essentialist definition of the
kind "color is . . . ," be it subjectivist, objectivist, or enactivist.
Although an indispensable moderate objectivism tacitly per-
vades the arguments, Thompson et al. attempt to underpin their
position by attacking a (straw man?) version of computational
objectivism that simply reduces color to, for example, spectral
reflectance. The "ultraobjectivist" correspondence require-
ments involved in Hardin's argument from external irre-
ducibility (sect. 2.4), which Thompson et al. adopt as a key
argument, is not necessarily implied by computational objec-
tivism. Furthermore, it is difficult to justify or even clearly state
such a demand, as it refers implicitly to (the problematic con-
cept of) "natural kinds," rather than to perceptual and physical
properties as such. (Notice in passing that it would already apply
to the notion of two lights or surfaces having the "same color,"
i.e., to equivalence classes with respect to metamerism). We do
not deny, though, that the untenability of this demand is in tune
with a comparative perspective focusing on variations across
species which may be hypothesized to "imply different phe-
nomenal color spaces" (sect. 2.1).
Is "phenomenal color space9' a clear notion at all? Thompson
et al. introduce "phenomenal color space" (whatever this means
exactly in animals) in terms of hue, saturation, and brightness.
However, already in the context of human color vision, this very
concept amounts to "downplaying the phenomenal structure of
color," which even seems to give rise to higher-dimensional
concepts of color space; witness the corresponding discussions
by, for example, Hering (1920), Katz (1911) or Evans (1974), and
the remarks on brightness/lightness in Thompson et al.'s Note
2. The orthodoxy of this view is in surprising contrast with the
complexity rightly assumed otherwise, for example, in taking
color perception to serve not only reflectance-related functions
and to be intertwined intrinsically with spatial features of per-
ception (and thus with the emergence of perceived objects as
such).
Thompson et al. place phenomenal color space at the top of a
hierarchy of color spaces (sect. 1.2), which are vaguely related to
levels of neural organization. The concept of level involved here
remains ambiguous, if not obscure, all the more so as - ironically
enough - human phenomenal color space is identified with the
color space as defined by the Comission Internationale de
l'Eclairage (CIE) and the corresponding tristimulus values (not
to mention some confusion in detail). These are actually based
on color-matching experiments with respect to small spots of
light (aperture colors) and that have for practical reasons been
chosen from a family of linearly-related color codes, among
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
47

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
which are those (e.g., Smith-Pokoray's r', g\ b', cf. Wyszecki &
Stiles 1982) that are commonly interpreted as receptor-level
ones. Thus, at the top of the hierarchy we find ourselves back at
level (i), as it were.
The concept of color space is devoid of any (empirical) mean-
ing if it is not associated with that of a color code, a color code
being understood here as a vector-valued mapping defined on
suitable stimuli (parametrized by physical indices) that repre-
sents specific perceptual or neural features/relations on the
appearances of signals evoked respectively in a specified con-
text.1 Although Thompson et al. allude to corresponding dis-
tinctions, they tend to jump to conclusions by neglecting the
methodological and conceptual distinctions necessary at this
point. Only a precise notion of a code allows a proper treatment
of the concept of dimensionality, let alone of "incommen-
surability. " For example, what sense does it make to assert that a
"bee color space and human color space can be said to be
commensurable, for the dimensionalities of the spaces are the
same" (sect. 2.2), if the equivalence classes for metamerism
already fall apart?
Ewolwing environments. We endorse the importance of an
evolutionary and ecological perspective and acknowledge the
limitations of the usual computational approaches based on the
Idea of isolating static single functions. In this connection, two
units of analysis need to be carefully distinguished, namely, the
evolving species and the individual (in a specific context). In
view of this distinction, as well as from an evolutionary point of
view, we consider the role attributed by Thompson et al. to
codetermination (important though it Is) and the dichotomy of
an "autonomous self-organizing system" versus a "hetero-
nomous input-output system" (sect. 3) to be, at best, overstated.
It remains unclear to us whether the "enactive view" based
thereon Is simply to express the well-known dialectical rela-
tionship between the notion of a stimulus and "the structure of
the percelver" or whether It attempts to achieve a synthesis by
introducing a new ontological specification of "environment"
transcending the objective-subjective distinction. It seems
barely possible to accommodate the above-mentioned issues
and to develop a theory of perception - regardless of whether or
not It is evolutionary In spirit - without carefully distinguishing
the following ontological/epistemological levels of analysis: (i)
the physical environment (be it organic or anorganic), (ii) the
"perceptual environment from a given animal's point of view"
(sect. 3) (be It conceived phenomenally or neurally), and (III) the
theory that a scientist constructs regarding (ii) and Its relation to
(i). Although Thompson et al.'s arguments referring to experi-
mental results necessarily rely on this distinction, the notion of
environment seems to escape any precise specification in their
programmatic considerations and philosophical claims. Not-
withstanding the target article's many stimulating aspects,
Thompson et al. 's enactive view, somehow being reminiscent of
Goethean holism, leaves us with the feeling that it encompasses
visions of vision that aim at more than science can be expected to
provide.
NOTE
1. A measurement-theoretic approach along the lines of Suppes et al.
(1989, Chapter 15) might be useful at this point.
are onSf in the head
James A. McGilvray
Department of Philosophy, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
H3A 277
Electronic mall: czjm@musica.mcgiil.ca
Thompson, Palacios & Varela, "ecological enactivists" all, tell us
that subjectivists are wrong - that colors aren't in the head.
They also tell us that the objectivists are wrong - that colors
(identified by the objectivist with surface spectral reflectance
properties of physical objects) aren't out there in the world.
Where are they? The enactivist begins an answer to this ques-
tion by saying that colors can be identified and mapped only by
attaching them to pairs consisting of organisms (of some evolved
type) and their environments. The subjectivist also says some-
thing like this: A particular organism's colors in the head are
"projected" onto things out there. But the enactivist does not
want to speak of projection. The enactivist wants to make colors
Into properties of "enacted perceptual environments experi-
enced by animals in their visually guided interactions." (sect. 3)
Colors, attached to objects In an organism's environment, are
properties of things "out there" after all. This is not, we are told,
a Gibsonian realism - It is not a noncomputationalist color
objectivism. Nor is it some arcane form of subjectivism. But If it
is neither, what is It? I confess that after my efforts to understand
the enactivist answer I am still mystified. And I find no reason to
abandon subjectivism, a subjectivism that is reinforced by the
data Thompson et al. provide.
It Is clear from what Thompson et al. claim that it is essential
for the enactivist to establish that a particular color is inconceiv-
able apart from a particular ecological niche - that is, from
classes of organisms and their (external) visual perceptual ob-
jects ("a relevant world for the animal," section 3). To attempt to
establish this, the enactivist begins by pointing to the close
association between action and perception. Perceptual proper-
ties are used in the Identification and reldentification of objects;
they subserve, then, the purposes of visual Identification and
reldentification - the survival and thriving of a class of organ-
isms. This is uncontroversial. The enactivist then argues that
these objects are identified and reidentified by means of proper-
ties that are in principle unique to members of the relevant class
(typically, species) of organism. Establishing uniqueness Is the
focus of most of the target article. I grant that different species
have different color spaces. Certainly having different color
spaces In certain cases confers advantages on a species - particu-
larly if tetra- and pentachromicity (as in birds) affords them
advantages in the frequency domain. (Appendix B) If relevantly
different species do have different color spaces, although it does
not follow directly that the objects of a niche are identified by
properties that are in principle unique to the species, it Is
certainly plausible that they are. So this too can be granted.
Another point enactivists must establish is that these unique
properties are properties of the perceptual objects of the class of
organism in question. Let us grant this. Think of it as a defini-
tional matter: A visual perceptual object should be the sort of
object that has the properties - including colors - that it is seen
to have (in this case, by a class of organisms). But to place these
things in an environment, the enactivist must also establish that
these perceptual objects are identical with objects "out there." I
do not think that this can be granted.
The enactivist cannot claim that the perceptual object with its
color properties Is identical with a physical object with certain
surface spectral reflectance properties, for the enactivist agrees
with the subjectivist that it cannot be. If the perceptual object is
not identical with the physical object out there, however, It Is
not obvious that we should trade a subjectivist position that
holds that, strictly speaking, colors are located in the head and
only "projected" out there, for a view that holds that colors are
out there, but that does not explain how they are or can be. With
some qualifications, subjectivists can accept everything I said
enactivists claim except that colors are out there. And they can,
unlike enactivists, explain how colors appear to be out there.
They are projected.
Projection may seem mysterious in this domain. Where
projection is articulated, it is often explained in terms of truth or
assertibility. Contemporary constructivists follow this route,
but it Is no help. In explaining the projection of colors we must
48
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
deal with pigeons as well, as ourselves, and pigeons notoriously
lack the high-level cognitive states that figure in truth. To
explain the relevant sort of projection, we must begin by saying
that the object out there is the object about which the visual
system needs to have information, including information con-
cerning its surface spectral reflectances. (These are very useful
for identification and reidentification, for they are relatively
invariant.) Call this physical object the "intended object." It
typically has surface spectral reflectance properties (unless it is
an emitter of light), but it is not colored. Now we must locate
colors inside the head. Make them properties of "phenomenal
objects," which can be identified with neural events. These
objects are ways external objects are perceived, and colors on
this view become event properties, making them (strictly speak-
ing) colorings. So an object with such-and-such a surface spec-
tral reflectance curve is presented greenly by and in a phe-
nomenal object that is not seen, but undergone. Green-colored
objects that are seen - the enactivist's perceptual objects - are
illusions. But they are natural illusions, the results of a visual
system's effectively and efficiently (for the organism) gauging
physical objects in certain positions in an environment.
This is not the occasion to elaborate and defend this realist-
subjectivist view of colors. My aim is to suggest that the evi-
dence the enactivists have given so far does not provide a
plausible case against the subjectivlst unless they explain how,
given that surface spectral reflectance objectivism is wrong,
there is nevertheless something that has colors and is, strictly
speaking, outside the brain. They must convince us that these
things are not illusions (albeit natural illusions).
found In the Japanese dace (Triholodon hakonensis) by
Hashimoto et al. (1988). This fish has an ultraviolet (UV) cone
type, and most probably a tetrachromatic color vision, but one
that has not been investigated behaviorally.
(2) The statement that tetrachromatic color vision systems
possess "ternary" colors cannot be overemphasized. It means
that there are colors that are perceived as "red-green-blue" at
the same time! This is Impossible for us to imagine. For the
goldfish or the turtle Pseudemys (Arnold & Neumeyer 1987) we
must expect four classes of such colors that are located in the four
planes of the tetrahedron: "red-green-blue," "red-UV-green,"
"green-UV-blue," and "blue-UV-red."
(3) From our Introspection we know that an additive mixture
of "red," "green," and "blue" results in the perception of
"white," which has a specific quality that we describe as "neu-
tral" or "uncolored." So far - and here we go one step further
than the authors, who do not touch this point - it is an entirely
open question whether an animal perceives "white" as "neu-
tral" as we do. Only In the honeybee does there seem to be an
indication of this (Menzel 1981). For a tetrachromatic animal we
would expect that "UV-blue-green-red" is perceived as white,
but it is also possible that an additive mixture of the appropriate
wavelengths would result in a simultaneous percept of all four
colors. (Here it has to be noted that, at least in cyprinid fishes,
the existence of so-called nonopponent or monophasic neurons
has nothing to do with the perception of achromatic colors).
Furthermore, I think that one must be careful to treat the three
qualities of human color vision - hue, brightness, and saturation
- as universals common to all color vision systems, as the
authors do.
On perceiwed colors
Christa Neumeyer
Institut fur Zoologie, Arbeitsgruppe III (Biophysik), J. Gutenberg-Universitat,
6500 Mainz, Germany
The theory that each animal lives in its own "subjective" world
that is determined by the properties of its sensory organs and its
brain was stated for the first time by Jakob von Uexkiill (1928).
Each animal creates its own "Umwe.lt," which is not only
determined by its senses but also by its motor responses, its
behavior. Thompson, Palacios & Varela have worked out this
point nicely in the context of color vision where the comparison
of different color vision systems makes it entirely clear how
much care is needed not to get trapped in an anthropocentric
view. In the question of how "colors" are perceived by an
animal, or how its world is composed with respect to color, the
authors come to some important conclusions that I would like to
emphasize and expand.
(1) In human trichromatic color vision there are four "unique"
colors, with "yellow" as a color that can be understood only on
the basis of neuronal Interactions between different "pho-
toreceptor channels." It is tempting to explain unique yellow
with the properties of certain "color-opponent" neurons. But, as
the authors point out, this is so far only an analogy, and it is not at
all demonstrated that these neurons are the physiological basis
for "unique" colors and "opponent" colors. In the honeybee, for
example, which has a color vision very similar to that of humans
(except for the shift into the ultraviolet range), it is not known
whether the number of unique hues is higher than three. Even
in the ingenious experiment on the pigeon by Wright and
Cummings (1971) cited by the authors it is not clear whether the
"transition points" correspond to the locations of unique colors.
To get insight into this problem, very refined behavioral experi-
ments are required. On the other hand, I would like to add that
tetraphasic (opponent) neurons proposed by the authors for
theoretical reasons for tetrachromatic color vision were indeed
Air©as of ignorance and confusion
in color science
Adam Reeves
Department of Psychology, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115
Electronic mall: reeves@northeastern.edu
Thompson et al. 's target article presents an elegant dissection of
computational, psychophysical, and comparative views of color
vision. Although the authors present valuable arguments for the
comparative view, perhaps their greatest accomplishment Is in
clarifying the distinctions among the three views, thereby help-
Ing scientists engaged In color vision to be more aware of their
presuppositions.
In making a case for the comparative approach, the target
article speaks volumes concerning what Is not known about color
vision. I comment on one area of ignorance and one area of
confusion. We are incredibly ignorant concerning the spectra of
natural objects and the spectral composition of real illuminants
(especially when multiply reflected). Our ignorance makes eco-
logical arguments often impossible to decide, for both our own
and other species. For example, do photopigment action spectra
covary with the regions of the spectrum containing most infor-
mation for the particular species? We cannot answer without
knowing what the typical spectra are. The extraordinary propo-
sition that nature is (almost) trichromatic, in that natural reflec-
tances can be (almost entirely) composed from three basis
functions, could explain the evolution of trichromacy in animals;
but the proposition is based on little more than an analysis of the
pigments used by the Munsell company. Is the purpose of color
vision to improve discrimination or not? With clever lighting, a
black/white movie can look like the real thing, so, at least for
humans, color is not essential for recognition (or even aesthet-
ics). Perhaps natural lighting is not so clever, however, and
important distinctions require color; we do not know. Do
human or monkey rod monochromats labor under a handicap,
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
49

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
other than the obvious one of bleaching in direct sunlight? Do
pigeons gain significant information from their additional recep-
tors? Again, we do not know. It is not enough to argue from the
existence of a thing directly to Its utility, however plausible.
The area of confusion Is color constancy. Although the authors
take this to provide an Important case against which the various
ontological views of color vision can be tested, the evidence here
Is contradictory. The current view Is that color constancy exists,
meaning that human observers can perceive the reflectance of
an object and discount the illuminant. Constancy can indeed be
near-perfect for lightness (white-gray-black), but this Is far from
the case for color (hue and saturation). Because our data contra-
dict the standard view, the research Is summarized in some
detail:
Arend and Reeves (1986) and Arend et al. (1991) showed that
color constancy Is at best only moderately good, and at worst
almost absent. Moreover, color constancy, far from being auto-
matic, Is strongly task dependent. The extent of color constancy
In a Mondrlan display varied from near 60% of perfect constancy
to less than 20%, depending on whether the task required
judgments In what Evans (1974) termed "surface mode" or
"light mode." Our observers adjusted the chromaticity of a
patch in a test display presented under one phase of daylight to
match the same patch In standard display presented under
another phase of daylight. Under surface mode instructions,
they matched the patches as if they "were cut from the same
piece of paper." Under light mode instructions, or what we also
call "unasserted" mode, subjects matched the saturation and
hue of the test patch disregarding other areas of the display.
Note that our methods Improved on those In earlier work, which
had claimed more consistent color constancy. We used natural,
not haploscopic, viewing (the latter produces differential adap-
tation of the two eyes, which is grossly unecological); we used
the same displays for test and comparison stimuli, with only the
Illuminant varying; we controlled light adaptation; and we
specified the matching task In detail.
It did not surprise us that mode should have a large effect on
constancy, as this Is typical in perception. For example, observ-
ers can judge both real size ("size constancy") and retinal size,
and do so remarkably well, as Thouless (1931) showed long ago.
Observers can match the same test patches using lightness
(perceived relectance) or brightness (apparent intensity), as
Arend and Goldstein (1987) showed using an achromatic version
of the Mondrlan configuration just described. Their lightness
matches followed reflectance nearly perfectly ("lightness con-
stancy"), whereas brightness matches followed intensity accord-
ing to the power law. Thus, In surface mode, observers show
near perfect achromatic (lightness) constancy and up to 60% of
color constancy. In light mode, constancy does not hold; judg-
ments follow a power of the Intensity of the stimulation (the
product of Illumination and reflection) In the case of brightness,
not just reflectance; and in the case of color, matches show 20%
or less color constancy.
We were surprised to find that the context of stimulation had
virtually no effect on color matches. We found very little effect
of stimulus complexity (comparing many-element Mondrlans to
simple center-surround configurations), luminance variations
(comparing near equllumlnaet displays with displays in which
brightness varied), cues to the illuminant, or presentation meth-
od (simultaneous or successive presentations of test and stan-
dard displays). Lightness constancy was slightly Inferior when
simple rather than complex displays were used.
How do our data affect theories of color ontology? Computa-
tional models such as Land's retinex, which discount the illumi-
nant In complex (but not simple) scenes are contradicted by our
finding almost no effect of stimulus complexity and virtually no
constancy In the light mode. A model Is needed In which the
observer Is permitted access to the visual system's best guesses
about both the Illuminant and the objects viewed. This contra-
dicts the surface-fixated computational viewpoint described In
the target article, but It does not contradict the computational
viewpoint In general. There are good reasons why the organism
should attempt to compute, and represent, the pattern of
illumination as well as the nature of the objects in the field of
view. The finding that observers have partial access to both
surface chromaticity and light at the eye, like the discovery that
observers can report both actual and retinal size, does not bear
on whether a "computational" or "ecological" explanatory per-
spective Is to be preferred, only on what needs to be explained.
What in the world determines
the structure of color space?
Roger N. Shepard
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-2130
Electronic mail: roger@psych.stanford.edu
True, the physical reflectances in a field of flowers have been
shaped by the eye and brain of the bee (target article: sect. 2.5,
para. 11 - following Barth 1985). At the same time, all eyes and
brains have been shaped by enduring regularities of the physical
world (Shepard 1987). Whatever emerges from the coevolution
of an organism and its environment, including the dimension-
ality of the organism's representation of colors, may reflect (a)
invariant properties of the physical world, (b) entrenched prop-
erties of the resident organisms, and (c) random accidents or
symmetry breakings over evolutionary history. These alter-
natives are not equally fundamental, however. An animal's color
space is undeniably a direct manifestation of its biological
makeup (alternative b). But any explanation of that biological
makeup beyond one that simply posits a history of accidents not
deducible from general principles (alternative c) must be
grounded in some enduring properties of the world (alternative
a). Only this way can we explain how the color of a flower,
however different it may appear to a person or a bee, appears
constant to each despite wide variations in the light that the
flower scatters back, under various conditions of illumination, to
our various eyes. In this commentary, I use color constancy to
draw attention to a possible environmental determinant of the
dimensionality of a species' color space.
Three distinctions are helpful: The first is between the prob-
lems posed .by the world and the neurophysiological mecha-
nisms that have evolved because they provide solutions to those
problems - even though those problems may have changed
along with the coevolving environment. An indiscriminate ad-
ducing of environmental constraints and neurophysiological
findings, as if the two were on equal footing, blurs this distinc-
tion and obscures what must ultimately count as an explanation.
The second distinction is between ecological features of our
world that have prevailed for evolutionarily significant periods
and such recent additions as "bricks," "buildings," and
"Mondrian displays" (target article, sect. 2.4, para 11; 16),
which cannot have played a role in the phylogenetic shaping of
our perceptual systems. Likewise, the cited departures from
color constancy under artificial illuminants (sect. 1.4, para. 1)
are irrelevant to the question of our degree of color constancy
under natural conditions. The third distinction is between the
aspects of surface reflectances that determine our perceptual
representations and the degree of color constancy of those
representations. These are lumped together by a definition of
color constancy as "the recovery of the invariant surface spectral
reflectances in a scene" (sect. 1.4, para. 4). Yet, under natural
conditions, constancy can be achieved without folly capturing
spectral reflectances.
In fact, the mapping from reflectances to perceived colors is
generally many-to-one. The dimensionality of the color spaces
of most species fall short of the number of degrees of freedom of
surface reflectances (which may be somewhere between five
50
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
and seven - Maloney 1986). Moreover, the dimensionality of
color space evidently varies between species. Trie conclusion
drawn in the target article (sect. 1.4, para. 12) is that color
cannot "be found in the (distal or proximal) physical stimuli."
Instead, we are urged to give "more attention to the local,
context-dependent features of perception than to the high-
level, physically invariant properties of the environment" em-
phasized in "the original Gibsonian program" (sect. 1.4, para. 7;
sect. 3, para. 9).
Taking the opposite tack, I have proposed that we search for
invariances at still more general and abstract levels (Shepard
1987; 1990; 1991). For highly visual diurnal species, the single
most important factor determining the dimensionality of its
color space may not be the ill defined five to seven degrees of
freedom of surface reflectances in its present local niche. In-
stead, it may be the more sharply delimited number of degrees
of freedom that has long constrained natural illumination in the
terrestrial environment as a whole. These three degrees of
freedom correspond to (1) a light-dark variation between direct
illumination from midday sun and clear sky versus reduced but
spectrally similar illumination reaching an object only by scat-
tering from achromatic clouds, cliffs, or moon, (2) a red-green
variation between the long-wavelength-rich illumination direct
from a low sun versus the long-wavelength-rich illumination
penetrating an atmosphere loaded with water vapor, and (3) a
blue-yellow variation between mostly short-wavelength-rich
illumination scattered to an object from clear sky versus mostly
short-wavelength-poor illumination reaching that object di-
rectly from the sun (see Judd et al. 1964; Dixon 1978; Shepard
1990; 1991). It may be no accident that these three degrees of
freedom of terrestrial illumination also correspond to the light-
dark, red-green, and blue-yellow opponent processes proposed
for the human visual system, on quite different (psychophysical
and neurophysiological) grounds, by Bering (1878) and Hurvich
and Jameson (1957).
The target article does speak of the "perception" of conditions
of illumination (sect. 1.4, para. 6; sect. 2.1, para. 4[iii]). But
what is most important, I suggest, is not the perception of
conditions of illumination, as such, but the perceptual compen-
sation for variations in that illumination in order to recognize
significant objects. On the basis of Maloney & Wandell's (1986)
general linear model for color vision, I have argued that re-
gardless of how much of the spectral reflectances of surfaces our
visual systems represent, our systems must analyze visual input
into three chromatic channels to correct for the illumination
and, thereby, to achieve constancy of color (including lightness)
under terrestrial conditions (Shepard 1990; 199.1). Indeed, even
if the chromatic colors of the objects themselves were irrelevant
for us, even if we required a representation that (like a "black-
and-white" photograph) was merely achromatic, we would still
need an initial analysis into three chromatic channels for the
resulting shades-of-gray representation to achieve lightness
constancy.
Of course, the chromatic aspects of objects are not irrelevant
for us. Like our ancestors, we benefit from the ability to detect
red berries against green leaves even when these are of similar
achromatic lightnesses. For the same reason, the need for
constancy is almost certainly not the only factor influencing the
dimensionalities of color representations. Species that are active
only in nocturnal, deep sea, murky, or subterranean environ-
ments, for example, may manage with fewer than three dimen-
sions of color representation because limitations on the quantity
or quality of available light (or on the varieties of visible surfaces)
either permits sufficient constancy with fewer than three di-
mensions or precludes analysis into as many as three chromat-
ically distinct channels. For other species, dimensions of repre-
sentation of spectral reflectances beyond the three needed for
constancy may have become a significant factor in the identifica-
tion of foods, mates, offspring, competitors, predators, or the
like. In some species, more than three chromatic channels may
also have been favored to compensate for additional, subtle
degrees of freedom of lighting that are peculiar to their niches -
for example, variations in illumination transmitted through
media or scattered from surfaces (such as leafy canopies) having
special, spectrally selective properties.
The structure of color space for each species may thus be
shaped, in part, by "local, context-dependent features" of that
species' niche. But such shaping must be understood in the
context of an evolutionary explanation of color perception in
terms of general constraints on objects, surfaces, and illumina-
tion in the world. In particular, the possibility should not be
neglected that the three-dimensionality of the color spaces of
such diverse and highly visual species as the human and the bee
may most fundamentally reflect a long enduring abstract invar-
iant of that world, namely, the prevailing three-dimensionality
of variations in terrestrial illumination.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Preparation of this commentary was supported by NSF Grant BNS
85-11685. The commentary has benefitted from discussions with Leda
Cosmides, Geoffrey Miller, and Brian Wandell.
Ecological subjectiwism?
Christine A. Skarda
Department of Molecular & Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
CA 94720
Electronic mail: wfreeman@garnet.herkeley.edu
Thompson et al. promise a new model of color vision that
departs from two approaches: One (objectivism) is that color is a
property of objects and that perception consists in the inter-
nalization of these physical properties; the other (subjectivism)
is that colors are produced by and explainable in terms of
neurophysiological functioning. The data cited are intriguing,
the emphasis on a more biologically realistic, less anthropo-
centric approach to vision is important, and the discussion of the
limitations of the two views is instructive, especially in scientific
circles where theoretical presuppositions of this type go un-
noticed but influence the direction taken by research. Unfortu-
nately, however, the promised new model never materializes.
Thompson et al. argue convincingly against the objectivist
view with data that show, for example, that what is perceived is
determined by the sensory-motor properties of the animal. The
view that vision is about "recovering" properties of objects
ignores the fact that what counts as an object is determined in
part by the structure and behavior of the animal. I have argued
elsewhere (Skarda 1989) that if perception were about recover-
ing the features of objects then whenever the same object
impinges on receptors it should lead to neural processing that
remains identical for that object over time. This does not
happen. Perception is different from what the objectivist model
would have us believe.
Against subjectivism, the authors point out that the facts
about color vision do not all yield to a neurophysiological
analysis. What are these facts? They include the observation
that animals are adaptive as their organic environment is, and
that they have coevolved: The animal's activity changes the
environment and tells us about what it perceives and how it
perceives it. Thus, to understand the perceptual object for any
given animal, we must take this ecological information into
account.
But the fact that we need this information to explain the
perceptual object, does not automatically result in a new model
of color vision. It is consistent with objectivism, for example,
that the animal's neurophysiological structure affects what is
perceived, that receptors act as "filters" for objective proper-
ties. Subjectivists, like Hardin, accept this point already. All
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
51

Commentary /Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
researchers determine what is perceived on the basis of animal
behavior, and no one I know of quarrels with the fact that
animals and their environments coevolve. So what is new about
Thompson et al.'s model of perception? How does it differ from
the tradition they criticize?
In section 2.4 (para. 11) Thompson et al. claim that "the visual
system must achieve" segmentation of the visual world and later
(para. 14) they tell us that surfaces are properties of the world
but "also figure as properties of the perceptual object." Under-
lying these claims is the traditional model of perception: Percep-
tion occurs when an object causally impinges on the organism,
producing an internal counterpart ("perceptual object") of the
world. Clearly, this perceptual object is animal-relative and
hence evolutionarily determined; furthermore, if we want to
know about what the animal perceives, then a "purely neu-
rophysiological" account is unsatisfactory because it is pitched at
the wrong level of description (I urge the authors to pay closer
attention to this issue). None of this ensures that the authors'
model represents a departure from the tradition, however.
The problem is a very difficult one. Thompson et al. 's "ecolog-
ical subjectivism" is not a solution, even if it represents a move
in the right direction. The problem is to find a new model of
perception rather than to reject one "ism" in favor of its alter-
native. Significantly, most of the authors' arguments are di-
rected against objectivism, and the subjectivism they criticize is
a very weak and muddled version indeed, if their account is
accurate. But there is nothing "new" about the authors' model of
vision. They accept the traditional problem: The perceptual
object is not identical with the physical object, so how does
vision succeed? The tradition offers two options, subjectivism
and objectivism. Thompson et al. opt for the subjectivist ap-
proach, but rather than reject the world outright, they attempt
to "modify" it using evolution and interaction to get a better fit,
to eliminate the gap or to make it less noticeable. The world,
they tell us, has the form it has because It has been shaped by
animal activity; it bears the Imprint of this interaction. In effect,
the authors have discovered a less subjective-appearing solution
by transforming the world Into a sensory-motor experience.
This, however, is not a new solution to the problem of percep-
tion. It Is an optical illusion.
Confusing structure and function
Kenneth M. Steele
Department of Psychology, Appalachian State University, Boone, NC
28608
Electronic mail: steelekm@appstate.hitnet;
steelekm @conrad. appstate. edu
Thompson, Palacios & Varela lay out a case for the importance of
comparative date In cognitive science. Using color vision, they
contrast objectivism (presented as a computational variant of
realism) and neurological subjectivism (a modern version of
Muller's law of specific nerve energies). They conclude that an
updated version of subjectivism, one that attends to ecological
niche and evolutionary history, Is most preferable. In this
commentary, I make the point that Thompson et al. appear
headed Into a subjectivist swamp by too much emphasis on
structural differences between the visual systems of pigeons and
people. I suggest that the problem comes from the following two
mistakes: They equate structure with function and explanation
with Intersubjectlve intercourse. I then discuss work on
form/categorical perception by pigeons that underscores the
importance of the distinction between structure and function,
concluding that this line of work provides more support for
objectivism than Thompson et al. would anticipate.
Structure and function are related, but they are not iso-
morphic. A new species was not created anew. It was cobbled
together from old parts, now used In new situations. Those old
parts were themselves cobbled. The path of speciation Is a twisty
little maze, and reproductive success does not follow necessarily
from design principles taught In the better engineering schools
(Gould & Lewontin 1979). But there Is a common factor, a world
In which all designs must work satisfactorily. Vertebrate or
invertebrate, all types of bodies reflect different mechanisms of
adaptation to the common constant of gravity.
Thompson et al. document the differences In retinal phys-
iology between people and pigeons, which suggest that there
are fundamental differences In their color spaces. Although
there will be arguments about the particular values of the
minima, the potential of a pentachromatic system in the pigeon
seems likely. It Is also true that this produces a problem of
commensurability, a pentachromatic (or even tetrachromatic)
space could not be completely mapped onto a trichromatic space
without remainder. What concerns me is the meaning of the
problem for Thompson et al. They do not seem to be so worried
about accounting for what pigeons do, but what they "experi-
ence" (their discussion in section 2.3 Is a clear example). On this
point I suggest that they have fallen into the classical mire of
solipsism In their speculative concern over the unbridgeable
gaps between species. Their mistake is to attend too much to
differences and to miss the common function. Their mistake Is
akin to worrying about the different number-worlds of slide
rules and electronic calculators. The mechanisms of the two are
very different; the errors each mechanism is liable to produce
are different; and the types of problems for which each mecha-
nism is most accurate are different. Examined very closely, slide
rules and electronic calculators produce the fundamental prob-
lems of commensurability that exist between analog and digital
systems. But the emphasis on differences misses the great
commonality In function. It misses the Important similarity over
specified scales of problems. There may be several satisfactory
paths to a common goal.
The alternative of multiple mechanisms for a common func-
tion Is seen in operant conditioning research on form/categorical
perception in pigeons. Operant research on form perception by
pigeons has been historically unconcerned with the structural
differences between pigeons' and people's visual systems. Ini-
tially the question was whether pigeons could be trained to form
perceptual categories that people used, such as the distinction
between the presence and absence of a person in a photographic
slide (Herrnstein & Loveland 1964). It has turned out that
pigeons can be trained successfully with such discriminations -
more easily than often assumed. The field quickly moved on to
the question of mapping the borders of such categories. What
were the domains of perceptual categories In pigeons that were
exposed to such procedures? These turned out to be remarkably
humanlike across many tasks. A pigeon's segmentation of cate-
gories with natural variation (such as fish or the leaves of trees)
turned out to be quite similar to distinctions used by people
(Cerella 1979; Herrnstein & de Villiers 1980). Multidimensional
scaling and cluster analysis of discrimination performance with
human-specific categories, like the American alphabet or geo-
metric forms, also looked very similar to data from people
(Blough 1982; 1990). More abstractly, the production of Integral
or configural stimulus effects In pigeons was driven by the
factors of proximity and similarity In a manner similar to people
(Steele 1990).
The similarities in performance between pigeons and people
were close enough to justify the initial suggestion that the means
underlying the performance were the same (Herrnstein et al.
1976). Pigeons see the way we see. That interpretation is now
strongly In doubt. Pigeons do not seem to use information In the
scene that we normally use (Cerella 1982; 1990). And pigeons
use Information in scenes that typically escapes our attention or
is even hard for us to use when informed (Green 1983; Vaughn &
Green 1983). Thus you have the following combination. On the
one hand, similarity of categorization performance; on the other
hand, dissimilarity of mechanisms underlying this performance.
52
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
This suggests that you have different visual mechanisms that
produce common effects because they have a common function
or goal: visually guided activity in an objective world. The
results are like the differences and similarities between a slide
rule and a calculator.
The problem for Thompson et al., in their preference for
neurophysiological subjectivism is to explain similarity in per-
formance between pigeons and people given such different
retinal and neural structures. Their last section on the enactive
view makes it clear that they plan a behavioral approach. I think
that if they pursue their enactive approach then some type of
objectivist assumption will be seen to have more pragmatic
value than neurological subjectivism.
Wavelength processing
and colour experience
Petra Stoeriga and Alan Coweyb
alnstitute of Medical Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich,
Germany; bDepartment of Experimental Psychology, Oxford University,
Oxford 0X1 34D, England
The history of epistemological theory encompasses positions
that range from extreme subjectivism (everything is in the mind
of the perceiver) to critical realism (things exist independent of
the perceiver and affect him, but he has no way of knowing to
what extent his perceptions reflect their nature) to naive realism
where it is simply assumed that what we perceive is the reality
(our perceptions and reality are congruent). The revolution
caused by evolutionary theory not only removed man from his
cherished position as the epitome of divine creation, it also had
an enduring impact on epistemology, giving critical realism a
biological foundation. Like the animals themselves, their per-
ceptual and cognitive repertoire has evolved in constant interac-
tion with the environment and, depending on the needs of the
organism and the properties of its ecological niche, will be tuned
to different aspects of reality. This implies that there is a real
world outside, independent of the mind, and that a part, tiny
though it may be, of its properties are perceivable in a way that
enables the perceiver to act successfully within this world -
successfully enough to survive. It also implies that within-
species differences in perceptual and cognitive abilities may
exist if the species has adapted to very different environments.
Colour vision is one of those many abilities that help to
differentiate the components of the visual world. Without actu-
ally using the term "evolutionary epistemology," as introduced
by Spencer (1890), Lorenz (1943), and a variety of contempo-
raries (e.g., Taylor 1979), Thompson et al. use this approach to
elaborate aspects of comparative colour vision that demonstrate
that other species with more than three types of colour receptor,
such as ducks and pigeons, see "a quality that is neither bluish,
nor reddish, nor greenish, nor yellowish, but resembles blue,
red, green, and yellow as much as they resemble one another"
(Hardin 1988), rendering their colour vision unimaginable to
beings with a more limited colour space such as ourselves.
In the course of their arguments, Thompson et al. adopt a
commonly used definition of colour vision, that is, the ability to
discriminate wavelength independent of relative intensity; they
go on to say that this ability "would not seem to entail the
enjoyment of colour experience, for it seems possible to imagine
the former without the latter." Indeed, it is not only possible to
imagine this dissociation, but we know of examples of wave-
length discrimination unaccompanied by colour experience.
The first example is wavelength discrimination in blindsight.
Blindsight is a term coined by Weiskrantz et al. (1974) to
describe the phenomenon of residual visual functions that per-
sist after the patient has suffered damage to striate cortex,
producing a homonymous visual field defect within which the
patient is experientially blind. [See also Campion et al. "Blind-
sight" BBS 6(3) 1983.] Despite the blindness, he may be able to
respond to stimuli confined to the blind field when he can be
persuaded to "guess." Using conditions meant to favour the
colour-opponent system, and two-alternative forced-choice
guessing, we have recently demonstrated that patients may not
only have a normal, if reduced, spectral sensitivity (Stoerig &
Cowey 1989), but that they may also be able to discriminate
wavelength stimuli matched for luminous efficiency on the basis
of their own spectral sensitivity curves (Stoerig & Cowey,
submitted). As the blindsight patients do not experience any
visual sensation when their blind field is stimulated, these
results demonstrate discrimination of wavelength independent
of their relative intensities that does not entail the experience of
colour, or indeed of seeing.
In contrast, in the second example it is only the experience of
colour that is lacking, but again wavelengths may nevertheless
be discriminated. This is the example of acquired cortical
colour-blindness or cerebral achromatopsia. In the extreme
form of this condition, caused by destruction of cortex in the
lingual and fusiform gyri, the patient perceives the world in grey
shades, like a black and white TV. Nevertheless he can detect
the border between adjacent colour fields, such as red and
green, irrespective of their luminance (i.e., there is no null
point at which the border disappears) and despite the fact that
the two colours look "the same shade of grey." Even more
impressive, he may look at a display of colours and pick the odd
one out, even though they all look the same shade of grey. The
patient still possesses-neurons whose job it is to signal chromatic
or achromatic edges or changes, no matter how they arise, and
he can make crude wavelength discriminations, although his
experience of colour is lost.
A dissociation of colour experience and wavelength discrimi-
nation is therefore more than just a possibility, although it is
pathological. The loss of colour experience robs the visual world
of emotional and aesthetic delights. To take just one example, an
achromatopsic patient described his surroundings as "being
darkly coloured, as in an unlit room at twilight, even when they
were bathed in sunlight" (Heywood et al. 1987, p. 25). We do
not wish to suggest that animals who have developed the
experimentally demonstrable ability to discriminate wave-
lengths do not experience the colours they see. Indeed, the
much more elaborate systems that some species have developed
may enable them to perceive beauty we cannot even dream of
because with our physiological system we cannot imagine a
colour that "is neither bluish, nor reddish, nor greenish, nor
yellowish." Colour and beauty are in the eye and brain of the
beholder, and whatever colour and beauty are perceived must
depend on both, and on the species-specific world in which they
evolved.
The ethnocentricity of colour
J. van Brakel
Department of Philosophy, University of Utrecht, 3508 TC Utrecht,
Netherlands
Electronic mail: brakel@phil.ruu.nl
I agree with most of Thompson, Palacios & Varela's criticism of
the limitations of objectivist and subjectivist approaches to
colour, but I think their "enactive" research program doesn't go
far enough in eradicating anthropomorphism and ethno-
centrism.
I believe that "the world" underdetermines physical level
specifications. This sort of conceptual relativity need not con-
cern us here. Hence I proceed as if our best theories were
reasonably successful in describing the physical world as it is.
Many objects reflect UV-light; species may take advantage of
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
53

Commentary /Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
that, the more so in "animal-environment codetermination"
(sect. 2.5). This does not change the physical fact that UV-
related information is retrieved from the physical environment.
Hence, there can be no doubt that when Thompson et al. write
that "animals with different sensory-motor capacities would
segment the world in different ways" (sect. 3, para. 11), this
refers to segmenting something like the phenomenal world
differently, not the physical world. On the one hand, this isn't
going far enough, on the other, it's going too far.
In saying "that the phenomenal structure of color and the
structure of the visual system covary" (sect. 1.2, para. 9)
Thompson et al. don't go far enough. Adding the structure of the
organism to the incoming light-rays still underdetermines the
phenomenal structure of colour, at least for humans. It's not just
a matter of "perceiver relativity" (sect. 2.4) for different species.
Such variation already occurs among humans, for whom percep-
tion is conceptually loaded and action-oriented in different
ways. This has two consequences. First, the "phenomenal
structure of color" (sect. 1.2) is not a fact of nature but an
ethnocentric artifact. (How is a "metallic" appearance to be
explained in terms of hue, saturation, and brightness? How do
we account for people who insist that there are two unique hues
of blue or who cannot be convinced that yellow and green are
really different things?)
Second, it is not the case that psychophysical colour channels
correspond to neuronal pathways. Knowledge of neuronal path-
ways, at least for a long time to come, severely underdetermines
possible psychophysical channels. (Actually, I believe that
"linking propositions" (sect. 1.2) can at best be only locally valid,
context-dependent statistical generalizations.)
There is no room here to argue for all of this (see van Brakel
1991). I limit myself to showing that nothing is lost and perhaps
something is gained by accepting these points of view. That
nothing is lost can be seen, for example, from the fact that the
research program Thompson et al. advocate (sect. 3) can easily
be reformulated in nonphenomenal language. Or, to take a
concrete example, consider a feather-sorting contest for pigeons
who allegedly live in a four- or five-dimensional "colour" world.
The pigeons divide a pile of indistinguishable white feathers into
two (or more) piles. What can be said about this? Physically we
can establish that some whites reflect UV-light, which the
pigeon is apparently able to "see." What does it add to say that it
sees extra hues? How do we know that the "non-UV"-white
looks white to the pigeon? Why would the sensitivity to UV-light
show up phenomenally as an extra unique hue? Why not as an
extra type of brightness, or as a metallic look, or as if vibrating
slowly? We could try to design experiments to exclude such
possibilities, but what could such experiments show over and
above the pigeon's sensitivity to UV-light?
Dropping the ethnocentric color space models opens up the
possibility of finding species-independent regularities or
species-specific characteristics independent of the constraint
that whatever might be discovered must fit the terminology of
hue/brightness/saturation and unique and nonunique hues, if
not cold and warm colors. After all, if the pigeon is ascribed
ternary color experiences, there's no reason why it shouldn't be
ascribed mysterious X-experiences that fit the third dimension
of the triad: cool, warm, X. This brings me to Thompson et al.'s
anthropomorphizing about pigeons (and other animals), in
which they are going too far.
They suggest that there are "different phenomenal color
spaces, some of which are incommensurable" (sect. 2.1, para.
1), but this still assumes that the pigeon has color experiences.
On the one hand, the way of life (and neurophysiology) of
pigeons and humans are so different that any assumption about
experiential similarities is tendentious, even if both were to
have the same number of identical cone absorption curves. On
the other hand, the fact that some people are dichromats or
blind doesn't imply that their phenomenal worlds are incom-
mensurable to other humans. There's a sense in which a blind
person lives in a world of different perceptual objects, but
there's a stronger sense in which a blind person lives in the same
experiential world as other humans.
Moreover, physically, it's not at all clear at what point incom-
mensurability would hold. Think, for example, of rod assisted
color vision in dichromats, of trade-off between dimensionality
and sensitivity, and of the effect on "dimensionality" of large
variations in cross-over points of ganglion cells.
Hence I suggest that we drop anthropomorphic color talk,
give up the assumption that color "must be specifiable in terms
of hue, saturation, and brightness" and forget that "to be a hue it
must be either unique or binary (or ternary)" (sect. 2.4, para. 2).
This is not a plea for austere objectivism. Thompson et al. are
right in stressing that perception is "context-dependent and
interest-relative" (sect. 2.5). The comparative study of "color"
vision should be governed by the interest-relativeness of catego-
ries, thereby replacing the mistaken interest in pure percep-
tion. What a physically specified category means to a human or
other animal should be apparent from what the human or animal
does with it and how it helps guide activities, not by how it is
(thought to be) experienced phenomenally.
Ways of coloring the ecological approach
Johan Wagemansa and Charles M. M. de Weertb
laboratory 
of Experimental Psychology, University of Leuven, B-3000
Leuven, Belgium; bNijmegen Institute for Cognition Research and
Information Technology, University of Nijmegen, 6500 HE Nijmegen, The
Netherlands
Electronic mail: afpaas10@blekul11.earn; 
bdeweert@nici.kun.nl
Thompson et al. analyze current approaches to color percep-
tion, computational vision on the one hand and neurophysiology
and psychophysics on the other, and find that their implicit
ontologies are either objectivistic (color is spectral reflectance
"in the world") or subjectivistic (color is "in the head"), respec-
tively. Based on a review of comparative studies of color vision,
the authors conclude that neither position is satisfactory because
colors result from animal-environment codetermination. In this
commentary we indicate that their so-called "enactive view" is
not fundamentally different from the much more widely known
"ecological approach" instigated by Gibson (1979) and that
Thompson et al. attempt to increase the contrast by coloring the
ecological approach in a particular way, that is, by neglecting a
fundamental body of research within this tradition. In addition,
we present some unpublished results on human perception and
the use of color mixture (together with color contrast and
constancy among the three basic phenomena of color percep-
tion), which raise some questions about the pervasiveness of
ecological laws. Whereas our first comment is rather critical, the
second is more like an open question with respect to another
way of introducing color in the ecological tradition.
1. A criticism. When taken through the discussion of objec-
tivism versus subjectivism to the dilemma of the chicken versus
egg position, the reader familiar with perceptual approaches
immediately thinks of Gibson's (1979) treatment of these issues
and his plea for the study of perception as an activity of a
perceptual system in its environment. Thompson et al. seem to
realize this link and begin to refer to Gibson and other adherents
of the ecological approach at this point in the target article.
Although they admit some affinity between their own enactive
view and Gibson's ecological position, they prefer to stress the
differences. We have the feeling, however, that the way the
authors color the ecological approach does it some injustice.
[See also Oilman: "Against Direct Perception" BBS (3)3 1980]
To start with, Thompson et al. applaud the ecological refusal
to separate perception from action and Gibson's deep insight
that perception must be understood within the ecological con-
text of guided activity. To show that these are not mere slogans,
54
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Commentary/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
it would have been useful to refer to some interesting empirical
work based on these assumptions, such as Lee's paradigmatic
study of plummeting gannets (Lee & Reddish 1981) and re-
search by Warren and his group on optic flow (Warren et al.
1991; Warren et al. 1988). Instead, Thompson etal. criticize the
original Gibsonian program for the exaggerated role of invar-
iances, the neglect of the complex neural processes, and the way
these processes contribute to shaping different environments
depending on the animal.
We agree that it would be interesting to develop additional
theories and models of the self-organizing properties of neural
networks as the proper substrate of perceptual and other activity
(Humphreys & Riddoch 1986; Wagemans 1990), but we think
one cannot be blamed for not doing everything at the same time.
If ecological optics - which differs from classical, physical optics,
by the way, because it studies light with respect to the perceiver
- shows that a certain invariant is picked up from the light, the
story is indeed not a full-fledged perceptual theory (Ramachan-
dran 1985; Wagemans 1988), but perhaps it is enough if the
psychophysical findings and their interpretations in terms of
perceptual mechanisms are not incompatible with basic proper-
ties of known possible means of implementation.
The second way Thompson et al. 's enactive view is supposed
to extend Gibson's ecological approach is by treating the en-
vironment not simply as the ecological setting for animal ac-
tivity, but also as something determined by that very activity.
Here, we think, the authors neglect a fundamental part of
Gibson's theorizing, which results in an apparent enhancement
of their own contribution. Although Gibson has always strug-
gled with the ancient dualisms discussed in the target article,
even in the context of color perception (see Gibson 1967), it was
only in his last writings that he coined the notion of "afford-
ances" to indicate the properties of things with respect to the
perceiver's behavior.
He explicitly states that "affordances are not simply phe-
nomenal qualities of subjective experience nor physical proper-
ties of things as now conceived by science, but ecological in the
sense that they are properties of the environment relative to an
animal" (Gibson 1982, p. 404; stress in the original). Gibson also
indicates that "affordances, and the stimulus information to
specify affordances, are neither subjective nor objective but
transcend this dichotomy; the actor/perceiver and the environ-
ment are complementary" (Gibson 1982, p. 411; stress in the
original). So, it is not only the distinction between actor and
perceiver that is given up, as Thompson et al. want us to believe,
but also the dualism between organism and environment. An
affordance is typically determined by the organism's activity and
hence dependent on the perceiver's characteristics. The climb-
on-ability of stairs is not the same for a basketball player and a
crawling infant, nor is the walk-through-ability of different
apertures. Again, empirical research is inspired by these ideas
(Mark 1987; Warren 1984; Warren & Whang 1987). We agree
that the notion of "affordances" seems odd and somewhat
mystical, but the same flavor is present in some of Thompson et
al.'s remarks, such as the one about the role of carotenoids in
colored objects and the retina. This seems like the "similis
similibus curantur" of medieval medicine.
In conclusion, although we are very much in sympathy with
the approach to color perception proposed by Thompson et al.,
it must be admitted that the contrast between their own enac-
tive view and Gibson's ecological approach is less sharp than
suggested. Perhaps this results from their coloring of other
approaches. In fact, a similar black-and-white picture is given of
the computational approach. In light of some very recent devel-
opments, the implicit philosophy of this approach is far from
being a narrow minded and onesided objectivism. Not only is
Brooks's (1991) recent work in robotics heavily dependent on
the direct interfacing of parallel activity-producing units to the
world through perception and action, as admitted by the au-
thors; Watt's most recent monograph (1991) is also full of
Figure 1 (Wagemans & De Weert). Necker cube (A) and
colored variants (B-C) used in experiments on color mixture. B
is a black-and-white representation of one of the stimuli used,
together with two possible 3-D interpretations. In C the color
relations are indicated (each number represents a color). The
leftmost item is the first part of the display presented to the
subjects, always followed by one of the two possible "boxes,"
corresponding to the 3-D interpretations in B (see text).
examples of why and how computational theories of vision have
to take the perceiver's actions into account.
2* An open question. We are currently investigating human
perception and the use of color mixture by means of colored
variants of the Necker cube (see Figure 1). The stimulus displays
are two-dimensional (2-D) patterns that can be interpreted as
three-dimensional (3-D) boxes. In the original Necker cube (see
Figure 1A), the 3-D interpretation is ambiguous. In our experi-
ments we attempt to disambiguate the displays by coloring them
in a specific way so that the overlapping patches are colored as
the additive mixture of the constituting colors (see Figure IB
and C). For example, when the patches indicated by number IV
are colored as the additive mixture of the colors of the patches
indicated by numbers I and II, a box as in Bii is seen. Alter-
natively, when patches VI are colored as the additive mixture of
II and III, then a box with a different 3-D orientation is
perceived (Biii).
Although we must still run some essential control conditions,
preliminary results indicate that human perceivers indeed se-
lect the 3-D orientation that corresponds with the additive
mixture rules (on 65% or 75% of the trials, averaged across
different color conditions; for a more detailed description, see
Wagemans 1990). This seems to suggest that the rules of ad-
ditive color mixture are used, although these are only valid for
mixed lights, not for the transparent surfaces that seem to be
implied by the box-like interpretation. Does this mean that our
color perception does not incorporate the appropriate laws of
color mixture? In normal ecological settings we are only seldom
confronted with additive color mixture, yet we have the right
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
55

Response /Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
machinery to compute the result (e.g., opponent chromatic
channels with summative properties). Considering the way our
color vision system is equipped, it is very unlikely that we are
able to use subtractive rules of color mixture in experimental
tasks such as these, yet subtractive color mixture occurs much
more often in our natural habitat. How does the enactive view of
color perception explain this apparent dilemma?
On the ways to color
Evan Thompson3, Adrian Paiaciosb,
and Francisco J. Varela0
department of Philosophy, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
M5S1A1, b'Department of Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511,
and clnstitut des Neurosciences (CNRS-Paris VI) and CREA, Ecole
Poly technique, 75005 Paris, France
Electronic mall: bapalac@yalevm.hitnet; 
cfv@frunip62.bitnet
In Ways of coloring, our aim was to develop a novel
theoretical framework for the study of color vision in
cognitive science based on recent research in com-
parative color vision. By making the ecologically embed-
ded, perceptually guided activities of color-seeing ani-
mals the Archimedian point for understanding color
vision, we intended to move beyond the subjectivist/
objectivist framework that characterizes much current
visual research. We argued that this framework, specifi-
cally in its up-to-date form of "neurophysiological subjec-
tivism" versus "computational objectivism," is not only
philosophically unsatisfactory, but also scientifically inad-
equate. In contrast, our "enactive" approach is intended
to provide an ecological framework that can encompass
specific research in neurophysiology, psychophysics,
computational vision, and ecological optics without the
conceptual and methodological shortcomings of subjec-
tivism and objectivism.
Our Response falls into three sections. In the first, we
address the more empirical and scientific issues raised in
the commentaries. In the second, we address the relation
between our comparative argument and the philosoph-
ical positions of computational objectivism and neu-
rophysiological subjectivism. Finally, we address issues
that center on animal-environment codetermination and
our enactive approach.
1.1. Open experimental questions. Several commentators
raise a number of issues that can be substantively ad-
dressed only by further experimental research. Several
subtle but important aspects of behavioral experiments in
comparative color vision are elaborated upon by Neu-
meyer* One pertinent example that we used in our target
article is the relation between hue-opponency and the
structure of chromatic channels. Neumeyer draws atten-
tion to evidence that we neglected for tetrachromatic
color channels in the Japanese dace (Hashimoto et al.
1988). She also raises an important point about what
might count as white in a tetrachromatic color space,
because it is possible that an additive mixture of all colors
in such a space would not be perceived as a unified
"neutral." This question clearly needs further experi-
mental attention. Koedrashev cites several studies on
anuran sexual discrimination and fish physiological optics
that provide good examples of the relations between
ecological aspects of the perceptual environment and
mechanisms of color discrimination. Gouras raises an-
other issue that requires further experimental investiga-
tion: How does an increase in photoreceptors of different
spectral sensitivity avoid chromatic aberration since the
receptors will respond to different image planes? We
know of no work addressing this question.
The relation between hue-opponency and opponent
coding is also discussed by Backhaus & Meeze! for the
visual system of the bee. We certainly agree that a linear
relation between these two cannot be assumed a priori;
our qualifications about color space and linking proposi-
tions (sect. 1.2) should indicate that we made no such
assumption. Rather, our intention was simply to show
that there is empirical evidence to support this relation as
a hypothesis, as Backhaus & Menzel themselves indicate
for the bee. There are clearly technical difficulties, how-
ever, and further issues that need to be explored.
Fiekelstein provides a nice example from psychophysical
studies of human color vision for small and large spots of
light. Her results seem to imply that a color channel must
be seen as a "variable tuning," which increases and
decreases its degree of opponency.
Jacobs is rather skeptical about the evidence that we
invoke to draw conclusions about color space. For exam-
ple, he discusses how the number of minima in the
wavelength discrimination curve or the number of spec-
trally distinct photoreceptors can be misleading as indica-
tions of color space dimensionality. (The same point is
raised by Backhaus & Menze! for the bee.) We agree with
Jacobs that a dose of skepticism here is healthful, but such
a skepticism does not imply that we must treat the
evidence in a piecemeal fashion, foregoing a broader and
more inclusive perspective like the one we attempt to
develop. For example, although there is clearly no one-
to-one logical correlation between wavelength discrimi-
nation minima or number of photoreceptor types and
color space dimensionality, their covariance is clearly
supported by convergent evidence from retinal organiza-
tion, physiological channels, and behavioral color mix-
ture in primates, insects, birds, and fishes. It is this kind
of multilevel analysis that can integrate the otherwise
"fragmentary" evidence, and that makes the notion of
comparative color spaces empirically defensible (a notion
that is missing in Jacobs's important pioneering mono-
graph [Jacobs 1981]).
The multilevel analysis we advocate is misconstrued by
Mausfeld et al. when they claim that we have created a
"hierarchy of color spaces, which are vaguely related to
neural structures" in which phenomenal color space is at
the top. On the contrary, we have proposed only various
levels of analysis that need stand in no (noninterest-
relative) hierarchy and that together constitute a color
space with various attributes. As for the relation to neural
structures, we agree that the links here are problematic,
as we explicitly indicated in relation to the problem of
linking propositions. Furthermore, we not only outline
56
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Response/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
what is known about color space at various levels, but also
provide some new ideas (e.g., the decorrelation pro-
cedure for calculating chromatic channels and the fre-
quency analysis of color vision; see Appendixes A and B)
that are admittedly only partial but certainly not vague.
Wagemans & de Weert contribute unpublished ex-
perimental results with additive coloration on Necker
cube faces (see their Figure 1). In their eyes, this experi-
ment raises the question of why additive rules are used for
transparent-like surfaces in Necker boxes. Because the
exposition and interpretation of their results is so brief,
we do not understand what "challenge" their results pose
for our view. We must therefore postpone any discussion
of these experiments until, their paper is published.
1.2. Coewoiution and physical constraints. Agreement is
expressed by Shepard with our view (stated in sect. 3)
that perceptual theory must simultaneously consider (i)
physical-level constraints; (ii) sensori-motor activity as
constituted by neuronal processes and developmental
constraints; and (iii) evolutionary history. In his eyes,
however, these three are not equally fundamental;
rather, (i) takes priority. From this position, he suggests
that trichromacy in primates and bees can be explained
(via a linear models framework: see Maloney) by the
limited three degrees of freedom in terrestrial illumina-
tion. In response, we have two points to make. First, the
preeminence that Shepard wishes to accord to physical-
level constraints and invariants is certainly possible as a
hypothesis, but contrary to what Shepard appears to
suggest, it cannot be taken as either logically necessary or
empirically demonstrated. Indeed, one goal of com-
parative research is to determine more precisely the
various roles played by (i), (ii), and (iii). We return to this
point in more detail in section 3. Second, even if
Shepard's hypothesis about the three degrees of variance
in terrestrial illumination is right, it hardly provides an
explanatory framework for the color vision of "highly
visual diurnal species" for it takes primate trichromacy as
the norm when in fact this kind of color vision is most
likely degenerate from an evolutionary perspective
(Goldsmith 1980; 1990). Furthermore, tetrachromacy
and pentachromacy appear to be common not only among
diurnal birds, but also among vertebrate lineages in
general (Goldsmith 1990). Surprisingly, Shepard does
not address (either in his commentary or his 1990 paper)
this considerable challenge to his view.
Maier & Burkhardt appear to agree with Shepard
about the importance of physical-level constraints when
they claim that we make too much of the differences in
color spaces and ignore the commonalities. In particular,
they point to the interesting cluster of regions of best
wavelength discrimination in different animals and argue
that evolutionary constraints must be quite strong to
build up such a convergence. We certainly agree that
such convergences must be explained, and hence that
item (i) above could eventually turn out to be the one
that carries the most explanatory weight here. But it is
also possible that such clustering could be explained by
the constraints involved in biochemical synthesis - wit-
ness for example the protein sequence similarity between
avian and primate pigments (Goldsmith 1990). Further-
more, there are quite dramatic differences in neural
channel implementation that these areas of best discrimi-
nation afford and these would seem to be more significant
in determining the animal's color experience. In general,
our plea is for a more parsimonious two-way determina-
tion between properties of organisms and their environ-
mental constraints. How much invariant physical con-
straints per se - that is, as not mediated through the
structure of organisms - can explain remains to be seen.
Until all the evidence is in, it seems to us that the room for
diversity is far larger than that for convergence. Indeed,
the mere fact that, as Maier & Burkhardt note, color
ontology continues to evolve and change, is a strong
indication that arguments from adaptive optimality might
be short of the mark.
Akins & Lamping also address this issue. In their view,
comparative research indicates that the color vision of
each species constitutes a "different informational 'cut'
. . . on the objective spectral world." They support this
claim by citing data from studies of fishes (which we also
cite: sect. 2.4) that reveal the covariance between pig-
ment sensitivities and ambient illumination. Again, such
broad physical-level constraints as properties of the am-
bient illumination are clearly important, but (as with the
data cited by Maier & Burkhardt) how these constraints
are shaped by the animal into a color space is another
matter. Akins & Lamping's data are limited to the pe-
ripheral receptor level, but from this level to the constitu-
tion of a behavioral color space there are numerous layers
of neuronal structure and activity. To describe these
layers as merely generating different informational "cuts"
on some objective list of parameters strikes us as "import-
ing an a priori bias into . . . the initial vocabulary of
explanation" contrary to Akins & Lamping's own agenda.
We therefore prefer to describe these layers as generat-
ing emergent behavioral domains or emergent domains of
ecologically situated animal activity.
Backhaus & Menzel add a number of important details
about the color systems of insects, including a clearer
account of the geometry of color opponency, receptor
sensitivity, and wavelength discrimination. We thank
them for greatly improving the evidence we cited in the
target article by contributing their two figures and for
reminding us (personal communication) that von Helver-
sen (1972) measured the honeybee's discrimination curve
and that Werner et al. (1988) provide evidence for color
constancy. They agree with us about the importance of
coadaptive mechanisms for understanding the evolution
of color vision, and they add to this point their fascinating
not yet published studies of the ecology of 500 insect-
pollinated plant species in Israel (Menzel & Shmida, in
preparation). As they summarize this evidence, there is
an amazing covariance between floral spectral reflec-
tances and the photoreceptor maxima of the visiting
insects. Because we do not yet have access to these results
we cannot comment further, but we certainly agree that
these kinds of studies provide a major advance for re-
search on the coevolution of color vision and animal
environments. We are puzzled, however, by Backhaus &
Menzel's view that maximal decorrelation (Appendix A)
and frequency analysis (Appendix B) do not allow specific
predictions in this area. On the contrary, it is by using the
decorrelation transformation that we are able to predict
using no other ad hoc results the discrimination minima
and color channel geometry of the goldfish as discussed in
the text; we have also used this procedure to generate
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
57

Response/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
predictions that match the known data for the honeybee
(numerical details in Palacios 1991). In the case of fre-
quency analysis, although work In this area is only begin-
ning, measurements of the modulation sensitivity func-
tion (MSF) are a first step toward a comparison of the
frequency limitations of color vision mechanisms with the
frequency limitations of the relevant objects In the ani-
mal's environment.
1.3. Color space and diwersitf of perceptual experience.
Various authors take Issue with our use of phenomenal
color space as described In terms of hue, saturation, and
brightness (Davidoff; Mausfeld et al.; Neumeyer; van
Brakel). The main criticisms are that this specification is
oversimplified, hopelessly bound to human experience,
and problematic when extended to other animals.
Davidoff argues that phenomenal color space Is a
questionable concept If we consider It an Independent
module. He considers a whole array of evidence that
shows that at every stage color perception is Interdepen-
dent with concurrent perceptual phenomena. For exam-
ple, color Is inseparable from shape and boundary, cate-
gories, and various modifications of chromatic channels.
We entirely agree on this point and are grateful to
Davidoff for adding this clarification. To speak of color
space as a unit of perception and behavior is a mere
convenience to isolate a center of attention; we In no way
wish to assume that It Is modular in the traditional sense.
Indeed, our attempt to Integrate color perception Into the
framework of perceptually guided activity Is consonant
with this point.
Mausfeld et al. rightly note that many complexities are
involved In the phenomenal dimensions of color space,
complexities that go beyond just the three dimensions of
hue, saturation, and brightness. These commentators are
mistaken, however, when they claim that we identify
phenomenal color space with the CIE space. On the
contrary, we explicitly Indicate that the CiE tristimulus
values are only one useful way of mapping one aspect of
phenomenal color space, namely, Its extent.
Van Brakel offers several Incisive comments about
phenomenal color, particularly when he imagines a hypo-
thetical "feather sorting contest'' among tetrachromatlc
pigeons. He rightly wonders why sensitivity to UV light
should show up phenomenally as an extra hue and not as,
say, an extra type of brightness, a metallic look, or slow
vibrations. Van Brakel's point Is well taken. What we
should have said Is that the phenomenal structure of any
color space can be assumed to have some fundamental
dimensions that specify It (these can be allowed to vary for
interest-relative purposes). In the psychophyslcal studies
of human color perception, these are hue, saturation, and
brightness, although there are certainly other phenome-
nologlcally significant dimensions, such as the focal/
nonfocal categorical organization studied by Rosch
(1973). The dimensions appropriate for chromatic experi-
ence In other creatures could well be different, however,
- with the one proviso that there be a hue dimension,
which would seem to be a minimal conceptually neces-
sary condition for something to count as a chromatic
space.L
Stoerig & Cowey summarize the evidence from human
patients where wavelength discrimination and color ex-
perience can be dissociated, for example, In the phe-
nomena of bllndslght and cerebral achromatopsia. As
they indicate, these phenomena provide evidence for our
claim that mere wavelength discrimination does not en-
tail color experience. But this evidence might also be
thought to challenge one of the central claims In our
target article, namely, that wherever a color discrimina-
tion apparatus (i.e., one Involved In additive color mix-
ture, color contrast, and color constancy) is In place, a
color experience proper to the color space in question
exists. Furthermore, It Is this claim that supports our
attribution of color experience to nonhuman animals.
Thus the phenomena that Stoerig & Cowey review bring
Into focus from a different angle the complex Issue just
discussed of what color experience can mean In the
context of other species. Our position has been a par-
simonious one: If there are the color discrimination be-
haviors and apparati to define a color space, then we
assume that such chromatic abilities are experiential In
the sense that Griffen (1984) has discussed for various
animal capacities. It certainly does not follow that animal
experience so understood implies self-consciousness or
self-awareness as in human experience, which Is con-
stituted by language and self-reflection. The phenomena
that Stoerig & Cowey cite, however, do Invite us in a
comparative context to wonder what might correspond to
achromatopsia In animals and how this could be revealed
experimentally. Just as a lesion can collapse individuals'
experience so they no longer experience color, we might
Imagine experimental demonstrations In animals where
the full presence of a color space and its associated
experience (say, in color discrimination associated with
sexual recognition) are collapsed by a disconnection syn-
drome leaving intact only residual chromatic discrimi-
natory abilities. This Intriguing Idea must remain spec-
ulative for the time being.
Can different color experiences In the sense of "experi-
ence" just Indicated be commensurable? Let us offer a
clarification. In our article, we followed a venerable
tradition In color science and referred to the "dimension-
ality" of color space In the strict technical sense of the
number of independent variables needed to specify It as a
vector space. Accordingly, when we say that two color
spaces are "incommensurable" we mean that there is no
mapping between the dimensions of the two spaces
without some remainder. (It should be noted here that
the dimensions are not specified purely at the receptor
level, hence Akins & Lamping are mistaken when they
say that the color space of any tetrachromat would be
commensurable with the gustatory space of any animal
with four taste receptors.) Both Mausfeld et al. and van
Brakel appear to have been led astray because they took
"incommensurable" In a much broader sense than we
Intended. How color experiences can be said to be com-
mensurable or Incommensurable In a broader sense is a
complex Issue that we do not have the space to discuss
here (see Thompson 1992).
Steele raises a different point about our discussion of
diversity In color experience. He thinks that by empha-
sizing the differences between people and pigeons we are
sliding into solipsism. He argues that these are merely
differences in how the same function Is Implemented, a
function that ultimately consists in a solution to a problem
58
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Response/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
posed by the physical world. His analogy is that of slide
rules and calculators. We find this analogy quite mystify-
ing, for it begs precisely the question we pose; the
comparative evidence suggests that for color vision there
is no such "same problem" to be solved by different
implementations. Steele fails to give any account of what
would count as the "common function" in the case at
hand. There is surely a family resemblance among the
various color spaces, but to assume that this resemblance
is based in a common function, as slide rules and arith-
metical calculators share the same arithmetical function,
is to go round in circles by assuming what needs to be
proven. Steele does give an interesting account of the
history of form perception in pigeons, however, showing
how recent research has come to the conclusion (not
surprisingly from our point of view) that pigeons have a
quite different sense of what counts as a visually relevant
scene, though it is not difficult to get pigeons to mimic the
same shape and form categorizations that humans per-
form. Steele suggests that the "common function or goal"
is nonetheless "visually-guided activity in an objective
world." We agree that both humans and pigeons have
visually guided activity in their respective environments
and that these share common basic physical constraints.
As the comparative evidence indicates, however, there is
a great deal of mediation among physical constraints,
organismic processes, and evolutionary history; for this
reason, we do not believe that broad physical constraints
automatically specify universal problems to be solved.
We take up this point in detail in section 3.
1.4. Computational color vision. Several researchers in
computational vision address our target article from that
point of view (Dannemiller; Feldman; Hurlbert; Mal-
oney; Reeves). Their commentaries are considerably
helpful in sharpening the differences between computa-
tional vision as inverse optics and our enactive approach.
1.4.1. Are we talking to a straw-man? According to
Hurlbert, our depiction of computational vision is a
"straw man." (Wageraans & de Weert also accuse us of
presenting a "black-and-white" picture of the computa-
tional approach). In Hurlbert's view, the point of inverse
optics is to recover invariant surface descriptors in gener-
al, of which reflectance is a good candidate. She also
claims that computational visual scientists do not equate
color with such surface descriptors as reflectance, but
rather "heed the distinction between physical stim-
ulus . . . and the perception (color) to which it gives
rise." Our complaint, however, is not that computational
visual scientists confuse stimulus and perception, which
of course they do not, but rather that they assume that
once reflectance is recovered color specifications can be
constructed from such descriptors without remainder.
Indeed, Hurlbert herself has written: "The computation
of color is a prime example of the difficult problem of
inverse optics . . . . The computational goal underlying
color constancy seems to be the extraction of invariant
surface spectral reflectance properties from the image
intensity signal, in which reflectance and illumination are
mixed." And then, discussing lightness algorithms, she
writes: "Computing color is thereby reduced to extract-
ing surface reflectance from the intensity signal in a single
chromatic channel" (Hurlbert & Poggio 1988, p. 482).
This is precisely the objectivist position (exemplified also
in the passage from Maloney [1985, p. 119] we cited) that
we take to task in our article.
In her commentary, however, Hurlbert offers a more
moderate and eclectic approach, one that is similar to that
advocated by Daenemillero Both hold that determining
constant color descriptors is primarily a matter of extract-
ing reflectance, but they admit that this task is insufficient
to characterize the full range of chromatic phenomena.
In Dannemiller's words, "chromatic information parti-
cipates in various tasks" and these tasks "determine
whether or not it is necessary to include an animal's
subjective experience of color in one's model." Similarly,
Hurlbert welcomes the "views of other animals" on
various chromatic tasks. We are quite sympathetic to this
multitask approach, but would give it a somewhat differ-
ent interpretation. There are surely some discrimination
tasks where the nature of an animal's color space can be
safely bracketed out of the picture. When we need to
account for the full-fledged behavior of the animal, how-
ever, we must take into account its specific color space,
for this will guide and constrain the lower-level mecha-
nisms closer to optical properties. In contrast to Dan-
nemiller's language, we would not say that this amounts
simply to "taking into account the animal's subjective
experience of color"; rather, it amounts to taking into
account the entire range of phenomena that determine
what color is. It does not suffice to assume that one can
move back-and-forth between "objective color" and
"subjective experience," for this merely perpetuates a
bad duality in an unstable compromise. Instead, what we
have tried to do is to move beyond the forced choice of
objectivism versus subjectivism by taking into account
the entire range of color phenomena in an integrated
ecological framework.
1.4.2. Spatial segmentation, representation^ and related
issues. The objection is made by Hurlbert that we
"grossly downplay" the research on segmentation al-
gorithms using color. This criticism is surprising, because
we introduce these algorithms as one of the three compo-
nents of computational color vision theory (sect. 1.3). We
explicitly state that one goal of computational vision is to
link surface and color, as reflectance is a property of
surfaces, not of unspecified boundaries. Our complaint
was rather that the implications of this work are ignored
or downplayed by those who assume that surfaces are
prespecified properties of the environment that the ani-
mal must simply recover via the appropriate repre-
sentations.
Hurlbert appears to agree with us that spatial segmen-
tation for other species depends on their sensorimotor
abilities, but she states that "computational models
founded on inverse optics do not prespecify the environ-
ment, nor do they deny that perception can shape the
environment, if the environment is defined as something
created by the animal in the act of perceiving it." Once
again, we find Hurlbert's stance on this matter far more
open-minded than most of the literature on inverse op-
tics, which certainly does assume that prespecified phys-
ical properties provide the primary data from which to
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
59

Response/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
recover invariants. Consider, for example, Marr's (1982,
p. 42) statement that "[t]he purpose of these representa-
tions is to provide useful descriptions of aspects of the real
world. The structure of the real world therefore plays an
important role in determining both the nature of the
representations that are used and the nature of the
processes that derive and maintain them/' Or consider
this description from Poggio et al.'s now classic descrip-
tion of regularization theory as applied to vision: "Early
vision consists of a set of processes that recover physical
properties of the visible three-dimensional surfaces from
the two-dimensional intensity arrays" (1985, p. 314).
Against this approach we do not deny the importance of
physical constraints; what we deny is that they play the
primary role such that their recovery via representations
is the central feature of color perception.
Hurlbert rightly reminds us that there is research on
sensorimotor processes and visually guided activity in
computational vision, such as Reichardt & Poggio's (1976)
study of visual orientation in the fly. This more biolog-
ically inspired approach has yet to affect the main direc-
tion of research in computational color vision, however.
Similarly, Feldman criticizes us for ignoring research on
"adaptation, attention, and priming that bear on the
relation between internal and external aspects of color,"
but he provides no references to substantiate his claim,
nor does he indicate how this supposed literature is
related to the mainstream of computational color vision
research. He also takes issue with our characterization of
such sensorimotor processes, claiming that these cannot
simply be described as self-organizing. He is right that
such a characterization is insufficient, and we do provide a
number of examples of specific neural circuits akin to the
ones he cites (vistibulo-ocular reflexes). Our point in the
article was not to eliminate the distinctive properties of
specific networks but simply to highlight the fact that
neural processes involve emergent properties that must
be taken into account. We do not think Feldman would
disagree with this point (and a more careful reading of our
target article might have avoided the misunderstanding).
Feldman thinks that our critique of representations
contradicts what has been learned about "cortical maps,
spatial cognition, and in fact, all but the simplest behav-
ior." We certainly do not deny that there are always
internal states of organisms (or machines) that covary with
perceptual and cognitive behaviors. Feldman misses the
point of our critique, which is aimed at representation in a
stronger sense, namely, the idea that the basic function of
perceptual and cognitive processes is to recover indepen-
dent physical descriptors that instruct animal (or ma-
chine) behavior. Here internal states are treated as the
instantiation of some semantic domain or world model.
Contrary to Feldman's suggestion, representation in this
sense is not a fact, but a hypothesis, theory, or research
program, one which is being increasingly criticized
throughout cognitive science. One of the most striking
examples is the trend in robotics pioneered by Brooks
(1986; 1987; 1989; see also Maes 1990) at the very heart of
artificial intelligence. Indeed, far from being "crippling
for visual and other cognitive scientists," an enactive
approach has proven to be quite fertile in the pragmatic
task of attempting to build autonomous robotic devices.
The debate over representations and the enactive cri-
tique are therefore entirely legitimate and cannot be
dismissed with a wave of one's hand.
1A3» Can the linear models framework suffice? It is
rightly pointed out by Malciney that the linear models
framework (LMF), of which he is one of the main archi-
tects, has provided fundamental insights into the phe-
nomena of color constancy. It predicts both the direction
and degree of nonconstancy for various models and al-
gorithms, as well as the existence of privileged spaces of
lights and surfaces where constancy is near perfect. And
because LMF is stated in general terms, it can be trans-
posed to various signal spaces, photoreceptor families,
and dimensionalities. We fully agree with these impor-
tant contributions of LMF and have discussed some of
them in section 1.3.
Our differences with Maloney center on whether LMF
is sufficient as an explanatory framework for color vision.
With respect to color constancy, the commentary by
Reeves is quite interesting, for it calls into question the
supposedly central role of constancy and surface invar-
iants in color perception. His data appear to contradict
the "surface-fixated computational viewpoint" that em-
phasizes constancy at the expense of sensitivity to the
pattern of illumination (cf. Jameson & Hurvich 1989), but
they do not contradict the "computational viewpoint in
general." They might reveal LMF to be a more narrow
perspective than is needed for the entirety of color
phenomenology in humans, however.
In relation to the comparative data, Maloney holds that
the only reason to seek tools other than LMF at this time
would be to falsify LMF. We do not claim in the target
article that the comparative data falsify LMF in any strong
sense. Our view is not contradictory to the LMF frame-
work; we merely find this framework is limited. What
need to be considered along with computational models
that focus on extracting surface invariants are all the other
neurological, ethological, and ecological dimensions of
animal color spaces. LMF and computational vision in
general have not addressed this large body of evidence,
which, until proven otherwise, must enter into the expla-
nation of color vision in natural systems. The issues
therefore do not center on the falsification of LMF, but
rather on how it proposes to address the larger set of
issues revealed by the comparative data. Consider, for
example, the possible role that color vision may play in
aerial navigation among birds or in generating perceptual
categories that have behavioral significance for animals in
their interactions. Maloney does not Indicate how these
phenomena are to be integrated into a framework that
relies exclusively on physical constraints and Invariant
descriptors. Instead, he chides us for advocating an ap-
proach that "is at once imprecise and scarcely falsifiable."
The range of ecological phenomena to which we point has
barely begun to be studied, however, and so accusations
of unfalsifiability are hardly appropriate at this stage. We
welcome any contributions that LMF has to make, but to
suppose that LMF provides a sufficient theoretical frame-
work for the ecological diversity of natural color spaces
and therefore that we need no new tools is reminiscent of
the well-known story of the man who continued to look for
his lost key under the lamppost because only there was
there enough light.
60
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Response/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
2. The comparatiwe argument
2.1. Objectivism. Among the commentators who discuss
objectivism, there appears to be some disagreement over
how this position is to be understood. We take objec-
tivism to be the position articulated by Hilbert (1987) and
Matthee (1988), and defended in their commentaries:
Color is a property that objects have independently of
perceivers. This statement of the objectivist thesis differs
from that offered by Averill, who holds that objectivism is
the view that colors are either physical properties or
logical constructions from physical properties, where a
physical property of an object is one in virtue of which it is
governed by natural laws (or in virtue of which it can enter
into causal interactions). Because this sense of "physical"
does not rule out properties of perceivers (e.g., physio-
logical properties), objectivism in Averill's sense could
include an account of color that refers to such (physical)
properties (cf. Dennett who describes Hardin's subjec-
tivist view as internal objectivism). But because any such
account would be perceiver-relative, it would contradict
the basic objectivist thesis of the perceiver-independence
of color as advocated by Hilbert (1987) and Matthen
(1988). (We return to discuss Averill's position at the end
of this section.) It should also be noted that it follows from
this thesis that colors objectively understood need not
correspond in any one-to-one manner with colors as
perceived (as Hilbert, 1987, extensively discusses).
Therefore, contrary to the contention of Backtiaus &
Menzel, objectivism about color is not at all "naive
realism," which typically holds that things are objectively
as they are perceived.
We offered two main arguments against objectivism -
the "argument from perceiver-relativity" and the "argu-
ment from external irreducibility" (sect. 2.4). flilbert9
Matthee, and Leviee claim that the basic objectivist
framework is untouched by these arguments and that our
comparative evidence can be accommodated within this
framework. A number of other commentators make spe-
cific points about the argument from perceiver-relativity
(Averill; Dannemiller; Hardle) and the argument from
external irreducibility (Mausfeld et al.). We address
these specific points first and then proceed to a more
general discussion of the objectivist framework.
2.1.1. The argument from perceiwer reiatiwity. Several
misinterpretations of this argument are apparent in the
commentaries. Hilbert supposes that the argument is
meant as a refutation of color objectivism and argues in
reply that it is question-begging. Averill supposes that
the point of the argument is to establish the impossibility
of perceiving a surface as an opaque one without perceiv-
ing it as colored. These are both misconstraals of the
argument. First, as we explicitly indicated, the argument
is intended to be conditional, based on a reasonable
hypothesis about the interdependence of color and spatial
segmentation, and so it does not have the status of a
conceptual or logical refutation. Second, the argument
does not purport to establish that it is impossible to
perceive an opaque surface as a surface before perceiving
it as colored. Instead, it simply purports to establish that
what is actually perceived as a surface involves color
vision. The point is to draw attention to the variations in
spatial segmentation among perceiving animals in rela-
tion to their color perception (see the commentaries by
Gouras9 Hardin, and Hurlbert, which appreciate this
point). These variations certainly do not establish the
impossibility of objectivism about perceptual content for
color and surface perception, but they do challenge its
plausibility. Objectivists cannot simply assume without
argument that what counts as a surface can be specified
independently of the perceiving animal. On the contrary,
because objectivism about color depends on objectivism
about surfaces, objectivists owe us an account of the
latter. And just as objectivism about color must be de-
fended not simply as conceptually possible but as em-
pirically plausible in the face of wide variations in color
vision throughout the animal world, so objectivism about
surfaces must be defended as empirically plausible in the
face of wide variations in spatial segmentation throughout
the animal world.
It is the subjectivist Hardie who addresses this issue.
In his commentary, he explains that his notion of "shape
simpliciter" can be assimilated to a physically basic notion
of spatial configuration, which provides a species-neutral
way of describing characteristics of animals and their
environments. This distinction between physical spatial
configuration and visual shape is obviously the kind of
distinction that is needed to ground an objectivist account
of surfaces. Our view (which can only be indicated pro-
grammatically here) is that surfaces are not transparent
entities in perception. Recent results on signal analysis
for example (Mallat & Zhong 1989) prove rigorously that
shape descriptions can be obtained by considering just
the sharp discontinuities in a signal measured at various
scales (what Marr called multiscale edges). This conden-
sation of salience in discrete signal points is nontrivial as
the mathematical tools brought to bear show and under-
mines the notion of shape as some neutral "spatial config-
uration." Furthermore, both the nature of the discon-
tinuities and the relevant scales provide a range of
physically significant anchor points that the neuronal
mechanisms of each animal will treat in different ways.
Thus although based on the same physical singularities,
diverse shapes and contours are stabilized depending on
animal behavior.
In a somewhat different vein, DannemiUer denies that
we need to postulate anything about the phenomenal
structure of an animal's color experience to understand
the role that color vision plays in spatial segmentation.
The link we attempted to establish between color vision
and spatial segmentation in other animals, however, did
not depend on hypothetical speculations about, say, ter-
nary hues in pigeon color space, but on the kinds of
segmentation algorithms that would be involved in tetra-
or pentachromatic color vision. Our point is simply that
such algorithms would most likely segment the world in
ways different from, say, the algorithms developed by
Rubin and Richards (1982; 1988), which correspond to the
color-opponent channels in trichromatic humans.
2.1.2. The argument from external irreducibility. Com-
putational objectivism does not necessarily imply that the
unique/binary structure of hue must reduce to spectral
reflectance, Mausfeld et al. claim, and therefore the
"correspondence requirements" involved in this argu-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
61

Response/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
ment (premise 8) are too strong. Similarly, Matthen
claims that computational objectivism is not committed to
any "smooth mapping" from color experience to distal
properties. The argument from external irreducibility
was not intended to meet this kind of point; rather, it was
meant to bring out the gap between the phenomenal
structure of color and animal-independent distal proper-
ties like spectral reflectance. Our view is that given this
gap, computational objectivism becomes a considerably
implausible position. To defend this view, let us turn to
the arguments offered by Matthen and Hilbert in their
commentaries.
Matthen's reply to the argument from external irre-
ducibility is to distinguish between two distinct quality
spaces for color vision — phenomenal quality space and a
distal quality space. The former corresponds to our notion
of phenomenal color space (sect. 1.2); the latter corre-
sponds to the distal properties that, Matthen supposes, it
is the biological function of chromatic perceptual states to
detect, and that, in his view, determine perceptual con-
tent. Whereas we argued that for objectivism to be
plausible some mapping between these two quality
spaces must be provided that enables us to capture
generalizations about hue, Matthen is willing to allow
that phenomenal space might contain structure that com-
pletely fails to match anything in the structure of the
distal property space. This possibility, however, leads
Matthen to suggest that "it is not color that is the content
of color vision, but some other physical quantity."
Matthen admits that this consequence may seem para-
doxical. To us, however, it seems like a reductio of the
objectivist view. That color should be the content of
chromatic perceptual states is a criterion of adequacy for
any theory of perceptual content. If one's theory of
content or one's theory of color leads to a contrary
conclusion then one must revise or abandon it. Contrary
to Matthen's view, the claim that color is not the content
of color vision is not a "clear consequence of distinguish-
ing between content and experience, and allowing each a
scientific role of its own." It is, rather, a consequence of
combining the distinction between content and experi-
ence with the view that it is the biological function of
perception to "recover" animal-independent distal prop-
erties. When the distinction between content and experi-
ence is combined with an enactive account of perception,
however, Matthen's consequence does not follow. The
enactive account of perceptual content incorporates a
distal component but holds that the relevant distal prop-
erties are ecological: They are properties of the world
understood as an animal environment and so must be
identified in relation to the perceptually guided activities
of animals. This does not imply, as Matthen seems to
think, that color vision has no content, nor does it lead to
the counterintuitive view that color is not the content of
color vision. Rather, it implies, in Breackes's elegant
formulation, that perceptions of red will be identified by
way of the property of redness, and redness in turn will be
identified by way of perceptions of red. The informative
circularity of this account exemplifies what Mausfeld et
al. call "the inherent Janus-facedness of the concept of
color." Mausfeld et al. are therefore wrong to suppose
that our enactive view implies an "essentialist" definition
of color; on the contrary, the enactive account shows how,
in Dennett's words, "no compact, noncircular definition
of color is possible.
2.1.3. Anthropocentric objectiwism and the comparatiwe
argument. The main challenge to objectivism made by
the comparative argument does not consist merely in the
variability of color experience across the animal kingdom.
Rather, it consists in the fact, revealed by comparative
research, that there is no single distal property that is the
biological function of color vision to detect. To repeat:
Both across and within animal species, color vision plays
many roles in the perceptual guidance of activity —
surface perception, perception of ambient lighting condi-
tions, and the generation of perceptual categories that
have cognitive and behavioral significance.2
Hilbert, Matthee, and Leviee respond to this chal-
lenge in the same way, namely, by claiming that it is a
virtue of objectivism that it is "anthropocentric.'' In their
view, the ontology of color is concerned with a property
that human beings perceive, and the objectivity of this
property is not impugned by other species perceiving
different properties. First, it should be noted that this
reply simply ignores one of the central points we make,
namely, that even in the case of primates and within the
human species, color vision plays many roles besides
those involved in the perception of surfaces (Burtt 1979;
Hailman 1977; Jacobs 1981; Jameson & Hurvich 1989;
and the commentary by Meeves). Although this point can
be made without the comparative argument, it is never-
theless the comparative perspective that brings this fact
most readily and quickly to light. For this reason, Levine
is mistaken when he says that "comparative studies of
color vision do no work for this argument."
Second, as Hilbert recognizes, anthropocentric objec-
tivism has a "glaring difficulty" - if color is identified with
that distal property perceived by humans, and if other
organisms, despite having similar visual machinery, do
not perceive this property, then it follows that those
organisms do not possess color vision (though they would
in Hardie's sense perhaps possess "color" vision). This
difficulty is indeed glaring, perhaps even disastrous.
Because the objectivist claims that color is that property
perceived by the human visual system, the ultimate
reference point for determining the nature of color must,
even for the objectivist, be the structure and performance
of the human visual system. As the comparative research
indicates, however, other animals possess appropriately
similar visual systems. It is therefore far more plausible
and parsimonious to say that these animals possess color
vision than to deny that they do because of a prior
commitment to an objectivist theory of perceptual con-
tent. Suppose, for example, that our speculations about
ternary hues in a tetrachromatic color space are right.
Tetrachromats would then perceive a quality, which, as it
would bear a resemblance relation to red, green, yellow,
and blue - that is, resemble red, green, yellow, and blue
as much as they resemble each other and yet not be
reddish, greenish, yellowish, or blueish (see Hardin,
1988, and the commentaries by Neumeyer and Stoerig &
Cowey) - would count as a hue (despite what other
features it might have: see van Brake!). This possibility
drives home from a rather different angle the point
admitted by Hilbert that there is a mismatch between the
62
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Response /Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
object!vist's account of the nature of color and the consid-
erations involved in attributing color vision to nonhuman
animals. Something does indeed have to give here, and it
is the objectivist theory of color. By abandoning objec-
tivism, the interests of philosophers and those of visual
scientists need not part company as Hilbert envisions at
the end of his commentary. The comparative argument
shows not just what is wrong with the objectivist frame-
work as a whole, but also how better theories can be
developed from the cooperation of philosophers and
visual scientists.
2.1.4. Averill's "limited objectivism". It is claimed by
Averill that our view of colors as properties of the extra-
dermal world understood as an animal environment im-
plies that colors are nonphysical in his sense (i. e., they are
not properties in virtue of which objects are governed by
laws or enter into causal interactions). We certainly do
not believe that color properties figure in the laws of
physics, and so we are not perturbed that colors are
nonphysical in this sense. Whether there are natural laws
at some level in which color properties figure strikes us as
an open question, however, one that is not decided by our
enactive approach. Suppose, for example, that colors are,
as we claim, ecological properties, and furthermore that
Gibsoeians are right that there are lawlike regularities to
be stated at a distinctly ecological level. Then color
properties might figure in the statement of these laws and
so be physical properties in Averill's sense. (In a some-
what different vein, Broackes, 1991, has argued that
there are nonreductive forms of scientific explanation that
appeal to color properties.) We do not have the space to
discuss these issues here. In any case, Averill's inference
that colors cannot figure in natural laws if they are
ecological properties does not follow.
Averill's owe position has some intriguing features,
however, ones that actually overlap with our ecological
position. He argues that the proper question is not, "Are
colors physical properties," but rather, "What features of
colors are physical properties?" In his view, those fea-
tures of color that are physical are differences in reflec-
tance, transmittance, polarization, and so on - in short,
the properties of physical optics. Those features that are
perceptual, on the other hand, are hue properties, that is,
redness, greenness, blueness, and yellowness. We like
Averill's question, but we would answer it in a somewhat
different way. Because we claim that colors are relational
properties of animal-environment ecosystems, we are
happy to say that colors have physical properties in
Averill's sense as long as it is remembered that these do
not exhaust the features of color and that they must be
individuated in relation to the animal. In answer to
Averill's question, then, we would say that the physical
components of color actually correspond to those studied
in ecological optics (see Wagemans & de Weert), that is,
they are properties of the ambient optic array or surface
layout as taken in relation to the sensory-motor capacities
of animals.
2.2* Subjectivism. In our target article, we considered
subjectivism to be the view that colors are internal senso-
ry qualities. Neurophysiological subjectivism is the view
that arises when one claims in addition that internal
sensory qualities are to be reductively identified with
neural states (Hardin 1988, pp. 111-12). Thus this philo-
sophical view has both a subjectivist and a reductionist
component.
A number of commentators defend neurophysiological
subjectivism against our ecologically based criticisms
(Backhaus & Menzel; Clark; Hardin; McGIlvray). Back-
haus & Menzel endorse both the subjectivist and reduc-
tionist components when they claim that although "we
experience our sensations . . . as located at the positions
of the objects outside . . . we know from psychophysical
and neurophysiological investigations that color is cre-
ated somewhere in the brain although the exact location
of this process is still unknown . . . ." This statement
seems both confused and question-begging. First, we
experience objects as intrinsically colored; we do not
experience them as being painted over, as it were, with a
coating of our sensations. Second, neurophysiology and
psychophysics show us that chromatic visual experiences
depend on the visual system, but the dependence is
surely distributed and nonlocalized. Finally, the straight-
forward identification of neuronal processes with color
simply begs the (conceptual and empirical) question of
whether the term "color" is better applied to spectral
reflectances as objectivists claim, to neuronal processes as
subjectivists claim, or to relational properties of animal-
environment ecosystems as we enactivists claim.
Clark claims that our characterization of subjectivism
as the view that colors are "internally generated qualities
that the animal simply projects onto the world" is a straw
man, despite the fact that Hardin (1988) explicitly de-
fends this view, as does McGIlvray in his commentary. In
Clark's view, the real point of subjectivism is that the
principles that collect stimuli into perceptual equivalence
classes cannot be framed in extradermal terms. But objec-
tivists need not disagree with this claim; indeed, in
Hilbert's (1987) view, the color classes "red," "green,"
"yellow," and "blue" are anthropocentric whereas objec-
tive color is spectral reflectance. Subjectivism becomes a
substantive philosophical position, then, when it claims
that colors are qualities that are generated by internal
states.
Clark argues that none of the evolutionary and ecologi-
cal phenomena we cite in support of our enactive ap-
proach is inconsistent with neurophysiological subjec-
tivism. In his view, neurophysiology explains without
remainder the chromatic visual experiences that species
have today, whereas evolutionary theory explains why
species have the visual systems they do. Our point in
citing the evolutionary and ecological phenomena, how-
ever, was to provide evidence for the claim that a narrow,
that is, entirely intradermal, account of chromatic visual
experience is unsatisfactory. (We admit that this point
was not made clear enough in the target article.) The
problem with neurophysiological subjectivism, in our
view, is that it gives only a proximal account of chromatic
perceptual content, and so neglects how visual experi-
ence is ecologically constituted. (Computational objec-
tivism errs at the other extreme by having an animal-
independent distal account of perceptual content.) If
chromatic experience is construed narrowly, then it is at
least a defensible research program to attempt to explain
such experience exhaustively in neural terms. (It should
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
63

Response /Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
be noted, however, that there are severe problems even
here. Consider human color categories, for example,
which involve linguistic and cultural dimensions; see
Lakoffl987; MacLaury 1987; and the commentary by van
Brakel.) If, on the other hand, chromatic experience is
construed widely, that is, in the extradermal context of its
ecological embeddedness, then it is quite implausible to
suppose that it can be explained entirely in neural terms.
Finally, when chromatic experience is thus construed,
the plausibility of identifying colors with neural states as
Clark9 Bardie^ and McGilvray advocate, is undermined
in favor of the view that treats them as relational proper-
ties of animals and their environments.
McGiSvray challenges us to explain how, given that
computational objectivism is wrong, there is nevertheless
something that has colors and is outside the brain.
McGilvray appears to believe that the only way for
perceptual objects to be outside the brain is for them to be
identical with physical objects, that is, with objects as
described in the organism-independent vocabulary of
(macroscopic) physics. Our claim that colors are proper-
ties of the extradermal world understood as an animal
environment, however, means that they are properties of
the world at an ecological level of description in Gibson's
(1979) sense, that is, of the world as described in relation
to the perceptually guided activities of animals. As we
indicate toward the end of the target article, this view
implies that colors are strictly speaking relational proper-
ties of animal-environment ecosystems. We do not un-
derstand why McGilvray is "mystified" by this view.
There is, after all, considerable precedent in the philo-
sophical tradition for treating colors relationally: Locke
had a relational account and, as Ben-Ze?ev rightly re-
minds us, so did Aristotle. (Our view is actually closer to
Aristotle's than Locke's, for as we indicate in the target
article, we reject Locke's sense-data account for visual
experience and hold that the relevant extradermal prop-
erties are ecological rather than purely physical.) The
conviction, which appears to underly McGilvray's discus-
sion, that colors must be either entirely "out there" or
entirely "in the head" provides an example of the subjec-
tive/objective straight]acket into which perception
theory should not be forced (see the commentary by Ben-
Ze?ev for an insightful extension and critical discussion of
this point).
McGilvray also challenges us to explain why the per-
ceptual object is not a "natural illusion." This term is also
used by Hardin (1988, pp. 111-12) and refers presumably
to illusions that nonetheless confer evolutionary and
ecological benefits on perceivers. It would appear, how-
ever, that the standpoint from which the perceptual
object is judged to be illusory in this case is that of
physics. But why should the criteria for what is real and
what is illusory be purely physical when our concerns are
biological, ecological, and psychological? To suppose that
they must implies a strong physicalist metaphysics that
cognitive scientists need not accept.
Despite our view that the perceptual object is a rela-
tional feature of the ecosystems of perceiving animals, a
number of commentators believe that ours is a modified
"ecological subjectivism" (Jacobs; Kinnear; Skarda;
Steele). Skarda in particular claims that we simply accept
the "traditional model of perception" according to which
perceptual objects are internally produced entities that
result from external objects causally affecting the visual
system. Our rejection of this model is explicit, however,
and is discussed by a number of commentators (Ben-
Ze'ev; Broackes; Dennett; Lia; Wagemans & de Weert).
Indeed, one of the central points of our discussion, which
we develop explicitly in section 3, is that perception must
be understood not as "recovery" (objectivism) or "projec-
tion" (subjectivism), but as a form of action, that is, as
perceptually guided activity.
Skarda appears to have ignored much of our article in
writing that we "accept the traditional problem: The
perceptual object is not identical with the physical object,
so how does vision succeed?" We distinguish between the
physical object and the perceptual object to highlight the
ecological status of the latter, not to locate it in the head.
And, again as we say in section 3, to ask how vision
succeeds in an enactive context is not to ask the "tradi-
tional" question of how a prespecified distal world is
recovered from proximal images, but rather how sen-
sorimotor patterns underlie the visual guidance of animal
activity in its ecological context. Finally, Skarda seems to
think that because our enactive approach claims that the
world an animal perceives cannot be given a purely
physical-level specification, it follows that we are "trans-
forming the world into a sensorimotor experience." Skar-
da does not supply the missing premises that supposedly
led her to this conclusion. In any case, the claim certainly
does not follow, nor did we argue for it; on the contrary,
we list physical-level constraints as ingredients of the
perceptual environment toward the end of our article.
In conclusion, then, it is a mistake to think of our
enactive approach as simply an updated, ecologically
modified version of subjectivism. We develop this point
further as we address issues concerning animal-
environment 
codetermination 
and 
the 
enactive
approach.
3. Enaction
environment
3.1. Gibson's ee®i@gS(safl approach* In section 3 of our
target article, we briefly discussed the relation between
our enactive approach and the ecological approach to
visual perception pioneered by Gibson (1979). [See also
Ullman: "Against Direct Perception" BBS 3(1) 1980.] We
stressed what we saw as the differences largely because
we wished to elicit commentary. As Wagemans & de
Weert and Ben Ze'ev quite rightly point out, however,
there are some fundamental similarities between enac-
tion and the ecological approach. The main similarity
consists in our agreement with Gibson that perception
should be understood as guided activity in an ecological
context. On this point, we agree with Wagemans & de
Weert that we should have referred to such studies as Lee
& Reddish's (1981) on ecological optics and visually
guided activity in gannets, and Warren's (1984) on the
perception of affordances in the visual guidance of activity
In stair climbing. We also agree that Gibson struggled to
become free of the "ancient dualisms," such as subjec-
tivism/objectivism, but we do not think he was entirely
successful As Ben-Ze'ev notes and as others have dis-
cussed (Heft 1989; Thompson 1992), Gibson often Ignores
his own insight into the relational nature of the perceptual
environment by describing the affordances of the en-
vironment and the Invariances in the ambient optic
64
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

Response/Thompson et aL: Ways of coloring
array as if they were independent of the animal (Gibson
1979, pp.. 138-39; 1972, p. 293). We believe that this
tendency derives from a (healthy) desire to eschew ide-
alism in the theory of perception. It is the single-minded
concern with this issue, however, that leads Gibsonians
to neglect the basic insights implicit in their own ap-
proach — for example, that in variances in the ambient
optic array depend not simply on how the distal layout
sculpts the light, but also on how sensorimotor activity
shapes the light in ways relevant to the animal's needs. Of
course, we do not wish to blame Gibsonians for "not
doing everything at the same time/' Our point, rather, is
that if Gibsonians rigorously followed through the conse-
quences of their own insights, they would be led to
embrace the kind of approach we are calling enactive. For
example, as Wagemans & de Weert note, ecological
optics differs from physical optics because it studies light
with respect to the perceiver. What exactly does this
mean? Despite Gibson's remarks about invariances exist-
ing in the ambient optic array independently of the
animal (Gibson 1972, p. 293), if one actually looks at the
details of studies in ecological optics one finds that
the sensorimotor capacities of the perceiver (which, let us
remember, depend on the ieterneural networks that
couple sensory and motor surfaces) specify (enact) pat-
terns in the light that inform the perceiver about both the
distal layout and his own ongoing activity (see Warren,
1984, for stair climbing; Kelso & Kay, 1987, for a general
treatment). It is precisely this idea, implicit in ecological
optics but not done justice by Gibsonian realism that is
made explicit in the enactive approach. Because space
precludes further discussion of this point (see Thompson
1992), we turn now to the central idea of our enactive
approach, namely, the codeteraiination of animal and
environment.
3.2. Animal-environment codetermination. A number of
commentators address this idea from both philosophical
and empirical perspectives (Akies & Lamping; Backhaus
& Menzel; Ben-Ze'ev; Broackes; Clark; Dennett; Har-
din; Hurlbert; Levine; Mausfeld et aL; Shepard). Their
criticisms center on two points: (1) We do not clearly
distinguish between the time scales of evolution and of
individual behavior (Backhaus & Menzel; Broackes; Den-
nett; Hardin; Hulbert; Mausfeld et aL); and (2) we do not
clearly distinguish between "causal" and "constitutive"
or "ontological" codetermination (Akins & Lamping;
Broackes; Clark; Levine). We agree that we did not state
our position clearly enough with respect to these distinc-
tions and we accordingly wish to restate our view in their
light.
As we stated in our target article and discussed above,
to encompass the entire range of phenomena involved in
comparative color vision in particular and perceptually
guided activity in general we need an explanatory frame-
work that combines (i) physical-level constraints; (ii) sen-
sorimotor activity as constituted by neuronal processes
and developmental constraints; and (iii) evolutionary his-
tory. (Or in Shepard's terms: (i) invariant properties of
the physical world; (ii) entrenched properties of resident
organisms; and (iii) random accidents or symmetry break-
ings over evolutionary history.) What are the relations
among these three items in the explanation of
perception?
This question is best addressed at two different time
scales - that of evolution and that of individual behavior.
An evolutionary time scale is needed for the structural
constitution of animals and environments (e.g., body
patterns, perceptual apparati, neural circuits, patterns of
environmental variation, etc.). The time scale of indi-
vidual behavior, on the other hand, is needed to encom-
pass the current physiology, psychology, ecology, and
social life of perceiving animals.
At either of these two time scales, the basic issue that
divides us from our critics is the role played by category
(i). The traditional view, which is espoused in somewhat
different ways by Akins & Lamping, Clark, Hurlbert,
and Shepard, is that the physical parameters in category
(i) are the preeminent explanatory items in both evolu-
tionary history and individual activity. In contrast, our
view is that at both time scales the items in all three
categories are of equal explanatory importance. We wish
to use the phrase "animal-environment codetermination"
as shorthand for the view that physical parameters, sen-
sorimotor activity, and evolutionary history are so en-
tangled with one another that none can be accorded any
(context-independent and noninterest-relative) pre-
eminence in the explanation of perceptually guided ac-
tivity and the ontological status of the perceptual
environment.3
An analogy can clarify the difference between these
two views. In the traditional view, such physical param-
eters as illuminants and reflectances play a role like that of
the notes in a score faithfully followed by a classical
musician, however much individual interpretation he
allows himself to exercise. In our view, however, physical
parameters are more like the notes the jazz musician
picks up for his improvisation. In the former case, the
notes comprising the score do have a certain preemi-
nence in relation to the performance: They are indeed
given or prespecified and instruct the performance in the
sense that they must be faithfully rendered. In the latter
case, the notes play the role of fragmentary boundary
conditions and do not instruct or specify the improvisa-
tion. Rather, the improvisation emerges from how the
melody, the capacities of the particular instrument, the
style and temperament of the individual player, and
the group in which the musician is playing come together
in a given performance.
It is an empirical issue whether the physical param-
eters involved in perception are more like the notes in a
classical score or more like the notes in a jazz improvisa-
tion. Our claim is that because of the enormous layering
of evolutionary pathways, sensorimotor structures, and
individual behavioral repertoires, physical parameters
play only the latter role rather than the former. Com-
parative color vision provides a particularly dramatic
example. At the evolutionary time scale, color-seeing
animals actually modify their physical environments:
They contribute to determining the availability of certain
fruit-bearing plants (frequency-dependent selection);
they help to determine the evolution of plant pigmenta-
tion; and they even change the patterns of illumination in
the environment by constructing dwellings, nesting, and
so forth.4 This kind of codetermination is clearly the most
literal and dramatic, and it is the one typically empha-
sized by critics of adaptationism in evolutionary theory
(Levins & Lewontin 1983; 1985; Odling-Smee 1988). We
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
65

References/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
certainly do not believe, however, that every physical
constraint entering the evolutionary story is so modified -
as Hurlbert notes, animals do not rewrite the laws of
reflection every time a new zoological group or class
occurs in evolution. Nonetheless, it does not follow, as
some appear to suppose (Dennett), that codetermination
holds only in these evolutionary contexts. In the sense
outlined above, codetermination applies not simply to
the evolutionary modification of the environment, but
also to individual behavior. At this time scale, the sen-
sorimotor patterns that underlie perceptually guided
activity endow the purely physical level with ecological
significance. Here perceptual color space provides the
best example. It is the chromatic capacities of the animal
that determine how reflectance and illuminant values are
combined to engender a color space of a given dimension-
ality; these capacities also determine the hue categories
that have perceptual significance for animals in their
ecological interactions. For other examples, we can con-
sider the likely diversity in spatial segmentation among
perceiving animals and the fascinating enactive approach
to focal vision outlined by Lia in his commentary.
Now that we have restated our view in relation to the
two time scales of evolution and individual behavior let us
turn to the difference we have supposedly neglected
between "causal" and "constitutive" or "ontological"
codetermination. According to Aklns & Lamping,
Broackes, Clark, and Levine, the evolutionary and eco-
logical phenomena we cite show only that animals
causally affect the environment but not that they deter-
mine what it is. This issue depends greatly on how the
term "environment" is understood. If the environment is
taken to be merely the physical constraints of category (i)
above, then it is indeed true that although animals
causally affect (some of) these constraints, they do not
determine what they are. But if the environment is taken
to be the world at a level of description that implicates
relationally the evolutionary history and sensorimotor
capacities of perceiving animals, then animals do deter-
mine its ontology, i.e., they determine what the environ-
ment is and the kinds of properties it contains. In fact,
within such a conceptual framework there are strictly
speaking only animal-environment ecosystems and hence
no animal without an environment and no environment
without an animal. On this point, we are Indebted both to
Gibson (1979) who pioneered such a conceptual frame-
work for the perceptual environment and to the critique
of adaptationism in evolutionary theory (Levins &
Lewontin 1983; 1985) - which, contrary to the views of
Broackes and Clark9 does indeed imply that animals
constitute their environments (in the relevant non-
physicalist and ecological sense of "environment").5
In reply to Maesfeld et al., then, we do indeed wish to
introduce "a new ontological specification of 'environ-
ment' transcending the subjective/objective distinction."
We would say that the perceptual environment is dis-
tinctively ecological in the sense that it emerges from the
interactions among physical constraints, sensorimotor
activity, and evolutionary history. Mausfeld et al. chide
us for not having a ready-made set of categories for
making this ecological specification of the environment
more precise. Further precision is indeed needed, but to
demand that we have a set of categories already available
when the ecological study of color vision and perception
In general is in its Infancy is inappropriate. It is precisely
for this reason that at the end of our article we call for
studies that, rather than imposing anthropocentric as-
sumptions, describe the perceptual environment from
the relevant animal's point of view.
A few points about the perceptual environment and
perceptual content remain to be discussed. First, it is the
ecological specification of the perceptual environment
that provides a framework beyond the problem-space of
subjectivism/objectivism. Hardin neglects this point
when he claims that insofar as our enactive approach is
supposed to differ from subjectivism it involves an equiv-
ocation "between perceivers as individuals and per-
ceivers as species as well as between representations and
physical objects." We have already addressed the sup-
posed equivocation between individuals and species. As
for the second, Hardin assimilates our notion of the
perceptual object to a perceptual representation. But as
we have just discussed and as we indicated in our article,
we hold that the perceptual object is ecological - It is a
relational feature of animals and their environments or a
property of animal-environment ecosystems. It is there-
fore precisely not a representation, at least where "repre-
sentation" is understood in the strong sense as an intra-
dermal (subjective) entity that provides a map or model of
the world. In Hardin's view, colors are such intradermal
entities (chromatic neural states); in our view, they are
relational properties of perceiving animals and their en-
vironments. Although Hardin's view in his commentary
strikes us as less extreme than the view he outlined in his
book (Hardin 1988), he does not address the relational
ecological treatment of color in contrast to neurophys-
iological subjectivism and so we are not sure where he
stands on this issue.
Second, in response to Broackes, we agree that we
were mistaken to suggest that ecological codetermination
logically implies codetermination in the theory of con-
tent. In the sense of "codetermination" that we have
outlined in this section, animals and environments are
reciprocally constitutive in an ecological sense. As
Broackes notes, however, codetermination In the theory
of content is based on a relation that is genuinely sym-
metrical: Color and the content of color experience deter-
mine what each is. Nevertheless, we think that there is a
rather close relation between the two kinds of codeter-
mination. In our view, ecological codetermination pro-
vides a naturalistic basis for holding codetermination in
the theory of content, despite the absence of a strict
logical relation of implication between them.6
Finally, Ben-Ze'ev raises a number of important points
about the perceptual environment and perceptual con-
tent. He wishes to add to our three categories above a
fourth that he calls "personal history," which is meant to
be a "psychological-level specification" encompassing the
perceiver's personal background, anticipations, moods,
emotions, and so forth. We agree that in the case of
humans (and perhaps other animals) this fourth category
should be added. In the case of color perception, this
category might encompass research on the relation be-
tween color and mood, emotion, and affective perception
in general. We agree with Ben-Ze'ev that admitting this
category would make the perceptual environment more
subjective — where "subjective" is understood as "experi-
ential" - but not more suhjectivist. In other words, the
66
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

References/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
affective and personal dimensions of the perceptual en-
vironment can be admitted without being analyzed in the
subjectivist/objectivist framework of internal sensory
qualities versus objective physical properties (see
Merleau-Ponty 1945/1962). Indeed, in the case of human
perception, a fifth category that is experiential but cer-
tainly not subjective must be added to encompass the
distinctively cultural aspects of the human perceptual
environment.7 [See also Deregowski: "Real Space and
Represented Space; Cross-cultural Perspectives" BBS
12(1) 1989.]
NOTES
1. It should also be noted that any nonhue dimension must be
appropriately connected to that of hue. On the other hand, if
hue, saturation, and brightness are internally related (as it is
reasonable to suppose) then it would be conceptually impossible
for something to be counted as a color space unless it comprised
these dimensions (although it could also comprise others). This
point raises philosophical issues that we cannot pursue here.
For further discussion see Thompson (1992).
2. It is for this reason that we said "color vision should be
understood in the context of the actual behavioral repertories
and visual ecologies of perceiving animals," a remark that
puzzles Levine. Our point is simply that the operation of color
vision should be understood in a theoretical context that is
defined by its concern for the role that it plays in ecologically
embedded, perceptually guided activity, rather than in a the-
oretical context that imposes engineering considerations that
are insensitive to the behavioral life of the animal.
30 This statement of the meaning of "animal-environment
codetermination" differs from that offered in the article in
section 2.5, which misleadingly suggests that codetermination
occurs only on an evolutionary time scale. We are here offering a
more general framework within which to address the points
raised by the commentators.
4. Clark is therefore mistaken when he claims that "the
stirring history of our species couldn't have affected any feature
of the light entering one's eyes." On the contrary, the history of
a species can and indeed has affected the features of the light
entering its members' eyes: Consider any primate species the
evolution of whose eyes may have been affected by migration
from, say, a forest environment to the environment of an open
savannah. Clark also supposes that star-gazing provides a coun-
terexample to our enactive theory that colors are properties of
the world that result from animal-environment codetermina-
tion. But star-gazing hardly provides a paradigm of perception
in the relevant sense of perceptually guided activity (as Clark
notes) and so is unlikely to provide much insight into ecologi-
cally situated perception.
5o Clark is right that evolutionary theory must be able to
refer to the environment that is shared by animals, but it must
also refer to animal-specific environments - or better specific
animal-environment ecosystems - and can indeed corroborate
claims about them. This task is presumably the province of
ecology in evolutionary theory.
6. Broackes also wonders whether we would resist using
physical terms in the explanation of color perception. As the
above threefold framework makes apparent, we think physical
terms are an essential ingredient in explaining color, but we do
not see why this undermines the ability of ecological codeter-
mination to ground codetermination in the theory of content.
7. Brusatin (1986) provides a fascinating discussion of these
cultural dimensions for human color experience.
References
Akins, K. (1990) Science and our inner lives: Birds of prey, bats, and the
common (featherless) bi-ped. In: Interpretation and explanation in the
study of animal behavior, ed. M. Bekoff & D. Jamieson.
Westview. 
[aET]
Allman, J. (1977) Evolution of the visual system in the early primates.
Progress in Psychobiology and Physiological Psychology 7:1-53. 
[BL]
Archer, S. N. & Lythgoe, J. N. (1990) The visual pigment basis for cone
polymorphism in the guppy (Poecilia reticulata). Vision Research 30:225-
33. 
[aET]
Archer, S. N., Endler, J. A., Lythgoe, J. N. & Partridge, J. C. (1987) Visual
pigment polymorphism in the guppy (Poecilia reticulata). Vision Research
27:1243-52. 
[aET]
Arend, L. E. & Goldstein, R. (1987) Simultaneous constancy, lightness and
brightness. Journal of the Optical Society of America A 4:2281-85. 
[AR]
Arend, L. E. & Reeves, A. (1986) Simultaneous color constancy. Journal of
the Optical Society of America A 3:1743-51. 
[AR]
Arend, L. E., Reeves, A., Schirillo, J. & Goldstein, R. (1991) Simultaneous
color constancy: Papers with diverse Munsell values. Journal of the
Optical Society of America A 8:661-72. 
[AR]
Arnold, K. & Neumeyer, C. (1987) Wavelength discrimination in the turtle
Pseudemys scripta elegans. Vision Research 27:1501-11. 
[CN]
Averill, E. (1985) Color and the anthropocentric problem. The Journal of
Philosophy 82:281-304. 
[EWA]
Backhaus, W. (1988) Color difference and color opponency in bees. In: Sense
organs. Interfaces between environment and behaviour, ed. N. Eisner &
F. G. Barth. Proceedings of the 16th Gottingen Neurobiology
Conference. Thieme. 
[WB]
(1991) Color opponent coding in the visual system of the bee. Vision
Research 31:1381-97. 
[WB]
(in press) The theory of colour vision and colour choice behaviour in
honeybees (Die Theorie des Farbensehens und des Farbwahlverhaltens
der Honigbiene). Verhandlungen der Deutschen Zoologischen
Gesellschaft 84. 
[WB]
(submitted) Graphical representations of tetrachromatic color vision. Journal
of the Optical Society of America A. 
[WB]
Backhaus, W. & Menzel, R. (1987) Color distance derived from a receptor
model for color vision in the honeybee. Biological Cybernetics 55:32—
331. 
[WB]
Backhaus, W., Werner, A. & Menzel, R. (1987). Color vision in honeybees:
Metric, dimensions, constancy, and ecological aspects. In: Neurobiology
and behavior of honeybees, ed. R. Menzel & A. Mercer.
Springer. 
[WB]
Ballard, D. H. (forthcoming) Animate vision. Artificial Intelligence. 
[KAA]
Barlow, H. B. (1982) What causes trichromacy? A theoretical analysis using
comb-filtered spectra. Vision Research 22:635-43. 
[aET, WB]
Barth, F. G. (1985) Insects and flowers: The biology of a partnership.
Translated from the German by M. A. Biederman-Thorson. Princeton
University Press. 
[aET, RNS]
Baylis, J. R. (1979) Optical signals and interspecific communication. In: The
behavioral significance of color, ed. E. H. Burtt. Garland STPM
Press. 
[aET]
Beatty, D. D. (1969) Visual pigments of the burdot (Lota lota) and seasonal
changes in their relative proportions. Vision Research 9:1173-83. 
[aET]
(1984) Visual pigments and the labile scotopic visual system of fish. Vision
Research 24:1563-73. 
[aET]
Bennett, J. (1971) Locke, Berkeley, Hume: Central themes. Oxford University
Press (Oxford). 
[aET]
Ben-Ze'ev, A. (1984) The Kantian revolution in perception. Journal for the
Theory of Social Behavior 14:69-84. 
[AB-Z]
(1988) The schema paradigm in perception. Journal of Mind and Behavior
9:487-513. 
[AB-Z]
(1989) Explaining the subject-object relation in perception. Social Research
56:511-43. 
[AB-Z]
(1991) Cognitive development: Two paradigms. In: Cognition, information
processing and psychophysics: Basic issues, ed. H. G. Geissler, S. W.
Link & J. T. Townsend. Erlbaum. 
[AB-Z]
(1992) The perceptual system, (in press) 
[AB-Z]
Bergson, H. (1982) Materie und Gedachtnis. Eine Abhandlung iiber die
Beziehungen zwischen Korper und Geist. Ullstein. 
[WB]
Berkeley, G. (1710/1965) The principles of human knowledge. In: Berkeley's
philosophical writings, ed. D. M. Armstrong. Macmillan. 
[aET]
Berlin, B. & Kay, P. (1969) Basic color terms: Their universality and
evolution. University of California Press. 
[aET, MM]
Bloch, S. & Martinoya, C. (1983) Specialization of visual functions for the
different retinal areas in the pigeon. In: Advances in behavioral
neuroethology, ed. P. Ewert, R. Capranica & D. Ingle. Plenum
Press. 
[aET]
Blough, D. S. (1982) Pigeon perception of letters of the alphabet. Science
218:397-398. 
[KMS]
(1990) Form similarity and categorization in pigeon visual research. In:
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
67

References/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
Quantitative analyses of behavior, vol. 8, ed. M. L. Commons, R. J.
Herrnstein, S. M. Kosslyn & D. M. Mumford. Erlbaum. 
[KMS]
Boden, M. (1988) Computer models of mind. Cambridge University
Press. 
[aET]
Bonnardel, V. & Varela, F. J. (1989) Response of the human color vision
system to sinusoidal power distributions. Neuroscience Abstracts
15(1):625. 
[aET]
Bowmaker, J. K. (1977) The visual pigments, oil droplets and spectral
sensitivity of the pigeon. Vision Research 17:1129-38. 
[aET, GHJ]
(1980a) Birds see ultraviolet light. Nature 284:306. 
[EM]
(1980b) Colour vision in birds and the role of oil droplets. Trends in
Neurosciences 3:196-99. 
[aET]
(1983) Trichromatic colour vision: Why only three receptor types? Trends in
Neurosciences 6:41-43. 
[aET]
Bowmaker, J. K. & Martin, G. R. (1985) Visual pigments and oil droplets in
the penguin, Spheniscus humboldti. Journal of Comparative Physiology A
156:71-77. 
[EM]
Bowmaker, J. K. & Kunz, Y. W. (1987) Ultraviolet receptors, tetrachromatic
colour vision and retinal mosaics in the brown trout (Salmo trutta): Age-
dependent changes. Vision Research 27:2101-08. 
[aET]
Bowmaker, J. K., Dartnall, H. J. & Herring, P. J. (1988) Longwave-sensitive
visual pigments in some deep-sea fishes: Segregation of "paired"
rhodopsine and porphyropsins. Journal of Comparative Psychology A
163:685-98. 
[aET]
Boynton, R. M. (1979) Human color vision. Holt, Rinehart &
Winston. 
[aET]
(1988) Color vision. Annual Review of Psychology 39:69-100. 
[aET]
Brainard, D. H. (1989) Understanding the illuminant's effect on color
appearance. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Stanford
University. 
[LTM]
Brainard, D. H. & Wandell, B. A. (1986) An analysis of the retinex theory
of color. Journal of the Optical Society of America A 3:1651-61.
[LTM]
(1991) A bilinear model of the illuminant's effect on color appearance. In:
Computational models of visual processing, ed. j . A. Movshon & M. S.
Landy. MIT Press (in press). 
[LTM]
Brainard, D. H., Wandell, B. A. & Cowan, W. B. (1989) Black light: How
sensors filter spectral variation of the illuminant. IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering, T-BME 36:140-49. 
[LTM]
Bridges, C. D. (1972) The rhodopsin-porphyropsin visual system. In:
Handbook of sensory physiology, VIII1, ed. H. J. Darn tall. Springer-
Verlag. 
[aET]
Brill, M. H. (1978) A device performing illuminant-invariant assessment of
chromatic relations. Journal of Theoretical Biology 71:473-78. 
[JLD,
LTM]
(1979) Further features of the illuminant-invariant trichromatic photosensor.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 78:305. 
[LTM]
(1990) Image segmentation by object color: A unifying framework and
connection to color constancy. Journal of the Optical Society of America
7:2041-47. 
[AH]
Brill, M. & Benzschawel, T. (1985) Remarks on signal-processing explanations
of the trichromacy of vision. Journal of the Optical Society of America A
2:1794-96. 
[aET]
Broackes, J. (1992) The autonomy of color. In: Reduction, explanation and real-
ism, ed. D. Charles & K. Lennon. Clarendon Press (in press). 
[rET, JB]
Brooks, R. (1986) Achieving artificial intelligence through building robots. Al
Memo 899, MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. 
[arET]
(1987) Autonomous mobile robots. In: Al in the 1980s and beyond, ed.
W. E. L. Grimson & R. S. Patil. MIT Press. 
[arET]
(1989) A robot that walks: Emergent behaviors from a carefully evolved
network. Al Memo 1091, MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. 
[arET]
(1991) Intelligence without representation. Artificial Intelligence 47:139-
59. 
[JW]
Brown, P. K. & Wald, G. (1964) Visual pigments in single rods and cones of
the human retina. Science 144:45-52. 
[aET]
Brunswik, E. (1956) Perception and the representative design of psychological
experiments. University of California Press. 
[PHK]
Brusatin, M. (1986) Histoires des couleurs. Flammarion. (Translated from
Italian edition of 1983.) 
[rET]
Brush, A. H. (1990) Metabolism of carotenoid pigments in birds. FASEB
4:2969-77. 
[aET]
Buchsbaum, G. (1980) A spatial processor model for object colour perception.
Journal of The Franklin Institute 310:1-26. 
[aET, JLD, LTM]
Buchsbaum, G. & Gottschalk, A. (1983) Trichromacy, opponent colours
coding, and optimum colour information transmission in the retina.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 220:89-113. 
[aET, WB]
Budnik, V., Mpodozis, J., Varela, F. J. & Maturana, H. R. (1984) Regional
specialization of the quail retina: Ganglion ceil density and oil droplet
distribution. Neurosciences Letters 51:145-50. 
[aET]
Burkhardt, D. (1982) Birds, berries and UV: A note on some consequences of
UV vision in birds. Naturwissenschaften 69:153—57. 
[aET]
(1989) UV vision: A bird's eye view of feathers. Journal of Comparative
Physiology A 164:787-96. 
[aET]
Burkhardt, D. & Maier, E. (1989) The spectral sensitivity of a passerine bird
is highest in the UV. Naturwissenschaften 76:82-83. 
[aET]
Burns, B. & Shepp, B. E. (1988) Dimensional interactions and the structure
of psychological space: The representation of hue, saturation and
brightness. Perception and Psychophysics 43:494-507. 
[JBD]
Burtt, E. H. Jr., ed. (1979) The behavioral significance of color. Garland
STPM Press. 
[arET]
Carpenter, G. & Grossberg, S. (1987) A massively parallel architecture for a
self-organizing neural pattern recognition machine. Computer Vision,
Graphics, and Image Processing 37:54-115. 
[aET]
Cerella, J. (1979) Visual classes and natural categories in the pigeon. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 5:68-
77. 
[KMS]
(1982) Mechanisms of concept formation in the pigeon. In: Analysis of
visual behavior, ed. D. J. Ingle, M. A. Goodale & R. J. W. Mansfield.
MIT Press. 
[KMS]
(1990) Shape constancy in the pigeon: The perspective transformations
decomposed. In: Quantitative analyses of behavior vol. 8, ed. M. L.
Commons, R. J. Herrnstein, S. M. Kosslyn & D. M. Mumford.
Erlbaum. 
[KMS]
Chalupa, L. M. & Dreher, B. (1991) High precision systems require high
precision "blueprints": A new view regarding the formation of
connections in the mammalian visual system. The Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience 3(3):209-19. 
[BL]
Chalupa, L. M. & Lia, B (1991) The nasotemporal division of retinal ganglion
cells with crossed and uncrossed projections in the fetal rhesus monkey.
The Journal of Neuroscience 11:191-202. 
[BL]
Chalupa, L. M., Killackey, H. P., Snider, C. J. & Lia, B. (1989) Callosal
projection neurons in area 17 of the fetal rhesus monkey. Developmental
Brain Research 46:303-08. 
[BL]
Chen, D. M. & Goldsmith, T. H. (1986) Four spectral classes of cones in the
retinas of birds. Journal of Comparative Physiology A 159:473-
79. 
[aET]
Chen, D. M., Collins, J. S. & Goldsmith, T. H. (1984) The ultraviolet
receptor of bird retinas. Science 225:337-40. 
[aET]
Chittka, L. & Menzel, R. (in preparation) Optimal sets of spectral inputs to
the color vision system of trichromatic, flower-visiting insects. Journal of
Comparative Physiology. 
[WB]
Chittka, L., Menzel, R. & Shmida, A. (1990) Optimal sets of spectral inputs
and opponent processes for coding of natural colors in insect color vision.
In: Sense organs. Interfaces between environment and behaviour, ed. N.
Eisner & F. G. Barth. Proceedings of the 16th Gottingen Neurobiology
Conference. Thieme. 
[WB]
Churchland, P. M. (1985) Reduction, qualia, and the direct introspection of
brain states. Journal of Philosophy 82:8-28. 
[aET]
(1986) Some reductive strategies in cognitive neurobiology. Mind 95:279-
309. 
[aET]
Churchland, P. S. & Sejnowski, T. J. (1988) Perspectives on cognitive
neuroscience. Science 242:741-45. 
[aET]
Clark, A. G. (1980) Psychological models and neural mechanisms: An
examination of reductionism in psychology. Oxford University
Press. 
[AGC]
(1992) Sensory qualities. Oxford University Press (in press). 
[AGC]
Cornman, J. W. (1975) Perception, common sense, and science. Yale
University Press. 
[WB]
Crawford, M. L. J., Anderson, R. A., Blake, R., Jacobs, G. H. & Neumeyer,
C. (1990) Interspecies comparisons in the understanding of human visual
perception. In: Visual perception. The neurophysiological 
foundations,
ed. L. Spillman & J. S. Werner. Academic Press. 
[aET]
Crescitelli, F., McFall-Ngai, M. & Horwitz, J. (1985) The visual pigment
sensitivity hypothesis: Further evidence from fishes of varying habitats.
Journal of Comparative Physiology A 157:323-33. 
[aET]
Cronin, T. W. & Marshall, N. J. (1989) A retina with at least ten spectral
types of photoreceptors in a mantis shrimp. Nature 339:137-40. 
[GHJ]
Dannemiller, J. L. (1989) Computational approaches to color constancy:
Adaptive and ontogenetic considerations. Psychological Review 96:255-
66. 
[JLD, MM]
Dartnall, H. J. A., Bowmaker, J. K. & Mollon, J. D. (1983) Human visual
pigments: Microspectrophotometric results from the eyes of seven
persons. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 220:115-
30. 
[aET]
68
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

References/Thompson 
et al.: Ways of coloring
Davidoff, J. B. (1974) The psychological relationship between lightness and
saturation. Perception and Psychophysics 16:79-83. 
[JBD]
(1991) Cognition through color. MIT Press. 
[JBD]
Dehay, C , Kennedy, H., Bullier, J. & Berland, M. (1988) Absence of
interhemispheric connections of area 17 during development in the
monkey. Nature 331:348-50. 
[BL]
Delius, J. D. & Emmerton, J. (1979) Visual performance of pigeons. In:
Neural mechanisms of behavior in the pigeon, ed. A. M. Granda & J. H.
Maxwell. Plenum Press. 
[aET]
Dennett, D. C. (1991) Consciousness explained. Little Brown
(forthcoming). 
[DCD]
DeRenzi, E., Faglioni, P., Scotti, G. & Spinnler, H. (1972) Impairment of
color sorting behavior after hemispheric damage: An experimental study
with the Holmgren skein test. Cortex 8:147-63. 
[JBD]
DeValois, R. & DeValois, K. (1975) Neural coding of color. In: Handbook of
perception, vol. V: Seeing, ed. E. C. Carterette & M. P. Friedman.
Academic Press. 
[aET]
(1988) Spatial vision. Oxford University Press. 
[aET]
DeValois, R. L., Abramov, I. & Jacobs, G. H. (1966) Analysis of response
patterns of LGN cells. Journal of the Optical Society of America 56:966-
77. 
[MAF]
DeYoe, E. A. & Van Essen, D. C. (1988) Concurrent processing streams in
monkey visual cortex. Trends in Neuroscience 11:219-26. 
[aET]
Dimentman, A. M., Karas, A. Ya., Maksimov, V. V. & Orlov, O. Yu. (1972)
On the constancy of color perception in carp. Pavlov Journal of Higher
Nervous Activity 22:772-79. 
[SLK]
Dixon, E. R. (1978) Spectral distribution of Australian daylight. Journal of the
Optical Society of America 68:437-50. 
[RNS]
Dixon, N. F. (1960) Apparent changes in the visual threshold: Central or
peripheral? British Journal of Psychology 51:297-309. 
[JBD]
Dobkins, K. R. & Albright, T. D. (1990) Color facilitates motion
correspondence in visual area MT. Society of Neuroscience 1990 Annual
Meeting Abstracts 16(2): 1220. 
[KAA]
Drake, S. (1957) Discoveries and opinions of Galileo. Doubleday. 
[aET]
Drever, J. (1961) Perception and action. Bulletin of the British Psychological
Society 45:1-9. 
[PHK]
Durrer, H. (1986) Colouration. In: Biology of the integument, the skin of
birds, ed. J. Bereiter-Hahn, A. G. Matoltsy & K. S. Richards.
Springer. 
[aET]
Dym, P. & McKean, S. (1975) Fourier signals and integrals. Academic
Press. 
[aET]
D'Zmura, M. & Lennie, P. (1986) Mechanisms of color constancy. Journal of
the Optical Society of America A 3:1662-72. 
[aET, JLD, LTM]
Egeth, H. E. & Pachella, R. (1969) Multidimensional stimulus identification.
Perception and Psychophysics 5:341-46. 
[JBD]
Elliot Smith, G. (1932) The evolution of the instruments of vision.
Transactions of the Ophthalmological Society of the United Kingdom
51:399-411. 
[BL]
Emmerton, J. (1983) Pattern discrimination in the near-ultraviolet by pigeons.
Perception and Psychophysics 34:555-59. 
[aET]
Emmerton, J. & Delius, J. D. (1980) Wavelength discrimination in the
"visible" and ultraviolet spectrum by pigeons. Journal of Comparative
Physiology A 141:47-52. 
[aET]
Erber, J., Menzel, R., Pfliiger, H.-J. & Todt, D., eds. (1989) Neural
mechanisms of behavior. Proceedings of the 2nd International Congress
of Neuroethology, September 10-16. Thieme. 
[WB]
Evans, R. M. (1974) The perception of color. Wiley. 
[RJM, AR]
Felfoldy, G. L. & Garner, W. R. (1971) The effects on speeded classification
of implicit and explicit instructions regarding stimulus dimensions.
Perception and Psychophysics 9:289-92. 
[JBD]
Finkelstein, M. A. (1988a) Spectral tuning of opponent channels is spatially
dependent. Color Research and Application 13:106-12. 
[MAF]
(1988b) Spectral tuning of opponent pathways is temporally dependent.
Color Research and Application 13:369-75. 
[MAF]
Finkelstein, M. A. & Hood, D. C. (1981) Cone system saturation: More than
one stage of sensitivity loss. Vision Research 21:319-28. 
[MAF]
(1982) Opponent-color cells can influence detection of small brief lights.
Vision Research 22:89-95. 
[MAF]
(1984) Detection and discrimination of small, brief lights: Variable tuning of
opponent channels. Vision Research 24:175-81. 
[MAF]
Finkelstein, M. A., Harrison, M. & Hood, D. C. (1990) Sites of sensitivity
control within a long-wavelength cone pathway. Vision Research 30:1145-
58. 
[MAF]
Flew, A. (1984) A Dictionary of Philosophy. Macmillan. 
[WB]
Foard, C. F. & Kemler-Nelson, D. G. (1984) Holistic and analytic modes of
processing: The multiple determinants of perceptual analysis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 113:94-111. 
[JBD]
Fodor, J. A. (1983) The modularity of mind. Bradford Books, MIT
Press. 
[JBD]
(1.987) Psychosemantics: The problem of meaning in the philosophy of mind.
MIT Press. 
[JL]
Freeman, W. (1975) Mass action in the nervous system. Academic
Press. 
[aET]
Freeman, W. & Skarda, C. (1985) Spatial EEG patterns, nonlinear dynamics,
and perception: The neo-Sherringtonian view. Brain Research Reviews
10:145-75. 
[aET]
Funt, B. V. & Drew, M. S. (1988) Color constancy computation in near-
Mondrian scenes using a finite dimensional linear model. IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, June 5-9. 
[LTM]
Garner, W. R. (1974) The Processing of information and structure.
Wiley. 
[JBD]
(1988) Facilitation and interference with a separable redundant dimension
in stimulus comparison. Perception and Psychophysics 44:321-30. 
[JBD]
Garner, W. R. & Felfoldy, G. L. (1970) Integrality of stimulus dimensions in
various types of information processing. Cognitive Psychology 1:225—
41. 
[JBD]
Gershon, R. (1987) The use of color in computational vision. Technical
Reports on Research in Biological and Computational Vision: RBCV-
TV-87-15. Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto. [aET]
Gershon, R. & Jepson, A. D. (1989) The computation of color constant
descriptors in chromatic images. Color Research and Application 14:325-
34. [JLD]
Gershon, R., Jepson, A. D. & Tsotsos, J. K. (1986) Ambient illumination and
the determination of material changes. Journal of the Optical Society of
America 3:1700-07. [JLD]
Gibson, J. J. (1961) Ecological otics. Vision Research 1:253-62. [BL]
(1967) New reasons for realism. Synthese 17:162-72. [aET, JW]
(1979) The ecological approach to visual perception. Houghton Mifflin Co.
[arET, PHK, BL, JW, AB-Z]
(1982) Notes on affordances. In: Reasons for realism: Selected essays of
James J. Gibson, ed. E. Reed & R. Jones. Erlbaum.
(1972) A theory of direct visual perception. In: The psychology of knowing,
ed. J. R. Royce & W. W. Rozeboom. Gordon & Breach. [rET]
Gnjubkin, V. F. (1989) Response of pigmented corneas of whitespotted
greenling to changes in light. Biologiya Morya 1:25-32. (English
translation - The Soviet Journal of Marine Biology 15:21-28) 
[SLK]
Gnjubkin, V. F., Kondrashev, S. L. & Orlov, O.Yu. (1975) On constant color
perception of common toad. Biofizika 20:725-30. 
[SLK]
Goldsmith, T. H. (1980) Hummingbirds see near ultraviolet light. Science
207:786-88. 
[arET]
(1990) Optimization, constraint, and history in the evolution of eyes.
Quarterly Review of Biology 65:281-322. 
[arET]
Goldsmith, T. H., Collins, J. S. & Licht, S. (1984) The cone oil droplets of
avian retinas. Vision Research 24:1661—71. 
[aET]
Gould, S. J. (1977) Ontogeny and phytogeny. Belknap Press/Harvard
University Press. 
[BL]
Gould, S. J. & Lewontin, R. C. (1979) The spandrels of San Marco and the
Panglossian Paradigm: A critique of the adaptionist programme.
Proceedings of the Royal Society B 205:591-98. 
[KMS]
Gould, S. J. & Vrba, E. S. (1982) Exaptation - a missing term in the science
of form. Paleobiology 8:4-15. 
[BL]
Gouras, P. (1985) Color vision. In: Principles of neural science, ed. E. R.
Kandel & J. H. Schwartz. Elsevier.
Gouras, P. & Zrenner, E. (1979) Enhancement of luminance flicker by color-
opponent mechanisms. Science 205:587-89. 
[MAF]
(1981) Color vision: A review from a neurophysiological perspective.
Progress in Sensory Physiology 1:139-79. 
[aET]
Granda, A. M. & Maxwell, J. H. eds. (1979) Neural mechanisms of behavior
in the pigeon. Plenum Press. 
[aET]
Greene, S. L. (1983) Feature memorization of pigeon concept formation. In:
Quantitative analyses of behavior, vol. 4, ed. M. L. Commons, R. J.
Hermstein & A. R. Wagner. Ballinger. 
[KMS]
Griffen, D. (1984) Animal thinking. Harvard University Press. 
[rET]
Grossberg, S. (1984) Studies in mind and brain. D. Reidel. 
[aET]
Guth, S. L. & Lodge, H. R. (1973) Heterochromatic additivity, foveal spectral
sensitivity, and a new color model. Journal of the Optical Society of
America 63:450-62. 
[MAF]
Hailman, J. P. (1977) Optical signals: Animal communication and light.
Indiana University Press. 
[arET]
Halsey, W. E., ed. (1969) Colliers encyclopedia, vol. 7. USA: Crowell-
Collier. 
[WB]
Hardin, C. L. (1984) Are "scientific" objects coloured? Mind 93:491-
500. 
[aET, DCD]
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
69

References/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
(1988) Color for philosophers: Unweaving the rainbow. Hackett. 
[arET,
WB, DCD, MM, PS]
(1990) Why color? In: Perceiving, measuring, and using color, ed. M. Brill.
Proceedings of SPIE 1250:293-300. 
[aET, JB, DCD]
Harosi, F. I. & Hashimoto, Y. (1983) Ultraviolet visual pigment in a
vertebrate: A tetrachromatic cone system in the dace. Science 222:1021-
23. 
[aET]
Hashimoto, Y., Harosi, F. I., Ueki, K. & Fukurotani, K. K. (1988) Ultra-
violet-sensitive cones in the color-coding systems of cyprinid retinas.
Neuroscience Research Suppl. 8:81-95. 
[rET, CN]
Heft, H. (1989) Affordances and the body: An intentional analysis of Gibson's
ecological approach to visual perception. Journal for the Theory of Social
Behavior 19:1-30. 
[rET, AB-Z]
Heider (Rosch), E. R. (1972) Universals in color naming and memory. Journal
of Experimental Psychology 93:10-20. 
[aET]
Heinerman, P. H. (1984) Yellow intraocular filters in fishes. Experimental
Biology 43:127-47. 
[SLK]
Helson, H. (1938) Fundamental problems in color vision. 1. The principles
governing changes in hue, saturation, and lightness of nonselective
samples in chromatic illumination. Journal of Experimental Psychology
23:439-76. 
[aET, JLD]
Helson, H. & Jeffers, V. B. (1940) Fundamental problems in color vision. II.
Hue, lightness, and saturation of selective samples in chromatic
illumination. Journal of Experimental Psychology 26:1-27. 
[aET]
Helverson, O. v. (1972) Zur spektralen Unterschiedsempfindlichkeit der
Honigbiene. Journal of Comparative Physiology 80:439-72. 
[rET, WB]
Bering, E. (1878) Zur Lehre vom Lichtsinn. Berlin. (Republished in English
translation as Outlines of a theory of the light sense. Harvard University
Press, 1964.) 
[RNS]
(1920) Grundzilge der Lehre vom Lichtsinn. Springer. 
[RJH]
Herrnstein, R. J. & de Villiers, P. A. (1980) Fish as a natural category for
people and pigeons. In: The psychology of learning and behavior, vol.
14, ed. G. H. Bower. Academic Press. 
[KMS]
Herrnstein, R. J. & Loveland, D. H. (1964) Complex visual concept in the
pigeon. Science 146:549-51. 
[KMS]
Herrnstein, R. J., Loveland, D. H. & Cable, C. (1976) Natural concepts in
pigeons. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes
2:285-302. 
[KMS]
Heywood, C. A. & Cowey, A. (1987) On the role of cortical area V4 in the
discrimination of hue and pattern in macaque monkeys. Journal of
'Neuroscience 7:2601-16. 
[aET]
Heywood, C. A., Wilson, B. & Cowey, A. (1987) A case study of cortical
colour "blindness" with relatively intact achromatic discrimination.
Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 50:22-29. 
[PS]
Hilbert, D. R. (1987) Color and color perception. A study in anthropocentric
realism. Stanford University: Center for the Study of Language and
Information. 
[arET, WB, DCD, MM]
Hood, D. C. (1981) Comments on linking the psychophysics of color vision to
current physiology. In: Relating physiology to psychophysics: Current
problems and approaches. Twelfth symposium, Center for Visual
Science. 
[MAF]
Hood, D. C. & Finkelstein, M. A. (1983) A case for the revision of textbook
models of color vision: The detection and appearance of small brief lights.
In: Colour vision: Physiology and psychophysics, ed. J. D. Mollon &
L. T. Sharpe. Academic Press. 
[aET, MAF]
Horn, B. K. P. (1974) Determining lightness from an image. Computer
Graphics and Image Processing 3:227-99. 
[aET]
Hudon, J. & Brush, H. A. (1989) Probable dietary basis of a color variant of
the cedar waxwing. Journal of Field Ornithology 60(3):361-68. 
[aET]
Hughes, A. (1972) Vergence in the cat. Vision Research 12:1961-94. 
[BL]
(1977) The topography of vision in mammals of contrasting life style:
Comparative optics and retinal organization. In: The visual system in
vertebrates, ed. F. Crescitelli. Springer-Verlag. 
[BL]
Hughes, A. & Vaney, D. L. (1982) The organization of binocular cortex in the
primary visual area of the rabbit. The Journal of Comparative Neurology
204:151-64. 
[BL]
Humphrey, N. (1984) Consciousness regained. Chapters in the development of
mind. Oxford University Press. 
[aET]
Humphreys, G. W. & Riddoch, M. J. (1986) Information processing systems
which embody computational rules: The connectionist approach. Mind it-
Language 1:201-12. 
[JW]
Hurlbert, A. (1986) Formal connections between lightness algorithms. Journal
of the Optical Society of America A 3:1684-93. 
[aET, LTM]
(1989) The computation of color. MIT AI Lab Technical Report 1154,
Cambridge, MA. 
[aET, AH]
Hurlbert, A. C. & Poggio, T. A. (1988) Synthesizing a color algorithm from
examples. Science 239:482-85. 
[rET, JLD]
Hurvich, L. M. (1981) Color vision. Sinnauer Associates, Inc. 
[aET]
(1985) Opponent-colours theory. In: Central and peripheral mechanisms of
color vision, ed. D. Ottoson & S. Zeki. Macmillan. 
[aET]
Hurvich, L. M. & Jameson, D. (1957) An opponent process theory of color
vision. Psychological Review 64:384-404. 
[aET, RNS]
Ingle, D. J. (1985) The goldfish as a retinex animal. Science 225:651-
53. 
[aET]
Ingling, C. R. Jr. (1978) Luminance and opponent color contributions to
visual detection and to temporal and spatial integration: Comment.
Journal of the Optical Society of America 68:1143-46. 
[MAF]
Ingling, C. R. Jr. & Tsou, B. H.-P. (1977) Orthogonal combination of the
three visual channels. Vision Research 17:1075-82. 
[aET, MAF]
Ingling, C. R. Jr., Scheibner, H. M. O. & Boynton, R. M. (1977) Color
naming of small foveal fields. Vision Research 17:1075-82. 
[MAF]
Jackson, F. (1982) Epiphenomenal qualia. Philosophical Quarterly 32:127-
36. 
[aET]
Jacobs, G. H. (1981) Comparative color vision. Academic Press. 
[arET,
GHJ]
(1986) Color vision variations in non-human primates. Trends in
Neuroscience 12:320-23. 
[aET]
Jameson, D. (1985) Opponent-colours theory in the light of physiological
findings. In: Central and peripheral mechanisms of colour vision, ed. D.
Ottoson & S. Zeki. Macmillan. 
[aET]
Jameson, D. & Hurvich, L. M. (1989) Essay concerning color constancy.
Annual Review of Psychology 40:1-22. 
[arET]
Jane, S. D. & Bowmaker, J. K. (1988) Tetrachromatic colour vision in the
duck (Anas platyrhynchos L.)\ Microspectrophotometry of visual pigments
and oil droplets. Journal of Comparative Physiology A 162:225-
35. 
[aET]
Jeffery, G. (1990) The topographic relationship between shifting binocular
maps in the developing dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. Experimental
Brain Research 82:408-16. 
[BL]
Judd, D. B. (1940) Hue, saturation, and lightness of surface colors with
chromatic illumination. Journal of the Optical Society of America 30:2-
32. 
[aET]
Judd, D. B., McAdam, D. L. & Wyszecki, G. (1964) Spectral distribution of
typical daylight as a function of correlated color temperature. Journal of
the Optical Society of America 54:1031-40. 
[RNS]
Kandel, E. R. & Schwartz, J. H. (1985) Principles of neural science, 2nd ed.
Elsevier North Holland. 
[aET]
Kant, I. (1929) Critique of pure reason. Macmillan. 
[PHK]
Katz, D. (1911) Die Erscheinungsweise der Farben und ihre Beeinflussung
durch die individuelle Erfahrung. Barth. 
[RJM]
Katz, M. J. (1983) Ontophyletics: Studying evolution beyond the genome.
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 26:323-32. 
[BL]
Kay, P. & McDaniel, C. K. (1978) The linguistic significance of the meaning
of basic color terms. Language 54:610-46. 
[aET]
Kelso, J. A. S. & Kay, B. A. (1987) Information and control: A macroscopic
analysis of perception-action coupling. In: Perceptives on perception and
action, ed. H. Heuer & A. F. Sanders. Erlbaum. 
[arET]
Killackey, H. P. (1990) Neocortical expansion: An attempt toward relating
phylogeny and ontogeny. The Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2:1—
17. 
[BL]
King-Smith, P. E. & Garden, D. (1976) Luminance and opponent-color
contributions to visual detection and adaptation and to temporal and
spatial integration. Journal of the Optical Society of America 66:709-
17. 
[MAF]
Kitcher, P. (1988) Marr's computational theory of vision. Philosophy of
Science 55:1-25. 
[aET]
Kondrashev, S. L., Gamburtzeva, A. G., Gnjubkina, V. P., Orlov, O. Yu. &
Pham Thi My (1986) Coloration of corneas in fish. A list of species. Vision
Research 26:287-90. 
[SLK]
Kondrashev, S. L., Gnjubkin, V. F., Dimentman, A. M. & Orlov, O. Yu.
(1976) Role of visual stimuli in the breeding behavior of Rana temporaria,
Bufo bufo and Bufo viridis. Zoologicheskij Zhurnal 55:1027-37. 
[SLK]
Krauskopf, J. (1978) On identifying detectors. In: Visual psychophysics and
physiology, ed. J. C. Armington, J. Krauskopf & B. R. Wooten.
Academic Press. 
[MAF]
Kuehni, R. G. (1989) What is color? A speculative essay. Color Research and
Application 14:207-10. 
[JLD]
Lakoff, G. (1987) Women, fire, and dangerous things: What categories reveal
about the mind. University of Chicago Press. 
[rET]
Land, E. H. (1977) The retinex theory of color vision. Scientific American
237:108-28. 
[aET]
(1978) Our "polar partnership" with the world around us. Harvard
Magazine 80:23-26. 
[aET]
(1983) Recent advances in retinex theory and some implications for cortical
computations: Color vision and the natural image. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences U.S.A. 80:5163-69. 
[aET, LTM]
70
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

References/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
(1986) An alternative technique for the computation of the designator in the
retinex theory of color vision. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences U.S.A. 83:3078-80. 
[aET]
Land, E. H. & McCann, J. J. (1971) Lightness and retinex theory. Journal of
the Optical Society of America 61:1-11. 
[JLD, LTM]
Lee, D. N. & Reddish, P. E. (1981) Plummeting gannets: A paradigm for
ecological optics. Nature 293:293-94. 
[rET, JW]
Lee, H.-C. (1986) Method for computing .the scene-illuminant chromaticity
from specular highlights. Journal of the Optical Society of America
3:1694-99. 
[AH, LTM]
Lennie, P. (1984) Recent developments in the physiology of color vision.
Trends in Neuroscience 7:243-48. 
[aET]
Lennie, P., Trevarthen, C , Van Essen, D. & Wassel, H. (1990) Parallel
processing of visual information. In: Visual perception. The
neurophysiological foundations, ed. L. Spillman & J. S. Werner.
Academic Press. 
[aET]
Leventhal, A. G., Schall, J. D., Ault, S. J., Provis, J. M. & Vitek, D. J.
(1988) Class-specific cell death shapes the distribution and pattern of
central projection of cat retinal ganglion cells. The Journal of
Neuroscience 8:2011-27. 
[BL]
Levine, J. S. & MacNichol, E. F. Jr. (1979) Visual pigments in teleost fishes:
Effect of habitat, microhabitat and behavior on visual system evolution.
Sensory Processes 3:95-131. 
[aET, KAA]
(1982) Color vision in fishes. Scientific American 246:140-49. 
[aET, KAA]
Levins, R. & Lewontin, R. (1983) The organism as the subject and object of
evolution. Scientia 118:63-82. Reprinted In: Levins, R. & Lewontin, R.
(1985) The dialectical biologist. Harvard University Press. 
[arET, DCD]
(1985) The dialectical biologist. Harvard University Press. 
[arET, DCD]
Lia, B. (1989) Prenatal development of regional specialization in the ganglion
cell layer of the retina: The topography of focal vision (doctoral
dissertation, University of California, Davis). Dissertation Abstracts
International 50:3332B. 
[BL]
Lia, B. & Chalupa, L. M. (1988) Prenatal development of regional
specialization in the primate retina. Investigative Ophthalmology and
Visual Science 29 (Suppl.):378. 
[BL]
Lia, B., Snider, C. J. & Chalupa, L. M. (1989) Topography and specificity of
visual thaiamocortical projections in the fetal rhesus monkey. Society for
Neuroscience Abstracts 15:1210. 
[BL]
Lia, B., Williams, R. W. & Chalupa, L. M. (1987) Formation of retinal
ganglion cell topography during prenatal development. Science 236:848-
51. 
[BL]
Liebman, P. A. (1972) Microspectrophotometry of photoreceptors. In:
Handbook of sensory physiology, vol. VIII1, ed. H. J. A Dartnall.
Springer-Verlag. 
[GHJ]
Livingstone, M. S. & Hubel, D. H. (1984) Anatomy and physiology of a color
system in the primate visual cortex. Journal of Neuroscience 4:309-
56. 
[aET]
(1988) Segregation of color, movement, and depth: Anatomy, physiology,
and perception. Science 240:740-49. 
[aET, JAF]
Locke, J. (1690/1975) An essay concerning human understanding, ed. P. H.
Nidditch. Oxford University Press. 
[aET]
Lockhead, G. R. (1972) Processing dimensional stimuli: A note. Psychological
Review 79:4.10-19. 
[JBD]
Loew, E. R. & Lythgoe, J. N. (1978) The ecology of cone pigments in teleost
fishes. Vision Research 18:715-22. 
[aET]
Logothetis, N. K., Schiller, P. H., Charles, E. R. & Hurlbert, A. C. (1990)
Perceptual deficits and the activity of the color-opponent and broad-band
pathways at isoluminance. Science 247:214-17. 
[aET]
Lorenz, K. (1943) Die angeborenen Formen moglicher Erfahrung. Zeitschrift
fur Tierpsychologie 5:235-409. 
[PS]
Lythgoe, J. N. (1979). The ecology of vision. Oxford University Press. 
[aET,
WB]
MacLaury, R. E. (1987) Color-category evolution and Shuswap yellow-with-
green. American Anthropologist 89:107-24. 
[rET]
Maes, P. (1990) Designing autonomous agents. MIT Press. 
[rET]
Maier, E. (1990) Verbaltensphysiologische Untersuchungen zum Farbensehen
des Sonnenvogels (Leiothrix lutea, Timalidae, Passeriformes). Doctoral
thesis, University of Regensburg. 
[EM]
Maldonado, P. E., Maturana, H. & Varela, F. J. (1988) Frontal and lateral
visual system in birds. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 32:57-62. 
[aET]
Mallat, S. G. & Zhong, S. (1989) Complete signal representation with
multiscale edges. Technical Report No. 483, Courant Institute, New York
University. 
[rET]
Maloney, L. T. (1984) Computational approaches to color constancy. Stanford
University: Dissertation. Reprinted as (1985) Stanford Applied Psychology
Laboratory Report 1985-01. 
[LTM]
(1985) Computational approaches to color constancy. Technical Report 1985-
01, Stanford University, Applied Psychological Laboratory. 
[arET]
(1986) Evaluation of linear models of surface spectral reflectance with small
numbers of parameters. Journal of the Optical Society of America A
3:1673-83. 
[LTM, RNS]
(1990) Photoreceptor spectral sensitivities and color correction. In:
Perceiving, measuring, and using color, ed. Michael H. Brill.
Proceedings of the SPIE 1250. 
[LTM]
(1992) Color constancy and color perception: The linear models framework.
In: Attention i? performance XIV: A silver jubilee, ed. D. E. Meyer & S.
Kornblum. Erlbaum (in press) 
[LTM]
Maloney, L. T. & Wandell, B. A. (1986) Color constancy: A method for
recovering surface spectral reflectance. Journal of the Optical Society of
America A3(l):29-33. 
[aET, JLD, LTM, RNS]
Mark, L. S. (1987) Eyeheight-scaled information about affordances: A study of
sitting and stair climbing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance 13:361-70. 
[JW]
Marr, D. (1982) Vision. A computational investigation into the human
representation and processing of visual information. W. H.
Freeman. 
[arET, JBD]
Marr, D. & Poggio, T. (1977) From understanding neural computation to
understanding neural circuitry. Neuroscience Research Program Bulletin
15:470-88. 
[aET]
Martin, G. R. (1977) Absolute visual threshold and scotopic spectral sensitivity
in the tawny owl (Strix aluco). Nature 268:636-38. 
[aET]
(1986) The eye of a passeriform bird, the European starling (Strunus
vulgaris): Eye movement amplitude, visual fields and schematic optics.
Journal of Comparative Physiology A 159:545-557. 
[aET]
Martin, G. R. & Gordon, I. E. (1974) Increment-threshold spectral sensitivity
in the tawny owl (Strix aluco). Vision Research 14:615-21. 
[EM]
Martin, G. R. & Lett, B. T. (1985) Formation of associations of coloured and
flavoured food with induced sickness in five avian species. Behavioral
Neural Biology 43:223-37. 
[aET]
Matthen, M. (1988) Biological functions and perceptual content. Journal of
Philosophy 85:5-27. 
[arET, MM]
Maturana, H. R. & Varela, F. J. (1980) Autopoiesis and cognition: The
realization of the living. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol.
42. D. Reidel. 
[aET]
(1982) Colour-opponent responses in the avian lateral geniculate: A case
study in the quail. Brain Research 247:227-41. 
[aET]
(1987) The tree of knowledge. The biological roots of human 
understanding.
New Science Library. 
[aET]
McCann, J. J., McKee, S. P. & Taylor, T. H. (1976) Quantitative studies in
retinex theory. Vision Research 16:445-58. 
[aET]
Menaud-Buteau, C. & Cavanagh, P. (1984) Localisation de 1'interference
forme/couleur au niveau perceptual dans une tache de type Stroop avec
des stimuli-dessins. Canadian Journal of Psychology 38:421-39. 
[JBD]
Menzel, R. (1979) Spectral sensitivity and color vision in invertebrates. In:
Comparative physiology and evolution of vision in invertebrates,
handbook of sensory physiology, vol. VII/6A, ed. H. Autrum. Springer
Verlag. 
[aET, WB]
(1981) Achromatic vision in the honeybee at low light intensities. Journal of
Comparative Physiology A 158:165-77. 
[CN]
(1989) Bienen sehen vieles anderes. Natiirliches Farbsehsystem
beschrieben. Forschung, Mitteilungen der DFG 2/89:20-22. 
[aET, WB]
Menzel, R. & Backhaus, W. (1989) Color vision in honeybees: Phenomena
and physiological mechanisms. In: Facets of vision, ed. D. G. Stavenga &
R. C. Hardie. Springer. 
[WB]
(1991) Color vision in insects. In: Vision and visual dysfunction, vol. VII,
ed. P. Gouras. Macmillan. 
[WB]
Menzel, R. & Shmida, A. (in preparation) The ecology of flower colors in the
insect pollinated plants of Israel. Evolutionary Biology. 
[rET, WB]
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1945/1962) The phenomenology of perception. Translated
by Colin Smith. Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
[rET]
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1964) L'Oeil et I'esprit. Gallimard. 
[aET]
Mollon, J. D. (1990) Neurobiology: The club-sandwich mystery. Nature
343:16-17. 
[aET]
Mollon, J. D. & Sharpe, L. T. eds. (1983) Color vision. Academic
Press. 
[aET]
Mollon, J. D., Bowmaker, J. K. & Jacobs, G. H. (1984) Variations of colour
vision in a New World primate can be explained by polymorphism of
retinal photopigments. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 222:373-
99. 
[aET]
Mullen, K. T. & Kulikowski, J. J. (1990) Wavelength discrimination at
detection threshold. Journal of the Optical Society of America A 7:733-
42. 
[JBD]
Muntz, W. R. (1975) Behavioral studies of vision in a fish and possible
relationships to the environment. In: Vision in fish, ed. M. A. Ali.
Plenum. 
[aET]
Muntz, W. R. & Mouat, G. S. (1984) Annual variation in the visual pigments
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
71

References/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
of brown trout inhabiting lochs providing different light environments.
Vision Research 24:1575-80. 
[aET]
Munz, F. W. & McFarland, W. N. (1977) Evolutionary adaptations of fishes
to the photopic environment. In: Handbook of sensory physiology, vol.
VII, ed. F. Crescitelli. Springer-Verlag. 
[aET, KAA]
Nagel, T. (1974/1980) What is it like to be a bat? In: Readings in the
philosophy of psychology, vol. 1, ed. Ned Block. Harvard University
Press. 
[aET]
Nagy, A. L. (1980) Large-field substitution Rayleigh matches of dichromats.
Journal of the Optical Society of America 70:778-84. 
[GHJ]
NASA (1977) Terrestrial photovoltaic measurement procedures.
ERDA/NASA/1022-77/16; NASA TM 73702. 
[KAA]
Nathans, J., Thomas, D. & Hogness, D. S. (1986) Molecular genetics of
human color vision: The genes encoding blue, green, and red pigments.
Science 232:193-202. 
[aET]
Neitz, J. & Jacobs, G. H. (1986) Polymorphism of the long-wavelength cone
in normal human color vision. Nature 323:623-25. 
[aET]
Neumeyer, C. (1980) Simultaneous color contrast in the honeybee. Journal of
Comparative Physiology A 139:165-76. 
[aET]
(1981) Chromatic adaptation in the honeybee: Successive color contrast and
color constancy. Journal of Comparative Physiology A 144:543-
53. 
[aET]
(1985) An ultraviolet receptor as a fourth receptor type in goldfish color
vision. Naturwissenschaften 72:162-63. 
[aET]
(1986) Wavelength discrimination in the goldfish. Journal of Comparative
Physiology A 158:203-13. 
[aET]
(1988) Das Farbensehen des Goldfisches. Eine verhaltensphysiologische
Analyse. Thieme. 
[aET, EM]
Neumeyer, C. & Arnold, K. (1989) Tetrachromatic color vision in the goldfish
becomes trichromatic under white adaptation light of moderate intensity.
Vision Research 29:1719-27. 
[aET]
Northcutt, E. G. (1990) Ontogeny and phylogeny: A re-evaluation of
conceptual relationships and some applications. Brain, Behavior and
Evolution 36:116-40. 
[BL]
Nuboer, J. F. W. (1986) A comparative view on colour vision. Netherlands
Journal of Zoology 36:344-80. 
[aET]
Nuboer, J. F. W. & Wortel, J. (1987) Colour vision via the pigeon's red and
yellow retinal fields. In: Seeing contour and colour, ed. J. J. Kullkowshi.
Cambridge University Press. 
[aET]
Odling-Smee, F. J. (1988) Niche-constructing phenotypes. In: The role of
behavior in evolution, ed. H. C. Plotkin. MIT Press/Bradford
Books. 
[arET]
O'Leary, D. D. M. (1989) Do cortical areas emerge from a protocortex?
Trends in Neurosciences 12:400-06. 
[BL]
Orlov, O. Yu. & Gamburtzeva, A. G. (1976) Changeable coloration of cornea
in the fish Hexagrammos octogrammus. Nature 263:405-06. 
[SLK]
Ottoson, D. & Zeki, S. eds. (1985) Central and peripheral mechanisms of
colour vision. Macmillan. 
[aET]
Overmyer, S. P. & Simon, J. R. (1985) The effect of irrelevant cues on
"same-different" judgments in a sequential information processing task.
Ada Psychologica 58:237-49. 
[JBD]
Oyama, S. (1985) The ontogeny of information: Developmental systems and
evolution. Cambridge University Press. 
[aET]
Palacios, A. (1991) La vision chromatique chez 1'oiseau: Etude
compartamentale. These de Doctorat. Universite de Paris VI. 
[arET]
Palacios, A. & Varela, F. J. (1991) Color mixing in the pigeon. II. A
psychophysical determination in the medium and shortwave spectral
range. Vision Research (in press). 
[aET]
Palacios, A., Bonnardel, V. & Varela, F. (1990a) Autoshaping as a method for
the chromatic discrimination of the pigeon. Comptes Rendues la
Academie des Sciences (Paris), Sciences de la Vie 331:213-18. 
[aET]
Palacios, A. C , Martinoya, S., Bloch, S. & Varela, F. J. (1990b) Color mixing
in the pigeon: A psychophysical determination in the longwave spectral
range. Vision Research 30:587-96. 
[aET, GHJ]
Partridge, J. C. (1989) The visual ecology of avian cone oil droplets. Journal
of Comparative Physiology A 165:415-26. 
[aET]
Partridge, C , Shand, J., Archer, S. N., Lythgoe, J. N. & Groningen-Luyben,
W. A. (1989) Interspecific variation in the visual pigments of the deep-sea
fishes. Journal of Comparative Physiology A 164:513-29. 
[aET]
Peitsch, D., Backhaus, W. & Menzel, R. (1989) Colour vision systems in
hymenopterans: A comparative study. In: Neural mechanisms of
behavior, ed. J. Erber, R. Menzel, H.-J. Pflueger & D. Todt.
Proceedings of the 2nd International Congress of Neuroethology,
September 10-16. Thieme. 
[WB]
Pettigrew, J. D. (1986) The evolution of binocular vision. In: Visual
neuroscience, ed. J. D. Pettigrew, K. J. Sanderson & W. R. Levick.
Cambridge University Press. 
[BL]
Piaget, J. (1969) The mechanisms of perception. Routledge & Kegan
Paul. 
[PHK]
Poggio, T. and staff (1988) The vision machine. Proceedings of the IU
Workshop, Cambridge, MA. 
[AH]
Poggio, T., Torre, V. & Koch, C. (1985) Computational vision and
regularization theory. Nature 317:314-19. 
[arET]
Polyak, S. L. (1957) The vertebrate visual system. University of Chicago
Press. 
[BL]
Posner, M. I. & Petersen, S. E. (1990) The attention system of the human
brain. Annual Review of Neuroscience 13:25-42. 
[JAF]
Priest, G. (1989) Primary qualities are secondary qualities, too. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 40:29-37. 
[aET]
Rakic, P. (1988) Specification of cerebral cortical areas. Science 241:170-
76. 
[BL]
Ramachandran, V. S. (1985) The neurobiology of perception. Perception
14:97-103. 
[aET, JW]
Reeke, G. N. & Edelman, G. M. (1988) Real brains and artificial intelligence.
Daedelus 117(l):143-73. 
[aET]
Reichardt, W. & Poggio, T. (1976) Visual control of orientation behaviour in
the fly. Quarterly Review of Biophysics 9:311-438. 
[rET, AH]
Remy, M. & Emmerton, J. (1989) Behavioral spectral sensitivities of different
retinal areas in pigeons. Behavioral Neuroscience 103:170-77. 
[aET]
Reuter, T. & Virtanen, K. (1976) Color discrimination mechanism in the
retina of the toad (Bufo bufo). Journal of Comparative Physiology
109:337-43. 
[SLK]
Robson, J. (1983) The morphology of cortico-fugal axons to the dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus. Journal of Comparative Neurology 216:89-
103. 
[aET]
Rodieck, R. W. (1973) The vertebrate retina. Freeman. 
[WB]
Rosch, E. (1973) Natural categories. Cognitive Psychology 4:328-50. 
[arET]
Rothschild, M. F. (1979) Remarks on carotenoids in the evolution of signals.
Coevolution of animals and plants, ed. L. E. Gilbert & P. H. Raven.
University of Texas. 
[aET]
Rowe, M. H. & Dreher, B. (1982) Functional morphology of beta cells in the
area centralis of the cat's retina: A model for the evolution of central
retinal specializations. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 21:1-23. 
[BL]
Rowland, W. J. (1979) The use of color in intraspecific communication. In:
The behavioral significance of color, ed. E. H. Burtt Jr. 
[aET]
Rubin, J. M. & Richards, W. A. (1982) Color vision and image intensities:
When are changes material? Biological Cybernetics 45:215-26. 
[arET,
JLD]
(1988) Color vision: Representing material categories. In: Natural
computation, ed. W. Richards. MIT Press/Bradford Books. 
[arET]
Sallstrom, P. (1973) Colour and physics: Some remarks concerning the
physical aspects of human colour vision. Technical Report 73-09, Institute
of Physics, University of Stockholm, Sweden. 
[JLD]
Schiller, P. H., Logothetis, N. K. & Charles, E. R. (1990) Functions of the
colour-opponent and broad-band channels of the visual system. Nature
343:68-70. 
[aET]
Sejnowksi, T. J., Koch, C. & Churchland, P. S. (1988) Computational
neuroscience. Science 241:1299-1306. 
[aET]
Sereno, M. I. & Allman, J. M. (1991) Cortical visual areas in mammals: In:
The Neural Basis of Visual Function, ed. A. G. Leventhal.
Macmillan. 
[BL]
Shepard, R. N. (1987) Evolution of a mesh between principles of the mind
and regularities of the world. In: The latest on the best: Essays on
evolution and optimality, ed. J. Dupre. MIT Press/Bradford
Books. [RNS]
(1990) A possible evolutionary basis for trichromacy. In: Perceiving,
measuring, and using color, ed. M. Brill. Proceedings of the SPIE/SPSE
Symposium on Electronic Imaging: Science and Technology 301—
09. 
[rET, RNS]
(1991) The perceptual organization of colors: An adaptation to regularities of
the terrestrial world? In: The adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and
the generation of culture, ed. J. Barkow, L. Cosmides & J. Tooby.
Oxford University Press (Oxford) (in press). 
[RNS]
Sittig, O. (1921) Stoerungen im Verhalten gegenueber Farben bei
Aphasischen. Monatsschrift fuer Psychiatrie und Neurologie 49:63-68;
169-87. 
[JBD]
Skarda, C. (1989) Understanding perception: Self-organizing neural dynamics.
La Nuova Critica 9/10:49-60. 
[CAS]
Skarda, C. & Freeman, W. (1987) How brains make chaos in order to make
sense of the world. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 10:161-95. 
[aET]
Smith, V. C. & Pokorny, J. (1977) Large-field trichromacy in protanopes and
deuteranopes. Journal of the Optical Society of America 67:213-
20. 
[GHJ]
Snodderly, D. M. (1979) Visual discrimination encountered in food foraging
72
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

References/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
by a neotropical primate: Implications for the evolution of color vision.
In: The behavioral significance of color, ed. E. H. Burtt, Jr. Garland
STPM Press. 
[aET]
Snow, D. W. (1971) Evolutionary aspects of fruit eating by birds. Ibis
113:194-202. 
[aET]
Spencer, H. (1890) Principles of Psychology (3rd ed.) Williams &
Norgate. 
[PS]
Sperling, H. G. & Harwerth, R. S. (1971) Red/green cone interactions in the
increment-threshold spectral sensitivity of primates. Science 172:180-
84. 
[MAP]
Sperry, R. W. (1952) Neurology and the mind-brain problem. American
Scientist 40:291-311. 
[BL]
Spillman, L. & Werner, J. S. eds. (1990) Visual perception. The
neurophysiological foundations. Academic Press. 
[aET]
Stalmeier, P. F. M. & DeWeert, C. M. M. (1988) Large colour differences
measured by spontaneous Gestalt formation. Color Research and
Application 13:209-18. 
[JBD]
Steele, K. M. (1990) Configural processes in pigeon perception. In:
Quantitative analyses of behavior, vol. 8, ed. M. L. Commons, R. J.
Herrnstein, S. M. Kosslyn & D. M. Mumford. Erlbaum. 
[KMS]
Steriade, M. & Deschenes, M. (1985) The thalamus as a neuronal oscillator.
Brain Research Reviews 18:165-70. 
[aET]
Stoerig, P. & Cowey A. (1989) Wavelength sensitivity in Blindsight. Nature
342:916-18. 
[PS]
(submitted) Wavelength discrimination in visual field defects. Brain. 
[PS]
Stroll, A. (1986) The role of surfaces in an ecological theory of perception.
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 46:437-53. 
[aET]
Stromeyer, C. F. Ill, Khoo, M. C. K., Muggeridge, D. & Young, R. A.
(1978) Detection of red and green flashes: Evidence for cancellation and
facilitation. Sensory Processes 2:248-71. 
[MAF]
Suppes, P., Krantz, D. H., Luce, R. D. & Tversky, A. (1989) Foundations of
measurement, vol. II. Geometrical, threshold, and probabilistic
representations. Academic Press. 
[RJM]
Svaetichin, G. & MacNichol, E. F. (1958) Retinal mechanisms for chromatic
and achromatic vision. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
74:385-404. 
[aET]
Taylor, G. R. (1979) The natural history of the mind. Seeker and Warburg,
London. 
[PS]
Teller, D. Y. (1984) Linking propositions. Vision Research 24:1233-
46. 
[aET]
(1990) The domain of visual science. In: Visual perception. The
neurophysiological foundations, ed. L. Spillman & J. S. Werner, (eds)
Academic Press. 
[aET]
Teller, D. Y. & Pugh, E. N. Jr. (1983) Linking propositions in color vision.
In: Colour vision: Physiology and Psychophysics, ed. J. D. Mollon &
L. T. Sharpe. Academic Press. 
[aET, MAF]
Thompson, E. (1989) Colour vision and the comparative argument: A case
study in cognitive science and the philosophy of perception. Doctoral
dissertation, Department of Philosophy, University of Toronto. 
[aET]
(1992) Colour vision: A study in cognitive science and the philosophy of
perception. Routledge Press, (in press) 
[rET]
Thouless, R. H. (1931) Phenomenal regression to the "real" object. I and II.
British Journal of Psychology 21:339-59; 22:1-30. 
[ AR]
Treisman, A. & Gormican, S. (1988) Feature analysis in early vision: Evidence
from search asymmetries. Psychological Review 95:15-48. 
[JLD]
Trevarthen, C. (1968) Two mechanisms of vision in primates. Psychologische
Forschung 31:299-337. 
[BL]
Turvey, M. T. (1977) Contrasting orientations to the theory of visual
information processing. Psychological Review 84:67-88. 
[aET]
Turvey, M. T., Shaw, R. E., Reed, E. S. & Mace, W. M. (1981) Ecological
laws of perceiving and acting: In reply to Fodor and Pylyshyn. Cognition
9:237-304. 
[aET]
Valberg, A., Seim, T., Lee, B. B. & Tryti, J. (1986) Reconstruction of
equidistant color space from responses of visual neurons of macaques.
Journal of the Optical Society of America A 3:1726-34. 
[WB]
Van Brakel, J. (1991) The plasticity of categories: The case of colour. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science (in press). 
[JVB]
Van der Loos, H. (1979) The development of topological equivalences in the
brain. In: Neural growth and differentiation, ed. E. Meisami & M. A. B.
Brazier. Raven Press. 
[BL]
Varela, F. J. (1979) Principles of Biological Autonomy. Elsevier North
Holland. 
[aET]
(1984) Living ways of sense-making: A middle path for neuroscience. In:
Disorder and order: Proceedings of the Stanford International
Symposium, ed. P. Livingston. Anma Libris. 
[aET]
(1989) Connaitre: Les sciences cognitives, tendances et perspectives.
Editions du Seuil. 
[aET]
(1991a) Perception and the origin of cognition: A cartography of current
ideas. In: Understanding origins; contemporary ideas on the origin of
life, mind and society. Boston studies in the philosophy of science, ed. F.
Varela & J. P. Dupuy. Kluwer Associates. 
[aET]
(1991b) Organisms: A meshwork of selfless selves. In: Organism and the
origin of self, ed. A. Tauber. Kluwer Associates. 
[aET]
Varela, F. & Singer, W. (1987). Neuronal dynamics in the visual cortico-
thalamic pathway as revealed through binocular rivalry. Experimental
Brain Research 66:10-20. 
[aET]
Varela, F. J., Palacios, A. & Goldsmith, T. H. (1991a) Color vision. In: Bird
vision and cognition, ed. H. J. Bischof & H. P. Zeigler. MIT
Press. 
[aET]
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E. & Rosch, E. (1991b) The embodied mind:
Cognitive science and human experience. MIT Press. 
[aET]
Varela, F. J., Letelier, J. C , Marin, G. & Maturana, H. R. (1983) The
neurophysiology of avian color vision. Archivos de Biologia y Medicina
Experimentales 16:291-303. 
[aET]
Vaughn, W. Jr. & Greene, S. L. (1983) Acquisition of absolute discriminations
in pigeons. In: Quantitative analyses of behavior, vol. 4, ed. M. L.
Commons, R. J. Herrnstein & A. R. Wagner. Ballinger. 
[KMS]
Volman, S. F. (1990) Neuroethological approaches to the evaluation of neural
systems. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 36:154-65. 
[BL]
Von Uexkiill, J. (1926) Theoretical biology. Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner &
Co., Ltd. 
[BL]
(1928/1973) Theoretische Biologie. Springer; Suhrkamp, (1973). 
[CN]
(1957) A stroll through the worlds of animals and men. In: Instinctive
behavior, ed. C. H. Schiller. International University Press. 
[BL]
Wagemans, J. (1988) Modules in vision: A case study of interdisciplinarity in
cognitive science. Ada Psychologica 67:59-93. 
[JW]
(1990) "Smart" mechanisms emerging from cooperation and competition
between modules. Psychological Research 52:181-96. 
[JW]
Walls, G. L. (1942) The vertebrate eye and its adaptive radiation. Hafher
Publishing Co. 
[BL]
(1962) The evolutionary history of eye movements. Vision Research 2:60-
80. 
[BL]
Wandell, B. A. & Pugh, E. N. Jr. (1980) Detection of long-duration, long-
wavelength incremental flashes by a chromatically coded pathway. Vision
Research 20:625-36. 
[MAF]
Ward, T. B., Foley, C. M. & Cole, J. (1986) Classifying multidimen-
sional stimuli: Stimulus, task and observer factors. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 12:211-25.
[JBD]
Warren, W. H. (1984) Perceiving affordances: Visual guidance of stair
climbing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 10:683-703. 
[rET, JW]
Warren, W. H. & Whang, S. (1987) Visual guidance of walking through
apertures: Body-scaled information for affordances. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 13:371-
83. 
[JW]
Warren, W. H., Mestre, D. R., Blackwell, A. W. & Morris, M. W. (1991)
Perception of circular heading from optical flow. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 17:28-43. 
[JW]
Warren, W. H., Morris, M. W. & Kalish, M. (1988) Perception of
translational heading from optical flow. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 14:646-60. 
[JW]
Wasserman, G. (1979) Color vision: An historical introduction. Academic
Press. 
[aET]
Watt, R. (1991) Understanding vision. Academic Press. 
[JW]
Weedon, B. C. (1963) Occurrence. In: Carotenoids, ed. O. Isler. Birkhauser
Verlag. 
[aET]
Weiskrantz, L. Warrington, E. K., Sanders, M. D. & Marshall, J. (1974)
Visual capacity in the hemianopic field following a restricted cortical
ablation. Brain 97:709-728. 
[PS]
Werner, A., Menzel, R. & Wherhan, C. (1.988) Color constancy in the
honeybee. Journal of Neuroscience 8:156-59. 
[rET, WB]
West, G. & Brill, M. H. (1982) Necessary and sufficient conditions for von
Kries chromatic adaptation to give color constancy. Journal of
Mathematical Biology 15:249-58. 
[LTM]
Westphal, J. (1987) Colour: Some philosophical problems from 
Wittgenstein.
Basil Blackwell. 
[aET]
Wheeler, T. G. (1982) Color vision and retinal chromatic information
processing in teleost: A review. Brain Research Reviews 4:177-
235. 
[aET]
Whitmore, A. V. & Bowmaker, J. K. (1989) Seasonal variation in cone
sensitivity and short-wave absorbing visual pigments in the rudd
Scardinius erythrophthalmus. Journal of Comparative Physiology A
166:103-15. 
[aET]
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1
73

References/Thompson et al.: Ways of coloring
Wiesel, T. N. & Hubel, D. H. (1966) Spatial and chromatic interactions in
the lateral geniculate body of the rhesus monkey. Journal of
Neurophysiology 29:1115-56. 
[MAF]
Williams, C. (1974) The effect of an irrelevant dimension on "same-different"
judgments of multi-dimensional stimuli. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology 26:26-31. 
[JBD]
Wilson, M. (1987) Berkeley on the mind-dependence of colors. Pacific
Philosophical Quarterly 68:249-64. 
[aET]
Wright, A. (1972) The influence of ultraviolet radiation on the pigeon's color
discrimination. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 17:325-
37. 
[aET]
(1979) Color-vision psychophysics: A comparison of pigeon and human. In:
Neural mechanisms of behavior in the pigeon, ed. A. M. Granda & J. H.
Maxwell. Plenum. 
[aET]
Wright, A. & Cummings, W. W. (1971) Color naming functions for the
pigeon. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 15:7-
17. 
[aET]
Wright, W. D. (1946) Researches on normal and defective colour vision.
Henry Kimpton. 
[GHJ]
(1988) A color palette in the brain? Color research and application
13(3): 138-39. 
[PHK]
Wright, W. D. & Pitt, F. H. G. (1934) Hue discrimination in normal colour
vision. Proceedings of the Physical Society of London 46:459. 
[WB]
Wyszecki, G. & Stiles, W. S. (1982) Color science: Concepts and methods,
quantitative data and formulae, 2nd ed. Wiley. 
[aET, LTM, RJM]
Yuille, A. (1984) A method for computing spectral reflectance. AI Memo 752.
MIT AI Lab. 
[aET]
Zeki, S. (1980) The representation of colours in the cerebral cortex. Nature
284:412-18. 
[aET]
(1983) Colour coding in the cerebral cortex: The reaction of cells in monkey
visual cortex to wavelengths and colours. Neuroscience 9:741-65. 
[aET]
(1985) Colour pathways and hierarchies in the cerebral cortex. In: Central
and peripheral mechanisms of colour vision, ed. D. Ottoson & S. Zeki.
Macrnillan. 
[aET]
Electronic Journal: Call for Papers ~
of tie best new magazines of 1990 In tie Library Journal's annual survey (by
" 15, 19 91).
are Invited to post to psyc@pucc.bitnet brief target articles (preferably not
tie form of Interactive "skywriting" discussion with the world psyciologleal
provides tie unique possibility of "test-piloting" material that may
©tier medium of sciolarly communication can even begin to match.
Ail contributions are refereed by members oS
wilci will cover ail areas of psyetoology9 neuiir©sckiiee9 behavioral biology 9 cognitive science
and related ieids9 as BBS ioeso (Nominations for tie Editorial Board are also IiwIfecL)
Subscription to PSYCOLOQUY Is ffree9 but you must fea¥e an electronic mail
("email") address. To subscribe^ send tie following one-line message to listserv@pucc.bitnet:
sub psyc LastBQfme Firstname
psyc@pucc.bitnet. PSYCOLOQUY cam also be received on Usenet as sci.psychology'.digest.
Co^Edltors:
scientific contributions:
Ste¥an Hamad
Visiting Fellow
Psyciotogy Department
Princeton Uml¥erslty
appliedlprofessiofiallclinical contributions:
Perry London
Dean
Graduate Sciooi of Applied and Professional Psychology
Entgers University
74
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1992) 15:1

