BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18, 659-722
Printed in the United States of America
The contents of consciousness:
A neuropsychological conjecture
Jeffrey A. Gray
Department of Psychology, Institute of Psychiatry, De Crespigny Park,
London SE5 8AF, England
Electronic mail: spjtjag@ucl.ac.uk
Abstract: Drawing on previous models of anxiety, intermediate memory, the positive symptoms of schizophrenia, and goal-directed
behaviour, a neuropsychological hypothesis is proposed for the generation of the contents of consciousness. It is suggested that these
correspond to the outputs of a comparator that, on a moment-by-moment basis, compares the current state of the organism's perceptual
world with a predicted state. An outline is given of the information-processing functions of the comparator system and of the neural
systems which mediate them. The hypothesis appears to be able to account for a number of key features of the contents of consciousness.
However, it is argued that neither this nor any existing comparable hypothesis is yet able to explain why the brain should generate
conscious experience of any kind at all.
Keywords: anxiety; comparator; consciousness; contents of consciousness; schizophrenia; septohippocampal system
Introduction
How does the brain generate conscious experience?
Twenty years ago most scientists thought this a question
for the philosophers; and most philosophers regarded it as
a symptom of some kind (though what kind never became
clear) of deep linguistic confusion. In sharp contrast to this
picture, there is now a large measure of agreement among
both scientists and philosophers that not only is there a real
problem about consciousness, but it is a scientific problem
and the time has come for the scientists to tackle it. Hardly
anyone today doubts that consciousness is in some way a
product of the brain, a product that is intimately connected
with the brains role in behaviour and the processing of
information. Cartesian dualism - the notion that brain-stuff
and mind-stuff are essentially separate, though able to
communicate with each other - has virtually no contempo-
rary followers. The main debate (Marsh 1993) now centres
on just how to go about determining the way in which
consciousness in fact relates to brain function.
Contemporary functionalists appear to hold the view that
there are no major philosophical or theoretical issues that
need to be resolved. It will be sufficient merely to gather
more, and more detailed, data regarding the empirical
relationships that link together environmental events, brain
function, conscious experience, information processing
(computation), and behaviour; the resulting data set will
itself then provide a sufficient account of how conscious-
ness fits into the overall scientific picture. Dennett
(in Marsh 1993, pp. 7-8), for example, argues that one can
already take what is known about the way the brain codes
and recodes visual stimuli, put it together with existing data
from psychophysics, and use this knowledge to predict,
successfully, new visual phenomena such as illusory experi-
ences. One can even "inject" such experiences into the
brains of experimental animals, as demonstrated for exam-
ple in elegant experiments (Newsome & Salzman 1993) in
which monkeys responded (behaviourally) to microstimula-
tion of a circuit encoding a particular direction of motion in
the same way that they had been trained to respond to an
exteroceptive stimulus having the same directional value.
What more than this, Dennett asks, do we need?
If your science can tell you under exactly what conditions a
subject will hate a certain stimulus or prefer one circumstance
to another, it seems to me that to say, "but that just gives you the
observable physical surroundings and circumstances of phe-
nomenology" isn't a fair representation of the facts. As far as
I can see, what's left to be inaccessible is pared down to
something which one has to take on faith as making a difference
even though it doesn't make any detectable difference. At that
point, it seems to me, science would say, "there's nothing left to
explain." (Dennett in Marsh 1993, pp. 7-8)
Kinsbourne (1993, p. 43) makes the same point still more
firmly: "I take as my premise a view that I call neurofunc-
tional - that awareness is an irreducible property of the
activity of functionally entrained neuronal assemblies and
therefore is amenable to no further explanation."
Some, however - probably the majority at a recent
symposium (Marsh 1993) - including myself, remain un-
convinced that it is going to be so simple. In this view, more
than just dedicated gathering of experimental data is going
to be needed. What is needed, rather, is a new theory, one
that will render the relations between brain events and
conscious experiences, to use Nagel's (Marsh 1993, p. 4)
felicitous term, "transparent" (as, say, the theory of heat
renders transparent the relation between the gas flame and
the boiling of the kettle), rather than a series of brute
correlations between environmental inputs, brain events,
and behavioural outputs, on the one hand, and conscious
experiences on the other. This, after all, is the standard set
in all other scientific domains, so why not here?
© 1995 Cambridge University Press
0U0-525X/95 $9.00+. 10
659

Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
What would such a theory need to explain? I have
considered this issue before (Gray 1971, p. 251) and con-
cluded that:
We stand in need of a scientific account of how conscious
experiences (in the sense which is best illustrated by the
experience of primitive sensations, that is, qualia) (1) evolved
and (2) confer survival value on organisms possessing them (the
evolutionary questions); and of how they (3) arise out of brain
events and (4) alter behaviour (the mechanistic questions).
A successful theory of consciousness would be one from
which answers to these questions could be deduced from
one unifying set of concepts. Consider the analogy with the
dual wave and particle aspects of elementary physical
particles (Marsh 1993, pp. 242-43). It is a brute fact that
such a duality of aspects exists in our universe, just as it is a
brute fact that there is a duality of brain events and
conscious experiences. But the theory of quantum me-
chanics provides a single set of equations from which both
the wave-like and the particle-like aspects of the behaviour
of fundamental particles can be predicted and understood;
whereas no such theory yet exists from which one might
derive the duality of brain events and conscious experi-
ences. Moreover, such a theory is at present unimaginable -
though only in die sense that no one could have imagined
relativity or quantum mechanics before they were invented
- not because we are dealing with the unknowable or a bad
language habit.
With this background in mind, we can now state the main
aim of this target article, which is to propose a new and
specific hypothesis concerning a limited version of question
3 distinguished above, namely: How do conscious experi-
ences arise out of brain events? (The hypothesis is termed
"new" principally in order to distinguish it from the overall
theoretical model to which, as indicated below, it is an
addition; it has, of course, many antecedents, as is made
clear in later sections of the paper.) According to diis
hypothesis a specific set of brain processes, linked to a
specific set of psychological (information-processing) func-
tions, provides the basis for conscious experiences. I shall
attempt to show how the nature of these processes and
functions might give rise to a number of specific features of
conscious experience. In this sense, the paper takes a
theoretical step beyond just the gadiering of data on cor-
relations between brain events and conscious experiences.
But it is a step that still falls far short of Nagel's standard of
transparency, as I shall show in the final section of the
paper.1
The new hypothesis is stated fully in section 3, below. In
brief, it proposes that the contents of consciousness consist
of the outputs of a comparator system (Gray 1982a; 1982b)
that has the general function of predicting, on a moment-
by-moment basis, the next perceived state of the world,
comparing this to the actual next perceived state of the
world, and determining whether the predicted and actual
states match or fail to do so ("mismatch"). The "contents of
consciousness" in this hypothesis refer to the subjective
experiences that make up what Jackendoff (1987, pp. 3-4)
calls "primary awareness," including above all the perceived
world with all its various qualities, but also bodily sensa-
tions, proprioception, mental images, dreams, internal
speech, hallucinations, and so on. What Jackendoff calls
"reflective awareness" - including for example beliefs and
self-awareness - lies outside the scope of the hypothesis.
The hypothesis states, therefore, that the contents of pri-
mary awareness consist of subjective qualities whose neural
and computational equivalents have been processed by the
comparator system, and have been determined by that
system to be familiar or novel. Because the comparator
system has itself previously been described within the
context of a detailed neuropsychological model of anxiety
(Gray 1982a; 1982b), intermediate memory (Gray &
Rawlins 1986; Rawlins 1985), the positive psychotic symp-
toms of schizophrenia (Gray et al. 1991a; 1991b; Schmajuk
et al., in preparation) and goal directed behaviour (Gray
1994), the new hypothesis necessarily also contains pro-
posals concerning die specific neural mechanisms that
generate the contents of consciousness. The general neuro-
psychological model is outlined in sections 1 and 2 below.
No attempt is made to summarise the data or arguments on
which it is based; for these, die reader is referred to the
original sources. In section 4,1 consider the level of analysis
occupied by the new hypothesis; and in section 5,1 attempt
to show how it is able to account for a range of special
features of consciousness noted in previous discussions of
the problem, for example, O'Keefe (1985), Marcel & Bi-
siach (1988) and, most recently, Marsh (1993). Finally, in
section 6, I consider the limitations in principle of this
general land of hypothesis.
In proposing any hypothesis concerning the contents of
primary awareness, one encounters the problem posed by
the private nature of conscious experience, in contrast to
the public, intersubjectively confirmable domain of scien-
tific data (Meehl 1966). It is not the privacy of conscious
experience per se that poses the problem, however. Scien-
tists need have no more difficulty in principle in agreeing on
observations about conscious experiences than they do in
agreeing about meter readings; witness the whole of psy-
chophysics. Furthermore, reports of such experiences can
be used to provide tests of specific hypotheses concerning
their nature; research on die rotation of mental images
(Cooper & Shepard 1973) provides a good, if controversial
(Pylyshyn 1984), example. From a scientific point of view,
the problem may be put as follows (Gray 1987): One's own
conscious experience is a datum that stands in need of
explanation; the conscious experiences of others, however,
can function only as a hypothesis by which to explain their
behaviour. The reason the problem posed by consciousness
seems so acute, at least to nonfunctionalists, is the follow-
ing: nothing that we know so far about behaviour, physiol-
ogy, die evolution of either behaviour or physiology, or the
possibilities of constructing automata to carry out complex
forms of behaviour is such that die hypothesis of conscious-
ness.would arise if it did not occur in addition as a datum in
our own experience; nor, having arisen, does it provide a
useful explanation of die phenomena observed in those
domains. The hypothesis proposed here approaches the
problem principally from the point of view of consciousness-
as-datum; tliat is, it seeks to account for some of the
phenomenological features of conscious experiences by
postulating specific neural and psychological functions that
might give rise to diem. In this respect, it resembles the
approach taken, on a much larger scale, by Jackendoff
(1987).
Sections 1 and 2 consider a further issue: how far does
the normal scientific process of building neuropsychologi-
cal models of specific psychological phenomena - as we
have done for anxiety (Gray 1982a; 1982b) and positive
psychotic symptoms (Gray et al. 1991a; 1991b) - lead ipso
660
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
facto to progress in solving the general problem of con-
sciousness? If Dennett (in Marsh 1993, pp. 7-10) is right,
the successful construction of such models should lead to
sufficient (and sufficiently detailed) understanding of the
relationships between brain, behaviour, and conscious ex-
perience for the general problem of consciousness gradu-
ally to wither away.
1. The comparator model: Anxiety
As developed so far, the comparator model encompasses
three interlinked levels of analysis: behavioural, neural, and
cognitive (i.e., information-processing). Notice that these
levels of analysis have not hitherto included an experiential
component (except in a limited sense that is clarified
below). Indeed, the aim of the present paper may be seen as
that of extending the model to the fourth level.
The model was first developed as a theory of anxiety
(Gray 1982a; 1982b). At the behavioural level, this theory
postulated a "behavioural inhibition system" (BIS), as pre-
sented in Figure 1. The critical eliciting stimuli for activity
in the BIS are conditioned stimuli associated with punish-
ment, conditioned stimuli associated with the omission,
or termination of reward ("frustrative nonreward"; Amsel
1962; 1992), and novel stimuli. The behaviour elicited by
these stimuli (right-hand side of Fig. 1) consists in behav-
ioural inhibition (interruption of any ongoing behaviour);
an increment in the level of arousal, such that the next
behaviour to occur is carried out with extra vigour and/or
speed; and an increment in attention, such that more
information is taken in, especially concerning novel fea-
tures of the environment. Any one of the inputs to the BIS
elicits all the outputs; furthermore, a range of interventions
is capable of blocking all the outputs to any of the inputs,
while leaving intact other input-output relationships (in-
cluding some that involve inputs to or outputs from the BIS,
but not both). These are some of the reasons for regarding
the BIS as indeed a unified system, rather than a congeries
of separate input-output relationships.
Among the interventions which specifically abolish the
input-output relationships that define the BIS is the admin-
istration of drugs, such as the benzodiazepines, barbitu-
rates, and alcohol, which reduce anxiety in human beings
(Gray 1977); indeed, the study of such drugs was a major
impetus to the formation of the concept of the BIS (Gray
1982a; 1982b). It is on this basis that I identified the
subjective state that accompanies activity in the BIS as
anxiety. This identification gains plausibility from the fact
that it leads to a face-valid description of human anxiety:
that is, a state in which one responds to threat (stimuli
associated with punishment or nonreward) or uncertainty
(novelty) with the reaction, "stop, look and listen, and get
ready for action" (right-hand side of Fig. 1).
In this sense, then, the model did include an experiential
component from its inception. However, let us suppose that
the identification of activity in the BIS with the subjective
state of anxiety is correct in every detail. Note, even so, that
we are still left with no more than a brute correlation: the
identification offers no account of how such activity gives
rise to the specific subjective features of felt anxiety, nor of
why activity in the BIS should give rise to any subjective
features at all. Thus the attribution of subjective features to
the model in this way does nothing to solve the central
problem of consciousness, it merely evades it.
INPUTS
Signals of Punishment
Signals of Nonreward
Novel Stimuli
Behavioral
Inhibition
System
i
Impa
Anti-
Anxiety
Drugs
r
OUTPUTS
Behavioral Inhibition
Increment In Arousal
Increased Attention
Figure 1. 
The behavioural inhibition system (BIS) as defined
by its inputs and outputs.
The set of neurological structures which appear to dis-
charge the functions of the BIS is illustrated in Figure 2,
including notably the septohippocampal system (SHS) and
its associated "Papez loop," areas of the temporal and frontal
neocortex, and the ascending noradrenergic and seroto-
nergic pathways that innervate these forebrain regions. We
shall leave until later a more detailed consideration of the
neural activity mediated by these structures. The proposal
that the BIS, as defined behaviourally (Fig. 1), consists of
such activity depends upon a variety of sources of informa-
tion (Gray 1982a). For the sake of the argument pursued
here, let us again suppose that this proposal is correct in
every detail: would this bring us any closer to an under-
standing of the relationship between, on the one hand, the
behavioural and neurological aspects of anxiety and, on the
other, its experiential features? Clearly not: we merely have
another brute correlation. To see that this is so, suppose
that, instead of the set of brain structures depicted in
Figure 2, another set turns out to mediate the functions of
the BIS. Would this lead to any testable predictions about
Figure 2. 
The septohippocampal system: the three major
building blocks are shown in heavy print: HF, the hippocampal
formation, made up of the entorhinal cortex, EC, the dentate
gyms, DG, 3, CA 1, and the subicular area, SUB: SA, the septal
area, containing the medial and lateral septal areas, MSA and LSA;
and the Papez circuit, which receives projections from and returns
them to the subicular area via the mammillary bodies, MB,
anteroventral thalamus, AVT, and cingulate cortex, CINC. Other
structures shown are the hypothalamus, HYP, the locus coeruleus,
LC, the raphe nuclei, RAP, and the prefrontal cortex, PFC. Arrows
show direction of projection; the projection form SUB to MSA
lacks anatomical confirmation. Words in lower case show postu-
lated functions; beh. inhib., behavioural inhibition. From Gray
(1982b).
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
661

Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
1
The World
Comparator •
1
Plans
Stored
Regularities
I
Generator
Predictior
t
of
Figure 3. 
Information processing required for the comparator
function of the septohippocampal system.
change in the subjective features of anxiety? The ability in
principle to derive such predictions would take us beyond
brute correlations and towards "transparency"; but the
theory that links the hypotheses depicted in Figures 1 and 2
to each other and to anxiety offers no way of deriving them.
Now, the main function of the brain is to process infor-
mation. Thus, faced with a neurological flow diagram, one
should ask not only how the structures illustrated therein
produce their relevant behavioural outputs, but also what
cognitive (i.e., information processing) operations they per-
form in order to do so. The information-processing func-
tions attributed in the model to the interlinked set of
structures depicted in Figure 2 are themselves illustrated in
Figure 3; detailed justification for the ideas contained in
this figure can be found in Gray (1982a; 1982b). The key
concept is that of the comparator, that is, a system which,
moment by moment, predicts the next likely event and
compares this prediction to the actual event. The experi-
mental evidence upon which this concept rests is complex
and taken from many sources, especially those summarised
by Gray (1982a; 1982b) in relation to anxiety. Eichenbaum
et al. (1994) have recently used a similar conceptual analysis
in the attempt to integrate experimental evidence concern-
ing the memorial functions of the hippocampal system.
The system depicted in Figures 2 and 3 (i) takes in
information describing the current state of the (perceived)
world; (ii) adds to this further information concerning the
subject's current motor program; (iii) makes use of informa-
tion stored in memory and describing past regularities that
relate stimulus events to other stimulus events (derived
from the process of classical conditioning); (iv) similarly
makes use of stored information describing past regularities
that relate responses to subsequent stimulus events (de-
rived from instrumental conditioning); (v) from these
sources of information predicts the next expected state of
the world; (vi) compares the predicted to the actual next
state of the world; (vii) decides either that there is a match
or that there is a mismatch between the predicted and
actual states of the world; (viii) if there is a match, proceeds
to run through steps (i) to (vii) again; but (ix) brings the
current motor program to a halt (i.e., operates the outputs
of the BIS; Fig. 1) if there is a mismatch, or (x) if the
predicted state of the world is associated with punishment
or nonreward; and (xi) in that case takes in further informa-
tion to resolve the difficulty that has interrupted the current
motor program.
Figure 3 depicts, as it were, the software of the compara-
tor proposed by Gray (1982a); as we have seen, the corre-
sponding hardware is as illustrated in Figure 2. At this
neural level, the core structure is the SHS, composed of the
septal area, entorhinal cortex, dentate gyrus, hippocampus,
and subicular area. Here we note only the following points
(refer to Figure 2 for the circuitry).
First, the heart of the comparator function is attributed
to the subicular area. This is postulated (1) to receive
elaborated descriptions of the perceptual world from the
entorhinal cortex, itself the recipient of input from all
cortical sensory association areas; (2) to receive predictions
from, and to initiate the generation of the next prediction
in, the Papez circuit (i.e., the circuit from the subiculum to
the mammillary bodies, the anteroventral thalamus, the
cingulate cortex and back to the subiculum); and (3) to
interface with motor programming systems (not themselves
included in Fig. 2; see below) so as either to bring them to a
halt or to permit them to continue.
Second, the prefrontal cortex is allotted the role of
providing the comparator system with information con-
cerning the current motor program (via its projections to
the entorhinal and cingulate cortices, the latter forming
part of the Papez circuit).
Third, the monoaminergic pathways which ascend from
the mesencephalon to innervate the SHS (consisting of
noradrenergic fibres originating in the locus coeruleus, and
serotonergic fibres originating in the median raphe) are
charged with alerting the whole system under conditions of
threat and diverting its activities to deal with the threat; in
the absence of threat, the information-processing activities
of the system can be put to other, nonemotional purposes
(Gray 1984).
Last, the system depicted in Figure 3 needs to be
quantized in time, to allow appropriate comparisons be-
tween specific perceived states of the world and corre-
sponding predictions, followed by initiation of the next
prediction and next intake of information describing the
world. This function is attributed to the hippocampal theta
rhythm, giving rise to an "instant" within the model of about
one-tenth of a second. (More specifically, the theta rhythm
in animals such as the rat has a frequency ranging from
about 6 to about 12 Hz; so an "instant" must have a duration
of approximately 80-160 msec.)
In the application of this model to anxiety (Gray 1982a;
1982b), the main focus of the analysis was on steps (ix)-(xi),
outlined above, and the further consequences of these
steps. A detailed attempt was made to show how the
combination of the three levels of analysis shown here in
Figures 1-3 (henceforth collectively termed simply "the
BIS") was able to account for a variety of features of human
anxiety and anxiety disorders, including many highly sub-
jective features (e.g., the compulsive ruminations of pa-
tients with obsessive-compulsive disorder). A key feature of
this application to human anxiety was the distinction be-
tween two modes of operation of the BIS. The first, "check-
ing," mode applies when the comparator repeatedly de-
clares "match" and recursively runs through steps (i)-(vii)
listed above. The second, "control," mode applies when
either a predicted threat or a mismatch is detected, leading
to operation of the behavioural outputs of the BIS (Fig. 1).
The phobic symptoms of human anxiety were attributed to
activity of the BIS in control mode; the cognitive symptoms
(worry, rumination, etc.), in part to the operation of step (xi)
in control mode, and in part to certain special features of
activity in checking mode that become possible uniquely in
human beings because of descending control over the BIS
from the prefrontal cortex, conveying influences from
language-based cortical systems.
662
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
Does the addition of the information-processing level of
analysis, summarised in Figure 3, to the other two levels
(Figs. 1 and 2) bring us any closer to a transparent theory of
the linkage between brain-and-behaviour and conscious
experience? Certainly, there are many passages in Grays
(1982a) detailed account of features of human anxiety
which might give the unwary reader the impression that
real progress in this direction has been made (see, e.g.,
pp. 442-44). This impression is strengthened, in particular,
by the use in the description of the software of the model
(Fig. 3) of terms that have a rather ambiguous status insofar
as consciousness is concerned. Consider, for example, "the
use of information stored in memory and describing past
regularities of experience in order to predict the next state
of the world" (steps iii-v), or "the comparison between this
predicted state and the actual state of the world" (steps vi,
vii). Are these conscious or unconscious processes? If we
were to model them in a computer program (as can be
done; e.g., Schmajuk et al., in preparation), we would surely
suppose them to lack conscious components; and it is in this
way that I intended to use these concepts. But the fact that
such predictions and comparisons are also familiar to us as
elements in our conscious experience allows one to slip all
too readily into the assumption that, by the simple postu-
lation of equivalence between certain aspects of neural
activity (e.g., the passage of impulses around the Papez
loop) and certain features of the processing of information
(e.g., the making of a prediction as to the next input into the
system) - itself a controversial but not a mysterious step in
theory building (see Marsh 1993, pp. 273-75) - one has
made a contribution to the substantive problem of con-
sciousness. But it is precisely the fact that we may leave the
status - conscious or unconscious - of such processes
undefined in the construction of this kind of information-
processing model that most clearly demonstrates our lack of
progress in understanding consciousness. For conscious-
ness must make a behavioural difference, otherwise it could
not have been the subject of Darwinian selection and
evolution (Gray 1971). If our theories make identical pre-
dictions whether the processes they postulate are treated as
conscious or not, then this critical difference that is due to
consciousness has clearly been left out.
2. The comparator model: Schizophrenia
More recently, Gray et al. (1991a; 1991b) have extended the
comparator model and applied it to some of the bizarre
cognitive features of acute schizophrenia with positive
symptoms. Whereas applications of the model to anxiety
were principally concerned with the consequences of dis-
rupting the monitoring of motor programs (when threats or
mismatch is detected), the extended model is more con-
cerned with the details of the monitoring process itself, and
the way in which this interacts with motor programs.
The running of the latter is attributed to a system separate
from the BIS, the "behavioural approach system" (BAS;
Gray 1994). Like the BIS, the BAS has been submitted to
three interlinked levels of behavioural, neurological, and
information-processing analysis.
The input-output relations that define the BAS at the
behavioural level are set out in Figure 4. In essence, this
depicts a simple positive feedback system, activated by
stimuli associated with reward or with the termination
or omission of punishment ("relieving nonpunishment";
r
Signals of Reward 
1
*
Signals of Nonpunishment 
—'
BAS
Approach
Figure 4. 
The behavioural approach (BAS) as defined by its
inputs and outputs.
Mowrer 1960), and operating so as to increase spatiotem-
poral proximity to such stimuli. By adding the postulate that
conditioned appetitive stimuli of this kind activate the BAS
to a degree proportional in their spatiotemporal proximity
to the unconditioned appetitive stimulus ("goal") with
which they are associated, we have in Figure 4 a system that
is in general capable of guiding the organism to the goals it
needs to attain (food, water, etc.) for survival (Deutsch
1964; Gray 1975, Ch. 5; Gray 1994).
The last decade has seen rapid progress at the neurologi-
cal level (Gray et al. 1991a; Groves 1983; Penney & Young
1981; Swerdlow & Koob 1987) in the construction of
plausible neuropsychological models of the BAS (though
this phrase has not itself been used, in the relevant litera-
ture; terms such as "motor programming system" have been
preferred). The key components are the basal ganglia (the
dorsal and ventral striatum, and dorsal and ventral pal-
lidum); the dopaminergic fibres that ascend from the mes-
encephalon (substantia nigra and nucleus A10 in the ventral
tegmental area) to innervate the basal ganglia; thalamic
nuclei closely linked to the basal ganglia; and similarly
neocortical areas (motor, sensorimotor, and prefrontal cor-
tex) closely linked to the basal ganglia. These components
are best seen as forming two closely interrelated sub-
systems, as illustrated in Figure 5 (based on Groves 1983;
Penney & Young 1981; and chiefly Swerdlow & Koob
1987). The upper part of this figure shows the interrelations
between nonlimbic cortex (i.e., motor, sensorimotor, and
association cortices), the caudate-putamen (or dorsal-
striatum), the dorsal globus pallidus, nn. ventralis anterior
(VA) and ventralis lateralis (VL) of the thalamus, and the
ascending dopaminergic pathway from the substantia nigra;
for the sake of brevity we shall refer to this set of structures
as the "caudate" motor system. Similarly, the lower part of
Figure 5 shows the interrelations between the limbic cortex
(i.e., prefrontal and cingulate cortices), n. accumbens (ven-
tral striatum), the ventral globus pallidus, the dorsomedial
(DM) thalamic nucleus, and the ascending dopaminergic
projection from A10; for brevity, we shall call this set of
structures the "accumbens" motor system. It is important to
note that n. accumbens also receives projections from two
major limbic structures: the subiculum (output station for
the SHS) and the amygdala. The overall system and its links
to the BIS are shown in Figure 6.
At the information-processing level, the key proposal
(Gray et al. 1991a) is that a particular set of neurons firing at
a particular time in the basal ganglia: (1) represents a step in
a goal-directed motor program; and (2) is selected for this
function by instrumental reinforcement mediated by the
connectivity of the neurons that make up the set (Rolls &
Williams 1987). Within this overall function, the role played
by the caudate subsystem is that of encoding the specific
content (in terms of relationships between stimuli, re-
sponses, and reinforcement) of successive steps in the
program. The complementary role played by the accum-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
663

Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
GLU
MCX
GLU
CfI
-1
I
GLU
I I
GABA
-
I l l
DA
VA/VL <—|
T*
DP
SN
-
Figure 5. 
Above The caudate motor system: non-limbic cortico-
striato-pallido-thalamic-midbrain circuitry. MCX: motor and
sensorimotor cortex. VA/VL: ventral anterior and ventrolateral
thalamic nuclei. CP: caudate-putamen (dorsal striatum). DP:
dorsal pallidum. SN: Substantia nigra.
Below The accumbens motor system: limbic cortico-striato-
pallido-thalamic-midbrain circuitry. LCX: limbic cortex, including
prefrontal and cingulate areas. DM: dorsomedial thalamic nu-
cleus: NAC: nucleus accumbens (ventral striatum). VP: ventral
pallidum. A 10: dopaminergic nucleus A 10 in the ventral tegmen-
tal area.
GLU, CABA and DA: the neurotramsmitters, glutamate, gamma-
aminobutyric acid and dopamine. H—: excitation and inhibition.
I, II, III: feedback loops, the first two positive, the third negative.
Based on Swerdlow and Koob (1987).
bens subsystem is that of (1) switching between steps in the
motor program; and (2), in interaction with the SHS,
monitoring the smooth running of the motor program in
terms of progress towards the intended goal. In more detail,
the specific hypotheses are as follows.
1. The caudate system, by way of its connections with
sensory and motor cortices, encodes the specific sen-
sorimotor content of each step in a motor program (e.g., for
a rat, turn left at a junction in a maze).
2. The accumbens system operates in tandem with the
caudate system so as to permit switching from one step to
the next in a program. In addition, there are outputs to
exploratory behavioural systems (via the superior colliculus
and mesencephalic locomotor region) that are activated in
response to novel stimuli.
3. Both the establishment of the sequence of steps that
makes up a given motor program and the subsequent
orderly (i.e., goal-directed) running of the program are
guided by the projection to n. accumbens from the amyg-
dala; this projection conveys information concerning cue-
reinforcement associations (Rolls & Williams 1987).
4. The septohippocampal system is responsible for
checking whether the outcome of a particular motor step
matches the expected outcome; this information is trans-
mitted to n. accumbens by the projection from the su-
biculum. For "match" a topographically localised signal is
sent to the accumbens, permitting switching to the next
step in the motor program. For "mismatch" a generalised
subicular input to accumbens interrupts all accumbens
function relating to motor steps, enabling instead the acti-
vation of exploratory behaviour outputs.
5. The activities of the caudate, accumbens, and sep-
tohippocampal systems are coordinated and kept in step
with one another by the prefrontal cortex, acting by way of
its interconnections, respectively, with (a) the cortical com-
ponents of the caudate system, (b) n. accumbens, dor-
somedial thalamus, and amygdala and (c) the entorhinal
and cingulate cortices.
6. Timing is coordinated between the septohippocampal
monitoring system and the basal ganglia motor program-
ming system; given the assumption that time is quantized in
the SHS by the theta rhythm (Gray 1982a), corresponding
to an "instant" of about a tenth of a second, this must also be
the duration of a step in the motor program.
The structure of this part of the overall model is obviously
similar to the part outlined in section 1. There is therefore
no need to repeat points made already concerning the light,
if any, that the model is able in and of itself to throw upon
the relationship between brain-and-behaviour and con-
sciousness. As we have seen, the fundamental questions
raised by this relationship remain opaque to such models.
However, applying the model to the cognitive abnor-
malities of acute schizophrenia throws this opacity into
particularly stark relief (Gray 1993).
The theory of the neuropsychology of schizophrenia that
my colleagues and I have developed (Gray et al. 1991a;
1991b; Schmajuk et al., in preparation) is intended to span
the complete range of explanation from a malfunction in the
brain to the psychological symptoms of the condition (Fig.
7). It integrates four levels of description: (1) a structural
abnormality in the brain (specifically, in the limbic fore-
brain, affecting the hippocampal formation, amygdala, and
temporal and frontal neocortex) gives rise to (2) a functional
neurochemical abnormality in the brain (specifically, rela-
tive hyperactivity of transmission in the ascending mesolim-
bic dopaminergic pathway); this in turn (3) disrupts a
cognitive process (specifically, the integration of past regu-
larities of experience with current stimulus recognition,
learning and action), and so produces (4) the positive
symptoms characteristic of acute schizophrenic psychosis
(Fig. 8). Notice that, if the explicandum (step 4) in this chain
were susceptible of definition in ordinary biological terms
(e.g., a failure in thermoregulation), this would be a familiar
type of integrative neuroscientific explanation and would
pose no theoretical or philosophical problems.
Unlike thermoregularion, however, most positive (Crow
1980) symptoms of schizophrenia (e.g., auditory hallucina-
tions, delusional beliefs, enhanced sensory awareness, diffi-
culties in the focussing of attention, etc.; see Freedman,
1974, for a distillation of autobiographical accounts) are
necessarily linked to conscious experience. So the question
arises: how do we get from the first, clearly neuroscientific
steps (1 and 2) in this chain of explanation to the fourth,
which apparently belongs to a different universe of dis-
course? The answer lies in step 3. This utilises the same
deliberate ambiguity that we noted at the end of the
previous section: a "weakening of the influence of stored
memories of regularities of previous input on current
664
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
SMC
GL J 
C LU 
Gl
VA/VL
Gfi 3A
DP
U
V M
Q
I
E C
T
s H s
I
u
Amyg
Subic
<—4 GABf-
3A
C P
GA )A DA
I
SN
GA 3A
SN
pc
N. Acc
GABA
DA
A10
GABA
s c
motor 
locomotor
activity 
activity
eye and head
movements
locomotor
activity
Figure 6. 
The basal ganglia and their connections with the limbic system. Structures: SMC = sensorimotor cortex; PFC = prefrontal
cortex; EC = entorhinal cortex; SHS = Septohippocampal system; Subic = subicular area; Amyg = amygdala; VA/VL = nucleus (N.)
ventralis anterior and ventralis lateralis thalami; VM = N. ventralis medialis thalami; DM = dorsalis medialis thalami; DP = dorsal
pallidum; VP = ventral pallidum; CP = caudate-putamen; N. Acc = N. accumbens; SNpr = substantia nigra, pars reticulata; SNpc =
substantia nigra, pars compacta; A 10 = A 10 in ventral tegmental area; SC = superior colliculus; PPN = pedunculopantine nucleus.
Transmitters: GLU = glutamate; DA = dopamine; GABA = gamma-aminobutyric acid. From Gray et al. (1991a).
perception," proposed by Hemsley (1987) to underlie the
positive symptoms of schizophrenia, describes a process
that can be treated either as conscious or not; and this
ambiguity is deliberately left unresolved (Gray 1993). This
failure to disambiguate is not due to oversight or insuffi-
cient analysis; it is a general, and probably (given current
understanding) inevitable, feature of all similar contempo-
rary attempts to apply neuroscientific concepts to the
explanation of conscious phenomena.
Nor are such theories rendered useless by their inherent
ambiguity. On the contrary, it has, for example, been
possible to derive from our model of schizophrenia and the
earlier hypotheses (Solomon etal. 1981; Weineretal. 1981)
of which this model is an elaboration, a variety of detailed
predictions, and to test them successfully in experiments
with both animal and human subjects, utilising both behav-
ioural and neuroscientific data. Much of the evidence in
support of the theory derives from two key behavioural
paradigms, latent inhibition and the Kamin blocking effect,
both first studied in experimental animals and also demon-
strable with human subjects. Here, I shall consider only
latent inhibition (Lubow 1973; 1989). This is an extremely
simple phenomenon. If a potential conditioned stimulus
(CS) (e.g., a tone or white noise) is presented to the subject
a number of times (typically, 20-40) without consequence,
this preexposure retards subsequent learning when the
stimulus does have consequence (e.g., it now predicts the
occurrence of a second stimulus: footshock if the subject is
a rat, an increment on a counter for human subjects). In
Hemsley s (1987) terms, a past regularity (CS with no
consequence) adversely affects the current learning of a
new association. If, therefore, one were unable normally to
integrate current learning with such past regularities, latent
inhibition should be blocked, that is, learning with a preex-
posed CS should resemble learning to a novel CS.
A number of experimental manipulations have been
shown to influence latent inhibition in ways predicted by
the theory (references in Gray et al. 1991a unless others
given). Thus, the indirect dopamine agonist and psycho-
tomimetic, amphetamine, blocks latent inhibition in both
rats and human volunteers, showing in both cases an
inverse dependence upon dose (N. S. Gray et al. 1992a);
this effect is reversed by dopamine receptor antagonists
with anti-psychotic action. Given on their own, such anti-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
665

Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
SYMPTOMS
I
COGNITIVE PROCESSES
t
NEUROCHEMISTRY
t
NEUROANATOMY
Figure 7. 
An integrative theory (Gray et al. 1991a) of positive
schizophrenic symptoms (top), seen as arising from a structural
abnormality in the brain (bottom), which gives rise to a functional
neurochemical abnormality, and hence to an abnormality in cogni-
tive processing.
psychotic drugs increase latent inhibition in both animal
(Dunn et al. 1993) and human (Williams et al. 1994)
subjects. The Gray et al. (1991a; 1991b) model attributes
the effect of amphetamine on latent inhibition to the
release of dopamine specifically in n. accumbens (Fig. 8);
intense dopaminergic activity in this structure is thought to
interrupt motor programming and substitute exploratory
behaviour (Kelly et al. 1975). This prediction is supported
by several observations. First, latent inhibition is also abol-
ished by nicotine (Joseph et al. 1993), a drug which causes
dopamine release in n. accumbens but not in the caudate-
putamen (Brazell et al. 1990). Second, a CS paired with
footshock elicits conditioned dopamine release in n. ac-
cumbens, and this response is blocked if the CS is first
preexposed, paralleling behavioural latent inhibition
(Young et al. 1993). Third, amphetamine injected directly
into n. accumbens, but not into the caudate-putamen, has
been reported to block latent inhibition by Solomon &
Staton (1982), although Killcross & Robbins (1993) failed
to replicate this finding. Fourth, excitotoxic lesions of the
shell of n. accumbens also block latent inhibition (Tai et al.,
PAST REGULARITIES
1
CURRENT PERCEPTION/ACTION
B.
LIMBIC FOREBRAIN
'(
BASAL GANGLIA
COMPARATOR
T
MOTOR PROGRAM
C.
SUBICULUM
T
N. ACCUMBENS
Figure 8. 
A schematic summary of the theory of schizophrenia
proposed by Gray et al. (1991a). (A) The abnormality of cognitive
processing consists of a failure to integrate past regularities of
experience with the current control of perception and action.
(B) This reflects a dysfunctional connection between the limbic
forebrain and the basal ganglia. (C) The specific pathway carrying
the dysfunctional connection is from the subiculum (in the limbic
forebrain) to the nucleus accumbens (in the basal ganglia).
(D) The computing functions thus disrupted are the passage of
information from a comparator system, utilizing stored traces of
past regularities (limbic forebrain), to a motor programming
system (located in the basal ganglia) controlling perception and
action.
in press). Fifth, destruction of die dopaminergic afferents to
the n. accumbens (by local injection of the catecholamine-
specific neurotoxin, 6-hydroxydopamine) has the same
effect as systemic administration of dopamine-receptor
antagonists, that is, this lesion potentiates latent inhibition
(Peters et al., in preparation).
The Gray et al. (1991a) model also predicts that latent
inhibition should be affected by manipulation of the input
from the hippocampal formation, via the subiculum, to n.
accumbens. This prediction too is supported by several
lines of observation. First, latent inhibition is abolished
after large hippocampal-system lesions and after destruc-
tion of the serotonergic innervation of the hippocampus
(Cassaday et al. 1993a); and it loses its normal dependence
upon context after more selective hippocampal lesions
(Good & Honey 1993). Second, section of the pathway
connecting the subiculum to n. accumbens also blocks
latent inhibition, and this effect is reversed by administer-
ing the dopamine-receptor antagonist, haloperidol, consis-
tent with the hypothesis that sectioning the subiculo-
accumbens projection affects behaviour by functionally
increasing dopaminergic transmission in n. accumbens
(Tarrasch et al. 1992). Third, the abolition of latent inhibi-
tion seen after large hippocampal lesions is also reversed by
systemic haloperidol (Schmajuk & Christiansen, in prepa-
ration). Fourth, Cassaday et al. (1993b) were able to block
latent inhibition by systemic administration of certain se-
rotonergic agonists but not others; and Boulenguez et al.
(1994) have demonstrated, after intrasubicular injection of
these compounds, that those which block latent inhibition,
but not those without this effect, give rise to dopamine
release in n. accumbens. Fifth, work in J. N. P. Rawlins's
laboratory (Yee et al. 1995) has shown that lesions in the
retrohippocampal region (entorhinal,cortex plus subicular
area) also block latent inhibition and that this effect too is
reversed by systemic haloperidol.2
With few exceptions (e.g., Killcross & Robbins 1993),
then, these observations are consistent with the hypothesis
that latent inhibition is disrupted by enhanced dopa-
minergic transmission in n. accumbens, whether this is
primary or secondary to structural damage in the hippo-
campal formation. Furthermore, the limited human data
suggest that in Man the same processes underlie latent
inhibitions as in the rat, although of course the specific
details of the experimental procedures differ widely in the
two cases. Finally, and critically, as initially reported by
Baruch et al. (1988a) and replicated by N. S. Gray et al.
(in press), latent inhibition is absent in the early stages of
an acute schizophrenic episode. Medication with anti-
psychotic drugs normalises latent inhibition over a period of
several weeks, the time it also normally takes for these
drugs to reduce psychotic symptoms. In unmedicated pa-
tients normalisation of latent inhibition is more drawn out,
taking over a year (N. S. Gray et al., in press). What is not yet
clear is the exact relationship between disrupted latent
inhibition and the occurrence of positive psychotic symp-
toms. Whereas in the Baruch et al. (1988a) study this
relationship was close, N. S. Gray et al. (1992b) selected
chronic schizophrenics in whom, despite neuroleptic treat-
ment, the positive-symptom score remained as high as in
Baruch s acute patients; nonetheless, the acute but not the
chronic patients showed loss of latent inhibition. Thus, loss
of latent inhibition appears to be a more sensitive index of
changes in dopaminergic transmission (as indicated also by
666
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

the ability of oral amphetamine to disrupt latent inhibition
in normal volunteers; N. S. Gray et al. 1992a) than positive
psychotic symptoms. This is an issue that requires further
research.
It is important to note that acute schizophrenics in the
preexposed condition of the latent inhibition paradigm
learn the association faster than do preexposed normal
controls. This eliminates the possibility that the aberrant
cognitive performance of the patients is an artefact arising
from interference from some aspect of their illness (hearing
voices in the head, insufficient motivation, unwillingness to
cooperate, etc.). Patient groups other than schizophrenics
have not so far shown comparable changes, although data
are limited to agoraphobics (Baruch 1988) and children
with attention deficit disorder (Lubow & Josman 1994).
However, normal individuals with high scores on question-
naire measures of schizotypy have reduced latent inhibition
compared to individuals low on schizotypy (Baruch et al.
1988b; Lipp & Vaitl 1992; Lubow et al. 1992). Thus, latent
inhibition is affected by both state (increased dopaminergic
transmission due to drug administration in normal subjects,
or during the acute psychotic period in patients) and trait
(schizotypy) factors, as indeed is the occurrence of schizo-
phrenic symptoms.
A possible inference from these experiments is that
the conscious experience of the amphetamine-treated rat
shares important features with that of amphetamine-
treated human beings and schizophrenic patients (Gray
1993). The form of the theory these experiments have been
designed to test, combined with the nature of the schizo-
phrenic symptoms that it attempts to explain, strongly
imply that the effect of amphetamine in blocking latent
inhibition in human subjects should be understood as
reflecting a change in conscious experience (taking the
form, roughly speaking, that the drug enhances the salience
in consciousness of the preexposed CS; see the descrip-
tions, summarised by Freedman (1974), of feelings of
"enhanced sensory awareness" in schizophrenics' auto-
biographical accounts of their illness). But similar effects
require similar explanations, especially if they are encom-
passed by the same theory based upon the same evidence.
It should therefore follow that, if the blockade of latent
inhibition by amphetamine in human subjects reflects a
change in conscious experience, so it does in the rat.
Since it is still disputed whether animals other than Man
have conscious experiences of any kind, the construction of
a body of data and theory from which such inferences may
be drawn, even if they remain tentative, is no mean achieve-
ment. Nonetheless, a point made in connection with the
similar discussion of the application of the model to anxiety
(sect. 1) remains valid: to the extent that models of this kind
rely on processes whose status - conscious or otherwise - is
left ambiguous, they necessarily fail to contribute to a
resolution of the substantive problem of consciousness,
namely, what difference is created by some neural pro-
cesses achieving consciousness while others do not?
3. A new hypothesis
Although, as we have seen, applying the comparator model
to both anxiety and schizophrenia has had implications for
the general study of consciousness, this was not the primary
purpose for which the model was developed. In this section,
in contrast, I propose a new hypothesis, based upon the
Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
comparator model, which aims explicitly to provide an
account of a number of specific features of conscious
experience in general. Given the extensive previous elab-
oration of the comparator model, outlined above and in
earlier publications (especially Gray 1982a and Gray et al.
1991a), the hypothesis is (to a first approximation) simply
stated: the contents of consciousness consist of the outputs of
the subicular comparator. This hypothesis is not simply an
extension of the way the model applies to anxiety or schizo-
phrenia, nor does it seek support in the same data as did
these earlier applications. Rather, it represents a new insight
(remembering, of course, that insights can be false as well as
true): a range of well-known features of conscious experi-
ence appear to fall out naturally from the hypothesis. In the
next section we consider what these features are. First,
however, the hypothesis needs to be stated in more detail.
It will be recalled (sect. 1) that the subicular area is the
region, within the model, in which predicted states of the
world (arriving from the Papez loop) are compared to actual
(perceived) states of the world (arriving from the entorhinal
cortex, part of the temporal lobe). Each such comparison
(occurring on the order of once every hundred milli-
seconds) results in a decision of "match" or "mismatch," the
two types of decision having different consequences for the
outputs distributed from the subicular area to other parts of
the brain. From an informational point of view, the contents
of the neural messages that are submitted to the process of
comparison are each equivalent to a multi-modal and highly
elaborated perceptual description (e.g., "a scented red rose,
in a glass vase in the corner of the room, rustling in a draft
near an open door"). But these equivalences are not, as it
were, written in the neural code carrying the information;
they derive, rather, from the relevant sensory inputs, motor
programs, potential behavioural outputs, and links to asso-
ciative memory stores that jointly give rise to the neural
activity that reaches the subicular area from the neocortex
and from the Papez loop.
Exactly how the process of comparison is made is un-
known; but one can envisage sets of neurons wired up in
such a way that they constitute "and" or "or" gates, etc., and
which automatically ensure that the result of the prediction
initiated around the Papez loop one "instant" (one hundred
milliseconds) ago enters the appropriate set of gates in the
same instant as the next current perceived state of the world
arriving from the entorhinal cortex. Once the match/
mismatch decision is made in the subicular comparator, this
decision is sent on to other structures. A match decision is
passed on as a topographically discrete message to the
nucleus accumbens, where it confirms the successful out-
come of the last step in the motor program and permits the
input to the accumbens from the amygdala to trigger the
initiation of the next step in the program. A mismatch
decision is passed on in two ways: as a message to the
cingulate cortex, where it brings the current motor program
to a halt; and as a generalised message to the nucleus
accumbens, which triggers exploratory behaviour. In either
case (match or mismatch), a message is transmitted back to
memory stores in the temporal lobe, indicating either that a
stored associative regularity has been confirmed or that
memory stores need to be updated (Gray 1982a, p. 283;
Gray & Rawlins 1986).
From one point of view, the outputs of this comparison
process are simple binary decisions: match or mismatch.
Clearly, however, the contents of consciousness contain
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
667

Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
much more than this. Thus, the proposal is that the infor-
mational equivalences (or some portion of them) that
correspond to neural activity in the subicular area (and/or
in the associated circuits and regions from which that
region receives, and to which it sends, neural messages) are
jointly instantiated into conscious experience and that they
are marked as "familiar/expected" or "novel/unexpected,"
depending upon the outcome of the comparison process.
Now, the bracketed phrases in the previous sentence indi-
cate several theoretical alternatives that present themselves
at this juncture.
The first alternative is that conscious experience is tightly
linked to activity in a highly restricted region of the brain
corresponding to the point at which the binary match/
mismatch decision is made (ex hypothesi, the subicular
area). As pointed out by B. Labet (personal communication,
June 17, 1993), this proposal should predict that "destruc-
tion of the subicular area should abolish the contents of
consciousness." There is no evidence to support this predic-
tion.3 It is not clear, however, how fatal Libet's objection is.
The subicular area, and even more the whole hippocampal
system, has a complex spatial organisation within the hu-
man brain and, when it suffers damage, this is in conse-
quence usually only partial. It is difficult to destroy these
regions totally even in experimental animals. Supposing
that we nonetheless succeed in doing so, we would still not
know how to detect altered consciousness (as distinct from
altered learning, memory, etc.) in animals - precisely
because we lack a transparent theory of the relationship
between consciousness and brain-and-behaviour.
A second alternative would involve neural feedback from
the subicular area to those regions from which the activity
feeding into its match/mismatch decision has been derived,
such feedback occurring at the time that each binary
decision is made. However, if feedback of this kind is
necessary for the entry into consciousness of activity in the
regions concerned, then this proposal would appear to
make the same prediction (apparently false but, as noted
above, neither adequately tested nor probably as yet test-
able) with regard to the effects of subicular damage as the
first. There is a further possible objection to this alternative.
If all the informational equivalences to which subicular
activity corresponds, and the inputs that give rise to them,
are jointly instantiated into consciousness, then conscious
experience should contain more than is found there. Recall
that the subicular comparison process requires inputs from
all sensory modalities, from motor programming systems,
from descriptions of potential behavioural outputs, and
from associative memory stores. But, as argued per-
suasively and in detail by Jackendoff (1987), one is typically
conscious only of the perceptual components of this con-
glomeration, not, for example, of the processes of motor
programming or memory guided processes of selection
or semantic interpretation. Thus, one would need to sup-
pose that only some of the systems linked to the subic-
ular comparison process receive what one might call
"consciousness-instigating" feedback - a qualification that
would appear to weaken this second alternative.
Nonetheless, it is the second alternative that I adopt. I
am prompted to do so by a further feature of consciousness,
pointed out by Jackendoff (1987, p. 51), the fact that
"experience is sharply differentiated by modality. There is
no mistaking visual awareness, for example, for auditory
awareness, or either of these for tactile awareness." It would
be consistent with this feature of consciousness that at least
part of the neural activity that gives rise to conscious
experience should remain closely tied to the different
perceptual systems themselves.
However, the "disunity of awareness," as Jackendoff
(1987) calls this phenomenon, must be considered together
with its complement: the fact that the various contents of
consciousness, though each of irreducibly different modal-
ities, are nonetheless somehow combined into a single
whole. As Searle (1993) puts it: "we never just have, for
example, a pain in the elbow, a feeling of warmth, or an
experience of seeing something red; we have them all
occurring simultaneously as part of one unified conscious
experience."
This unity of awareness has traditionally been one of the
arguments used to support the notion that conscious expe-
rience is linked to activity in one, privileged part of the
brain. The prototypical hypothesis of this kind is that of
Descartes, who linked mental and spiritual life to the pineal
gland. Dennett and Kinsbourne (1992; Dennett 1991)
accordingly refer (disparagingly) to such a privileged locus
in the brain as the "Cartesian theatre." As part of his
argument against theories that invoke a Cartesian theatre
(such as the one proposed here), Kinsbourne (1993, p. 45)
states that "there is no area in the brain that receives inputs
from all sensory sources." This statement is incorrect,
however. Just such a sensory convergence occurs onto the
region of the temporal cortex that projects into the hippo-
campal formation and in the hippocampus itself; and single-
unit recording from neurons in the latter structure demon-
strate responses to a wide variety of multimodal environ-
mental features (for a review, see Eichenbaum et al. 1994;
. Gray 1982a). (A second part of Kinsbourne's argument
against the Cartesian theatre is also incorrect: "Which
representations, then, contribute to awareness? None are
specially designated for this purpose. Any one is capable of
doing so, should it become entrained with the dominant
neuronal action pattern in the cortex" [1993, p. 46]. How-
ever, as noted above, and argued in detail by Jackendoff
(1987), it is very largely perceptual material that enters
consciousness, to the exclusion of other potential sources of
material, even when these dominate behaviour, as in the
case when one is executing a complex and fast-moving
motor skill.)
How, then, can one accommodate both Jackendoff s
point about the disunity of awareness and the equally
striking phenomenal experience of unity in awareness
(O'Keefe 1985, p. 90; Searle 1993)? An account capable of
this reconciliation would attribute unity to activity in the
hippocampal system (as discussed in more detail below),
upon which all perceptual systems converge, and disunity
to additional, linked activity in the perceptual systems
themselves. Thus, the hypothesis can now be restated as
follows: the contents of consciousness consist of activity in
the subicular comparator, together with feedback from the
comparator to those sets of neurons in perceptual systems
which have just provided input to the comparator in respect
of the current process of comparison.
Adoption of this second alternative of the "comparator"
hypothesis gives rise to two further theoretical options.
Should we regard "feedback" from the comparator to
perceptual systems: (1) as merely flagging the activity
present in the latter as "expected/familiar" or "unex-
pected/novel"; or (2) as contributing in a more nuanced
668
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

manner to the description of the perceived world that
finally enters consciousness?
An advantage of choosing option (2) is that the argument
pursued here then joins hands with those that have been
advanced, with much success, by such "constructivist" theo-
rists as Neisser (1976) and Jackendoff (1987). Indeed, the
present approach in general shares much with Neisser's
(1976) concept of "the perceptual cycle." As applied to the
visual case, he states this concept as follows.
The cognitive structures crucial for vision are the anticipatory
schemata that prepare the perceiver to accept certain kinds of
information rather than others and thus control the activity of
looking. Because we can see only what we know how to look for,
it is these schemata (together with the information actually
available) that determine what will be perceived. (Neisser 1976,
p. 20)
Neisser's contrast of schemata with "information actually
available" corresponds, within the present approach, to that
between predictions and descriptions of the current per-
ceived state of the world, the former resulting from pro-
cessing in the subicular comparator circuits, the latter from
processing in cortical perceptual systems.
Jackendoff (1987) takes this type of analysis further,
concentrating in particular on the question: what is the level
at which informational structures enter consciousness? His
closely argued answer to this question takes the form of
an "intermediate-level" theory of consciousness. Roughly
speaking, this theory holds that the contents of conscious-
ness reflect informational structures that are derived from
a combination (within each modality of perception) of
bottom-up and top-down processing. As Jackendoff shows,
normally one is not (and perhaps one never is) aware of
sensation unaffected by conceptual interpretation, nor of
pure conceptual structure, but only of an admixture of the
two that optimizes the fit between them. In line with the
intermediate-level theory (Jackendoff 1987, p. 298), "feed-
back" from the subicular comparator to cortical perceptual
systems will be understood here to mean that this feedback
(together with inputs originating at sensory surfaces) is
actively used in the construction of an optimal fit between
bottom-up and top-down processing. In such a construc-
tional process, the flagging of some parts of the current
informational structures as "novel" and others as "familiar"
would be expected to play a critical role in indicating the
currently needed adjustments between predicted and ac-
tual perceived states of the world.
Up to this point, Jackendoff s analysis (with which the
present argument now converges) has been applied to
modality-specific processing. He then goes on to ask (1987,
p. 300):
How is it that entities detected in multiple modalities can be
experienced as unified? For instance, when I look at something
and handle it at the same time, how can I experience it as the
saine object, if my awareness is disunified into visual and haptic
modalities? The answer comes from the character of process-
ing. The visual and haptic representations that support aware-
ness of the object are each in registration with 3D model [in
Marr's 1982 sense] and conceptual structures that encode the
shape, identity and category of the object. If it so happens that
they are in registration with the same 3D model and conceptual
structure, then the two modalities will be understood and
experienced as simultaneous manifestations of the same object.
Within the present theory, the conceptual structure that
performs this unifying function is part of the information
that circulates in the subicular comparator system, where it
Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
aids the making of predictions that are then fed back to
modality-specific perceptual systems.
I conclude this section by considering how the new
hypothesis relates to the known anatomy and physiology of
the hippocampal system, and to previous hypotheses con-
cerning the functions of this system.
As already noted, it is consistent with the hypothesis that
(largely via the entorhinal cortex in the temporal lobe) the
hippocampal formation both (1) receives inputs from all
modalities, after extensive prior processing at all levels of
the cortical sensory systems, and (2) projects back to these
systems (for reviews, see Eichenbaum et al. 1994; Gray
1982a; O'Keefe & Nadel 1978). The hippocampal forma-
tion also receives afferents from the prefrontal and cingu-
late cortices that are capable of delivering requisite infor-
mation concerning ongoing motor programs; afferents
from the amygdala and from ascending monoamine sys-
tems able to deliver information concerning motivational
and reinforcing events; afferents from the temporal lobe
able to convey information from memory stores; and, in
virtually all these cases, there are relatively direct routes by
which the hippocampal formation is able to feed back to the
structures that project to it (Gray 1982a). A key feature of
the anatomical connections of the hippocampal formation,
and the subicular region in particular, is its location on
Papez's (1937) circuit: thus, efferents from the subiculum
descend to the mammillary bodies and thalamus and then
re-ascend to the cingulate cortex and back to the subic-
ulum. Finally, afferents from the prefrontal cortex consti-
tute a likely route by which, in Man, cortical language
systems can influence hippocampal processing (Gray
1982a, Chs. 13 and 14).
Also consistent with the hypothesis is the fact that neu-
rons in the hippocampus respond to a wide diversity of
multimodal environmental features (for reviews, see
Eichenbaum et al. 1994; Gray 1982a; O'Keefe & Nadel
1978). It is particularly striking that these firing repertoires
are flexible and rapidly disposable: that is to say, individual
neurons pick up on whatever regularities the experimenter
chooses to put into the animal's environment, do so quickly,
and can respond to one feature in one environment but to a
quite different one in a second environment (for review, see
Gray 1982a). These features are what one might expect of a
structure with a close relationship to conscious experience.
Also consistent with the hypothesis is the capacity of hippo-
campal neurons to respond differentially depending upon
the familiarity or novelty of environmental stimuli or com-
binations of environmental stimuli (Gray 1982a; O'Keefe &
Nadel 1978). The important role played by novelty and
match/mismatch decisions in conscious experience has
been stressed by many writers (Baars 1988, p. 181; Mandler
1984; for a recent experimental example, see Johnston et al.
1990).
As pointed out by Baars (1988), any analysis of nov-
elty/familiarity requires the concept of context: "all under-
standable novelty exists within a relatively stable context
that is not novel." A number of theories of hippocampal
function have allotted to it just such a role in the analysis of
context (Hirsh 1974; Winocur 1981). In O'Keefe & Nadel's
(1978) theory of hippocampal function in animals, the
relevant context is specifically spatial (although, in applying
their theory to Man, these authors propose the more
general function of "cognitive mapping"). The key role
played by spatial frameworks in conscious experience is at
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
669

Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
once apparent to introspection. The experimental evidence
for a hippocampal role in the analysis of context - a role that
is not confined to spatial contexts even in animals - is
abundant (for reviews, see Eichenbaum et al. 1994; Gray
1982a). In general, this evidence suggests that the hippo-
campus is necessary for normal associations to be formed
between focal stimulus events and the context in which they
occur (for a recent example, see Good & Honey 1993).
In the light of Jackendoff s (1987) intermediate-level
theory of consciousness, a hippocampal function of this
kind achieves particular significance. As noted above, his
analysis shows that the perceptual contents of conscious-
ness are constructs derived from an interaction between
bottom-up sensory processing, on the one hand, and top-
down conceptual processing, on the other, neither of which
enters consciousness on its own. Both Jackendoff and Baars
(1988, p. 227) give as an example of this kind of interaction
the well-known tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon, in which
the context primes a well-defined gap which, however, lacks
clearly defined conscious properties until it is filled by a
word recognised as being "correct." Putting this kind of
analysis together with the neuropsychological argument
pursued here, we may propose that Jackendoff s level of
conceptual processing is identical to the contextual analysis
that has been attributed to the hippocampal system (Hirsh
1974; O'Keefe & Nadel 1978; Winocur 1981); that the
specification of context (and therefore, conceptual struc-
ture) forms part of the prediction of the next perceived state
of the world computed by the Papez loop for entry into the
subicular comparator; that this is brought together with
current multimodal perceptual information in the compar-
ator; and that, finally, the outputs of this comparison are fed
back to the perceptual systems in the manner discussed
above.
4. The level of analysis occupied
by the new hypothesis
Note that the only events initially seen as constituting the
various processes executed by the comparator system are
trains of neural impulses, synaptic transmissions, and the
like. The informational language that may also be used to
describe these events does not necessarily imply that there
are additional events beyond the neural ones; it simply
constitutes an alternative, and heuristically useful, way of
talking about the same neural events. (For a discussion of
this issue, see Searle 1993 and Marsh 1993, pp. 162-64.) An
example from a different domain may reinforce this point.
The genetic code, made up of sequences of the four
DNA bases, may be treated as having both syntax (includ-
ing, e.g., segmentation into triplets of bases) and semantics
(the aminoacids that are specified by particular triplets, and
the peptides, etc., specified by higher-order combinations
of amino acids). No one supposes, however, that strings of
DNA bases consist of more than one level of physical reality
- the syntax and semantics do not constitute levels addi-
tional to the physicochemical level. But this is not to say that
talk of syntax and semantics in this case is just a way of
talking. On the contrary: making use of the syntax and
semantics to "read" the genetic code delivers rich insights
into biological reality that purely chemical analysis cannot
provide. There are several features of this example which
appear to have parallels in the action of the brain.
First, the applicability of both the physicochemical and
the syntactic levels of discourse to the genetic code is
possible because the laws of physics and chemistry can be
satisfied while still leaving open different combinatorial
options (Polanyi & Prosch 1975). Thus, each correct syntac-
tic structure is instantiated by its own specific physi-
cochemical process, but the occurrence of that rather than
another process is not fully determined only by physi-
cochemical laws. Pylyshyn (1980; 1984) has stressed the
relevance of this principle to the case of the relationship of
brain function to computational processes. As he puts it:
"the formal syntactic structure of particular occurrences
(tokens) of symbolic expressions corresponds to real physi-
cal differences in the system, differences that affect the
relevant features of the system's behavior" (Pylyshyn 1984,
p. 74; and see also pp. 62-69).
Second, the presence in the genetic code of a semantic
level is due to selection by consequences. Thus, the reason
that the construction of particular amino acids and higher-
order biological entities are specified by particular strings
of DNA lies in the Darwinian survival value that has been
conferred on the ancestors of the relevant organisms by the
possession of just those entities. In the same way, it appears
likely, the reason the brain generates particular sequences
of neural (computational) processes lies in the ontogenetic
survival value (successful adaptation to the environment)
conferred on the organism by those sequences; and the
semantics of such processes can be regarded as lying in the
types of adaptation to which they give rise. (This principle
is, of course, a major positive legacy from the behaviourist
tradition in psychology.)
Third, although there is only one level of physical reality
represented by strings of DNA bases, no full account can be
given of the particular strings that exist by appeal only to the
laws of physics and chemistry. Such an account needs also to
appeal to biological laws, in particular those of Darwinian
survival and Mendelian genetics. Both for this reason and
because, as noted above, the laws of physics and chemistry
leave open options for combining DNA bases, there is a
real, but un-mysterious, sense in which genetics cannot be
reduced to chemistry (Polanyi & Prosch 1975). The parallel
case in respect of brain function can be stated particularly
clearly by using the example of language.
Anything that is going on in the brain to produce syntax or
semantics is part of neurophysiology; there are nerve cells doing
all the things that nerve cells have to do. Then, however, one
must ask: why are the nerve cells doing those things and not
others? The answer to that question is not in terms of neuro-
physiology, it is in terms of constraints that are required
for communication between individuals, because that's what
speech is all about. The constraints on speech between individ-
uals include a level of syntax, because without syntax you don't
have the informational combinatorial capacities that you need
for language, and a level of semantics, because without that you
don't have shared referents. Neither the semantic nor the
syntactic properties that are necessary are properties of neuro-
physiological events; they are properties of the communication
system. (Gray in Marsh 1993, p. 163; and, for a more general
discussion, see Pylyshyn 1984, pp. 62-69)
Up until this point, then, nothing has been said that
requires the postulation of other than physicochemical
events taking place in and between nerve cells; even though
a full account of why these events take the specific form
they do requires biological laws as well as those of physics
and chemistry. The hypothesis proposed here, however,
670
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

goes one stage further to consider the level of conscious
experience. As noted in section 3, according to this hypoth-
esis, the successive contents of consciousness consist in the
successive results of the match/mismatch process that takes
place once per 100-millisecond instant in the subiculum,
followed by feedback to the perceptual systems whose
outputs have contributed to that process. It is only at this
point in our theory construction that we postulate a second
set of events - conscious events - as occurring besides, and
in some as yet unknown way linked to the neural events that
constitute the subicular comparison process. Note that, as
argued above, it appears possible in principle to give a
perfectly good materialist account of brain events, whether
considered under a physicochemical or a syntactic (compu-
tational) or semantic description (Pylyshyn 1980; 1984),
without recourse to the hypothesis of consciousness. Thus,
the main reason for bringing consciousness into our ac-
count is the same as Hilary's reason for climbing Mount
Everest: because it is there (as a datum).
In a penetrating discussion of the appropriate levels at
which one should describe brain events, Pylyshyn (1980;
1984) introduces a further useful concept: that of "cognitive
penetrability." This term is used to distinguish between
"phenomena that can be explained functionally and those
that must be explained by appeal to semantically inter-
preted representations"; the former are said to belong to
the brain s "functional architecture", whereas the latter are
"cognitive processes" sensu stricto (Pylyshyn 1984, p. 130).
The hallmark of "cognitively penetrable" - commonly
also described as "intentional" (Searle 1983) - processes is
that "the relation between environmental events and be-
havior can be radically, yet systematically, varied by a wide
range of conditions that need have no more in common
than that they provide certain information" (Pylyshyn 1980,
p. 120). Another way of putting this distinction is to contrast
a representational system for which the semantically inter-
preted content of representations plays a causal role in the
unfolding of events, with one for which such representa-
tional content does not play a causal role. Clearly, while it
seems legitimate to interpret portion X of the genetic code
as representing the particular protein, A, for which it codes,
and while it is also legitimate to suppose that the value to
organisms of possessing protein A has played a causal role in
determining the existence in the genome of portion X of the
genetic code, it makes no sense at all to suppose that a
semantically interpreted representation by X of A plays a
causal role in the production by the cell of the protein. It
would seem, therefore, that the existence of cognitively
penetrable processes (which can hardly be in doubt, at least
for our own species; Pylyshyn 1984) requires a level of
analysis that goes beyond those considered earlier in this
section.
The question therefore arises: is this further level identi-
cal to the level at which conscious events enter the system?
Pylyshyn s (1984, p. 265) answer to this question is explicit:
the distinction between functional architecture and cog-
nitively penetrable processes "cuts across the conscious-
unconscious distinction." However, he offers little support
for this assertion.
Contrary to Pylyshyn s view, it would seem parsimonious
to suppose that, beyond the level of neural processes
(capable of analysis in neurophysiological, syntactic, and
semantic terms as indicated above, but nonetheless consist-
ing of only one set of events), there is (at most) only one
Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
other level that need be taken into account. We know that
the level of conscious events exists (while leaving open the
question whether these will eventually turn out to be
identical to the neural events with which they are associ-
ated, as supposed by mind-brain identity theorists; Borst
1970; Gray 1971). Thus, on grounds of parsimony we
should, so long as we can, suppose that the level of inten-
tionality (cognitive penetrability) is the same as that of
conscious experience.
This assumption is aided, in the case of the argument
pursued here, by the fact that according to the new hypoth-
esis the contents of consciousness have exactly the kinds of
property required by an intentional analysis: they consist of
multimodal perceptual descriptions derived by comparison
between predicted and actual perceived states of the world.
Thus, they are constructs whose relationship to states in the
real environment is indirect, and hence capable of referential
slippage, although, of course, such constructs must in general
bear a reasonably close relation to states in the real environ-
ment, since they derive from a process of selection by
consequences in the manner outlined above. Indeed, one
way of considering the new hypothesis is as providing an
explanation for the existence of intentionality (a suggestion
made also by Emrich 1992). If that (tentative) claim were to
turn out to be correct, the theory developed here could be
seen both as constituting a possible account of some of the
features of consciousness-as-datum, and as proposing a hy-
pothesis about the nature of conscious events able to explain
certain features of behaviour (namely, those grouped by
Pylyshyn under the rubric of "cognitive penetrability").
5. Testing the hypothesis against features
of conscious experience
This section considers a number of features of conscious
experience which appear to find a natural explanation in the
light of the new hypothesis and some other features which
do not fit the hypothesis so well.
5.1. Conscious experience is closely linked
to current action plans
This feature of consciousness flows naturally from the
model: the current motor program forms part of the data
used to construct the next prediction; and the output of the
match/mismatch decision is fed back to the motor program
either to permit continuation or to bring it to a halt (Gray et
al. 1991a; Gray 1994). [See also Jeannerod: "The Repre-
senting Brain" BBS 17(2) 1994.]
5.2. One Is conscious of the outputs of motor
programs, not of the program itself
It is a fact of common experience that we are not normally
aware of either the planning or the execution of movements
as such, but only of the end points (which may include
kinaesthetic and proprioceptive feedback making up the
"feel" of the movement) that constitute the successive sub-
goals of these movements (cf. Jackendoff 1987, p. 45;
Lashley 1956; O'Keefe 1985, p. 69). Consider, for example,
running towards and kicking a football; or articulating and
speaking a sentence. As Velmans (in Marsh 1993, p. 121)
points out, we are aware even of what we are saying only
after we have said it; and the sub-vocal speech that consti-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
671

Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
tutes much of the process we call "thinking" consists (for
me, at least) of the hearing of words - that is, outputs,
clearly, of a linguistic motor program - in my head. Since
the postulated comparator is designed precisely to compare
actual with expected outputs of motor programs, it follows
naturally from the hypothesis that such outputs constitute
the contents of consciousness.
5.3. Consciousness occurs too late to affect
the outcomes of the processes to which
it is apparently linked
Velmans (1991) has reviewed a range of human information
processes that are normally accompanied by conscious
awareness (the analysis and selection of stimuli, learning
and memory, and the production of voluntary responses,
including those requiring planning and creativity). He has
marshalled evidence that, in each of these cases, the rele-
vant conscious events follow the information processes to
which they are related. Libet s (1985; 1993; Libet et al.
1991) well-known experiments on the delays between
(i) neural events in certain brain regions and (ii) the
transitions to conscious awareness of either sensation or
volition related to these neural events give rise to the same
conclusion. Such a conclusion is to be expected if a monitor-
ing system of the kind proposed here forms the basis of the
contents of consciousness. However, there is a discrepancy
between the duration of the delay suggested by Libet s
experiments (about 500 msec) and the delay that would be
expected from the comparator model: given that time is
quantised into units about 100 msec long, the average delay
should be about 50 msec. A possible account of such extra-
long durations would postulate an additional delay prior to
the initiation of the comparison process, linked perhaps to
the unusual nature of Libet s experimental stimuli.
5.4. What about pain?
The arguments of sects. 5.2 and 5.3 treat consciousness as a
monitoring process (see also Weiskrantz 1988). But Hum-
phrey (in Marsh 1993, p. 166) has objected, "what has a stab
of pain got to do with monitoring?" A possible answer to this
objection is that a system which is concerned with predict-
ing what should happen next, and keeping check that motor
programs are proceeding "according to plan," is one that
must also have an interrupt mechanism for times when
things are not going according to plan. Pain can perhaps be
construed as just such an interrupt mechanism - and a
particularly powerful one. It shares with other features of
consciousness that it occurs too late actually to affect
responses to the noxious stimulus that gives rise to it (the
hand is withdrawn from the flame before the pain is felt).
Thus the information it provides must, like other forms of
mismatch, gain such functional utility as it possesses from
effects on future repetitions of the same motor program. In
this sense, therefore, pain is a form of monitoring: it is
telling you that the motor program you have just exercised
is faulty and needs modification.
5.5. Conscious events occur on a time-scale that is
about two orders of magnitude slower than that
of the neural events that underlie them
The expected duration of a content of consciousness on the
comparator model is that of a quantised time unit, that is,
about 100 milliseconds. This time unit arose from consider-
ations of the neuronal circuitry proposed to mediate the
comparator function, and especially the duration of a wave
of the hippocampal theta rhythm (Gray 1982a; 1982b); but
it is about the right order of magnitude for the duration of
conscious events (for a summary, see Baars 1988, pp. 96-
97). However, the comparator model also supposes that
time is indeed quantised into these units, in order to permit
comparison between corresponding neuronal descriptions
of actual and expected events. Conscious experience, in
contrast, does not appear to come in separate chunks in
this way.
5.6. Relative to real time, apparent time is "smeared"
in conscious experience
The discussion engendered by Libet's (1985; 1993) experi-
ments has clarified the difference between the real-time
sequencing of events and the sequencing of events in
experienced time (Dennett & Kinsbourne 1992; Dennett
1991; Nagel, in Marsh 1993, pp. 144-45). The hypothesis
proposed here implies that what enters consciousness will
reflect the prediction made by the comparator circuitry as
to the next likely perceived event, and whether that predic-
tion is sufficiently well verified or not by the actual per-
ceived event. It follows, therefore, from the hypothesis that
experienced time will be based upon these predictions and
their contents, and not directly upon the sequencing of
events in real time. It is also clear that the precision with
which experienced events can be dated with respect to their
relative time of occurrence is much coarser (Nagel in
Marsh 1993, pp. 144-45) than the precision that might be
expected from the time scale of occurrence of the neuronal
events that underlie consciousness. The quantisation of
time into 100-millisecond instants by the comparator model
implies just this result: that events occurring within a single
instant have no definite time sequence with respect to each
other; and that any apparent time sequence within such an
instant is determined by the informational content of the
inputs to the comparator which determine the contents of
consciousness, rather than by the objective timing of events
occurring at sensory surfaces.
5.7. Conscious experience has a spatio-temporal unity
that is quite unlike the patterns of neuronal events
that underlie it
There are two distinct, though probably related issues
raised by this contrast. One - the so-called "binding prob-
lem" - lies at the level of neuronal events. These are
distributed widely in both time (on the neuronal milli-
second scale) and brain location: what holds together the
set that makes up a particular content of consciousness?
The other issue concerns the perceptual features that drive
the firing of subsets of neurons in particular brain locations.
These features each only reflect aspects (e.g., in the visual
domain, colour, or motion; Zeki 1978) of the fully experi-
enced percept: what holds the separate perceptual features
together? A possible answer to both questions is suggested
by the comparator model, namely, that the temporally and
spatially distributed neuronal events that code the separate
perceptual features contributing to an overall perceptual
experience are themselves nonconscious; that they com-
bine to cause the entry of a particular prediction into the
672
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

comparator circuits; that this prediction includes the speci-
fication of spatial and temporal coordinates referred to the
outside world; and that it is this prediction which consti-
tutes the basis of the eventual conscious experience. If this
line of argument is correct, the binding problem becomes
more tractable, since the relationship between neuronal
events and conscious experience is determined by the
conjoint inputs into just one brain region, that is, the
subicular area. The outputs from this region, redistributed
(see sect. 3) to the sites of origin of its own inputs, then
activate the detailed features that constitute the contents of
consciousness.
5.8. Conscious experience consists of a series of
constructions based upon a model of some aspect
of the world rather than direct reflections of inputs
from the world (Oatley 1988)
Dennett & Kinsbourne (1992; Dennett 1991; Kinsbourne
1993) have recently discussed a number of perceptual
phenomena which provide dramatic evidence for the es-
sentially constructive nature of consciousness. This feature
of conscious experience is clearly built into the comparator
model, since each content of consciousness depends upon
the predicted state of the world that enters the comparator
(see sect. 3). Matching is conducted upon a limited set of
attributes, and only these can enter the contents of con-
sciousness. Furthermore, "match" decisions, clearly, can be
incorrect, in terms of what is actually happening in the
world, even if sensory systems have correctly described the
perceptual world; but it is these incorrect "match" decisions
that will constitute the contents of consciousness.
5.9. There are "multiple drafts" of conscious
experience
Dennett & Kinsbourne have marshalled data (e.g., from
Geldard & Sherrick's 1972 "cutaneous rabbit" experiment)
indicating that initial perceptual input may give rise to
alternative conscious experiences depending upon later
perceptual input. In principle, phenomena of this land are
compatible with the comparator model, since it could be
argued that the potential multiple drafts compete with each
other nonconsciously until the victor enters the comparator
circuits (i.e., provides a prediction as to the next expected
state of the world), thereby constituting a basis for eventual
conscious experience. However, as in Libet's experiments
(see sect. 5.6), the time-scale of the cutaneous rabbit is too
slow for the comparator model: determination of the con-
tents of consciousness can take up to a second or so
(Dennett & Kinsbourne 1992, p. 186) rather than the tenth
of a second suggested as the maximum by the comparator
model. Dennett & Kinsbourne (1992) have interpreted
such data as showing the impossibility of a "Cartesian
theatre," that is, a single, unified locus in the brain (even if a
ramified one, as discussed in sects. 5.7 and 3) at which
neuronal activity becomes conscious. In distinction to their
position, the comparator model preserves the notion of a
Cartesian theatre, consisting in the comparator circuitry.
Thus, the phenomena cited by Dennett & Kinsbourne as
supporting their position, and especially the time-scale over
which these phenomena operate, constitute an important
objection to the comparator model. The account of Libet's
experimental results (in terms of a delay prior to the onset
Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
of the comparison process), tentatively proposed at the end
of section 5.3, cannot apply in this case, since the critical
interval is interposed between different stimuli that give
rise to the conscious experience.
5.10. Consciousness is highly selective
This well-known aspect of conscious experience flows di-
rectly from the comparator model. This specifies (Gray
1982a; 1982b) two routes to selectivity. First, inputs to the
subicular comparator from sensory systems are determined
by selective processes guided by the content of the last
output from the comparator and the currently active pre-
diction; in this way, continuity is provided to link successive
events related, for example, by a common motor program.
Second, any event that has a previous association with
punishment or nonreward or any novel event is given
priority for processing over others; this selectivity is accom-
plished within the hippocampal formation, a critical role
being played by the monoaminergic afferents to this struc-
ture from the locus coeruleus and raphe nuclei.
5.11. Neuronal events operate in parallel;
consciousness operates serially
This feature of consciousness also flows directly from the
model, which supposes a succession of match/mismatch
decisions by the comparator.
5.12. Conscious experience is closely linked to
memory, both in that current experience can be
distorted by past experience and in that episodic
memory is a major criterion by which we Infer that a
conscious experience has indeed occurred
Again, this feature of consciousness flows directly from the
model. The formation of a prediction is based explicitly
upon a combination of current input and stored regularities
involving similar stimuli and/or responses; and the outcome
of the current match/mismatch decision is used to update
memory stores (Gray 1982a; 1982b; Gray & Rawlins 1986).
5.13. In cases of sensory neglect not only is there lack
of consciousness of the neglected stimuli, there is
also no awareness that anything Is missing
(Jeannerod 1987)
As pointed out by Kinsbourne (in Marsh 1993, p. 258), this
can be explained if consciousness is based upon a compara-
tor system. Suppose that the damage to the brain underly-
ing the neglect has removed not only the capacity to detect
the neglected input, but also the capacity to set up the
prediction that such an input is to be expected: no predic-
tion, no mismatch, and so no awareness of anything missing.
5.14. Novelty and familiarity
The comparator model distinguishes between match and
mismatch decisions, corresponding (if the decisions are
correct) to novel or familiar events. Does this distinction
imply a similar distinction between two modes of experi-
ence? It is clear that novel events have privileged access to
conscious experience (see sect. 5.10). But it is equally clear
that these are not the only events that have access to
consciousness.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
673

Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
Consider, for example, the case of listening to a familiar
piece of music: without conscious experience, this would be
a rather pointless exercise. This is a particularly interesting
example: my introspections reveal a definite predictive
process, in which the next expected note is often generated
in my head just before it enters again through my ears.
There also appears to be a connection between the occur-
rence of this kind of predictive process and the ability to
remember the music. The first time one hears a new piece
of sufficient complexity it is difficult either to grasp its
musical structure or to recall it. With repetition, it becomes
both more comprehensible during listening and more easily
recalled. Both these changes appear to be related to the
increasing capacity to predict the next event in the musical
sequence. Completely unpredicted events, in contrast,
while they at once gain access to consciousness, are often
difficult to recall (cf. Baars 1988, p. 181). This relationship
between familiarity and memorability is to be expected on
the comparator model: a "match" decision automatically
provides a list of attributes on which the matching has been
made and which can now be confirmed in memory stores.
Thus, both match and mismatch outcomes of the com-
parator can enter conscious experience (each perhaps, as
noted above, with slightly different properties); and mis-
match outcomes appear always to do so. A difficulty arises,
however, when we ask the question: do all match outcomes
register in consciousness? Consider a well-practiced motor
program (the usual example is driving while simultaneously
carrying on a conversation; e.g., O'Keefe 1985). The com-
parator system must continue to operate during the execu-
tion of such a program, since any mismatch (e.g., the front
offside wheel crossing over the middle of the road) is
rapidly detected. Yet everyone is familiar with the sudden
realisation that one has just driven several miles, apparently
without having paid any conscious attention to the process
of driving. Schneider and Shiffrin (1977) coined the term
"automatic processing" for this kind of capacity, suggesting
that it arises as a result of prolonged practice on a task. The
present hypothesis has no principled way of accounting
for the difference between such apparently unconscious
"match" outcomes and the conscious variety that occur in
the music example.
5.15. The contents of consciousness are multimodal
(cf. O'Keefe 1985, p. 90)
This follows directly from the multimodal nature of the
sensory information that reaches the hippocampal forma-
tion from the neocortex via the temporal lobe (see the
discussion of the unity of awareness in sect. 3).
5.16. What about simple single stimuli?
"The idea that conscious contents arise only in connection
with match-mismatch decisions of a comparator seems
difficult to apply to simple cases of awareness, for example
that of a light touch to a finger" (B. Libet, personal commu-
nication, June 17,1993). This objection can perhaps be met
by the proposal that the onset of any stimulus event imme-
diately gives rise to a predictive process, based upon the
most relevant previous experiences of similar stimulus
events, as to the continuation (with or without change) of
that same event. We have recently found that including a
postulate along these lines is of value in formulating a
mathematical model (Schmajuk et al., in preparation) of
latent inhibition, a phenomenon that is central to applying
the general neuropsychological model to schizophrenia
(see sect. 2).
5.17. Anxiety and schizophrenia
Since the new hypothesis is an extension of previous models
of anxiety and schizophrenia (as outlined in sects. 1 and 2),
it cannot be counted directly in its favour that it is applica-
ble to these conditions. It is nonetheless worth indicating
just how certain features of the subjectively experienced
symptoms of anxiety and psychosis fit with the hypothesis.
A well-known feature of anxiety is that anxiogenic stimuli
dominate conscious experience to the exclusion of other
experiences, giving rise, for example, to worry, rumination,
and failure to concentrate on other matters in hand. This
feature of anxiety follows naturally from the priority given
to threat stimuli within the comparator system (Gray 1982a;
1982b; sect. 1, above).
The model of schizophrenia (Gray et al. 1991a; 1991b)
within which the new hypothesis is embedded treats posi-
tive psychotic symptoms as arising because stimuli that
ought, if processing were proceeding normally, to be
treated as "expected/familiar" are in fact treated as "unex-
pected/novel." This argument leads to a natural account of
the way in which apparently trivial stimuli are able to force
themselves upon the awareness of the schizophrenic
(Hemsley 1987; 1993). Disruption in the Kamin blocking
effect, which, as a model of positive psychotic symptoms,
has many of the same credentials as does disrupted latent
inhibition (Jones et al. 1992), provides an equally natural
account of the manner in which schizophrenics form spu-
rious delusional associations (Hemsley 1993), although not
of the specific contents of such delusions. Frith (1987; Frith
& Done 1989) has proposed a related hypothesis, according
to which the neural circuitry normally responsible for
tagging actions as "willed" (in our model, the link from
prefrontal cortex to entorhinal cortex) is faulty in schizo-
phrenia, giving rise to a variety of symptoms (including
verbal auditory hallucinations) in which the patient expert-,
ences his own acts as alien. A further interesting possibility
emerges from the new hypothesis, as formulated here.
Matussek (1952, p. 92) describes a patient who was aware
of: "a lack of continuity of his perceptions in both space and
over time. He saw the environment only in fragments.
There was no appreciation of the whole. He saw only details
against a meaningless background." This is the land of
phenomenology that one might expect from a breakdown in
the capacity of the comparator system (making use of
contextually derived conceptual structure) to hold in regis-
ter with each other (Jackendoff 1987, p. 300; sect. 3 above)
the different inputs that arrive there simultaneously.
There are also a number of more general observations in
psychopathology that support a role for temporal-lobe
structures in subjective experience, including, for example,
links between abnormal temporal-lobe function and epi-
leptic "auras," between lesions and disruption of episodic
memory and between electrical stimulation and forced
remembering (Lishman 1987). A detailed analysis of these
phenomena, however, would take us too far afield.
The arguments considered in sections 5.1-5.17 all apply
the new hypothesis to existing data or to generally available
introspective evidence. The hypothesis would, of course, be
674
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

much more valuable if it led to new predictions open to
experimental test. The fact that I am unable to generate
such predictions may indicate a basic weakness in the
hypothesis relative to other hypotheses that are possible in
the current state of knowledge; or it may indicate a general
difficulty while we lack a more general, transparent theory
of consciousness (Nagel, in Marsh 1993, p. 4).
6. Limitations of the hypothesis
In this final section I wish to consider what kind of advance
the new hypothesis would represent, assuming that it turns
out to be essentially correct. Even though this eventuality
has a low probability, the exercise is worthwhile, I believe,
since it can be used to consider anew the features that a
truly successful theory of consciousness will need to pos-
sess. To reiterate material in the Introduction, such a theory
would need to explain: (1) how subjective experiences
evolved; (2) how they confer survival value on organisms
possessing them (the evolutionary questions); (3) how they
arise out of brain events; and (4) how they alter behaviour
(the mechanistic questions; Gray 1971, p. 251).
From the biological point of view, it is the last of these
questions which is in many ways crucial. If we knew how
consciousness alters the behaviour that it accompanies, we
would be able to see what survival value (question 2)
consciousness confers, and so how it might have evolved
(question 1). Unfortunately, our hypothesis has little to
offer in this respect. The fault lies, however, more in the
data than in the hypothesis itself. As noted in section 5.3,
these suggest that most important psychological functions
are completed before consciousness has time to have any-
thing to do about them (Velmans 1991). This feature of the
data is nicely accommodated by a hypothesis that links the
contents of consciousness to the outcomes of a monitoring
process. But the fit between hypothesis and data still leaves
a void: if consciousness is a product of Darwinian evolution,
it must confer survival value and therefore it must affect
behaviour.
Rather than abandon this biological perspective, we
would surely wish to continue to search for such a behav-
ioural function. One suggestion arises from the original aim
of the comparator hypothesis, which was to provide a
neuropsychological account of anxiety (Gray 1982a; 1982b).
From that point of view, the role of the comparator was to
identify motor programs as faulty (in that they lead to
unpredicted events, to punishment, or to the failure to
obtain reward) followed by a search for an alternative, more
successful program. If consciousness is tightly linked to the
operation of the comparator, as our hypothesis suggests,
then perhaps it is here that we should seek its function: not
in transactions with the environment as they actually hap-
pen, but in the modification of such transactions for future
use. To be sure, this proposal flies in the face of a stubborn
intuition that consciousness has to do with the here and
now. It is difficult, for example, to suppose that the only
handicap associated with the lack of full visual experience in
Weiskrantz's (1986) "blindsight" cases is a failure to adapt to
future possibilities of visual input into the scotoma. [See
also Compion et al.: "Is Blindsight an Effect of Scattered
Light, Spared Cortex, and Near-Threshold Vision?" BBS
6(3) 1983.] Nonetheless, stubborn intuitions have proved to
be wrong before; so this possibility is perhaps worth follow-
ing up. An alternative to the evolutionary questions (1 and
Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
2, above) would be to start on a taxonomic quest, by
classifying species, for example, in terms of the develop-
ment of the particular neuronal machinery (hippocampus,
subiculum etc.) posited as underlying the formation of the
contents of consciousness; and, in parallel, in terms of the
behaviour patterns that depend upon the integrity of these
structures. Such an exercise might in turn suggest possible
answers to the evolutionary questions. But note that the
absence of the relevant neuronal structures could not be
taken to indicate absence of consciousness (since, in other
cases, it is known that quite different structures can achieve
the same functions; compare, e.g., the mammalian retina
with insects' compound eyes).
In these ways, then, while the hypothesis does not fare at
all well by the standards of questions 1, 2, and 4, it may
nonetheless have some limited heuristic value. But the
question to which it was primarily addressed was the third:
how does subjective experience arise out of brain events?
How does it fare by this standard?
The hypothesis does, I think, go beyond brute correla-
tion: that is, beyond the mere statement that conscious
experience is related to brain events of such-and-such a
kind in such-and-such a place. It does so by proposing ways
in which specific features of the relevant brain events give
rise to specific features of the contents of conscious-
ness. Note, however, that the critical features of the pro-
posed brain events from which the relevant derivations are
drawn are only secondarily neuronal features (impulses
travelling into and out from the subiculum, for example).
The critical features, rather, are specified in terms of
information-processing activities: prediction, comparison,
match-mismatch decisions, and so on. It is from these
notions that it is possible to offer an account of the fact, for
example, that one is conscious of the outcomes of motor
programs, not of the motorprogram itself (sect. 5.2). Thus it
is a neuropsychological hypothesis that is proposed, not a
purely neural one. In this way, therefore, the hypothesis is
perhaps just as congenial to those, such as Dennett (1991),
who seek to explain (or explain away) consciousness in
functionalist (information-processing) terms as to those,
such as Searle (1980; 1993), who expect that we shall one
day be able to point to specific features of the physical
activity of the brain as giving rise to consciousness.
It is just this neutrality between these two points of view
which exposes the limitations of the hypothesis. This can be
seen as setting up a three-way set of equivalences: activity in
a particular neural circuit (hippocampus, subiculum, etc.)
= information-processing of a particular kind (the compar-
ator function) = generation of the contents of conscious-
ness. But the hypothesis has nothing to say about the
following questions, (i) Suppose we changed the circuitry
while retaining the information processing: would the con-
tents of consciousness remain the same? (ii) Suppose we
changed the information processes performed by the cir-
cuitry: would the same neuronal activity still generate
conscious contents? (iii) Suppose the answers to questions
(i) and (ii) are that one must preserve both the neural
machinery and the information-processing functions in
order to generate conscious experience: why does this
particular combination produce any kind of conscious ex-
perience (as distinct from the particular contents of con-
sciousness for which the hypothesis does begin to offer a
genuine account) rather than none?
By normal scientific standards, then, it would appear that
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
675

Commentary/Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
we are still a long way from having a transparent theory
(Nagel, in Marsh 1993, p. 4), that is, one able to predict the
occurrence of conscious events, given relevant facts about
behaviour and/or brain events (whether the latter are
conceived in neuronal terms, in information-processing
terms, or both). Nor does it appear likely that such a theory
will emerge simply from the gathering of new facts of the
same kind (useful as this exercise is likely to be for the
eventual construction of a successful theory). The new
hypothesis proposed here does, however, take us a small
step forward, in that it attempts to account for the form
taken by specific features of the contents of consciousness.
How can we go beyond this? If it is correct (Marsh 1993,
pp. 77-78) that we are waiting for a new kind of theory, then
it is likely to be as difficult to answer this question now as it
would have been to think about hunting for bosons in 1900.
NOTES
1. In general terms, this enterprise is similar to one undertaken
previously by Edelman (1989). In more particular terms, it resem-
bles most closely the model of consciousness proposed by O'Keefe
(1985). [See also multiple book review of O'Keefe & Nadel's The
Hippocampus As A Cognitive Map BBS 2(4) 1979.] This model too
attributes central roles to the hippocampus, the hippocampal
theta rhythm, and match/mismatch decisions. Despite this family
resemblance, however, the two models have been developed
independently and differ in many details.
2. Rawlins's work also shows that there is a projection to n.
accumbens from the entorhinal cortex as well as from the subic-
ulum, and that, for blockade of latent inhibition, destruction of the
subicular region alone is insufficient. Thus it may be necessary to
reformulate the critical output station from the hippocampal
formation to the accumbens system as the "retrohippocampal"
rather than the "subicular" area. This change of detail does not
affect the arguments pursued here.
3. Nor, it should be added, is there evidence implicating other
localised brain regions in the requisite manner. To be sure, there
are regions in the mid-brain whose destruction abolishes con-
sciousness. However, damage of this kind has much wider effects
than merely eliminating the properties of subjective experience.
For example, such damage also eliminates all waking behaviour,
much of which appears not to depend upon conscious experience.
Open Peer Commentary
Commentary submitted by the qualified professional readership of this
journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as Continuing
Commentary on this article. Integrative overviews and syntheses are
especially encouraged.
Segmentalized consciousness
in schizophrenia
Andrew Crider
Department of Psychology, Williams College, Williamstown, MA 01267
acrider@williams.edu
Abstract: Segmentalized consciousness in schizophrenia reflects a loss of
the normal Gestalt organization and contextualization of perception.
Grays model explains such segmentalization in terms of septo-
hippocampal dysfunction, which is consistent with known neuropsycho-
logical impairment in schizophrenia. However, other considerations sug-
gest that everyday perception and its failure in schizophrenia also involve
prefrontal executive mechanisms, which are only minimally elaborated by
Gray.
On Gray's hypothesis, the contents of consciousness consist of
multimodal Gestalts derived from a comparison between pre-
dicted and actually perceived states of the world. This hypothesis
is based in part on an earlier neuropsychological formulation of
schizophrenic symptom development (Gray et al. 1991a); I would
accordingly like to return to the example of schizophrenia as a
means of evaluating Gray's thesis.
In schizophrenia, the organized, Gestalt qualities of ordinary
conscious experience are often lost or degraded, resulting in what
Shakow (1963) described as segmentalized consciousness, or "an
increased awareness of, and preoccupation with, the ordinarily
disregarded details of existence . . . which normal people sponta-
neously forget, train themselves, or are trained rigorously to
disregard." Segmentalized consciousness tends to arise in periods
of delusional mood and is often a precursor to the development of
primary delusional beliefs. In Sass's (1992) terms, segmentalized
consciousness includes experiences of unreality and fragmenta-
tion. In unreality, sensory impressions are separated from their
normal pragmatic and affective contexts, so that the world appears
one-dimensional, static, and inauthentic. Fragmentation involves
a splitting of normal perceptual Gestalts into component details
that appear isolated and meaningless. The following account from
Sechehaye (1970) complements the example cited by Gray (sect.
5, para. 22):
In these disturbing circumstances I sensed again the atmosphere of
unreality. During class, in the quiet of the work period, I heard the
street noises - a trolley passing, people talking, a horse neighing, a horn
sounding, each detached, immovable, separated from its source, with-
out meaning. Around me, the other children . . . were robots or pup-
pets, moved by an invisible mechanism . . . . On the platform, the
teacher, too, talking, gesticulating, rising to write on the blackboard, was
a grotesque jack-in-the-box, (p. 24)
The loss of contextualization and perceptual Gestalts in seg-
mentalized consciousness is broadly consistent with the tendency
of schizophrenia patients to substitute superficial for in-depth
processing of stimuli (Anscombe 1987; Swerdlow et al. 1994).
Grays formulation permits a neuropsychological understanding
of this processing failure in terms of a dysfunction of septo-
hippocampal activity. Thus, unreality can be seen as secondary to a
malfunctioning subicular comparator, which for Gray (after
Hemsley 1993) produces a weakening of the influence of past
experience on current perception (sect. 2, para. 13). That is to say,
segmentalization in schizophrenia represents an improverishment
of perceptual experience due to the loss of the significance
normally supplied by access to memories of similar experiences.
Fragmentation is implicitly discussed by Gray under the rubric
of the unity of awareness (sect. 3), which he regards as an
achievement of comparator function as instantiated in hippocam-
pal activity. Fragmented perception in schizophrenia can thus be
attributed to a failure of the normal hippocampally mediated
construction of perceptual Gestalts from disparate sensory inputs.
Needless to say, there is ample evidence for impairments of
hippocampal structure and function in schizophrenia (e.g., Friston
et al. 1992; Suddath et al. 1990). Gray's formulation therefore
provides a cogent explanation for central features of the segmen-
talization process in schizophrenia and, by extension, for the role
of septo-hippocampal function in organized Gestalt perception.
On the other hand, the mechanisms by which Shakow's "nor-
mally disregarded details of existence" arise into consciousness are
somewhat less apparent. Gray's account centers on comparator
mismatch signals and the consequent activation of a behavioral
inhibition system that interrupts motor programs and directs
attention to the source of novelty. In schizophrenia, mismatch
would hypothetically result from impaired access to stored regu-
larities of experience upon which a prediction of actuality is
normally made. In accord with Gray's formulation, segmentalized
consciousness in schizophrenia is typically accompanied by a
676
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Commentary /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
posture of behavioral immobility and attentional fixation (Sass
1992), a posture compatible with the output of a behavioral
inhibition system. The clinical observation that a return from
segmentalized to more normal modes of perception can often be
effected by a kind of disinhibitory engagement of the patient in
familiar behavioral routines (Fleminger 1992; Sass 1992) is also
clearly compatible with the relation drawn by Gray between motor
programming and the contents of consciousness.
However, other considerations suggest that anomalous con-
sciousness in schizophrenia involves a failure of a higher level
executive in addition, if not as an alternative, to Gray's comparator
mechanism. Normal individuals are quite capable of perceiving
the details of their surroundings in a decontextualized and frag-
mented manner if they choose to do so by adopting certain
facilitating attitudes (Sass 1992). In everyday perception, attention
to such details is inhibited in favor of a focus on the Gestalt
characteristics and thematic features of events (Cutting 1985;
Stevens & Gold 1991). In Anscombe's (1987) analysis, segmen-
talized consciousness in schizophrenia betrays an inability to
sustain an intentional focus to attention, which is by default
captured by incidental features of the patient's environment.
Anscombe refers to this condition as an "ataxia" of attention, which
implies the failure of an executive properly to supervise a lower-
level response selection system (e.g., Shallice 1988). In neural
terms, an ataxia of attention can be related to a failure of prefrontal
mechanisms to sustain goal-oriented attentional sets or to resist
distraction by strong but incidental stimuli (Fuster 1989; Shallice
1988). There is also good evidence for prefrontal hypoactivity in
schizophrenia, particularly on tasks requiring executive control
over responding (Andreasen 1992).
Unfortunately, Gray's model is relatively silent regarding execu-
tive function, beyond the fairly cursory and unelaborated assign-
ment of a systems coordinating role to prefrontal cortex (see also
Gray et al. 1991a). The model would benefit from a fuller consid-
eration of prefrontally mediated cognitive functions in interaction
with limbic and striatal systems in the generation of conscious
experience. An impairment of such higher level functions as
intentionulity and resistance to distraction appear to allow for the
emergence of segmentalized consciousness in schizophrenia. By
implication, normal conscious experience must require similar
executive functions acting in concert with the motor programming
and comparator processes central to Gray's model.
Overworking the hippocampus
Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford MA 02155.
ddennett@emerald.tufts.edu
Abstract: The postulated hippocampal comparator, like any other sub-
system, must rely on "syntactic" patterns in its "input," and hence could not
have the extraordinary powers Gray supposes. It may play a more modest
role, but it is not the place "where it all comes together" for consciousness.
Gray mistakenly thinks I have rejected the sort of theoretical
enterprise he is undertaking, because, according to him, I think
that "more data" is all that is needed to resolve all the issues. Not at
all. My stalking horse was the bizarre (often pathetic) claim that no
amount of empirical, "third-person point-of-view" science (data
phis theory) could ever reduce the residue of mystery about
consciousness to zero. This "New Mysterianism" (Flanagan 1991)
is a school of "thought" that he should want to combat as vigorously
as I have done.
I am all in favor of devising and investigating models of the sort
Gray attempts, and for the reasons he gives. Gray's model, in fact,
provides an excellent opportunity to clarify the major theoretical
claims Kinsbourne and I have made (Dennett 1991; Dennett &
Kinsbourne 1992), because it exhibits, in crisp detail, the intersec-
tion of two central misunderstandings. First, Gray has been
seduced by one of the pet themes of the Mysterians: consciousness
is all-or-nothing (Searle 1992, p. 83) and (hence) cannot be
composed of lots of nonconscious (or quasiconscious) elements
distributed in a large system. This leads Gray to overlook the
possibility that a sufficiently powerful combination of merely
"syntactic" (and unconscious) phenomena, like those he illustrates
by DNA protein-synthesis, might account for the semantic com-
petence that is, surely, our best hallmark of consciousness. Second,
Gray is still an adherent of the "wasp-waist" (Kinsbourne 1993) or
"bottleneck" (Dennett 1991) vision of consciousness as a property
that gets conferred on the contents of various cerebral vehicles
when they arrive somewhere special. (The idea is that arrival at
this inner observer is straightforwardly analogous to such macro-
scopic events as the arrival of sound waves at the ears of whole
observers.) Putting the two bad ideas together inspires Gray to try
to promote his model of a subicular comparator system, which in
its own right has many excellent features, into a job it could not
possibly handle: the seat of consciousness.
Let us suppose that Gray has made the case for the existence,
location, and general physico-chemical nature of a comparator
system, straddling various perceptual (and other) pathways, and
let us suppose moreover that he is right about its function of
providing a "familiarity signal" (Dennett 1979, p. 101)1 when it
matches current activity with activity in a previous "moment."
Now the hippocampal mechanism that accomplishes this postu-
lated comparison task must operate on some "syntactic" principle:
the brute physical pattern of activity in the perceptual stream will
trigger the alarm or it won't, depending on whatever features of
those local patterns the comparator is sensitive to. Such a syntactic
comparison will have been designed (by an evolutionary process,
as Gray says) to track or mirror whatever semantic regularities the
brain must most reliably respond to. The most interesting - if tacit
- claim made by Gray's model, I think, is that this comparator task
is so important that this is a place in the brain to look for major
convergence of the syntax and semantics of the whole system. The
claim, in effect, is this: just as the protein-specifying semantics of
DNA codons is the key to unlocking the mysteries of inheritance,
so the perceptual-feature-specifying semantics of syntactic pat-
terns detectable in the hippocampal comparator is a key to
unlocking the mysteries of intentionality!
Now if Gray is wrong about this - if the syntactic patterns to
which his hippocampal comparator is sensitive are relatively crude
in what they track - then he has at best discovered a bit-player in
the drama of consciousness. But even if he were right that the
comparator is a major locus of semantic competence, this would
still give it only a contributory role in the whole task of content
discernment (and appreciation) that is the work of consciousness
(agreeing with Gray that if consciousness did no work, as some
mysterians suppose, then it could not have evolved).
The truly hopeless Cartesian alternative, of course, would be to
postulate that the resources of an entire mind or comprehending
intelligence are somehow brought to bear in this local region,
rendering it capable of directly recognizing (appreciating, dis-
criminating) the purely semantic similarities and differences in the
stream. Gray seems to lapse into this view when he supposes "a
second set of events - conscious events - as occurring besides, and
in some as yet unknown way linked to, the neural events that
constitute the subicular comparison process." He does not address
the crucial question directly. He supposes that "multi-modal and
highly elaborated perceptual description" together with informa-
tion on other relevant topics (e.g., "information concerning mo-
tivational and reinforcing events" are "circulated" through the
subicular area, but of course unless the subicular area can under-
stand all the information available in its "input," its homuncular
role ("seen this, done that") must be limited to syntactic compari-
sons. But Gray contrasts the power of the subicular comparator
with the power of other cognitive machinery, claiming for it that
"seinantically interpreted content [emphasis in original] of repre-
sentations plays a causal role in the unfolding of events." At that
point, by concentrating all the power of mentality into his subicu-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
677

Commentary/Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
lar subsystem, he forces it to be composed of wonder tissue; but
this is a fatal misstep from which he could gracefully retreat.
"Merely syntactic" comparator operations are not nothing -
they are, indeed, the very elements out of which any non-
miraculous theory of consciousness or intelligence must be com-
posed - but it is precisely this limited role that must prevent the
subicular area (or any other neuro-anatomically restricted region)
from being "the place where it all comes together"^br conscious-
ness. There can be bottlenecks - and we may suppose for the sake
of argument that Gray has located a functionally important one -
but not appreciating bottlenecks. And since the dimly envisaged
capacity to appreciate the contents is well-nigh definitional of
consciousness, one could never motivate the claim to have discov-
ered the seat of consciousness (as opposed to the seat of some
more minor functional component of mentality) without showing
how arrival at that proposed seat led to or accomplished that
appreciation.
Gray sees that this is a problem, and adjusts his hypothesis
several times to make it at least not obvious that he couldn't solve
it, but the adjustments have the effect of conceding, not rebutting,
the main lines of our objections. It is not just the obvious problem
that is pointed out by Libet in his communication with Gray (see
sect. 3, para. 5, of target article): the privileged location of the
activity necessary and sufficient for consciousness implies that
"destruction of the subicular area" should obtund conscious expe-
rience, a prediction that Gray himself describes as apparently false
- see also the commentary by Kinsbourne in this issue. It is the
larger theoretical problem of trying to localize in space and time
phenomena which by their very nature involve global compe-
tences that could not (except in ill-envisaged miracles) be the
responsibility of a single module.
Might the hippocampal comparator then be the gateway into
consciousness, the porters lodge if not the Combination Room?
(Gray speaks of the comparator's "feedback" as "contributing in a
more nuanced manner to the description of the perceived world
that finally enters [emphasis added] consciousness".) It might be a
gateway, one among many, but what matters in any case for
consciousness of some "message" is not the order or time of arrival
at any gateway, but the way the message is eventually dealt with by
subsequent processes, in whatever order.
NOTE
1. In this article I postulated just such a system as part of a purely
speculative — and neuroanatomically uninformed — account of how deja vu
might be caused; many are the grounds for looking for not just one but
many comparator systems.
Possible roles for a predictor plus
comparator mechanism in human episodic
recognition memory and imitative learning
Simon Dennis and Michael Humphreys
Department of Psychology, The University of Queensland, Australia, 4072.
mav@psy.uq.oz.au and mh@psy.uq.oz.au
Abstract: This commentary is divided into two parts. The first considers a
possible role for Gray's predictor plus comparator mechanism in human
episodic recognition memory. It draws on the computational specifications
of recognition outlined in Humphreys et al. (1994) to demonstrate how the
logically necessary components of recognition tasks might be mapped onto
the mechanism. The second part demonstrates how the mechanism
outlined by Gray might be implicated in a form of imitative learning
suitable for the acquisition of complex tasks.
1. Human episodic recognition memory. Recognition memory
is a phenomenon which might be expected to sit on the boundary
of conscious and unconscious processing. Unlike cued and free
recall, recognition decisions do not seem to require prior opera-
tions or to involve much in the way of retrieval strategies (Hum-
phreys & Bain 1983). In conditions where recall performance is
limited, the feeling that the item occurred in the specified context
seems to be immediately available. According to Gray's compara-
tor model, then, one might expect such a decision to be made in or
near the subiculum.
In addition to the subjective evidence, however, the functional
components of the comparator model provide a good fit to a
possible computation-level specification of long term episodic
recognition tasks. (Note that Rawlins 1985 and Gray 1985 suggest,
on the basis of evidence from Sidman et al. 1968, that short term
verbal memory is not implemented in Gray's architecture.) In list-
specific item recognition (LSIR), subjects study a number of lists
of words. After each list they are required to determine whether
each of a set of test words occurred in that list or a prior list or not at
all. The cues are the word itself and the appropriate list context.
Humphreys et al. (1994) provide two alternative specifications of
the LSIR task.
Alternative 1
LSIR(LIST,P,L,M) =
NotEmpty(Retrieve(Compatible(P,L),M) D LIST)
Alternative 2
LSIR(LIST,P,L,M) = NotEmpty(Retrieve(LIST,M) l~l
Compatible(P,L))
The first specification (Alternative 1) suggests that after being
mapped to a central representation by the Compatible function,
the presented word is used to query memory. The result of this
Retrieve operation will be a set of items which should include the
appropriate list context if the word appeared in that context. This
set of items is intersected with the list context provided and the
NotEmpty function is applied to determine whether the list
context is in the retrieval set.
In contrast, the second specification (Alternative 2) uses the list
context as a retrieval cue. If the word was studied in the list context
it will be included in the retrieval set. The intersection and
NotEmpty functions are used to determine whether the central
representation of the word is in the retrieval set.
Neither functionally nor experimentally is it easy to distinguish
these possibilities. The comparator architecture, however, would
seem to be more compatible with the second alternative. The
Generator of Predictions (GoP) prior to the presentation of a word
would have access to the list context. Its prediction of the next
stimulus would be equivalent to the Retrieve operation with the
list cue, that is, it would predict any word that occurred in the
appropriate context. When the word is actually input, the compar-
ator could subsume the intersection and NotEmpty functions to
produce an indication of match or mismatch on which the recogni-
tion response could be based. This match/mismatch signal must
then be mapped onto an appropriate response (Humphreys &
Dennis 1994). It is more difficult to see how the first alternative
could be implemented, since it is the list contexts which are
matched in that case, not the next input stimulus directly. Gray's
model and the associated neuropsychological evidence, then,
provide evidence for deciding an issue which evades computa-
tional, behavioural, and algorithmic analyses.
This analysis suggests two modifications to Gray's analysis. First,
in general, it is not possible to predict what will come next even
when there have been appropriate prior learning episodes. What
will be predicted is a set of possible next states. Second, Gray's
architecture can be used to implement an episodic recognition
memory; however, a mechanism must exist to attach the output of
the comparator to a response. Such a comparator and response
attachment mechanism might be expected to confer substantial
comparative advantage to the organism, since the ability to re-
spond to familiar stimuli would aid many behaviours, including the
interactions between individuals from the same group.
678
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Commentary /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
2. Imitative learning. The mathematical analysis of learning
algorithms suggests that the learning of complex tasks, which
could include language comprehension and production, can
be more efficient if the learner has access to the correct response
represented as a vector of targets rather than just a scalar feedback
as to whether or not the response was correct (Williams 1986).
In an autonomous system such as the human, this raises two
related problems. First, the mapping from an intention to the
appropriate motor commands must be learned. Second, the map-
ping from inputs (including the memorial state) to intentions must
be acquired. In neither case are the correct outputs directly
available.
Jordan and Rumelhart (1992) address the first of these prob-
lems by introducing the notion of a forward model (see also Jordan
1990; Jordan & Jacobs 1990) that maps from motor commands to
predictions of the results of these commands in the environment
(i.e., distal variables). The current predicted distal variables are
compared against actual distal variables and the error information
is used to adjust the parameters of the forward model. Subse-
quently, error information derived by comparing the predicted
distal variables against the intended distal variables can be back-
propagated through the forward model into the network responsi-
ble for formulating the motor commands (the control network) to
ensure that these commands lead to the appropriate distal out-
comes. In this way the control network can be trained without
having access to the correct motor commands.
Dennis (1995) makes the point that an autonomous system only
has access to variables resident in the brain or impinging upon the
sensory apparatus (i.e., proximal variables). However, provided
the distal variables give rise to proximal variables in an appropriate
way, the proximal variables can be used to train a forward model
and a control network (Dennis 1995). In Dennis's approach,
instead of predicting the distal variables, the forward model
predicts the next sensory input, as is the case in Gray's Generator
of Predictions. The error signal generated by comparing the actual
sensory input with the predicted sensory input (the output of
Cray's comparator) can be backpropagated to optimise both the
forward model and the control network. This mechanism gives rise
to a form of imitative learning.
As an example, consider the task of learning the visual referent
of a word. Suppose our system must learn to say "dog" in the
presence of a dog. As a consequence of random articulation and
babbling, the system forms a mapping between the articulation
commands that it produces and the auditory input it receives as a
consequence, that is, it learns a forward model. When the visual
stimulus representing a dog appears, the system may or may not
hear the auditory stimulus "dog," depending on whether an adult
is present and whether they choose to respond. In a system that is
unable to affect its environment, this indeterminacy would pre-
vent the mapping from being optimised. The typical learner,
however, can affect its environment by producing motor com-
mands. If the error information is backpropagated into a control
network capable of producing sounds, the system can reduce the
prediction error by producing the auditory "dog" stimulus itself.
That is, it can fulfil its own prophecy. The result is that the system
comes to imitate other intentional agents in its environment.
Dennis (1995) provides the control diagram of the imitative
learning system and applies it to a simple robot arm targeting
problem. The advantage of such a technique is that it relies on
vector error feedback rather than a scalar reinforcement signal
and therefore, at least in theory, it can be more efficient. Further-
more, the calculation of this error signal requires only proximal
variables.
The two key components necessary for the implementation of
imitative learning are a predictor of the next sensory input and a
mechanism for comparing the prediction against the actual input.
Both of these components are central to Gray's model.
3. Conclusion. The computational arguments derived from
episodic recognition and imitative learning paradigms provide
evidence from a very different style of analysis for the comparator
and predictor mechanisms in Gray's model. While they do not
answer why consciousness has been selected and there is substan-
tial work to be done to demonstrate that such a system is imple-
mented in the brain, they do suggest why these components may
have conferred a comparative advantage.
Hunting for consciousness in the brain:
What is (the name of) the game?
Jose-Luis Dfaz
Centro de Neurobiologia, Universidad Nacional Autdnoma de Mexico,
Instituto Mexicano de Psiquiatria, and Cognitive Science Program, The
University ot Arizona, Tucson, AZS5727.jldiaz@ccit.arizona.edu
Abstract: Robust theories concerning the connection between conscious-
ness and brain function should derive not only from empirical evidence
but also from a well grounded inind-body ontology. In the case of the
comparator hypothesis, Gray develops his ideas relying extensively on
empirical evidence, but he bounces irresolutely among logically incompat-
ible metaphysical theses which, in turn, leads him to excessively skeptical
conclusions concerning the naturalization of consciousness.
Gray is surely right that we need specific, heuristic, and plausible
neuropsychological theories "linking" consciousness and brain.
Moreover, he has made a commendable effort in developing an
interesting and promising cognitive-informational model of con-
sciousness (the comparator hypothesis) and a bold (but probably
flawed) attempt at locating the comparator in the brain (the
feedback activity between the subiculum and perceptual systems).
My impression is that the location attempt is flawed, not because it
rests almost exclusively on empirical data but because the theory
behind it lacks a correspondingly well developed epistemology,
and especially because it depicts a disconcerting mind-body ontol-
ogy. As I will try to show in this commentary, in order to engender
plausible theories concerning the mysterious connection between
consciousness and brain activity, a well-adjusted marriage be-
tween philosophy and empirical science is not only convenient but
necessary.
In the first sentence of the text, Gray's choice of the word
"generates" suggests a metaphysical preference, since conscious-
ness must be something other resulting from brain activity. Such
an emergence notion resurfaces soon in propositions such as
"consciousness is in some way a product of the brain." At this point
I am a satisfied reader, because I believe there is certainly nothing
(terribly) wrong with espousing an emergence notion of con-
sciousness. In fact, despite its difficulties, emergentism is a reason-
ably coherent idea born in the scientific spheres of early Darwin-
ism, developed in the layered world conception of the General
System Theories, and specifically applied to the problem of
consciousness in several materialist and mentalist modes (Dfaz
1989; O'Connor 1994). Moreover, philosophers have developed a
similar notion of their own called "supervenience," and two of
them (Horgan 1993; Kim 1993) have meticulously worked out
several possible interpretations of this notion, the difficult mental
causality problems involved, and its relations with emergence.
Thus, I assume a neural emergence account of consciousness
until, soon after the opening statements, Gray selects the case of
wave-particle complementarity and its elegant formalization in
quantum mechanics as the best analogy of the consciousness-brain
duality to guide his theory. Now, mind-brain notions based on
Bohr's complementary principle are strongly connected to an
ontological solution very different from that of supervenience and
emergentism, namely, dual aspect, neutral monist theses (Globus
1973), where awareness and certain brain activities are considered
to be either two sides of the same physical process (Lockwood
1989) or two aspects of a third psychological reality (Bohm 1986). I
am sure there are promising ways to reconcile supervenience and
dual aspect, by proposing, for example, that the highest emergent
brain function is a psychophysical process with both neural and
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
679

Commentary /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
mental aspects, but one soon realizes that Gray does not much
care for reconciling metaphysical theories.
We seem to be back on track at the beginning of section 3, when
conscious contents are conceived to be outputs of the subiculum
neuro-cognitive comparator system, except that "output" indicates
something more like physiological or perhaps psychological prod-
ucts (and therefore inert epiphenomena) rather than mereological
emergents. Nevertheless, since Gray's theory demands that con-
scious contents be causally efficient in order to influence behavior,
I recollect Kim's (1993) supervenience conundrum of mental
causality: What should be the nature of these emergent properties
so that they can be causally efficient, and why should a system
evolve two efficient causes (neurophysiological and mental) of
physical events? As I am pondering these questions, Gray presents
a new surprise and uses the word equivalence when he establishes
links between the neural and the subjective "levels" (sect. 1, para.
7; sect. 3, para. 2). To speak of "equivalents" is to endorse a psycho-
physical identity theory of sorts but surely not in this case, because
the very architecture of the comparator system proposed in the
first section encompasses four levels of analysis (behavioral, neu-
ral, cognitive, and experiential) that cannot be identical or equiva-
lent to one another. Moreover, if there are levels, there are layers,
so I had better stick to a complex system notion in which the
hierarchy and emergence relationships among them needs to be
carefully worked out. But this is not quite right either, because if I
consider Gray's next four levels (neuroanatomical-neurochemical-
cognitive processes-symptoms; Fig. 7) according to the text, the
relationships between these layers are causal and no emergence or
supervenience is posed. At this point one feels the urge for a
clarification, but instead there are more surprises in store, be-
cause, in section 4, Gray leans toward functionalism with his
genetic code analogy of the multiple instantiation thesis, com-
bined with an apparently strong monist notion of a single level of
(physicochemical) reality. This line of reasoning seems to head
inexorably towards a form of property dualism so dear to cognitive
scientists, but I am wrong again, because consciousness is consid-
ered in the very same section a second level of reality occurring
besides the neural events. "Besides" faces one with psychophysical
parallelism, and the argument given for such a dualism is that "we
know that the level of conscious events exists" (sect. 4, para. 11). I
do know that consciousness exists by simple introspection, but
how do I know that it is a level"?
One approaches the end of the target article somewhat shaken
and, when Gray concludes that in the present state of affairs we are
not ready to develop transparent theories about consciousness,
brain, and behavior, one has the strong impression that he is
suffering the disheartening consequence of a bewildering dance
with several of the mutually exclusive psycho-physical theories
(dashing but jealous and deceiving muses). Finally, when I read his
brave and insightful idea that such a theory will not appear from the
simple gathering of more empirical data, I cannot avoid concluding
that if he had proceeded to assemble his metaphysics with the same
zest and dedication invested in his neurophysiological models,
he would have spun his limbic conjecture into a more coherent,
robust, and personally satisfying neuropsychological theory.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank the National Autonomous University of Mexico for a sabbatical
fellowship and a share from grant DGAPA-IN602491.
Consciousness, memory, and the
hippocampal system: What kind of
connections can we make?
Howard Eichenbauma and Neal J. Cohenb
"Center for Behavioral Neuroscience, State University of New York at Stony
Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-2575; bBeckman Institute and Department of
Psychology, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801.
howard.eichenbaum@sunysb.edu and njc@uiuc.edu
Abstract: Gray's account is remarkable in its depth and scope but too little
attention is paid to poor correspondences with the literature on hippocam-
pal/subicular damage, the theta rhythm, and novelty detection. An alter-
native account, focusing on hippocampal involvement in organizing mem-
ories in a way that makes them accessible to conscious recollection but not
in access to consciousness per se, avoids each of these limitations.
Gray is to be applauded for having the courage to take on
consciousness and give it a serious and scholarly neuropsychologi-
cal treatment. The scope of his account is remarkable: philosophi-
cal and cognitive considerations, the neuroanatomy and physiol-
ogy of memory, attention, emotion, and motor programs, and the
neuropharmacology and psychopathology of anxiety and schizo-
phrenia. Gray's sweeping integration is too great a challenge for us
to address in full in this brief commentary. Instead, our comments
are confined to our shared interest in the hippocampus and the
central role it plays in conscious experience.
We wish to focus on three areas in which the data on hippocam-
pal function are inconsistent with Gray's hypothesis. Although he
raises each of these problems himself, Gray dispenses with them in
a way that is unsatisfying, leaving us to wonder whether any
evidence can be sufficient to disprove his hypothesis. At the very
least, these issues merit more serious treatment.
First, a wealth of data on the behavioral effects of hippocampal
damage conflict with Gray's notion that "the contents of conscious-
ness consist of the outputs of the subicular comparator (sect. 3,
para. 1)." Large lesions of the hippocampal region, including most
of the subiculum, have no effect on consciousness in humans and
no effect on "conscious" reactions to stimuli in animals, to the
extent that such reactions can be determined. Gray's obvious point
that natural and experimental lesions of the hippocampus are
seldom complete pales against the many experiments (including
some very good ones by Gray and his colleagues) demonstrating
that hippocampal damage results in profound impairments of
memory but total sparing of other perceptual, motor, and cognitive
capacities, including consciousness. Is Gray really rejecting the
validity of neuropsychological dissociation in order to save his
theory? Moreover, his assertion that we lack the ability to even
detect alterations of consciousness in animals that might be
produced by hippocampal/subicular damage renders the entire
enterprise beyond the province of current empirical science.
Second, the duration of the hippocampal processing cycle (the
theta rhythm) does not match the timing of neural events associ-
ated with consciousness (sect. 5.3). Not all is lost, however; at least
the theta cycle is shorter than the period required for what Gray
calls an "instant" of consciousness. But, other than that, do the data
on theta put any constraints on Gray's theory, or is the theory again
outside the province of empirical falsifiability?
Third, the critical novelty/mismatch processing attributed to
the subicular comparator is not the only kind of event that has
access to consciousness. Frankly, little of conscious experience is
concerned with novelty detection. Although Gray seems to con-
cede this point (sect. 5.14), he offers no explanation of why, then,
the contents of consciousness should be so dependent on his
subicular comparator.
We raise these concerns not to belittle Gray's effort, but rather
to point to areas that are not well addressed by the current
hypothesis but that can be accommodated within a somewhat
different view of the role of the hippocampal system in conscious
experience. In our own view of the hippocampal system, declara-
tive memory (explicit remembering), and conscious experience,
we have proposed (Cohen & Eichenbaum 1993; Eichenbaum et
al. 1994) that the hippocampal system (including the hippo-
campus, subiculum, and immediately surrounding cortex) medi-
ates the organization of memory representations in widespread
neocortical regions. Our view is similar to Gray's in suggesting that
the hippocampus supports comparisons among items and events.
However, we part company from Gray in our view of how these
comparisons are used and what role the hippocampus plays in
conscious experience. He proposes that the hippocampus acts as a
gateway to various behavioral and cognitive subsystems as stimuli
680
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Commentary/Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
seek access to conscious experience. By contrast, we have sug-
gested that the hippocampal system uses the outcomes of item
comparisons to create and update networks of cortical memory
representations to capture important relationships among the
items, and that these cortical memory representations can be used
by whatever (not yet fully specified) extra-hippocampal brain
systems are involved in conscious recollection and cognitively
mediated processing.
Hippocampally mediated declarative memories are, on our
account, fundamentally relational, as described above, and flex-
ible, in that they can be expressed in a variety of ways using forms
of expression not necessarily used during the learning event. Thus,
in humans, the brain s verbal systems can access, manipulate, and
express declarative memories of even wholly nonverbal events.
Conscious recollection is another very powerful example of access
to and manipulations within relational networks by high-order
cognitive mechanisms and systems in humans and in animals.
Thus, in our model, the hippocampal system plays only an indirect
role in consciousness - it organizes the database, so to speak, on
which other brain systems may operate and, in so doing, it
determines the structure and range of conscious recollections.
Theta-paced hippocampal comparator mechanisms only come
into play during new encodings, not during access to conscious-
ness, thereby obviating the above stated concerns about the theta
timing cycle and novelty detection. Also, consistent with the
human and animal neuropsychological literature, the importance
of the hippocampal system in conscious recollection is limited:
Hippocampal damage prevents the establishment of new memory
representations that are subject to conscious access but it does not
prevent access to memory representations consolidated prior to
the damage. Because the hippocampus has a time-limited role in
the establishment and updating of cortical relational representa-
tions, the cortical networks can eventually be accessed without
hippocampal support. Accordingly, in our view, the hippocampal
system is neither the place where consciousness occurs nor the
system critical for its occurrence. Instead, it has evolved to support
a particular kind of memory (declarative memory) that, while
essential for conscious recollection, is not equivalent to the "con-
tents of consciousness."
Context and consciousness
Colin G. Ellard
Department of Psychology, University of Waterioo, Waterloo, Ontario,
Canada, N6A 5C2. cellard@watarts.uwaterloo.ca
Abstract: The commentary argues (1) that we cannot be sure that
luimun consciousness has survival value and (2) that in order to understand
the origins and, perhaps, the function of consciousness, we should examine
the behavioural and neural precursors to consciousness in nonhumans. An
example is given of research on the role of context in decisions regarding
fleeing from probable predators in the Mongolian gerbil.
Gray's target article sets an agenda for the production of a
transparent theory of consciousness that includes four separate
but related issues: the (1) evolution, (2) survival value, (3) neural
basis of consciousness, and (4) the mechanism by which conscious-
ness alters behaviour. Gray's hypothesis relates mostly to (3) and,
as he admits, sheds little light on any of the other points. I would
like to offer one brief criticism of Grays arguments and some
further comments with regard to the subiculum s proposed func-
tion as a brain structure that compares predicted with perceived
events.
I take issue with Gray's strong assertion that consciousness must
affect behaviour in the sense of contributing to the Darwinian
fitness of the possessor. Although it is not a very attractive
possibility, one could argue that consciousness has arisen as an
exaptive consequence of some other unknown property of neural
tissue. If this is the case, it is no longer mysterious that conscious
awareness of events appears to happen too late to have immediate
behavioural consequences, or that we know nothing of the mecha-
nism by which consciousness might alter behaviour, since no such
mechanism need exist.
This criticism aside, my main interest in this article and in some
of Gray's previous work was the assertion that much of the septo-
hippocampal system, and the subiculum in particular, is devoted to
an ongoing comparison of the perceived state of the world with the
predicted state of the world. In other words, Gray argues that
consciousness has arisen from a mechanism whose main function
is to analyze context, and to separate the novel from the familiar.
My own work, on risk assessment and predator avoidance,
illustrates another way of seeing the adaptiveness of contextual
analysis. In an ongoing series of experiments, I have demonstrated
that Mongolian gerbils will flee from transient, overhead visual
stimuli in a laboratory setting, and that the configurational proper-
ties of the stimuli have little or no influence over the nature or
the strength of such responses (Ellard & Chapman 1991). On the
other hand, contextual variables, such as the familiarity of the
environment in which overhead transients are presented, are of
paramount importance. For example, gerbils that have habituated
to repetitive presentation of a visual transient cannot be dishabitu-
ated by changing the visual properties of the stimulus, but can be
dishabituated by changes in the spatial context in which the
stimulus is presented (Ellard, submitted). I have suggested that
gerbils (and probably many other prey animals) respond to some
sensory stimuli as either threatening or innocuous on the basis of
the circumstances that accompany the presentation of the stim-
ulus, rather than on the basis of any local or configurational
properties of the stimulus itself. In other words, gerbils respond to
all stimuli as threatening or no stimuli as threatening, depending
on their familiarity with the context in which the stimulus is
presented. The obvious adaptive advantage of such an arrange-
ment is that it pushes the time-consuming and computationally
expensive problem of stimulus recognition to a point in time that
actually precedes stimulus onset. By the time the stimulus appears,
the animal is primed to treat it in an appropriate way.
From the point of view of Gray's conjecture about conscious-
ness, my studies of predator "recognition" recommend themselves
in two ways. First they may shed some light on the annoying
feature of conscious awareness that it is always a few milliseconds
too late to do any good. Although it is very unlikely, imagine that
the same visual transients that elicit fleeing responses in gerbils
also give rise to gerbil qualia. From the standpoint of the experi-
ments that I have described, the qualia associated with the
stimulus would be functionally irrelevant with respect to the
fleeing response. Most of the relevant sensory context that pro-
duced the response could have been in place prior to stimulus
presentation.
Second, the findings that I have described suggest another role
for feedback connections to sensory areas that several authors
including Gray in the target article (Humphreys 1992; Jackendoff
1987) have identified as being somehow related to consciousness.
Perhaps, in addition to reinstating the stimulus events that gave
rise to qualia (Humphreys 1992) or providing the modality-
specificity of conscious experience (Gray, target article; Jacken-
doff 1987), these feedback connections serve to condition the
responsiveness of sensory areas to incoming information on the
basis of "top-down" influences related to context and expectations.
Classical findings in neurophysiology (MacDonnell & Flynn 1966)
suggest that receptive field properties of sensory neurons only one
or two synapses removed from the receptor can be influenced by
the motivational context in which the stimulus is presented.
Gray's hypothesis is attractive in that the neural architecture he
describes has properties that suggest a relationship with self-
awareness, but like all accounts of consciousness so far, he cannot
offer a convincing account of the origins or the functions of
consciousness. Although I remain unconvinced that consciousness
has survival value, I agree with Gray that a fruitful approach to the
origins of consciousness must include a consideration of the role of
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
681

Commentary /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
brain regions in animals that are homologous with those that are
thought to produce conscious experience in humans. Not only this,
but careful attention to the environmental problems that an
animal's nervous system has evolved to solve may shed light on
aspects of animal behaviour that bear precursor relationships to
human consciousness. In the case of the gerbil, processes that are
analogous to those described by Gray in conscious humans are
used in a novel way to reduce the computational load associated
with responses in rapidly moving, overhead predators. Although
gerbils need not be conscious to do this, there is little question that
using such a mechanism increases their Darwinian fitness.
On seeking the mythical fountain
of consciousness
Jeffrey Foss
Department of Philosophy, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia,
Canada V8W3P4. june19@uwm.uvic.ca
Abstract: Because consciousness has an organizational, or functional,
center, Cray supposes that there must be a corresponding physical center
in the brain. He proposes further that since this center generates con-
sciousness, ablating it would eliminate consciousness, while leaving behav-
ior intact. But the center of consciousness is simply the product of the
functional linkages among sensory input, memory, inner speech, and so on,
and behavior.
When still a small boy, I discovered what made the pictures in our
TV, namely the vacuum tube the repairman replaced, since with it
everything was fine, while without it the sound was okay but the
screen was blank. Using the same logic, but weaker evidence, Gray
concludes that it is the "subicular comparator" that makes con-
sciousness.
Empirical evidence can lead us away from the realization that it
is the brain and person as a whole that is conscious, since parts of
the brain can be removed or damaged and consciousness remain.
Because the eyes, for example, can be removed and still leave one
conscious, we cannot conceive of consciousness as being gener-
ated in the eyes, and so imagine it lodged instead deeper in the
central nervous system. This sifting logic eliminates in turn the
optic nerves, chiasm, lateral geniculate, and even the visual cortex.
As Gray points out in his reply to Libet, only the elimination of
(unspecified) mid-brain structures has the effect of removing
consciousness - but sadly this also "eliminates all waking behav-
ior." (note 3). Undaunted, Gray holds out the hope that ablation of
the subicular comparator would remove consciousness, presum-
ably while leaving behavior intact. As a bonus, this gives him
respite from quick disproof, given the unlikelihood of its ablation
due to its "complex spatial organisation."
Gray takes consciousness to be an all or nothing affair. But just
as cutting away bits of the TV may reduce, but not eliminate, its
performance, ablations of the brain or peripheral nervous system
may reduce consciousness. That consciousness is reduced when
one loses one's sight should be obvious enough, and yet the
stubborn idea remains that the blind are, for all that, still com-
pletely conscious. Well, sure, but only as a reduced mass is still a
mass. Nor, indeed, does consciousness vary simply in degree on a
one-dimensional scale. For example, intensity is different from
focus. Anyone who has known the pleasures of intoxicated love
knows that consciousness may be intense while incoherent, a
collection of bright fragments which defy discursive unification or
clear memory. On the other hand, one may narrowly focus on a
problem even as consciousness dwindles into sleep. Sometimes
the internal voice dominates, commenting noisily on what is seen
or sensed, while at other times the beauty or violence of what is
seen silences the voice altogether. Usually we are somewhere in
between in all of these dimensions, loosely focused on the day's
business while wool-gathering on distant topics, intermittently
aware of a dawning headache, but aware that, yes, the fridge has
been making a strange noise, only when it is pointed out. Con-
sciousness as we know it is the shifting intertwining of various
strings of information, sometimes in subservience to a focal
intention, sometimes in mere lyrical insouciance.
To his credit, Gray sees that to grasp what consciousness is one
must come to grips with its organization: he offers a theory of
the contents of consciousness, noting its "unity," its "disunity,"
its "level," and its "smeared" temporality, and wildly over-
emphasizing the comparison of expectation and observation. But
things go badly awry when he tries to find physical, rather than
functional, counterparts to these organizational details. Consider
unity. Note, first, that not all consciousness is unified. Certainly my
consciousness is poorly unified sometimes, as in the seconds after
the alarm clock sounds, and I think the consciousness of small
babies and hyperactive children is similarly disunified. Neverthe-
less, the sort of consciousness aspired to, and sometimes achieved,
by some contemporary adults is well-integrated: it has a center.
This center is functional, not physical. But Gray has form follow
function, with the center of consciousness matched by a center in
the brain: the subicular comparator. Anything of which we may be
conscious must come to this area, which then generates
"'consciousness-instigating' feedback." Lo, the fountain of con-
sciousness!
However, some real centers are not physical. Consider the focal
point of a lens: it is not another material thing beside the lens, nor
something inside the lens - yet a lens without a focal point is just a
chunk of glass. Likewise, the center of consciousness is not a
spiritual thing beside the brain, nor is it some structure inside the
brain. It is instead a functional consequence of the ideal organiza-
tion of the various information streams available to consciousness.
Your current perception of variously shaped inkstains on the page
is informed by memory traces induced by past reading lessons, as
well as your current reflections on what I am saying, integrated
with yet other things, to yield your present state of consciousness.
This integration is imperfect: there are relevant bits of information
in your memory which you should recall, but do not, to mention
just one flaw.
With training, skill, and luck, the integration is good enough to
squeeze a sort of unity out of the many bits it encompasses -
though one is often at odds with oneself, of two minds, making
excuses for eating the doughnut while conjuring up images of
clogged arteries to urge its shunning. One may be unable to recall
driving home, and, like Gray, mistakenly judging {hat one did so
"without having paid any conscious attention to the process of
driving." Perhaps a little effort, hypnotic prompting, or sodium
amytal, might jog one's memory, but even if it does not, one can
take comfort in the reflection that the imperfect integration of
one's consciousness of the drive home with one's present con-
sciousness is not proof that one was unconscious of the road.
Suppose Gray's mooted test were satisfied beyond his wildest
dreams, and one were able to turn the subicular comparator on or
off like a light. After a behaviorally normal day at the office,
discovering one had carelessly left it switched off all day, one flips
it on, only to find oneself saying, 'My god! I've gone the whole day
without consciousness!' Would this not be evidence of the frag-
mentation of one's consciousness, rather than its day-long ab-
sence?
Consciousness is for other people
Chris Frith
Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, Institute of Neurology, %
Cyclotron Unit, Clinical Sciences Centre, Hammersmith Hospital, London
W12 OHS, England, cfrith@cu.rpms.ac.uk
Abstract: Gray has expanded his account of schizophrenia to explain
consciousness as well. His theory explains neither phenomenon ade-
quately because he treats individual minds (and brains) in isolation. The
primary function of consciousness is to permit high level interactions with
682
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Commentary/Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
other conscious beings. The key symptoms of schizophrenia reflect a
failure of this mechanism.
1. The relevance of schizophrenia to theories of conscious-
ness. Gray and his colleagues (Gray et al. 1990) previously
presented an elaborate account of schizophrenia which attempted
to link psychotic symptoms with brain function via a description at
the cognitive level. This proposal is now extended to provide an
account of consciousness in the normal case. I agree with Gray that
studies of schizophrenia throw important light on the normal
functioning of consciousness. This is because the major symptoms
of schizophrenia (e.g., thought insertion and delusions of alien
control) are essentially disorders of consciousness (Frith 1979).
I am not convinced, however, that Gray's account explains such
symptoms. The theory can certainly explain a disorder in which
the sufferer is unable to distinguish between relevant and irrele-
vant stimuli. This might well lead to elaborate accounts (delusions)
as to why certain irrelevant events were important. But this
disorder is not schizophrenia. The symptoms of schizophrenia are
far more specific. In the case of auditory hallucinations, for
example, the patient will hear voices that are experienced as
coming from a powerful entity that is trying to monitor and control
his or her behaviour (Chadwick & Birchwood 1994). For other
symptoms too, (e.g., delusions of alien control, paranoid delusions,
and delusions of reference) an essential component concerns the
intentions and actions of other beings (see Frith 1992, Chap. 7).
Likewise, Grays account does not capture the essence of
consciousness. As stated by the author himself the theory does not
explain why the brain should generate conscious experience. In
what follows, I shall very briefly sketch a conjecture that resolves
both of these problems.
2. Cognitive accounts of consciousness. 
Gray's proposal
closely resembles a number of previous accounts (e.g., the Super-
visory Attentional System of Shallice 1988, Chap. 14). These
accounts contrast unconscious, automatic processes with con-
scious, strategic processes. For example, consciousness is said to
have a "trouble shooting" role which is brought into play in novel
situations when automatic processes fail. The problem with this
family of accounts is that no one has yet put forward a good reason
why this type of information processing requires phenomenologi-
cal consciousness.
3. The contents of consciousness. These accounts of con-
sciousness start by enumerating the contents of consciousness and
then suggest that all the different contents involve one particular
type of information processing. However, in order to make such a
link it is crucial to contrast the things that are in consciousness with
the things that are not. This side of the equation is usually omitted.
Bridgeman (1992) makes a very important observation about the
difference between information that is conscious and information
that is not by considering the visual system. In this system (as in
others) different kinds of information about the same scene are
represented in different brain locations (Zeki 1978). An important
classification of these different kinds of information makes a
distinction between motor and cognitive vision (Bridgeman's
terms). The motor representation provides an absolute egocentric
calibration of visual space, while the cognitive representation is
independent of egocentric space. The motor representation allows
an intimate connection between vision and movement permitting
grasping, for example. Information in the motor system is not
conscious, while information in the cognitive system is. A double
dissociation of these two systems can be observed in neurological
patients (e.g., Goodale & Milner 1992).
I propose, as a general principle, that consciousness contains
only those representations that are coded independently of ego-
centric coordinates. Thus the model of the world that is repre-
sented in our consciousness is, as far as this is possible, indepen-
dent of our own point of view.
4. The purpose of consciousness. Of all the representations
held in the brain, that which is coded in non-egocentric coordi-
nates will most closely resemble that held in the brain of another.
It is these representations that will best enable prediction of the
behaviour of another creature in the current situation. Such a
representational system can eventually develop the capacity to
recognise agents (things which act under their own power, have
goals, and have intentions) and predict the behaviour of these
agents on the basis of the beliefs and wishes of these agents (having
an intentional stance). Phenomenological consciousness is neces-
sary for taking an intentional stance towards other agents. To do
this we have to be able to treat ourselves as agents also. For this
purpose, awareness of our own intentions and the various possible
actions between which we appear to be choosing is very important.
These abilities confer enormous advantages when interacting with
other creatures. Shareable knowledge (which I equate with the
contents of consciousness) is the necessary basis for the develop-
ment of language and communication. In this account, the major
mistake of most theories of consciousness is to try to develop an
explanation in terms of an isolated organism.
5. Consciousness and schizophrenia. In this account con-
sciousness plays a critical role in interpreting the behaviour of
others in terms of wishes and intentions. It is precisely this ability
that goes awry in schizophrenia. Studying the neural basis of the
symptoms of schizophrenia will provide clues to the neural basis of
consciousness.
Psychopathology and the discontinuity
of conscious experience
David R. Hemsley
Psychology Department, Institute of Psychiatry, London, SE5 8AF, England
Abstract: It is accepted that "primary awareness" may emerge from the
integration of two classes of information. It is unclear, however, why this
cannot take place within the comparator rather than in conjunction with
feedback to the perceptual systems. The model has plausibility in relation
to the continuity of conscious experience in the normal waking state and
may be extended to encompass certain aspects of the "sense of self" which
are frequently disrupted in psychotic patients.
Gray's argument that "primary awareness" emerges, in an as yet
unspecified way, from the integration of two (at least) classes of
information - one generated from stored material and one im-
pinging on the sense organs - appears plausible. (It is not obvious,
however, how the model is to be applied to the deliberate retrieval
of material into conscious awareness.) The conscious experience is
thus equated with the "operation" of schemata on sensory input.
The problem for the organism is to ensure that contextual influ-
ences "determine the appropriate schema, and to match the
present occurrences with the frame provided for them" (Norman
& Bobrow 1976, p. 119).
It is not clear why this integration, and its conscious equivalent,
cannot take place within the comparator, as is implied in section 3,
rather than in conjunction with feedback to the perceptual sys-
tems (sect. 3, para. 10). One can accept that the model must take
account of the constructivist positions of Neisser (1976) and
Jackendoff (1987), but is there any reason why the comparator
could not both signal novelty and "contribute in a more nuanced
manner" to awareness? All of the requisite information would
appear to be available. In defence of the latter formulation, it
could be argued that it is better able to deal with such phenomena
as hallucinatory experiences occurring within a single modality.
Gray's target article suggestion that a function of consciousness
should be sought in "the modification of such transactions for
future use" (sect. 6, para. 3) is appealing. One possibility is that it
acts as a guide to what is most usefully stored and employed in the
generation of future predictions. "Match outcomes" (cf. sect. 5.14,
para. 3) may only enter conscious experience when the reinforce-
ment systems are activated.
A feature of consciousness emphasized by James (1890; 1892) is
its essential continuity in the normal waking state. To the extent
that aspects of preceding sensory input are preserved within the
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
683

Commentary /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
"expectancy" which is generated, and which is integrated with
subsequent input, the model has a certain "transparency" with
respect to this feature of consciousness. James proposed that the
transitive parts of conscious experience result in its "distinctive
stream like attributes," and that they are composed of vague
impressions of cognitive activity or "feelings of tendency." It is
tempting to equate these with the unconscious expectancies of
Gray's model (sect. 1, para. 13). As James pointed out, where the
stream of consciousness is disrupted, psychopathology results,
corresponding to such phenomena as "thought block." It is of
course a malfunction of the "prediction generator" which is at the
core of the cognitive model of schizophrenia (Gray et al. 1991a;
1991b; Hemsley 1993; 1994).
Gray excludes self awareness from his model (Introduction).
Collicutt and Hemsley (1985), however, have emphasized James's
distinction between the "empirical self," which can be the object
of thought, and the "pure ego" which gives active thought its own
personal identity and which may indeed be identical with the
stream of thought. I have argued (Hemsley 1994) that this aspect
of the sense of self corresponds to the consistent manner in which
stored material operates on sensory input. James noted that we are
aware of responding to even a novel stimulus in a way that has a
certain familiarity. The idea that there is a fundamental distur-
bance in the "sense of self" in schizophrenia has played a central
role in the development of theories of the disorder. On the above
formulation it is implicit in the cognitive model.
In the normal subject, a novel stimulus is considered to elicit the
"mismatch" signal and the associated increase in arousal and
attentional allocation because no "stored regularity" is available. In
schizophrenia, the model proposes that repeated "mismatch"
signals result from a failure within the circuit contributing to the
moment by moment predictions of subsequent sensory input. It is
therefore reassuring that anxiety is prominent in the early stages of
schizophrenia (Chapman 1966) and is associated with positive
symptomatology (Penn et al. 1994).
Schizophrenia clearly encompasses a set of phenomena where
the characteristics of normal conscious experience are particularly
disrupted. However, although the Gray et al. (1991a; 1991b)
model can plausibly account for a range of disturbances, it does, as
the authors acknowledge, have difficulties with hallucinations, the
most striking of the disturbances of the stream of conscious
experience. It is unclear why repeated "mismatch" signals should
result in such phenomena. It is possible that they provide a
"window of opportunity" for the intrusion of material from long
term storage. Gray's (1982; see multiple book review: "The Neuro-
psychology of Anxiety" BBS 5(3) 1982) model of anxiety suggested
that the storage of those regularities upon which expectancies are
based may be within the temporal lobes, and that the direct
projection from temporal cortex to subiculum (Van Hoesen et al.
1979) may therefore be relevant. Normal input to subiculum is
conceivably required to inhibit the direct flow of information from
the temporal lobes. I have argued elsewhere (e.g., Hemsley 1993)
that the abnormal perceptual experiences of normal subjects in
conditions of unstructured sensory input (no "predictions" pos-
sible) provide a model for such phenomena.
It appears likely that the model will require considerable
extension/modification to deal with the abnormalities of conscious
experience characteristic of the later stages of schizophrenia.
Anxiety/arousal is not normally prominent, whether indexed be-
haviourally or in terms of electrodermal responsiveness; and the
clinical picture is frequently of such negative symptoms as "pov-
erty of thought." As Anscombe (1987, p. 254) puts it, "less and less
the subject forms his own impressions and more and more he is
impinged upon by his environment" (my emphasis). This conceiv-
ably corresponds to a failure to generate any predictions, or ones
so vague as to fail to elicit the "mismatch" signal. This in turn raises
a further issue the model must eventually address: What factors
affect the "limited set of attributes" (sect. 5.8) upon which match-
ing is to be based and which in turn determine the content of
conscious experience?
Perspective, reflection, transparent
explanation, and other minds
S. L. Hurley
Department of Politics, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, England
Abstract: Perspective and reflection (whether involving conceptual or
nonconceptual content) have each been considered in some way basic to
phenomenal consciousness. Each has possible evolutionary value, though
neither seems sufficient for consciousness. Consider an account of con-
sciousness in terms of the combination of perspective and reflection, its
relationship to the problem of other minds, and its capacity to inherit
evolutionary explanation from its components.
There are two features that have seemed to many in some way
important in understanding phenomenal consciousness. These are
perspective and reflection. By perspective, I mean the point of
view that we attribute to creatures who are agents and perceivers,
who move actively through their environment and interact with it
while perceiving it. The challenge here is to say something about
what it is to occupy a perspective that does not simply presuppose
consciousness. By reflection, I mean that exercise of a capacity to
sustain states with contents (be they conceptual or nonconceptual)
that are reflexively higher-order in some way, that is, are in some
way about their possessor or its contentful states, among other
things. Though "reflection" may suggest conceptual content and
thought, what is needed here may be reflexively higher-order
content with no commitment to its conceptual character, if one
wishes leave open whether creatures without concepts may be
conscious. Of course, reflexive contents, along with other con-
tents, need not be conscious; I may have an unconscious thought
about my own thoughts. Without this proviso, the appeal to
reflection would move in a very small circle.
I take Gray's hypothesis to relate to the challenge to say
something that doesn't simply presuppose consciousness about
the perspectival aspects of consciousness. There is a generic
similarity among various current moves in this area, all of which
involve an appeal to feedback and something like a comparator
system. I describe the essential structure here as that of a complex
adaptive feedback system (Hurley, work in progress). The general
idea implicit in these various moves, as I see it, is this: a creature
with perspective (that is, a creature that is an agent and a
perceiver) keeps an ongoing record of the relationships between
motor output and sensory input, and compares current motor
output with current sensory input for match or mismatch with the
recorded relationships. Sensory input is a function of both motor
output and environment, and keeping running track of this func-
tion via multiple feedback channels and a dynamic comparator
system is essential to both agency and perception, and thus to the
capacity for perspective. This is an important idea, because it
corrects the dominant tendency to think of sentient creatures
exclusively the other way around: to regard motor output as a
function of sensory input, and to consider how any cognitive or
rational capacities may interface between the two.
Gray regards his hypothesis as falling short of meeting the
demand for a transparent explanation of consciousness pressed by
Nagel and others: while it goes beyond mere brute correlation to
provide some structural understanding of consciousness, it still
leaves mysterious why there should be any such thing as con-
sciousness at all. The point could be generalized to the appeal to
perspective at large: even if the above general ideas about per-
spective are correct, why should a creature with perspective in this
general sense be conscious? Why couldn't the whole dynamic
system operate without consciousness, and what makes the differ-
ence? What is the added value of consciousness, in evolutionary or
other terms? Of course, there is no similar problem about why
perspective understood as above might have evolved - there is
plenty to say about that. It is just that perspective, it seems, might
obtain without consciousness - so why should it obtain with
consciousness? The essential ingredient still seems to be missing;
the demand for transparent explanation is not met.
684
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Commentary /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
Similar points have been made about the appeal to reflexively
higher-order content in explaining consciousness. In a nutshell, it
seems quite possible for there to be unconscious contentful states
and unconscious higher-order contentful states; so it seems pos-
sible that the entity to which we attribute reflective states not be
conscious - unless, that is, we have built consciousness into the
idea of reflection from the beginning. Could there not be an
automaton or a computer with the capacity for reflexively higher-
order contentful states? Surely it would not therefore necessarily
be conscious! Again, the essential ingredient seems to be missing,
and the demand for transparent explanation is not met. While we
can understand why a capacity for higher-order contentful states
per se might be of evolutionary value (consider false alarm calls
and the like), why couldn't any such evolutionary work be done just
as well without consciousness?
The above is intended to summarize very roughly points that are
already familiar in the literature. The question I want to go on to
raise is this: even if we grant these familiar points when they are
made separately about the appeals to perspective and to reflec-
tion, what happens when we combine these two ideas? That is,
suppose instead of trying to account for consciousness either in
terms of perspective or in terms of reflection separately, we appeal
to both at once? (Are they really as independent of one another as
they first appear to be? - a deep issue, which I don't pursue here.)
Consider the possibility that neither alone is sufficient for con-
sciousness, that neither alone provides the missing ingredient, but
that they are both necessary and are jointly sufficient for con-
sciousness. A centipede or a sleepwalker may have perspective,
but presumably lack reflection; a computer may have higher-order
states, but it lacks the full-blooded perspective of agency and
perception. The combined account doesn't rule out of conscious-
ness creatures incapable of deploying concepts, since it allows for
nonconceptual reflexive states. Thus it may meet worries, which
attach to pure higher-order thought accounts, about whether
higher-order thought is necessary for consciousness. (Davies &
Humphreys 1993, pp. 25-26). But is the combination sufficient
for consciousness? If an entity has both perspective and reflection,
is there a further question about whether it is conscious?
A bad response to this question is this: How could these factors
together make for consciousness, when neither does separately?
This just assumes without justification a kind of separability, that
is, that perspective and reflection could not together amount to
something qualitatively different from what they amount to sepa-
rately. A different response is more enlightening: it amounts to
invoking a version of the problem of other minds. After all,
philosophers are familiar with the sceptical hypothesis that, for all
we know, the other human beings around us, who feature both
perspective and reflection par excellence, might really be robots
or automata, not conscious at all. To the extent that it is conceiv-
able that creatures with these features lack phenomenal con-
sciousness, appeal to these features cannot provide a fully satisfy-
ing explanation (cf. Davies & Humphreys 1993, p. 35). If satisfying
both criteria doesn't quiet such worries even in the case of human
beings where the reflection in question involves conceptual con-
tent, how could the combined account explain consciousness? And
how could the combination then possibly suffice for consciousness
in other animals, when even less is required, that is, where
nonconceptual reflexive states are involved?
But in reply we should ask: Does the demand for transparent
explanation, when applied to the combined appeal to perspective
and conceptual reflection, amount to any more than pressing a
form of the problem of other minds? Some philosophers still take
this problem seriously, but others do not. At least, if the need for
transparent explanation of consciousness in such cases could be
connected with a form of the problem of other minds, many might
find it less urgent. It is far from unintelligible that creatures with
perspective and conceptual reflection are conscious; rather, it is
natural to assume they are. To the degree this assumption is
philosophically acceptable, the explanatory gap may be reduced:
that is, the need may be reduced for transparent explanation of
why creatures with these features should be conscious (though not
for empirical explanation of these features themselves, as in Gray's
target article). The next question would then be: In the context of a
combined account, is the move from conceptual to nonconceptual
reflexive states critical? A difficulty here is to leave logical space
for a solution to occupy: we may want to allow the possibility that
creatures without concepts may be conscious, but want also to
allow the possibility that creatures with perspective and reflection
are not conscious. The danger is that, for any account that doesn't
simply help itself to consciousness directly, we want to insist both
that creatures who fail to satisfy it may be conscious and that
creatures who do satisfy it may not be. But nothing could meet this
specification.
Finally, notice a byproduct of the combined appeal to perspec-
tive and reflection in explaining why there should be such a thing
as consciousness at all: the combined account inherits any evolu-
tionary work done by perspective and by reflection separately. We
needn't offer an evolutionary account of why there should be
consciousness per se if we already have accounts of how each of
the two elements of consciousness might separately be of evolu-
tionary value. (Of course, I have not provided such accounts,
merely gestured in their direction.)
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I am grateful to Nicholas Rawlins and Anita Avramides for discussion of
these issues, and to the McDonnell-Pew Centre for Cognitive Neuro-
science in Oxford for its support of interdisciplinary work between
philosophy and neuroscience.
Mind - your head!
R. P. Ingvaldsen3 and H. T. A. Whiting6
'Department of Sport Sciences, University of Trondheim, N-7055 Dragvoll,
Trondheim, Norway; "Department of Psychology, University of York,
Heslington, York, YO1 SDX, United Kingdom, rolf.ingvaldsen@no.unit.avh
and htawi @tower. york.ac.uk
Abstract: Gray takes an information-processing paradigm as his departure
point, invoking a comparator as part of the system. He concludes that
consciousness is to be found "in" the comparator but is unable to point to
how the comparison takes place. Thus, the comparator turns out not to be
an entity arising out of brain research per se, but out of the logic of the
paradigm. In this way, Gray both reinvents dualism and remains trapped in
the language game of his own model - ending up dealing with the
unknowable.
1. Mind - your head! The essential and necessary element in
any theory that rests upon a cybernetic way of thinking is a
comparator. Robb (1972), for example, in her exposition of an
information-processing approach to skill acquisition, sees the
function of such a comparator to be the comparison of mental
images of the intended action with the actual outcome - the
difference being the information of value and the reason for
further action. Gray goes beyond this basic requirement in equat-
ing the output of just such a comparator with the phenomenon of
consciousness, at the same time leaving it unclear as to why the
brain should generate conscious experience at all.
In an attempt to clarify his own position, Gray resurrects some
of the old body-mind ghosts for our attention. In declaring
Cartesian dualism to be an obsolete position, he puts forward an
alternative which he explains in terms of levels of organization -
consciousness being postulated as the fourth level in a comparator
model that encompasses three interlinked levels of analysis: be-
havioural, neural, and cognitive. Gray is at pains to assure us that
his scientific approach (using as an analogy the development of
quantum mechanics) is not just a question of "dealing with the
unknowable or a bad language habit" but represents a real step in
the direction of a scientific theory of consciousness.
Given the paradigm selected by Gray, and his conviction that
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
685

Commentary /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
"consciousness is in some way a product of the brain, a product
intimately connected with the brain's role in behaviour and the
processing of information," this is a position which it is very easy to
understand. We are in no way convinced, however, that Gray has
solved any of the fundamental problems arising from the position
of Cartesian dualism (e.g., by introducing the concept of "brain
events and conscious experience" or by getting rid of the language
problems involved in the selected paradigm. On the contrary, we
wish to claim that Gray both reinvents dualism in his model and
remains trapped in the language-game - ending up dealing with
the unknowable.
2. Dualism and/or duality. Gray wishes to claim that, in scien-
tific terms, one's own conscious experience is a datum that "stands
in need of explanation," whereas for others, consciousness only
functions as an hypothesis by which to explain behaviour. In
making this claim, Gray contradicts Descartes' cogito ergo sum in a
radical way. After all, for Descartes, consciousness was the only
thing that could not be doubted and it accordingly formed the
cornerstone for all other truths - as such, it was not a matter for
science but served as a premise on which to build logic (and
science). On the other hand, Gray, like Descartes, puts forward the
individual experience of consciousness as an independent datum
to be trusted and insists upon consciousness influencing behav-
iour, that is, "steering" the physical matter. For Descartes, the
connection between consciousness and the physical world was
guaranteed by God; for Gray, by Darwin. We would like to make
two comments in relation to this standpoint:
As Wittgenstein (1976) points out, as our conscious experience
is private, we cannot know it as we do other "things." It will remain,
therefore, as Gray also points out, a kind of hypothesis that can
explain the behaviour of others. But this is not the crux of the
problem! As Wittgenstein (1976, p. 293) points out, the root
problem is that we cannot take our experience as an independent
datum because there are no criteria by which it can be evaluated.
An attempt can be made to rescue the situation by appealing, as
does Gray, to the Darwinian logic of this datum, but to do this one
must reason with someone, that is, the private datum of conscious-
ness rests on a collective discourse, thereby questioning the
original argument of consciousness as an independent datum.
Gray also insists upon consciousness as having some kind of
effect on behaviour; "we" are not just observing our own experi-
ence. He also admits that there are no (neurophysiological) clues
as to how the connection could occur, just some indication of
where in the brain it is likely to happen. In this respect, Gray is on
the same level as Descartes - they both think (hope) to know the
whereabouts of consciousness. For Descartes, the problem was
how to connect two kinds of "reality"; for Gray it is how to
understand the relation between different levels of organization.
But, as the relation between consciousness and organization on
the level below are not known, this constitutes a kind of meth-
odological dualism - arising from the levels of analysis approach
implicit in the paradigm adopted. However, as the relation be-
tween the lower levels is also obscure, we would prefer to say that
we are here dealing with a set of dualisms - there are several sets
(levels) of data without any known connection even though they
are presupposed to be interlinked, arising, as they do, from looking
at the same organism. This is, as we see it, a problem inherent in
any interpretation in which "levels" are given a kind of indepen-
dent, ontological, status. One must look for the connections - each
unknown connection giving rise to its own dualism (e.g., body vs.
mind, neurophysiology vs. information processing, etc.). The
problem can only be resolved by investigating the model invoked
(the paradigm) and not by looking into the head. Haken (1988),
from a Synergetics perspective, does make an attempt to resolve
the problem by trying to find rules which would connect the
different levels but this, in itself, does not remove the fundamental
problem implicit in any levels of analysis approach.
3. Traps in the language of information-processing. Any
theory that takes an information-processing paradigm as its depar-
ture point must invoke a comparator as part of the system, the
comparator forming the link between input and output leading to
a controllable system (Ingvaldsen & Whiting 1993). If one decides,
like Gray, to incorporate consciousness into the controlling system
one is ultimately faced with the question about the whereabouts of
the seat of consciousness. From the paradigm Gray embraces,
there can be only one answer - in the comparator! But, even if we
locate this "seat," we are still left with the problem of explaining
how the comparison takes place and how the levels are inter-
connected. This, as Gray admits, we do not know! From his
theoretical standpoint, we only know that the result is in terms of
match/mismatch decisions which make up the content of con-
sciousness. Thus, it seems clear that the comparator is not an
"entity" arising out of brain research per se but out of the logic of
the paradigm. In this way, Gray remains trapped in his own
language game, with the consequent risk of trying to "know" the
"unknowable"!
Information synthesis in cortical areas as an
important link in brain mechanisms of mind
Alexei M. Ivanitsky
Institute of Higher Nervous Activity and Neurophysiology, Russian Academy
of Sciences, GSP-7, Moscow 117865, Russia, ivanit@ivnd.msk.su
Abstract: To explore the mechanism of sensation correlations between
EP (evoked potential) component amplitude and signal detection indices
(d' and criterion) were studied. The time of sensation coincided with the
peak latency of those EP components that showed a correlation with both
indices. The components presumably reflected information synthesis in
projection cortical neurons. A mechanism providing the synthesis process
is proposed.
Gray proposes an attractive brain mechanism of consciousness.
His ideas are rather close to our hypothesis about the brain
mechanism of sensation based on experimental work (Ivanitsky &
Strelets 1977; Ivanitsky et al. 1989). I returned to these ideas in my
recent publications (Ivanitsky 1993; 1994). These data have also
been summarized in two monographs published in Russian
(Ivanitsky 1976; Ivanitsky et al. 1984). Since that time some
important data have appeared that are likewise in good correspon-
dence with our views.
The idea of our experiments was as follows. In one series, the
subjects had to discriminate the intensity of visual stimuli and in
another series that of somatosensory stimuli, responding via but-
ton press. Visual and somatosensory cortical evoked potentials in
response to stimuli were recorded. The psychophysical indices of
perception of the same stimuli were also measured using signal-
detection theoretic methods. Thus, we have the characteristics of
stimulus processing referring to two levels of events: brain events
in the form of evoked potential amplitudes and mental events
presented by two psychophysical indices - the detectability index
d' and the response criterion index. Correlations were calculated
between these two rows of events. These correlations were about
equal for visual and somatosensory modalities: the amplitude of
the first EP components correlated with d' values and the ampli-
tude of the late EP components, especially the P300 wave,
correlated with the criterion index. These correlations were quite
reasonable, as first components actually reflect the sensory input
to the cortical projection areas and the late components were
related to the evaluation of stimulus significance. Most important
was the double correlation of both the two psychophysical indices
and some intermediate components of the projection cortex EPs.
These components were the N140 somatosensory EP and P180
wave visual EP. It was concluded that these EP components
reflected the synthesis of two kinds of information: sensory infor-
mation about the stimulus physical parameters and memory
information about stimulus significance.
A hypothetical brain mechanism underlying the information
synthesis was proposed: There is first information flow from
686
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Commentary /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
projection to associative cortex, then to liinbico-hippocampal area,
the subcortical centers of emotion and motivation, with a subse-
quent return of the excitation to the cortex where this inflow was
superimposed on traces of sensory excitation in the projection
cortex neurons. It is noteworthy that- a similar excitation run was
described later by Mishkin (1993), who recorded neuronal activity
in the monkey brain.
It is of special interest that the peak latencies of those evoked
potential components that showed the double correlation with
psychophysical indices coincided rather precisely with the sensa-
tion time measured in psychophysical experiments (Baars 1993;
Blumenthal 1977; Pieron 1960). One may also note that this time is
quite compatible with the duration of the human theta-rhythm
cycle, which Gray considers a main timer in brain circuits underly-
ing mental events.
The idea of the excitatory circuits as a brain basis of conscious-
ness has also been developed by Edelman (1989). It is noteworthy
that the time of 150 msec taken for the reentrant process in
Edelman s scheme corresponds precisely with the visual sensation
time predicted in our experiments (180 msec). This time consisted
of the requisite 30 msec for nerve impulse arrival to the visual
cortex and 150 msec for a reentrant cycle.
The idea of information synthesis as an important link in the
brain basis of mind was later developed in our works on the brain
mechanisms of the thinking process. Special cortical formations -
interaction foci - have been described for the synthesis process
performance in associative cortical areas (Ivanitsky 1993).
Thus, we now see that rather similar networks have been
proposed by a number of scientists working in different countries
and using different methods. This fact could perhaps be consid-
ered a sign that our direction is correct and we are actually
approaching an understanding of the real mechanism of mind.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research described in this commentary was supported in part by grant
N M9Q000 from the International Science Foundation.
Septohippocampal comparator:
Consciousness generator or attention
feedback loop?
Marcel Kinsboume
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155.
Abstract: As Gray insists, his comparator model proposes a brute correla-
tion only - of consciousness with septohippocampal output. I suggest that
the comparator straddles a feedback loop that boosts the activation of
novel representations, thus helping them feature in present or recollected
experience. Such a role in organizing conscious contents would transcend
correlation and help explain how consciousness emerges from brain
function.
The target article embeds within an intuition that there is a Hard
Question about consciousness, a model which, to the author's
regret, merely addresses the Easy Question. But perhaps address-
ing the Easy Question will make the Hard One go away.
1. Intuitions about consciousness. Cray's intuition is that we
should be able to do better in explaining consciousness than to rely
upon "brute correlations between brain events and . . . conscious
experiences" (Intro., para. 3). This is true. But to call for a
paradigm shift to explain consciousness may be overkill. I believe
he underestimates the potential for explanation that resides in
studying the relationship between individual experiences and the
corresponding neural states. If such work results in simplifying
formulations that have predictive power, then this will have
rendered conscious states no less "transparent" than any theory in
physics does its target problem. The intuition that consciousness is
so special that it deserves more, has, since Gray (1971), been
enthusiastically restated by well-known others. This intuitive
meme at least motivates its carrier to strenuous efforts to stay alive
(and while alive, to spread the meme). However, intuitions are
equal opportunity enterprises, at the mercy of conflicting intu-
itions, such as my own. In any case, major discoveries are neces-
sarily counterintuitive and opaque to common sense. Otherwise,
they would already have been discovered.
2. The comparator. Being conscious is what it is like for a brain
to be in any one of a set of functional states. How does it achieve
such functional states? Gray suggests a brute correlation between
the subicular output of the septohippocampal (SH) system and
being conscious, but not how this comes about or how it relates to
the economy of the brain. Can we extend this suggestion beyond
correlation so as to align it with a functional model? If cell
assemblies entrain the representations they embody into the
totality of what the person is conscious of at the time, how might
the comparator influence these cell assemblies?
3. What does the comparator compare? Cray's model em-
bodies Sokolov's suggestion that the brain compares observed
input to anticipated input, a mismatch indicating novelty, in the
sense of unexpectedness. Since we do not first experience an event
and then its unexpectedness, the match/mismatch must be pre-
conscious. Gray plausibly concludes (contra Searle) that fully
elaborated and meaningful but as yet unconscious percepts queue
up for the comparator treatment. Does SH matching encompass a
convergence of coded information about all inputs mediated by all
sensory systems, classifying (tagging) them new or old?
My argument against massive sensory convergence (of which
Gray disapproves), was aimed against just this kind of homuncular
heresy. Of course sensory systems project to the hippocampal
formation. But given "sparse coding" in the hippocampus it is
implausible that the full richness of ongoing experience is shoe-
horned through SH for "consciousness treatment." "It is incon-
ceivable that any single region of the brain might integrate
spatially all the fragments of sensory and motor activity necessary
to define a set of unique events" (Damasio 1989, p. 38). Moreover,
hippocampal destruction does not abolish consciousness. But the
comparator might still contribute to the selection of contents for
consciousness, by intervening in the continual competition be-
tween cortical representations for prominence in experience.
4. The comparator's role in selective attending and remem-
bering. To remember (consciously re-experience) an episode, one
needs a retrieval cue (in any modality) that uniquely characterizes
the episode, so that the memorandum can be singled out from
countless generic-ally similar events (Kinsboume 1989). Clearly
such a cue must have elicited a "mismatch" signal when the
corresponding experience originally occurred. By virtue of its
novelty it would at that time have elicited selective attention by
activating the well documented back-projections from SH,
through subiculum (Swanson & Cowan 1977) directly as well as via
thalamic nuclei, to the cerebral cortex (Rosene & Van Hoesen
1977). So Gray's comparator straddles multiple loops that might
feed back to the novel representations/cell assemblies so as to
raise their level of activation. By means of this positive feedback,
their novelty would lend them a competitive edge relative to other
cell assemblies for entrainment in the "dominant focus" of cere-
bral activity. Also, such multiple representations that are simul-
taneously boosted would, by virtue of joining the dominant focus,
mediate relations among stimuli (Hirsh 1980). I have suggested
that a "dominant focus" of brain activity, consisting of entrained
representations and continually varying in its composition, under-
lies ongoing experience and intention (Kinsboume 1988; in press
a). Having a particular experience is what it is like for a brain to
incorporate a particular dominant focus.
The hippocampus' essential role in episodic remembering may
not be the direct result of selection pressures but a by-product of
this hypothesized boosting of the activation of distinctive repre-
sentations for further selective attention. When reactivated (cued)
at some later time, cortical cell assemblies that had been selec-
tively activated by feedback from the SH loop trigger the rein-
statement in awareness, by the vector completion property of the
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
687

Commentary /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
neural network, of crucial elements of the remembered (re-
experienced) events. At that moment, the dominant focus repre-
sents a prior event rather than what is happening at the time.
5. Which representations undergo comparator treatment?
Gray confronts my proposal that any representation could con-
ceivably contribute to awareness with Jackendoff's observation
that it is "intermediary" representations that do so. But these
claims are not incompatible. Those cell assemblies that cohere
more than momentarily more often represent finished percepts
than earlier stages in their microgenesis. But when processing
sequences are disrupted, other representations may also qualify
and generate altered states of consciousness in patients with brain
damage or psychopathology (Kinsbourne, in press b).
6. The comparator's significance for consciousness. Al-
though SH probably does not output the totality of conscious
content, as Gray suggests, it may largely determine which figure
emerges against the ground of competing inputs. This would be no
brute correlation but a step toward a general theory of how
consciousness works. If so, there would be no need to scrutinize
the output from subiculum for elite consciousness-generating
neurophysiology. Consciousness remains the subjective aspect of
the integrated activity of varying subsets of a wide range of cortical
cell assemblies (rather than of a unique module). We have no
reasons to attribute unique properties to this circuitry, as distinct
from minimal necessary organizational characteristics that are yet
to be discovered. Easy and Hard Questions merge.
Correlating mind and body
T. J. Lloyd-Jones, N. Donnelly, and B. Weekes
Department of Psychology, University of Kent, Canterbury, Kent CT2 7LZ,
U.K. t.j.lloyd-jones@ukc.ac.uk
Abstract: Gray's integration of the different levels of description and
explanation in his theory is problematic: (1) The introduction of conscious-
ness into his theorising consists of the mind-brain identity assumption,
which tells us nothing new. (2) There need not be correlations between
levels of description. (3) Gray's account does not extend beyond "brute"
correlation. Integration must be achieved in a principled, mutually con-
straining way.
Gray provides an impressive overview of his research, concentrat-
ing especially on his concerns with anxiety and schizophrenia. The
research, as he explains, addresses and attempts to integrate
theories at four levels of description: neuroanatomical, neuro-
chemical, information processing, and subjective symptomatol-
ogy. Considered within these levels, the outlined research, we
believe, is exemplary. However, despite a valiant effort, the at-
tempt to integrate the different levels of description and explana-
tion remains problematic.
Gray has set up a three-way set of equivalences where neural
activity (neuroanatomy and neurochemistry) = information pro-
cessing of a particular land = the generation of the contents of
consciousness (sect. 6.6). In this way, Gray presumes a form of
mind-brain identity theory (cf. Smart 1959) with an intermediate
level of description: that of information processing. Now, the
debate as to the relative merit of identity theory or parallelism (and
of whatever particular form of the theory one prefers, e.g., type or
token) has been long and strenuously argued. Moreover, it is still as
yet unresolved (see Bechtel 1988; Churchland 1984; Macdonald
1989). Nevertheless, the whole substance of Gray's claims to be
able to introduce the contents of consciousness into his theorising
consists of this assumption. A "new" theory that explains conscious
awareness in terms of mind-brain identity tells us nothing new.
Moreover, from this assumption arise two crucial issues which
need to be addressed: (1) To what extent are there or need there
be correlations between two or more of these levels? and (2) To
what extent does Grays account extend beyond "brute" correla-
tion?
Let us address the first issue. Neuropsychology has in the past
aimed to establish brain-behaviour relationships without in gen-
eral exploring the richness of the computations that may underlie
any particular faculty. According to this research strategy, it is
possible, in principle, to discover a location in the brain which is
responsible for consciousness (for example, the subiculum).
Therefore, to the extent that correlations exist between conscious-
ness and neural activity, these correlations will only point to a
mapping between a brain location and conscious awareness. In
contrast, however, we believe (with Gray) that to understand the
nature and complexity of consciousness it will be necessary to
develop functional models. These, we hope, will specify the
component processes which function so as to give rise to conscious
activity. However, it is important to acknowledge that the func-
tional level of description may, in principle, be instantiated in an
infinite number of ways at the neural level. Furthermore, it may
also be the case that consciousness can be instantiated within a
variety of different functional architectures. For example, Bad-
deley (1993) suggests that conscious awareness may be a function
of the central executive in his working memory model. Jackendoff
(1987) suggests that the functional component responsible for
visual conscious awareness is the 2.5D sketch as delineated by
Marr (1982). Thus, in contrast to the neuropsychological ap-
proach, no simple correlations may exist between the functional
level of description and either the neural or the conscious levels;
indeed, there need not be any correlation between functional
processing and conscious awareness levels of description and
explanation. At best, information gained from the neural level and
theorising at the neural level can constrain theorising at the
functional level.
With this in mind, we turn to point 2: Gray has incorporated an
intermediate functional level to facilitate the link between neural
and conscious levels of description. From the paragraph above the
question arises as to the extent to which information at the neural
level constrains: (1) the structure and function of the comparator
(producing match/mismatch decisions) and (2) the involvement of
schemas in the matching of stored knowledge to incoming sensory
data in the interaction of top-down and bottom-up information
processing. As far as we can ascertain, although Gray suggests
interesting possibilities for a range of information (device) -
neural level activity parallels - at no point does this analysis move
beyond that of brute correlation. No architectural constraints at
the neural level govern postulated functions at the information
processing level. Hypothesising more specific units within levels
of description nevertheless fails to go beyond correlation and
towards explanation. It is possible, however, to define such con-
straining architectural features for at least some psychological
systems (see Kosslyn et al. 1990 for an example from vision
research). To illustrate, recordings of cells within the visual path-
ways have suggested at least two functional systems: One begins in
the magnocellular layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN)
and projects upwards to the parietal cortex. This pathway seems
relatively specialised for the analysis of retinal motion and of
stereopsis; it is concerned with the location of objects in 3D space.
The second pathway begins primarily in the parvocellular layers of
the LGN and projects to the temporal cortex. Here the various
streams process colour and spatial detail and seem concerned
primarily with the recognition of objects (see Zeki 1993).
In summary, although attempts to integrate across levels of
description have immense value, the integration must be achieved
in a principled manner. Theorising is at its most powerful when
computational theory, neurological theory, and neurological and
behavioural evidence are used in mutually constraining way, and in
so doing drive research.
688
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Commentary/Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
Human consciousness: One of a kind
R. E. Lubow
Department of Psychology, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, 69978, Israel.
lubow@freud.tau.ac.il
Abstract: To avoid teleological interpretations, it is important to make a
distinction between functions and uses of consciousness, and to address
questions concerning the consequences of consciousness. Assumptions
about the phylogenetic distribution of consciousness are examined. It is
concluded that there is some value in identifying consciousness an exclu-
sively human attribute.
Gray's treatment of consciousness, while intriguing and thought-
provoking, at times takes a disturbing teleological turn, as when he
asks about its function. Although this may reflect nothing more
than careless phrasing, a few elaborations are in order. To begin
with, the distinction must be drawn between "function" and "use."
Consciousness has no function, in the sense that it does not exist in
order to accomplish something; it is not goal oriented. On the
other hand, granted that consciousness exists, it is, indeed, useful.
The distinction becomes obvious when one looks at physical as
opposed to biological phenomena. Gravity, for example, does not
exist in order to perform some function. Nevertheless, it is
extremely useful, in an endless number of unconnected ways,
from keeping coffee in my cup to shaping the evolution of
inorganic materials and organic life forms. Given that gravity
exists, there are certain inevitable consequences. But, surely we
would not want to identify that state of affairs with notions
concerning the functions of gravity.
When Gray does describe the consequences of consciousness,
he focuses on a very limited aspect of it: the momentary awareness
that is a byproduct of selective attention processes initiated by
exteroceptive stimulation. Surely the important advantages of
consciousness are not to be found in the coffee cup, but in some
larger arena. Indeed, the most salient feature of consciousness is
that it promotes an escape from the immediate present. With
consciousness, we actively reorganize the past as well as shape the
future. It is consciousness that allows us to cross the boundaries of
time and space, to build cathedrals and spaceships, to write
histories and, perhaps most to the point, to rewrite them.
These uniquely human, awe-inspiring consequences of con-
sciousness bring me to the next point. Although it has long been
fashionable, at least in some academic circles, and certainly in
Gray's paper, to treat consciousness as a product of evolution, in
the sense that consciousness is (or was) present in some degree
in organisms other than humans, there is good reason not to accept
such a hypothesis. To begin with, consciousness is a subjective
state which cannot be reported on by past or present nonverbal
organisms. However, that by itself is insufficient reason for refus-
ing to accept the hypothesis. There are many other such subjective
states which do not require introspective linguistic reports to
verify their existence, for example, vision. No one doubts that a
pigeon sees, although its visual experience may in no way resemble
our own; nor can one ever determine whether it does. This,
despite the fact that one can empirically demonstrate that human
and pigeon have similar visual acuity, similar spectral sensitivity
curves, and so forth. It is these latter observations, and hundred of
more obvious ones, both casual and formal, that allow us to
conclude that, yes, the pigeon does have vision. It is instructive
that no one would seriously debate that proposition. But what
comparable observations can be made that would allow us to
assess consciousness in nonhuman animals?
The early behaviorists, for reasons already noted, clearly ac-
cepted the proposition that consciousness was not the proper
domain for the scientific study of animal behavior. However, at a
metatheoretical level, they endorsed concepts such as gradualism,
continuity, and progress in regard to relating animal to man.
Consequently, in the interest of consistency, they were obliged to
delegitimize the study of consciousness in humans. The behavior-
ists avoided the phenomenon of consciousness in order to empha-
size the animal-like qualities in humans (and, indeed, at that time,
there was much to be gained from this tactic).
On the other hand, contemporary cognitive scientists, not
sharing with the early behaviorists their investment in animal
learning theory, focus almost exclusively on human behavior.
Nevertheless, they still accept traditional Darwinian notions of
continuity, and consequently they tend to see consciousness every-
where (Lubow 1981). Gray is no exception. By proposing an
animal model of schizophrenia (Gray et al. 1991), and using such a
model in his discourse on consciousness (present paper), he is
surely embracing the untestable notion that animals have con-
sciousness.
We appear, then, to have two alternatives, both serving the
interests of phylogenetic consistency: consciousness is either no-
where or everywhere. However, there is a third hypothesis, nei-
ther more nor less valid than that of continuity, one that allows for a
reconciliation between the demand for dealing with observables
and the impossibility of studying consciousness at the subhuman
level: consciousness is exclusively a property of the human brain.
Somewhere in the long line of hominid evolution, a critical mass of
some type(s) of neurological tissue was reached, and conscious-
ness appeared, as though full-blown from the head of Zeus. This,
of course, is the familiar idea of an emergent property, in regard to
which Jaynes (1976) argued that consciousness appeared as re-
cently as the first millennium B.C. Although one need not take so
strong a position, if one maintains that for prehistoric humans, as
in lower animals, we can only infer the presence of consciousness
from the material artifacts which survived their existence, then,
indeed, consciousness would be a recent, and exclusively human,
acquisition.
In summary, it is futile to make assumptions about the distribu-
tion of consciousness that are either all-inclusive or all-exclusive. It
would appear more reasonable to assume that consciousness is not
a mere extension of what preceded it, neither a longer nor a
stronger limb, but rather like language, which may be inextricably
linked with it, a qualitative change from prior conditions. And, just
as it would not be the best of tactics to study human language by
examining the grunts and snorts of lower animals, so the study of
consciousness would seem to be best confined to ourselves. There
may be some elemental truth in the tautological statement that
human consciousness is one of a kind.
Comparators, functions, and experiences
Harold Merskey
Professor Emeritus of Psychiatry, University of Western Ontario, London
Psychiatric Hospital, London, Ontario N6A 4H1, Canada
Abstract: The comparator model is insufficient for three reasons. First,
consciousness is involved in the process of comparison as well as in the
output. Second, we still do not have enough neurophysiological informa-
tion to match the events of consciousness, although such knowledge is
growing. Third, the anatomical localisation proposed can be damaged
bilaterally but consciousness will persist.
The theme is difficult and Gray has put together an attractive
theoretical schema. I think it fails to be acceptable for three
reasons.
First, there is something different between the outputs of a
comparator and an intuitive notion of consciousness. At least part
of consciousness appears to function in the middle of human
processes of evaluation, appreciation, or decision-making. Such
activities would be the computer/comparator's process and not its
results. But states of consciousness or outputs are also results and
not only steps, gears, agents (or Gods) in the middle of the
machine. Thus, the comparator model is in difficulties. What it is
thought to do does not comprehend the whole of cognition and
awareness.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
689

Commentary /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
The example of planning a journey challenges Gray's views.
Here consciousness is, at least in part, planning agent and ticket
clerk, partly visualizing where to go, while itemizing a sequence.
This must apply to a number of visualized actions. Such actions
then appear as outcomes rather than only as integral parts of
comparisons. This is not the pure function of a comparator.
Second, we can be very optimistic about a somewhat millennial-
ist notion that, given time, the brain functions or changes which
correspond to consciousness will emerge and be evident on the
basis of continuing neurophysiological discovery. For that to
happen we would have to be able to match conscious awareness
with contemporary, physiological reports, but that does not seem
to be inherently improbable, particularly in the days of modern
imaging. Until then- we may be wiser to wait, and time should
suffice for this outcome.
The third main reason for the failure of the theory is that it
depends upon some questionable anatomical propositions. Pre-
sumably, if the subiculum on both sides is not working, the
comparator system will not be active and consciousness will not be
available. If both temporal lobes are significantly damaged, the
individual does not lose consciousness but suffers a significant
impairment in memory (Scoville & Milner 1957). If the function of
the subiculum is held to be an essential component of conscious-
ness, then the theory is probably wrong in that particular detail.
Bilateral lesions of the hippocampus are not a favoured condition,
but have occurred once or twice in the past, and the descriptions of
such cases indicate continuing consciousness and awareness, de-
spite severe loss of anterograde memory. If the theory depends
upon this specific location for its validity, it cannot survive this sort
of factual information.
Pain provides another illustration of the anatomical problem. As
a primitive reflex, nociception calls into being responses which
may only involve consciousness secondarily. Pain is a very primi-
tive phenomenon, and - in so far as we can talk about it by analogy
in animals - it is associated with retreat from damaging or
potentially damaging stimuli. Nociception produces a response
which does not immediately require consciousness because the
built-in reflexes for removal from the scene or for defensive
fighting behaviour can be treated as automatic, occurring before
the emergence of an emotional state. Reports of localization of
pain to the cerebral cortex are quite rare for good reason since pain
hardly requires the elaborate contribution of the cerebrum. The
subjective states which we call pain may serve to amplify some
initial emergency behaviour and to provide continuing adaptive
behaviour. The best high level localization known for pain is
probably the cingulate portion of the limbic system (Talbot et al.
1991). This does not seem to require the subiculum for its
existence.
Gray makes a good point that consciousness is presumed to have
an evolutionary value. Perhaps this is because we can conceptual-
ize brain functions better in terms of the relationship between
awareness and responsiveness than if we rely only on the latter.
Consciousness may justify its biological pre-eminence simply
because it also has some evolutionary benefits. It is tempting to
suppose that these may include anticipatory visual formulations
and testing of ideas, and later adaptations which subjective states
will promote. Such benefits can be adaptive but again are not part
of the function of a simple comparator.
Perhaps widespread or multiple comparators are required,
some with process functions and others with experiential qualities
which provide for drives. This goes beyond Gray's propositions
that we can be grateful to him for offering a powerful complex
stimulus in the form of his schema.
The control of consciousness via a
neuropsychological feedback loop
Todd D. Nelson
Department of Psychology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Ml
48824. tdnelson@msu.edu
Abstract: Gray's neuropsychological model of consciousness uses a hier-
archical feedback loop framework that has been extensively discussed by
many others in psychology. This commentary therefore urges Gray to
integrate with, or at least acknowledge previous models. It also points out
flaws in his feedback model and suggests directions for further theoretical
work.
Though many before him have discussed the structure of goal-
directed behavior, no one until Gray, in this target article, has
explored in such detail the possibility of conscious experience
being linked to specific neurological structures, and for that alone,
Gray's model is worthy of serious consideration. Does it represent
an advance in our knowledge of how conscious experiences are
formed? I believe, with the right modifications (which I present
below), the model could present such an advance. I will restrict my
remarks to a discussion of the self-regulation model at its core.
Gray's comparator is the generic comparator that is central to
the models of Powers (1973), Carver and Scheier (1981), and
Miller et al. (1960). However, Gray proposes that the comparator,
at the neurological level only, seeks to determine whether there is
a "match or mismatch" (sect. 1, para. 7) between the current and
the predicted (or expected) state of the world. I find this a bit
simplistic for a description of the function of any comparator
system. Many researchers (including Gray) acknowledge that
behavior is organized hierarchically (Nelson 1993) and that the
functions of lower-level systems are controlled by the outputs of
their next-higher systems. Within this hierarchy, at each level,
there is a range of acceptable states of the world which will "fit"
with one's expectations for the comparison at that level. There is
also a range of perceptions which do not fit, or are unacceptable.
Hence even at the neurological level, there is this range of
acceptable and unacceptable comparisons between what is pre-
dicted and what is perceived. It is not enough to ask whether there
is a "match" or "mismatch" between the present condition and
what is expected. Rather, the question should be "If there is a
mismatch, what kind of mismatch is it?" Specifically, many re-
searchers (notably Powers and Carver & Scheier) contend that
behavior is controlled by a series of hierarchically ordered nega-
tive feedback loops. That is, if there is a match between percep-
tions and expectations, everything is fine. If the perception falls
short of expectations (a negative discrepancy), then the self-
regulatory system interrupts behavior (as Gray suggests occurs in
his description of the mismatch). What happens if the mismatch is
one in which our perceptions exceed our expectations (the positive
discrepancy)? Gray does not address this in his model, and he
should. These perceptions may not interrupt the behavioral se-
quence, even at the neurological level. Some (e.g., Bandura 1982)
have argued that positive discrepancies are essential to the self-
regulatory system. Others agree, but stipulate that these positive
feedback systems (or "discrepancy producing" systems) are inher-
ently unstable, and that they are subordinate to a higher-level
negative feedback ("discrepancy reducing") system (Scheier &
Carver 1988).
I was struck by the failure to refer to a literature that seems to
bear quite directly on the problem of how the neurological systems
produce the contents of conscious experience. Powers (1973;
1989) has proposed a cybernetic approach to behavior with a
hierarchical organization of self-regulatory feedback systems
along nine levels of control, ranging from the most abstract (the
ideal self-image) to a specific level of control (e.g., the neuronal
level). Powers (1980) even discussed how his model could account
for conscious experience. In his detailed model of the hierarchical
organization of behavior, Powers (1973) suggested that we act in
690
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Commentary/Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
order to change the environment so that it matches our expecta-
tions for that perception. In other words, behavior is simply the
control of perception. Gray suggests that his model shares much
with Neisser's (1976) perspective. Neisser writes, "The cognitive
structures crucial for vision are the anticipatory schemata that
prepare the perceiver to accept certain kinds of information rather
than others and thus control the activity of looking. . . . it is these
schemata . . . that determine what will be perceived" (as cited by
Gray, sect. 3, para. 12). Again, it seems that Gray is re-inventing
the wheel in stating "almost exactly what Powers wrote over 20
years ago.
Gray (section 5.14) states that his model has "no principled way
of accounting for the difference between such apparently uncon-
scious 'match' outcomes and the conscious variety that occur." I
am curious why Gray believes that the processes at the "automatic
processing" (Schneider & Shiffrin 1977) level and the conscious
processes should be different. Such a distinction seems unneces-
sary. The basic comparator processes that occur in conscious
activity also function outside conscious awareness (see Carver &
Scheier, 1981, for a detailed discussion of this point).
Although the notion that conscious experiences can be tied to
specific neurological structures and processes is not new (contrary
to Gray's assertions; see Powers 1973), Gray's model represents a
laudable first step in the investigation of how consciousness is
generated and how it is changed. An important next step for this
model (or variants of it) is to specify the reciprocal influence of the
feedback systems at the neurological level, and the higher levels
(e.g., the behavior sequences or prescriptions of behavior, what
Powers termed the "program" and "principle" levels, respectively)
in determining the moment by moment changes in the contents of
consciousness. In addition, it would be useful to examine how the
neurological system deals with positive discrepancies between
expectations and perception.
Reticular-thalamic activation of the cortex
generates conscious contents
James Newman
Colorado Neurological Institute, Denver, CO 80218. newmanjb@aol.com
Abstract: Gray hypothesizes that the contents of consciousness corre-
spond to the outputs of a subicular (hippocampal/temporal lobe) compar-
ator that compares the current state of the organism's perceptual world
with a predicted state. I argue that Gray has identified a key contributing
system to conscious awareness, but that his model is inadequate for
explaining how conscious contents are generated in the brain. An alterna-
tive model is offered.
1. Our work with Global Workspace (GW) theory and the neural
substrates of conscious processes (Baars 1983; 1988; Newman
1990; 1995; Newman & Baars 1993; Newman et al., in press) has
identified several key concepts and constraints in consciousness
studies. In his target article, Gray speaks to a number of these
issues. For example, he rightly concludes that a "unifying set of
concepts" is necessary to a scientific account of the evolutionary
and survival value of conscious behavior. The focus of Gray,
however, is upon how "primary awareness" might arise out of brain
events. His conjecture is that the "contents of consciousness
consist of the outputs of the subicular comparator" (sect. 3, para.
1). His model has a number of strengths and weaknesses. To
highlight these requires a brief presentation of an alternative
model of how conscious contents are generated within the brain.
A basic premise of GW theory is that the study of conscious
contents and processes must begin with a "contrastive analysis" of
conscious and unconscious phenomenon. For example, what is the
difference between my experience of writing this commentary and
my memory of writing a letter the previous day? Certainly the
latter exists in some recallable, yet nonconscious form. Or, what is
the difference between my conscious awareness of the ideas I am
conveying in this sentence and the multiple sub-tasks being
automatically carried out by my brain (e.g., word selection, sen-
tence parsing, typing, etc.), all with minimal-to-no awareness
(Baars 1988)?
The second example illustrates two basic distinctions in GW
theory. The first is that routine, overlearned cognitive tasks tend to
be performed unconsciously, by arrays of specialized modular
processors. In contrast, the "conscious system" consists of a global
workspace, or monitoring, architecture that allocates processing
resources based, first, upon biological contingencies of novelty,
need, or potential threat and, second, cognitive schemas, pur-
poses, and plans. The defining properties of perceptual contents
that engage conscious attention (i.e., the global allocation of
processing resources) are that they: (1) vary in some significant
degree from current expectations; or (2) are congruent with the
current, predominant intent/goal of the organism. In contrast, the
processing of stimuli which are predictable or overlearned is
automatically allocated to nonconscious, modular processors
(Newman et al., in press).
2. These GW criteria dovetail nicely with Gray's comparator
model. Conscious awareness requires an ongoing comparison of
present and past experience (as well as current intentions and
goals) to determine which of many competing stimuli are relevant
to conscious requirements and which are not. In a sense, the
organism is continually performing a contrastive analysis of its
present perceptions and behavior. Gray's "comparator" is clearly
central to this processes. But do its outputs, per se, generate
primary awareness?
The neuropsychological evidence militates against the subicular
region being the sine qua non for primary consciousness. The most
dramatic (but hardly unique) example is the widely studied case of
H. M., who underwent bilateral removal of the anterior two-thirds
of his hippocampus and a goodly portion of both temporal lobes.
His capacity for encoding new episodic memories since the 1953
operation has been profoundly impaired. He is quite incapable of
comparing his current state of mind with his post-surgery experi-
ences. Yet, no one has suggested that H. M.'s brain ceased
producing conscious contents. Hippocampal lesioned patients
simply have no continuity of awareness/memory beyond the
moment (except pre-surgery LTM) (Edelman 1989; Rose 1992).
3. There are regions of the brain the destruction of which results
in direct impairments of conscious awareness and attention. These
are, in order of severity: the reticular formation of the brain stem,
the intralaminar complex of the thalamus (ILC in Fig. 1, below),
and the cortical areas most densely interconnected with this
complex. Bilateral destruction of the reticular formation or
thalamic complex produces coma. Unilateral lesions of various
cortical areas or subcortical nuclei interconnected with the
reticular-thalamic core produce attentional neglect syndromes
(Bogen 1995; Mesulam 1985; Heilman et al. 1985).
Newman & Baars (1993) reviews the accumulated evidence of
over forty years of research implicating the extended reticular-
thalamic activation system (ERTAS) in the genesis of conscious-
ness. A more recent paper focuses upon the central role of the
thalamus in the generation of complex, distributed patterns of
EEG activation. It is these recurring oscillatory patterns, espe-
cially in the 20-60 Hz range, which Newman (1995) posits as the
neural analogs of conscious contents. Hippocampal-induced theta
rhythms (4-12 Hz) are integral, but secondary, to these processes.
4. Gray's subicular comparator makes a vital contribution to the
ERTAS system. I would argue, however, that subicular outputs
produce alterations in patterns of ERTAS activation, not conscious
contents per se (the subiculum's role in memory encoding and
recall is probably much more content specific, but is beyond the
limits of this commentary). Accepting Gray's "alternative" hypoth-
esis (sect. 3), I posit that his comparator provides feedback to the
ERTAS, "flagging" present perceptions as "expected/familiar" or
"unexpected/novel." A novel/unexpected flag interrupts ongoing
behavior, causing an ERTAS-mediated orienting response. Con-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
691

Commentary/Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
MIDBRAIN
RETICULAR FORMATjON
TEMPORAL LOBE
BRAIN STEM
Figure 1 (Newman). Outputs from the hippocampus/subiculum
travel via the fornix to the intralaminar complex (ILC) of the
thalamus, the midbrain reticular formation, and limbic nuclei (not
labeled). This activation effected via the fornix (theta rhythms)
conveys "flagging" messages ("unexpected" or "expected") to the
extended reticular-thalamic activation system (ERTAS), altering
the cortical E E C
versely, an expected/familiar flag would produce habituation or, in
the case of goal-directed behavior, a shift in attention to the next
step in the current program. These scenarios are consistent with
what is known about the anatomy and physiology of the ERTAS
and the comparator system Gray describes. The fornix, the main
subcortical output pathway of the subiculum/hippocampus, pro-
jects first to the intralaminar complex (ILC) and, finally, to the
midbrain reticular formation (see Fig. 1). The fornix is believed to
be the "pacemaker" for the hippocampal theta rhythm (Diamond
et al. 1985).
In conclusion, Gray articulately describes a complex limbic-
striatal-cortical system that is undoubtedly key to arousal, motiva-
tion, motor programming, and memory processes. Our model
views these functions of the comparator system, however, as
mediating between the unconscious and conscious systems of the
brain. This simply means that before any highly integrated percep-
tion that could become a conscious content can become one, it
must undergo a comparator "test" which flags it as relevant, or not,
to the organisms conscious needs/intentions. Edelman's (1989)
theory of "primary consciousness" says essentially the same thing
about the hippocampal system, describing it as "a selective link
between parallel and sequential patterns of global mappings
that . . . allow[s] temporal ordering of perceptual categorizations"
(p. 132). In this context, Gray actually goes considerably farther
towards elucidating the adaptive value of consciousness than he
realizes.
The elusive quale
Howard Rachlin
Psychology Department, State University of New York, Stony Brook, NY
11794. hrechlin@psych1 .psy.sunysb.edu
Abstract: If sensations were behaviorally conceived, as they should be, as
complex functional patterns of interaction between overt behavior and the
environment, there would be no point in searching for them as instan-
taneous psychic elements (qualia) within the brain or as internal products
of the brain.
A friend of mine, a newly married heterosexual man, once said to
me, "I'd give anything to know how a woman feels during sex." My
immediate response was to ask him whether he thought he already
knew how another man (I, for instance) felt during sex. On
reflection, I should have asked him whether he thought he knew
how he himself felt during sex, perhaps just an hour ago. He
probably would have replied that he remembered, and so knew in
the most direct possible way, how he himself felt. But in what way
is remembering a conscious experience like having the experience
itself? My friend's memory of his feeling during a sex act an hour
ago would certainly not have been a repetition or even a watered-
down sex experience (we were walking in the street at the time).
That memory must have been qualitatively different (a different
quale) from the original experience. My friends memory could not
possibly serve as a datum for the science (Gray envisions) that
would explain, "experience of primitive sensations, that is, qualia."
Perhaps, for Gray, a memory may itself be a quale, but it must
certainly be a different quale from the sensation it is a memory of.
Even if we grant that during sex my friend was having some sort of
particular conscious experience (of the sort envisioned by Gray),
there would be no way for him to know (in the sense envisioned by
Gray) how he felt during sex in general; how could he compare
that quale with a previous one? This is why, contrary to Gray, even
"the whole of psychophysics," past, present, and future, will never
flush out a quale. In psychophysical experiments people make
judgments about the presence or intensity of environmental
stimuli, not about conscious experience. We have neither internal
organs to sense internal quales (as distinct from environmental
stimuli) nor a vocabulary to describe them (as distinct from the
vocabulary we use to describe those stimuli).
Gray is right in criticizing philosophical functionalists and
materialists for identifying consciousness with the software or the
hardware of the brain. But he makes the same error they do in
supposing that consciousness is to be found in the brain in the first
place. As Gray knows, the stimulus that gives rise to the sensation
of red (let alone the experience of sex) consists of a very complex
spatially and temporally extended series of events. Why then does
he suppose that a sensation itself is a quale - a unitary internal
conscious element? It would be better to conceive of a sensation
(or any other conscious event) as an overt pattern of behavior; to
have a sensation of red is to have in the past discriminated between
red objects and not-red objects and at the moment to be making
such a discrimination. The sensation is located where all mental
events are located - not inside the body but in the functional
interaction of the whole body and the environment in what
Skinner (1953) called a "history of reinforcement" and Gibson
(1950) called an "affordance."
By way of questioning this sort of behavioristic program for
studying the mind, Gray asks, "What is the difference between two
awake individuals, one of them stone deaf, who are both sitting
immobile in a room in which a record player is playing a Mozart
string quartet?' (cited by Rachlin 1994b; Staddon 1993). Let us
call this Gray's first question. A behaviorist could (and should)
answer: "One individual is hearing the music and one is not." But
what does it mean to hear and not to hear? To hear is to
consistently discriminate between sound and silence by revealing
over time what Gray would call a "brute correlation" between
overt behavior and sound. For the hearing person this correlation
is significantly different from zero; for the stone deaf person, the
correlation is zero. That and that alone is what it means to hear.
Gray's first question singles out a pair of corresponding (or
intersecting) points on two correlations. But it is in the whole
correlation over time, not any individual point, that the meaning of
"hearing" and "stone deaf" hides. Certainly the brain contains the
mechanism by which hearing works. But, as Gray's entire target
article illustrates, no matter how precisely we examine this under-
lying mechanism, the quale still eludes us. There is every reason to
continue to study the brain, just as there is every reason to pursue
the science of chemistry. But we are no more likely to understand
the mind through the workings of the brain than we are to
understand the meaning of a painting through the chemistry of
paint.
692
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Commentary /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
In further response to arguments like these, Gray (personal
communication) has posed a second question: "What if both
listeners are hearing the Mozart quartet but one is enjoying it and
one is not?" This question progresses from (supposedly simple)
perception to perception plus feeling or emotion. But the behav-
ioral view still applies. What matters for mental states is not just
present overt behavior but present overt behavior in the context of
the past and future. If one listener listens to Mozart all the time
and all his friends and relatives believe he loves Mozart then by
definition he loves Mozart; if the other usually refuses to listen to
Mozart and his friends and relatives all believe he hates Mozart
then by definition he hates Mozart. The Mozart lover still loves
Mozart even if he happens to be suffering from a broken leg at the
moment (see Rachlin, 1985, for a discussion of pain as behavior).
The Mozart-hater still hates Mozart even if he is in the process of
digesting a pleasant meal. Patterns of behavior may overlap. What
is the point of adding one or a series of love-Mozart or hate-Mozart
quales to these patterns? Can you really hate Mozart and still
repeatedly and consistently act as if you loved Mozart? Such a state
of affairs is not just empirically impossible - it is logically impossi-
ble (Rachlin 1994a; 1994b).
Finally, granting that Cray's conception of consciousness (as an
eventually understandable but not presently known internal state
caused by, but not identical to, brain physiology) has motivated
superb physiological research (by Gray and others) and perhaps
led to some useful clinical techniques, why complain? The reason
to complain is that Gray's approach sets consciousness up on a
pedestal and at the same time trivializes it. According to Gray we
should try to understand consciousness for the same reason that
Hilary climbed Mt. Everest, "because it is there." In that case we
could pursue physiology, ignore behavior, and safely wait for some
psychological Hilary (or Einstein or Planck) to come alone to
figure out how the brain gives birth to qualia.
In summary, even such relatively simple conscious events as
sensations and perceptions are best conceived as complex func-
tional patterns of interaction between overt behavior and environ-
ment. The reason the brain mechanism generates such patterns is
that they maximize utility (Rachlin 1995) and, thereby, survival.
Conscious events (properly understood as behavioral patterns)
have no meaning at an instant of time. It is therefore futile to
search for an instantaneous psychic element (a quale) either in the
brain or as an internal product of the brain. It is not there.
Unitary consciousness requires distributed
comparators and global mappings
George N. Reeke, Jr.
Laboratory of Biological Modelling, The Rockefeller University, New York,
NY 10021. reeke@lobimo.rockefeller.edu
Abstract: Gray, like other recent authors, seeks a scientific approach to
consciousness, but fails to provide a biologically convincing description,
partly because he implicitly bases his model on a computationalist founda-
tion that embeds the contents of thought in irreducible symbolic represen-
tations. When patterns of neural activity instantiating conscious thought
are shorn of homuncular observers, it appears most likely that these
patterns and the circuitry that compares them with memories and plans
should be found distributed over large regions of neocortex.
1. Consciousness and computation. Gray promises a scien-
tific approach to explaining the contents of consciousness (specifi-
cally "primary awareness": Edelman 1989; Jackendoff 1987), but
he is only able to identify these contents rather loosely with the
output of a neural circuit that compares current and predicted
states of the perceptual world. After criticizing Dennett and
Kinsbourne (1992), quite properly, for just asserting that aware-
ness is an irreducible property of appropriately functioning neural
assemblies, he fails to provide a sufficiently rich alternative. He
recognizes that the output of a comparison is a simple match/
mismatch decision, but then founders in trying to describe how
this binary output might be augmented to represent thoughts. But
a mere coded signal can never be a thought (Bickhard 1991). Gray
makes this category error because he fails to free himself from the
assumption that thought is a computation.
This assumption that the main function of the brain is to process
information, (sect. 1, para. 6) that is, to compute, implies that the
brain traffics in encoded representations. If that is all there is,
awareness can indeed only be an epiphenomenon, as Dennett has
recognized. But if the main function of the brain is instead to
create information, then conscious thought can be understood as
one form taken by the created information.
The computational analogy leads Gray to err by breaking
conscious processes down into modules that communicate by
exchanging messages, as in a parallel computer (see Reeke 1991
for a commentary on a similar assumption by Minsky 1985). One
of these modules is the Cartesian theater, which Gray identifies
with his comparator circuitry (sect. 5.9), although by Dennetts
definition it should be the place where the output of the compara-
tor is interpreted. It is curious that Gray makes a point of
dismissing the arguments against the Cartesian theater, even
though he accepts that it creates difficulties for his theory (sect.
5.9), when his theory does not require such a region. Gray does so
to help explain the perceived unity of consciousness in the face of
the separateness of the sensory modalities (Jackendoff 1987).
A better explanation for this apparent dichotomy can be found
by focussing less on the comparator and more on what is to be
compared. In this view, the contents of consciousness must com-
prise large portions of the responses of individual sensory areas, as
well as responses in areas (e.g. the entorhinal cortex) that receive
input from multiple sensory pathways. The perceived unity of
these diverse elements is a consequence of their extensive reen-
trant interconnections, which give rise to what Edelman (1987)
has called "global mappings." By postulating a single area where
the output of his comparator is interpreted to generate conscious
thought, Gray invests his theory with a not-so-hidden homunculus
(Reeke & Edelman 1988), the functioning of which he does not
even attempt to explain.
2. Comparator and hippocampus. If we were to set aside these
arguments about the inadequacy of comparator output as the
physical basis of thought and accept Grays account of conscious-
ness, we would still find several problems with the anatomical and
physiological picture of the comparator itself that Gray has given
us. Contrary to Gray, such a comparator could not be located in the
hippocampal formation, but would have to be widely distributed
throughout the cerebral cortex to be consistent with the data on
behavior and memory in humans and animals with hippocampal
lesions (reviewed in, e.g., Cohen & Eichenbaum 1994), partic-
ularly that regarding the celebrated case H. M. (Scoville & Milner
1957) who is perfectly conscious yet, as Gray himself admits, lacks
most of the circuitry critical to the comparator theory. The theta
rhythm can hardly be the main timer that regulates conscious
experience in Gray's model, given that it is so inconspicuous as to
be arguably absent in primates. Gray too readily dismisses the
smoothness of conscious perception in the face of the chunkiness
predicted by his theory based on a succession of discrete compari-
son events. Finally, the binding problem appears to be solved by
phase entrainment of pulse trains in cortex, not by subicular
activation as argued by Gray (Eckhorn et al. 1988; Gray & Singer
1989; Tononi et al. 1992).
Gray mentions (Introduction, para. 5), but does not describe,
the consciousness theory of Edelman (1989), which Edelman
works out in full detail, including a discussion quite different from
Gray's (sect. 2) of how disorders such as schizophrenia might arise
from disruptions of particular pathways in the conscious brain.
Because Edelman s theory also involves a neural comparator in a
central role, it is important to distinguish the two theories.1 For
Edelman, categorization rather than comparison is the central
process of consciousness. Categorization is a property of even the
most rudimentary nervous systems, because it is necessary for
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
693

Commentary /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
discriminative behavior. The key added feature in conscious brains
is the presence of massive reentrant loops in which categorizations
of interoceptive stimuli, external stimuli, and comparisons of the
two are continuously confronted with new categorizations of the
world. Categorization of the comparison between external and
internal stimuli (C[C(W)C(I)] in Edelman's notation) is the basis
for memory, which therefore emerges as a recategorization of
correlated current and prior responses. Edelman avoids ascribing
the contents of consciousness to the output of the comparator, or
of any other single area, considering it rather to be a global
property of the entire system.
3. Adaptive value of consciousness. 
Cray professes to be
unable to find sufficient adaptive value in conscious awareness to
support its emergence during evolution. Yet, if he is conscious the
way I am, he must have noticed the ongoing contributions of
conscious thought to problem solving and planning, both short-
and long-term, without which survival would be incomparably
more difficult. Gray's problem can only arise if conscious aware-
ness is an epiphenomenon of an underlying computational process
that is actually responsible for planning and problem solving. Gray
accepts this point of view, citing arguments and data reviewed in
Velmans (1991) and Libet (1993) to the effect that conscious
awareness can be reported in certain situations only after behavior
has been decided. Gray recognizes that this view requires an
explanation for the efficacy of computation to control behavior, as
does that of the spiritual mind in dualistic theories. He appeals for
this to Pylyshyn (1984), who describes how the semantic content of
neural signals can affect their interactions with the neuronal
circuitry in which they exist.
However, an explanation for the puzzling data of Libet and
others, one that preserves the efficacy of conscious thought, can be
arrived at by dropping the assumption that conscious processes are
unitary and occur in a single Cartesian theater. If awareness is
distributed across most of the cortex, as suggested above, and
unified by reentrant signalling, then it is quite possible for differ-
ent aspects of awareness to occur in different sequences as
perceived elsewhere in the system. The situation is analogous to
the relativity of simultaneity in Einsteinian space-time, except that
here the velocity of signal propagation is so much less than the
velocity of light that apparent reversals in temporal sequence can
readily be perceived, even within the brain of a single observer,
(see Fig. 1).
4. Qualia. The participation of multiple, reentrantly interacting
brain regions in conscious awareness provides one possible, tenta-
tive approach to the problem of qualia, one of the phenomena for
which Gray would have us seek an account (Introduction, para. 4).
Gray makes a beginning with his idea that we can deduce sim-
ilarities in some aspects of the conscious experience of rodents and
primates from the similar effects of certain drugs in the two orders
(sect. 2, para. 19). However, this analysis is suspect, because the
similarity of drug effects can be predicted from similarities in
physiology without any reference to the contents of neural signals.
Anaesthetics, paralytics, and more subtle drugs would be expected
to work just as well in zombies as in humans.
I suggest that a better approach can be found by considering the
nearly perfect continuity of conscious awareness across small
changes in the environment and its consistency across multiple
sensory domains. These facts practically demand a corresponding
continuity and consistency in the underlying neural activity. Edel-
man & Reeke (1990) made a similar argument regarding peoples
ability (which we called "zoomability") to ponder aspects of the
world at many different levels of detail, moving among these levels
at will. Perhaps when we become able to enumerate some of the
possible mappings of phenomena in the world onto patterns of
neural response, it will be found that these requirements of
continuity, consistency, and zoomability will impose severe con-
straints on the mappings that are admissible. These constraints
would operate similarly in all individuals of a species, leading to
similarities in their neural responses and possibly in the qualia they
perceive.
Figure 1 (Reeke). Because of the relatively slow transmission
velocity of neural signals, particularly along polysynaptic path-
ways, two neural responses, a, occurring in region A, and p,
occurring in region B of the cerebral cortex, can be perceived in
opposite order in different areas constituting parts of the appa-
ratus of conscious awareness, designated by C\ and C2. In this
highly schematic example, B reaches Cy before a, but a reaches
C2 before B. The percept depends on the nature of the signals and
the past experience of the organism, although, in fact, a and B are
simultaneous events.
NOTE
1. My description here is a severely abbreviated summary of Edelman s
ideas which necessarily omits relevant qualifications and supporting evi-
dence. See the references cited for details.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by a grant from the Neurosciences Research
Foundation.
Prospects for a cognitive neuroscience
of consciousness
Antti Revonsuo
Department of Philosophy/Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of
Turku, FIN-20500 Turku, Finland, revonsuo@sara.utu.fi
Abstract: In this commentary, 1 point out some weaknesses in Gray's
target article and, in the light of that discussion, I attempt to delineate the
lands of problem a cognitive neuroscience of consciousness faces on its
way to a scientific understanding of subjective experience.
Gray's approach to consciousness is reasonable. He admits that
phenomenological experience really exists and that the tough
problem is: What could provide us with strong theoretical under-
standing about the link between the mental and the neural reality?
He advocates a multidisciplinary strategy; convergence of the
research programs of philosophy, psychology, and neuroscience.
Given the merits of such a cognitive neuroscientific approach,
why is it then that the contribution Gray makes to our understand-
ing of consciousness remains relatively modest (as the author
himself admits)? One of the main problems appears to be that
there is currently no coherent field of consciousness research,
drawing from a common database of empirical evidence. Gray's
conjecture is based on models of anxiety and schizophrenia, but
there are many other theories that draw on completely different
sources. For example, Schacter's (1990) model is based on the
r, Cricks and Koch's
i (Crick 1994;
ophysiological properties
of wakefulness and sleep (LJinas & Pare 1991; Llinds & Ribary
694
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Commentary /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
1993), and Baars's (1994; Baars & Newman 1994) mostly on
cognitive and physiological psychology (for reviews, see Revonsuo
1993; 1994). It is encouraging that these models have also been
explicitly compared (Churchland 1994; Crick 1994; Llinas &
Ribary 1994). After all, they claim to investigate the very same
phenomenon; how could they afford to ignore each other?
It seems however, that Gray largely ignores these other theories.
He assigns a central role to the hippocampus and its theta rhythm,
whereas most of the theories mentioned above emphasize the role
of thalamocortical loops between primary sensory cortices and
thalamic nuclei and the 40-Hz oscillations discovered in those
systems. Gray does not give us any hint concerning whether his
hypothesis is a competing or a complementary one in relation to
the others. Also, there is an awkward lack of concordance between
Gray and some others about the basic question of whether the
hippocampus plays any part in bringing about conscious phenom-
ena. Consider the comments of Churchland (1994, p. 14) in a
recent review:
the hippocampus might have seemed a likely candidate for a central
role in consciousness because it is a region of tremendous convergence
of fibres from diverse areas in the brain. We now know, however, that
bilateral loss of the hippocampus, though it impairs the capacity to learn
new things, does not entail loss of consciousness. At this stage, ruling
something out is itself a valuable advance.
So, can we rule the hippocampus out or not? Are these disagree-
ments due to interpreting the same data differently, or simply to
some parties being unaware of some of the relevant data? If there
is no agreement in the field on even the very basic questions, it is
no wonder that consciousness research makes progress so ago-
nizingly slow. The lesson is that we need interaction between the
different theories of consciousness that draw from very different
empirical sources.
An important characteristic of Gray's model is the attempt to
integrate features of conscious experience with other levels of
analysis. This endeavor reflects the realization that a theory of
consciousness must not only grant that consciousness exists, but
also provide us with a description of the explanandum. While
Gray's attempt is certainly respectable, it seems to fall short of
providing any genuine insights into the relation between con-
sciousness and brain mechanisms. Why is this? As Gray (sect. 6,
last paragraph) notes, we are "waiting for a new kind of theory."
But what kind of theory is that? Neither the symbolic paradigm
nor connectionism are entirely satisfactory, because they do not
capture the relevant levels of organization in nature; there are
levels of organization in the brain that we do not yet know about
(Bechtel 1994).
If we are realists about consciousness, we grant that there is a
level of analysis that includes the facts of consciousness, that is,
facts about how things -are for a subject (Nagel 1993). And this is
the very phenomenon that is the starting point of the whole
enterprise; the level that we actually want to understand in terms
of the lower levels. The greatest obstacle here seems to be that we
have no systematic account of the phenomenon even on its own
terms; only haphazard lists of the features of consciousness, such
as the one Gray (sect. 5) presents. I am afraid that not much
progress can be made unless those descriptions are based on more
methodical foundations.
Understanding consciousness on its own terms, describing the
phenomenon accurately, treating it as a true level intrinsic to the
mind-brain seems to require a systematic, empirical, scientific
phenomenology. Only in case phenomenology can constitute an
appropriate level of description are we able to treat it as an
appropriate level of explanation. So far, not much of an empirical,
systematic phenomenology is in sight. Perhaps the search for an
adequate metaphor of consciousness - Cartesian theatre; multiple
drafts (Dennett 1991); virtual reality (Revonsuo 1995) - is the first
symptom of the need for an appropriate way of thinking about
consciousness.
In sum, I consider Gray's target article an impressive feat of
theorizing on consciousness, but at the same time I think it suffers
from certain serious deficiencies, perhaps typical of the whole
field of consciousness studies at the moment. There are two major
problems: first, lack of common ground and interaction between
different theories, and second, lack of a systematic description of
the phenomenon of interest. The former disadvantage is not
difficult to overcome, and I believe that the domain of conscious-
ness studies will be much more integrated in the not too distant
future. The latter problem maybe more demanding. In any case, it
is difficult to see how cognitive neuroscientific theories of con-
sciousness such as Gray's could ever be adequately developed
unless we get a better hold of the crucial level of description: the
phenomenology of consciousness itself.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author is financially supported by the Academy of Finland.
Communication and consciousness:
A neural network conjecture
N. A. Schmajuk and E. Axelrad
Department of Psychology: Experimental, Duke University, Durham, NC
27708-0086. nestoreacpub.duke.edu
Abstract: The communicative aspects of the contents of consciousness are
analyzed in the framework of a neural network model of animal communi-
cation. We discuss some issues raised by Gray, such as the control of the
contents of consciousness, the adaptive value of consciousness, conscious
and unconscious behaviors, and the nature of a model's consciousness.
The present commentary addresses some of the issues analyzed by
Gray in the framework of a neural network model of operant
conditioning applied to the description of animal communication.
While Gray emphasizes that the contents of consciousness are
controlled by novelty, we elaborate on the communicative pro-
cesses that might control part of those contents.
Schmajuk (1994) presented a neural network model of operant
conditioning that describes escape and avoidance behaviors as
moment-to-moment phenomena. The model includes (a) a classi-
cal conditioning block that builds a predictive internal model of
the environment and (b) an operant conditioning block that selects
from alternative responses (R). As in Gray's comparator model
(sect. 1, para. 7 and Fig. 3), mismatches between predicted and
actual environmental events modify (a) the internal model and
(b) the behavioral strategies. The model learns to avoid a shock
unconditioned stimulus (US) when a conditioned stimulus (CS) is
presented by generating the correct avoidance response (Ra). A
simulated animal demonstrates many aspects of escape and avoid-
ance behavior shown by real animals.
Schmajuk and Axelrad (1995) modeled animal communication
by assuming that two simulated animals interact with the environ-
ment and with each other in a "language loop" (Smith 1994) or
"verbal community" (Skinner 1957). Figure 1 shows that in the
communication model, each simulated animal selects through
operant conditioning, not only Rs but also Calls that are input to
the other animal. Both Rs and Calls are also fed back to the animal
that generates them. The model incorporates a social facilitation
property (Thorpe 1963) by which simulated animals will tend to
answer a Call with the same Call. Simulated animals can model
some animal communication paradigms, such as discriminative
avoidance for different alarm calls, imitative learning, and super-
stitious calling.
It has been suggested (Egger 1904; Piaget 1967) that an impor-
tant part of the contents of consciousness is a form of "inner
speech." This self-communicative property of consciousness is
modeled by the feedback Calls of the simulated animals. As is the
case for all responses, these Calls are selected by the operant
conditioning block.
In the context of the communication model depicted in Figure
1, we now consider some of the issues raised by Gray:
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
695

Commentary/Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
Figure 1 (Schmajuk). 
Two neural networks of operant condi-
tioning are applied to the description of animal communication. It
is conjectured that part of the contents of consciousness are the
feedback Calls (dashed lines) within each network. The laws
governing conscious processes are assumed to be the same as
those ruling communication and, therefore controlled by rein-
forcement rather than novelty.
1. Contents of consciousness. Gray (sect. 4, last para.) writes
that "[the contents of consciousness] consist of multimodal per-
ceptual descriptions derived by comparison between predicted
and actual perceived states of the world." In contrast to Gray's
conjecture that the contents of consciousness are controlled by
novelty, in the communication model, part of these contents are
governed by the same reinforcing principles as operant condition-
ing. This view does not exclude the fact that, as suggested by
Schmajuk, Lam & Gray (submitted), novelty strongly modulates
the formation of CS-Call associations.
2. Evolutionary advantage of conscious processing. Gray
(sect. 1, last para.) argues that "consciousness must make a
behavioural difference . . . subject to Darwinian selection and
evolution." If part of the contents of consciousness is Call feed-
back, then the evolutionary pressure selecting for communication
also selects for this aspect of consciousness.
The communication model shown in Figure 1 was used to test
for an advantage to Call feedback in a cooperative task for the
simulated animals to solve with or without Call feedback. In this
task, when a CS is presented to both simulated animals, they learn
to avoid the US by converging to the same R (cooperation).
Simulated animals communicate through arbitrary Calls with no
direct effect on the delivery of the US. Figure 2 shows that animals
demonstrate more cooperation and, therefore, more successful
avoidance when they have Call feedback regardless of whether
they communicate or not. Simulations show that the advantage of
detecting Calls (whether as feedback or communication) is that
Calls amplify the effect of environmental input on the selection of
correct responses by each simulated animal, that is, a CS activates
the correct response directly through CS-R associations and
indirectly through CS-Call and Call-R associations.
3. Conscious and unconscious processing. Gray (sect. 1, last
para.) writes "it is precisely the fact that we may leave the status -
conscious or unconscious - of such processes undefined . . . that
most clearly demonstrates our lack of progress in understanding
consciousness." Again, we use the communication model depicted
in Figure 1 to better understand the interaction between con-
scious and unconscious processing in a cooperative avoidance task.
During avoidance learning, in the operant block CS1, Calll
feedback, and Rl feedback each contribute to the selection of the
Call Feedback 
No Call Feedback
Figure 2 (Schmajuk). 
Simulated results for different combina-
tions of communication and Call feedback for two animals in a
cooperative avoidance task. Percentage of correct responses over
800 trials, for simulations that include (a) Call feedback and
Communication; (b) Call feedback and no Communication; (c) no
Call feedback and Communication; and (d) no Call feedback and
no Communication.
avoidance response Rl. Changes in the contents of consciousness
are modeled by introducing a second CS2, strongly associated with
Call2, which "changes" feedback Calll to feedback Call2. CS2 can
be regarded as a "distractor."
Early in training, both the CS1-R1 and the Calll-Rl associa-
tions contribute to successful avoidance. When distractor CS2 is
introduced and Call2 is elicited, the absence of Calll impairs
avoidance. Therefore, conscious processing is important at this
stage for amplification of the effect of CS1 on the generation of Rl.
Late in training, the association between CS1 and Rl is sufficient
for successful avoidance. When distractor CS2 is introduced, the
absence of Calll does not impair avoidance. Therefore, conscious
processing is not important at this stage for the elicitation of Rl.
The avoidance response is "unconsciously" or "automatically"
maintained.
4. Modelling of conscious processes. Gray (sect. 1, last para.)
suggests that "if we were to model [comparisons between pre-
dicted and actual states of the world] in a computer pro-
gram.. . . we would surely suppose [the program] to lack con-
scious components." Since we define Call feedback as a part of
conscious processing, and each model generates and detects its
own Calls, then, for that fleeting moment of simulation, the model
does indeed have one component of consciousness. More gener-
ally, just as learning models certainly learn, and models of atten-
tion attend, a complete model of consciousness would be con-
scious.
In sum, some of the issues analyzed by Gray are addressed in the
framework of a neural network model of animal communication.
Based on the idea that the contents of consciousness and animal
communication are intimately intertwined, it is suggested that
(1) the contents of consciousness are specified by reinforcement
and modulated by novelty, (2) conscious processing is evolu-
tionarily advantageous in cooperative tasks, (3) behavior can be
consciously or unconsciously controlled at different stages of
training, and (4) models of consciousness might have conscious
components.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to John Staddon and Owen Flanagan for their comments
on an early version of the manuscript. This project was supported in part
by contracts from the Office of Naval Research and the Air Force Office of
Scientific Research.
696
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Commentary/Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
Consciousness beyond the comparator
Victor A. Shames and Timothy L. Hubbard
Department of Psychology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721.
victor@ccit.arizona.edu
Abstract: Gray's comparator model fails to provide an adequate explana-
tion of consciousness for two reasons. First, it is based on a narrow
definition of consciousness that excludes basic phenomenology and active
functions of consciousness. Second, match/mismatch decisions can be
made without producing an experience of consciousness. The model thus
violates the sufficiency criterion.
Although we are intrigued by Gray's conjecture about the relation-
ship between consciousness and a comparator located in the
subicular area of the hippocampal formation, we are concerned
about two shortcomings of this approach. The first is the unneces-
sarily narrow definition of consciousness upon which this model is
based and the second is the failure of the model to establish that
the activity of a comparator is a sufficient condition for conscious
experience.
Gray fails to consider two features of consciousness in his
definition:
1. Basic phenomenology. Gray states that "the contents of
consciousness consist of activity in the subicular comparator"
(sect. 3, para. 10). However, he has failed to show the connection
between the activity of the comparator and the phenomenology of
consciousness. As Jackendoff (1987, p. 14) points out, the effec-
tiveness of neurological models is determined by their ability to
show how consciousness "as you or I experience it arises from what
our brains are doing." We wonder whether any understanding of
the subjective aspects of consciousness is provided by a model
such as Gray's that addresses the neurological issues but fails to
make an adequate link to the phenomenology of subjective experi-
ence.
2. Active as opposed to reactive functions. Gray maintains that
"consciousness occurs too late to affect the outcomes of the
processes to which it is apparently linked" (sect. 5.3), suggesting
that the role of consciousness is merely a reactive or passive one.
While such a notion is consistent with the common observation
that we do not seem to have any privileged access to the workings
of our own cognitive processes, it appears too broad a generaliza-
tion. Even if consciousness occurs too late to affect perceptual or
motor processing, it is clear that it must play a more active role in
higher cognitive processes such as planning and problem-solving.
We fail to see how Grays comparator model accounts for aware-
ness of the nonperceptual representations involved in these as well
as other abstract thought processes.
In addition to overlooking these aspects of consciousness, Gray
has produced a model that fails to accomplish his initial objective
of explaining how conscious experiences "arise out of brain events"
(sect. 1, para. 4). This model fails as an explanation because the
activity of the comparator proposed by Gray is not a sufficient
condition for the experience of consciousness. Furthermore, fail-
ure to meet this sufficiency criterion occurs regardless of whether
Gray's model is treated as an explanatory-causal model or an
identity model.
Evidence for the violation of the sufficiency criterion can be
observed in studies of implicit memory (for a review, see Schacter
1987). Kihlstrom (1990) defines implicit memory as the effect on
experience, thought, and action of events that cannot be con-
sciously remembered. Implicit tests of memory such as stem or
fragment completions do not refer directly to a prior study
episode; therefore, performance on such tests involves matching
the test stimulus with a memory trace that may be nonconscious.
To account for implicit memory data, the comparator in Grays
model would have to execute match/mismatch decisions on im-
plicit tests without the subject necessarily being conscious of the
output.
When a fragment completion task is used as an implicit test of
memory, subjects are instructed to study a list that includes words
such as ASSASSIN; they are then asked to complete word frag-
ments such as A 
A 
I 
to form legal English words (see
Tulving et al. 1982). The instructions for the fragment completion
task do not refer directly to the study list. Even amnesic patients,
who are virtually unable to recall or recognize the previously
studied words, show a greater probability of successfully complet-
ing fragments that match words on the study list than fragments
that do not.
A different type of implicit test involving pictures rather than
words was used by Tranel and Damasio (1985) in a paradigm
involving prosopagnosic patients. Patients with prosopagnosia lose
the ability to recognize previously familiar faces. In this study,
patients were shown photographs of familiar and unfamiliar faces.
Although they were unable to recognize the familiar faces con-
sciously, the patients demonstrated more frequent as well as larger
skin conductance responses to familiar than to unfamiliar faces.
In these two examples, words and faces that cannot be con-
sciously remembered exert an effect on two very different implicit
measures. Successful completion of word fragments in one case
and increases in skin conductance in the other case can be
attributed in large degree to the matching of a test stimulus with a
nonconscious memory trace. Although task performance in both
examples depends on the execution of a match/mismatch decision
by the comparator, the output of this decision cannot result in
consciousness for amnesic or prosopagnosic patients and need not
result in consciousness for nonpatient populations. Because the
output of this match/mismatch decision does not necessarily
produce an experience of consciousness, the activity of the com-
parator is not a sufficient condition for consciousness.
There are two reasons why the comparator model proposed by
Gray fails to provide an adequate explanation of consciousness.
One is that the aspects of consciousness that Gray takes into
consideration fail to include important features such as the phe-
nomenology and active functions of consciousness. The other is
that the explanatory link he has proposed between the comparator
and consciousness requires that an experience of consciousness
occur whenever a match/mismatch decision is made. As we have
shown in our examples from the implicit memory literature, this is
clearly not the case.
The homunculus at home
J. David Smith
Department of Psychology and Center tor Cognitive Science, State
University of New York at Buffalo, Amherst, NY 14260.
psysmith@ubvms.cc.buffalo.edu
Abstract: In Gray's conjecture, mismatches in the subicular comparator
(needing problem resolution) and matches (during appetitive approach)
have equal prominence in consciousness. In rival cognitive views novelty
and difficulty (i.e., information-processing mismatches) especially elicit
more conscious modes of cognition and higher levels of self-regulation.
The mismatch between Gray's conjecture and these views is discussed.
Gray's target article seeks a heuristic and reasonable alliance
between consciousness and a monitoring function that oversees
the organism's daily coping. This monitoring function is linked to
the mismatches and matches encountered by the subicular com-
parator. I was reading this reasonable proposal easily, paying scant
attention, when suddenly I became conscious of a fundamental
mismatch. The mismatch I became conscious of was that con-
sciousness is supposed to be about mismatches, but Gray only half
endorses this view. This half endorsement could mean that the
conjecture is wholly wrong.
A hundred years of cognitive science has urged the view that
mismatches, novelty, difficulty, and thwartings foster more con-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
697

Commentary/Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
scious modes of cognition. In other cases, Dewey (1934/1980,
p. 59) noted that "the behavioral impulses will be too smooth and
well-oiled to admit of consciousness." James (1890/1952, p. 93)
added that consciousness "is only intense when nerve processes
are hesitant." Tolman (1932/1967, p. 217) noted that "conscious
awareness and ideation tend to arise primarily at moments of
conflicting sign gestalts, conflicting practical differentiations and
predictions."
Half of Gray's conjecture restates these claims, though none of
the ancestors are credited. Gray acknowledges that mismatches in
the comparator create a unique cascade of neurological and
behavioral events. This cascade (behavioral inhibition, increased
attention, exploratory behaviors, extra information uptake, etc.)
represents the Behavioral Inhibition System (BIS) in control
mode, and Gray ascribes the phobic symptoms of human anxiety
to this system.
If the organism's regulation in response to mismatches were
selectively linked to consciousness, then Gray's view would con-
verge with that of James, Dewey, Tolman, and my own (Smith et al.
1995). But this is not what Gray intends. For he links matches in
the comparator equally strongly to consciousness. Indeed, a third
of the paper incorporates the Behavioral Approach System (BAS)
into the model. The BAS is activated by rewarding stimuli, or those
associated with the termination of punishment. It allows the
organism to move up the spatiotemporal gradient towards reward,
perhaps using the waypoints provided by intermediate, condi-
tioned, appetitive stimuli.
The problem is that these approach mechanisms may well be
too well-oiled to admit of consciousness; they may need no
"extraneous help" (James 1890/1952, p. 93) from consciousness to
run off smoothly. They may become, and arguably should become,
automatic in Shiffrin and Schneider's (1977) terminology. Includ-
ing them in consciousness is a striking mismatch to many other
views of its contents.
Conscious of this mismatch, I made a Gedanken sandwich. In
one scenario, the peanut-butter jar was full, there was a clean
spoon, the bread was fresh and whole-wheat. I moved up the
peanut-butter gradient smoothly, automatically, and uncon-
sciously, though using Gray's BAS extensively, and lighting thou-
sands of matches in the subicular comparator. In a second sce-
nario, the jar had been misplaced, the spoons were dirty, the bread
was stale and rye. Consciousness was acute through all these trying
mismatches, and muttering was heard above the exploratory,
regulatory roar of the BIS.
Thus, conscious problem-resolution (mismatches), and auto-
matic approach (matches), have an equal role in Gray's conjec-
tured consciousness. He notes this equity in a brief passage in sect.
5.4, last para., having nothing principled to say about either it or
the inequity that strongly favors mismatches in consciousness. But
the trouble for Gray's conjecture is worse than its silence on this
point. The problem is structural, and only by changing conjectures
could it be remedied. Once Gray says (sect. 3, para. 1) that "the
contents of consciousness consist of the outputs of the subicular
comparator," this curious equity is ensured. For the comparator is
happily outputting, all the time, both thwarting mismatches and
easily flowing matches. Both are in the comparator, and both will
equally color consciousness. Game, set, and mismatch with nearly
all other ideas about consciousness.
Gray might possibly benefit by changing conjectures. He might
have a monitoring function watching the screen of the comparator,
poised to jump in with the BIS when problematic mismatches
need resolution or close calls need a referee. He might have this
same monitor be able to choose to watch the screen of the
comparator when familiar beauty is present and elegant, desired
matches are unfolding (see his discussion of music in sect. 5.14,
para. 2). This new conjecture would still grant to Gray that the
subicular comparator is a very interesting brain region. It might
really be the big screen, multimodal, multimedia entertainment
and information system of the mind/brain.
However, on this view, consciousness would not be in the
comparator. Consciousness would be sitting off unknown and
shadowed somewhere, choosing to watch the comparators sus-
pense dramas and its beautiful concerts, possibly an occasional
news program or info-mercial, but not the hackneyed, matching
reruns. Possibly consciousness, whom we haven't found yet on this
view, could even be holding a remote and channel surfing.
Ultimate differences
G. Lynn Stephens and George Graham
Department of Philosophy, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL 35294. arhu006@uabdpo.bitnet
Abstract: Gray unwisely melds together two distinguishable contributions
of consciousness: one to epistemology, the other to evolution. He also
renders consciousness needlessly invisible behaviorally.
Gray's interesting target article is about how consciousness arises
from neurology. In our judgment there is much else in the article
worthy of comment. One such topic will focus our commentary.
Gray writes: "Consciousness must make a behavioral differ-
ence, otherwise it could not have been the subject of Darwinian
selection and evolution" (sect. 1, last para.) He also remarks: "If we
knew how consciousness alters the behaviour that it accompanies,
we would be able to see what survival value . . . consciousness
confers, and so how it might have evolved" (sect. 6, para. 2).
There are two contexts in which consciousness (subjective
experience) may make a behavioral difference. The first is Dar-
winian or evolutionary. To be explained as a product of natural
selection, consciousness must alter behavior in ways that confer
survival value. The second is epistemological. To justify our belief
that organisms (other than ourselves) are conscious, consciousness
must make some distinctive or characteristic alteration in an
organism's behavior. The alteration may not be criteria! for con-
sciousness, but it should at least offer good reason to belfeve that
consciousness is responsible for behavior.
Judging from remarks like those mentioned above, Gray seems
to think that the evolutionary and epistemological difference must
be one and the same. The behavioral effects that explain the
evolutionary difference made by consciousness must be identical to
the behavioral effects that constitute the epistemological difference.
Gray takes a gloomy view of the prospects for identifying the
epistemological difference made by consciousness. He writes:
"Nothing we know so far about behaviour . . . is such that the
hypothesis of consciousness would arise" (Introduction, para. 7).
What sorts of behavior are distinctive of conscious as opposed to
unconscious processes? For Gray, behavior seems silent. Noncon-
scious information processing can explain "conscious" behavior
just as well.
Is there need for gloom? We think not. In our discipline of
philosophy, there is now a hefty literature on whether conscious-
ness has behavioral effects. Much of the literature consists of
comparisons and contrasts between behavioral performance with
and without consciousness (Flanagan 1992; Lahav 1993; Van
Gulick 1995). One plausible hypothesis is that the presence of
consciousness improves performance even when performance
occurs without consciousness. I may unconsciously identify a
predator but not as well or effectively as when perceptually
conscious of the predator. The "improvement" may consist in one
or more of several qualities of behavior, such as alacrity, flexibility,
and readiness for recall. Or to put the hypothesis differently,
consciousness may be essential to the effectiveness of behavior
without playing an essential role in its occurrence.
According to Gray, skepticism about epistemology produces
skepticism about whether we can learn of Mother Nature's func-
tion for consciousness. In equating the epistemological difference
with the evolutionary one, Gray is also gloomy about discovering
how consciousness enhances survival.
698
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Commentary/Gray. Neuropsychology of consciousness
We will not try to allay fears about whether the biological
function of consciousness is discoverable. However, even if the
function is undiscoverable, we should not be impelled to equate
the evolutionary difference with the epistemological one. The two
may well be different. First off, the behavioral difference which
warrants our hypothesis that an organism is conscious may play no
role in explaining the biological function of consciousness. Sup-
pose that consciousness has a biological function, for example,
enhancing predator identification. It is coherent to suppose that in
addition to predator identification there is a set of behavioral
effects of consciousness (e.g., head scratching) which are com-
pletely devoid of survival value. We may be warranted in believing
that an organism is conscious because, say, it scratches its head,
even though predator identification rather than head scratching
improves survival.
In the second place, consciousness may have a biological func-
tion without making an epistemological difference. Suppose, for
example, that predator identification is essential for survival and is
performed consciously. Suppose also that, unknown to us, this
same behavior could not be performed unconsciously. Alas, how-
ever, suppose that we cannot tell whether the behavior is per-
formed consciously. In such a gray and gloomy epistemological
circumstance, consciousness has a function without making an
epistemological difference.
There are two tasks which should not be fused from the outset in
constructing a theory of consciousness. One (the epistemological)
consists in determining which behavior is performed consciously
and perhaps needs to be performed consciously. The other (the
evolutionary) consists in determining whether consciousness ad-
mits of Darwinian explanation and enhances a species' chances for
survival. If it turned out that these two tasks are one and the same,
that would be an interesting and perhaps unexpectedly Panglos-
sian result. However, contrary to Gray, the result is not required by
a successful theory of consciousness. A successful theory can make
do with ultimate differences.
Don't leave the "un" off "consciousness"
Neal R. Swerdlow
Department of Psychiatry, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0804. nswerdlow@ucsd.edu
Abstract: Gray extrapolates from circuit models of psychopathology to
propose neural substrates for the contents of consciousness. I raise three
concerns: (1) knowledge of synaptic arrangements may be inadequate to
fully support his model; (2) latent inhibition deficits in schizophrenia, a
focus of this and related models, are complex and deserve replication; and
(3) this conjecture omits discussion of the neuropsychological basis for the
contents of the unconscious.
Several models suggest that the brain substrates of movement,
affect, and thought are structured in parallel cortico-striato-
pallido-thalamic (CSPT) circuits, and that consequently move-
ment, affect, and thought are regulated by similar cortical and
subcortical interactions (Baxter et al. 1992; Gray, Feldon et al.
1991; Modell et al. 1989; Nauta 1989; Swerdlow & Koob 1987).
Extrapolating from these models, Gray proposes specific sub-
strates for the contents of consciousness that include, in a broad
sense, the extended CSPT substrates described in his previous
BBS target article (Gray, Feldon et al. 1991) focusing on the
subicular "comparator" unit as a key circuit element.
That the contents of consciousness are regulated by this ex-
tended CSPT circuitry is implied in Grays previous proposals
(Gray et al. 1991a): The substrates that provide order and disorder
to thought in schizophrenic patients must be critical for determin-
ing the structure of thought in nonschizophrenics. I raise three
areas where this model may be challenged.
1. Synaptology. Many elements of Gray's circuitries, partic-
ularly the microcircuit interactions, extend beyond established
anatomy and physiology. One example is the claim that the
subiculum "interrupts all accumbens function relating to motor
steps, enabling instead the activation of exploratory behaviour
outputs." What neural events might cause such an "interruption"?
Some data suggest that the subicular output facilitates DA release
via presynaptic activation of DA terminals in the nucleus accum-
bens (NAC) (Imperato et al. 1990; Wang 1991); other evidence
suggests a direct termination of excitatory limbic cortical inputs
onto accumbens cell bodies (Bouyer et al. 1984; Sesack & Pickel
1990; Smith & Bolam 1990), which would presumably oppose the
effects of presynaptic DA release. The way we "view" this single
circuit element - whether NAC glutamate and dopamine function
in concert, opposition, or both - could drastically change models
for the subiculo-accumbens regulation of behavior. Dopamine and
glutamate might interact differently within different accum-
bens subregions (shell vs. core; see Gerfen et al. 1987; 1991;
Groenewegen et al. 1987; Heimer et al. 1991) or functional units
(striasome vs. matrix; see Graybiel et al. 1981; Graybiel & Rags-
dale 1983). We are struggling to understand how such complex
synaptic arrangements regulate simple rat behaviors (Pulvirenti
1991; Swerdlow et al. 1992; Wan et al. 1995). Are we ready to apply
such shaky synaptology to questions of consciousness?
2. Latent inhibition (LI). Central to. Gray's model for subiculo-
accumbens regulation of conscious experience is his interpreta-
tion of studies of LI. LI occurs when "a past regularity (CS with no
consequence) adversely affects the current learning of a new
association." Preclinical studies link disturbances in subiculo-
accumbens activity, and accumbens hyperdopaminergia, with the
loss of LI. The critical implication vis-a-vis the present proposal is
that changes in subiculo-accumbens activity change the conscious
experience, that is, the salience of the preexposed CS.
Supporting this theory are two published reports that "acute
schizophrenics in the preexposed condition of the LI paradigm
learn this association faster than do preexposed normal controls."
These important findings deserve careful examination. The total
published sample of preexposed acute schizophrenia patients who
exhibit LI deficits is, to my knowledge, 22 (Baruch et al., 1988,
report 23 subjects divided between preexposed and nonpreex-
posed groups; N. Gray et al., 1992a, report 9 subjects in the
preexposed group). Both studies use a similar audiotape-based LI
task; is the phenomenon task-specific? Only patients defined as
"acute schizophrenics" have deficient LI, but these patients aver-
age 7 years of illness, 3.5 previous hospitalizations, and 500 ing/day
equivalents of chlorpromazine (approximately). Can we attribute
the loss of LI in these "acute" patients to acute hyperdopaminergia
- a critical linkage for Gray's model - since most subjects were
taking antipsychotics at the time of testing? Finally, data suggest
that schizophrenics learn more slowly than controls in the non-
preexposed (NPE) condition (N. Gray et al. 1992a); this contrib-
utes to the significant interaction of condition X group, on which
claims of "deficient LI in acute schizophrenia" are based. These
concerns are raised with full knowledge of how difficult it is to
complete such work: It is no surprise that there are just two LI
studies in schizophrenics yet dozens of published animal studies
that "model" this observation. Still, with critical sample size of 22,
in a between-subject design, with nonparametric comparisons of
bimodally distributed data, nonautomated data collected with
nonblind testing conditions, and possible between-group differ-
ences in nonpreexposed performance, we might wish to be cau-
tious in formulating global hypotheses based on this finding.
3. The unconscious. Gray's model of conscious content doesn't
provide a mechanism in series or parallel that accounts for the
contents of the unconscious. Just as "hardly anyone doubts that
consciousness is . . . a product of the brain," so most psychiatrists
and psychologists would not doubt the existence of unconscious
processes that direct behavior and thought. A hypothesis of the
contents of consciousness must accommodate at least the exis-
tence, if not the precise neural substrates, of unconscious pro-
cesses.
Gray argues that "the level of intentionality is the same as that of
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
699

Commentary /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
conscious experience," and that the contents of consciousness
"bear a reasonably close relationship to states in the real environ-
ment, since they derive from a process of selection." But, is a
"close relationship to real states" necessarily favored in selection?
Creativity, fantasy, denial, rationalization, and other products of
unconscious processing offer selective advantages. Individuals
who cannot effectively utilize these processes suffer negative
societal and interpersonal consequences and negative health
events, all of which reduce genetic viability. The brain accommo-
dates this genetic pressure by sustaining neural substrates capable
of unconscious processing and by sustaining substrates that allow
us to recognize, and gain insight into, unconscious processes.
"Preset" expectations - developmental^ or genetically deter-
mined - provide default parameters for the "match/mismatch"
comparator. Such "presettings" guide action that is not based on
the "true" comparator readout from the external world. This might
occur when our actions are reactions to past situations (e.g.,
transference, projection, displacement) and, in some individuals,
paranoia. The content of many forms of anxiety has unconscious
origins (e.g., horrific image of infant evisceration in patients with
OCD), and unconscious "presettings" appear throughout our
conscious experience — from parapraxis to prejudice. Superstition,
hope, fantasy, guilt, conscience: all yield "action plans" guided by
information that does not consciously enter the comparator. What
is the substrate for preset expectations?
The striatal Spiny I matrix may be one substrate capable of
"gating" cortical content, repressing unwanted ("ego dystonic")
information, and promoting/amplifying desired ("ego syntonic")
information. Within this matrix, complex interactions determine
which cortical events will be promoted and which will be damp-
ened. The particular cortico-striatal dynamics - the relationship of
limbic cortical inputs (source of the "primordial reservoir") to
striasome or matrix, and the subsequent efferent targets of these
striatal cells (Albin et al. 1992; Dure et al. 1992; Flaherty &
Graybiel 1994; Gimenez-Amaya & Graybiel 1990; Penney &
Young 1986; Ragsdale & Graybiel 1990), the spatial relationships
of ascending dopamine terminals and descending cortical gluta-
mate terminals projecting onto the medium spiny cell dendrites
(Bouyer et al. 1984; Sesack & Pickel 1990; Smith & Bolam 1990)
and onto each other (Imperato et al. 1990; Wang 1991), the
distributions of the numerous modulatory neuropeptides (Voorn
et al. 1989; Gerfen et al. 1991), the spatial relationships of the
matrisomes and their association with tonically active neurons
(TANs) (Aosaki et al. 1994), among other unknown elements of
striatal organization - are certainly influenced by genetic and
developmental forces (Graybiel & Ragsdale 1980). They must
have profound interindividual, cultural, racial, and geographically
based differences, and these differences must be reflected in
templates of "presettings." While the neural substrates of the
unconscious are probably distributed throughout CSPT circuitry
(at least), connections between different portions of the limbic
cortex and the Spiny I matrix are perfectly suited to provide
sources for limbic "primary process" information and unconscious
cognitive censorship and promotion - key structural elements of
the psychic apparatus.
Gray leaves room for striatal censorship in his discussion of
consciousness as a "monitoring process." But if not the uncon-
scious brain, "who is watching the monitor?" In his treatment of
the "binding problem," Gray notes that "neuronal events that code
the . . . perceptual experience are themselves nonconscious . . .
[but lead to] a prediction which constitutes the basis of the
eventual conscious experience." The characteristics of these neu-
ronal events determine, within certain constraints, the nature of
the conscious experience. How we bind information, the structure
of "the set that makes up a particular content of consciousness," is
a function of our unconscious brain.
Gray's conjecture addresses the contents of consciousness,
rather than consciousness perse, and thus it need not describe the
entirety of consciousness or experience, just as a list of ingredients
does not fully describe a cake. In the end, we are still left with the
mystery of how the parts make the whole. I suggest that a key
ingredient - the unconscious - has been omitted, and, without it,
the cake cannot rise. Fortunately, much of Gray's proposal com-
fortably accommodates an unconscious, as if, at an unconscious
level, this was his intention.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The commentator was supported by NIMH R37-MH42228and R29-MH
48381.
On giving a more active and selective role
to consciousness
Frederick Toates
Biology Department, The Open University, Milton Keynes MK7 6AA,
England f.toates@open.ac.uk
Abstract: An active role for conscious processes in the production of
behaviour is proposed, involving top level controls in a hierarchy of
behavioural control. It is suggested that by inhibiting or sensitizing lower
levels in the hierarchy conscious processes can play a role in the organiza-
tion of ongoing behaviour. Conscious control can be more or less evident,
according to prevailing circumstances.
I congratulate Gray on his insightful article. There is much to
agree with (e.g., the idea of consciousness having to do with
monitoring disparity between expected and actual, a check on the
efficacy of actions, cf. Baars 1988). However, I would also argue for
a more active role of consciousness in organizing ongoing behav-
iour. I suspect that Gray's long adherence to a behavioural inhibi-
tion system model of hippocampal function has delivered a some-
what restricted view of consciousness (vital as an inhibition
function is, amongst other roles). Based on rat studies, I would see
the hippocampus as mediating the use of cognitive, declarative
knowledge in the control of on-going behaviour (Toates 1994a;
1994b; 1994c). I would see it as a high level input in a hierarchy of
behavioural control (Gallistel 1980), which in humans is associated
with conscious experience (Baars 1988). This fits well with subjec-
tive experience or, as Gray puts it, "stubborn intuitions" (such
intuitions must surely be allowed to carry considerable weight in
the present exercise in theory building, given Gray's partly experi-
ential database).
I would see a slow, serial, cognitive (and, in humans, conscious),
mode of control having at its disposal lower, parallel, and faster
levels in the hierarchy (Baars, 1988), to which the higher level can
allocate greater weighting as a task becomes familiar (Toates
1994a,b,c). [See also Toates "Homeostasis and Drinking" BBS vol.
2(1) 1979.] Modulation of the sensitivity of the lower level controls
by the higher might indeed at times involve inhibition on their
activity so that physically present stimuli that might otherwise
trigger behaviour no longer do so. However, in other circum-
stances, the top-down control might equally involve sensitization of
lower level controls. (Maybe this is what Gray would attribute to an
anatomically distinct BAS system). I believe that cognitive (hippo-
campally mediated) control over on-going behaviour is exerted
when (a) the current sensory input offers no behavioural solution
based upon lower level procedural controls (an addition to Gray's
assumptions) and (b) when procedural control fails (i.e., mismatch
occurs between the expected and actual consequences of behavior,
in agreement with Gray). At a high level in a hierarchy of control,
disparity between an expected and actual state of the world would
seem to be an ideal candidate to play a role in the instigation of on-
going behaviour. Indeed, from a control-theoretic perspective
(Miller et al. 1960; Powers 1973; Toates 1994b), I find it difficult to
imagine how purposive behaviour could possibly be organized in
other than such a negative feedback mode.
How then do we answer the puzzle that consciousness appears
to be too slow to mediate on-going behaviour? In one sense, this
also fits intuition: highly practised tasks (e.g., tying a tie) are often
700
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Commentary/Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
slowed up and disrupted by paying attention to them. Switching to
full cognitive control can indeed mean slowing up, which is the
inevitable price (along with the cost of engaging specialized
processing capacity) of giving flexibility to behaviour. However,
both intuition and the law of the land suggest a role for conscious-
ness even in rapid responses. Possibly the solution is to see
consciousness as acting in the role of overall modulator of lower
levels in a hierarchy (cf. Gallistel 1980). Thus, conscious processes
might not necessarily mediate, say, the finger triggering a gun but a
prior aggressive motivational content of consciousness might exert
a role in sensitizing aggression-related lower level controls which
are unconsciously activated by the sight of a potent target. Sim-
ilarly, for the most part, Gray might well be justified in his
statement of approval of Velmans's (1991) ideas:-"we are aware
even of what we are saying only after we have said it (sect. 5.2)."
However, (a) I believe that I consciously select emotionally and
cognitively biased verbal strategies and goals to which the actual
words are subservient and (b) I know that, when I really want to, I
can choose my words carefully (i.e., go into full cognitive, con-
scious control over a lower level in the hierarchy) but at a cost in
speed of presentation.
Similarly, I would want to give consciousness a role in pain over
and above simply noting what felt bad for future reference (as
important as that role is). The sufferer can sometimes find creative
here-and-now solutions to minimizing nociceptive input by mon-
itoring the conscious sensation of pain and what actions lead to its
reduction (e.g., try lying on your left side in bed and then gently
squeeze the back muscles). Gray is doubtless right in claiming that
pain "occurs too late actually to affect responses to the noxious
stimulus that gives rise to it" (sect. 5.4) in the case of quickly
pulling the foot from a thorn but not in the case of chronic pain.
Gray wonders why we are unaware of our actions in driving
during a period over which a good match to expectation occurs,
whereas we are aware of listening to, say, a thoroughly familiar
record of Tchaikovsky's Nutcracker. I would say that consciousness
will be alerted by mismatch but, being an active process, it can
choose to focus upon even a perfect match if one happens to be
motivated to do so and one exerts selectivity within conscious
control.
Consciousness does not seem to be linked
to a single neural mechanism
Carlo Umiltaa and Marco Zorzib
'Dipartimento di Psicologia Generate, University di Padova, 3S139 Padova,
Italy, "Dipartimento di Psicologia, University di Trieste, 34123 Trieste, Italy.
umilta@ipdunivx.unipd.it
Abstract: On the basis of neuropsychological evidence, it is clear that
attention should be given a role in any model (or conjecture) of conscious-
ness. What is known about the many instances of dissociation between
explicit and implicit knowledge after brain damage suggests that conscious
experience might not be linked to a restricted area of the brain. Even if it
were true that there is a single brain area devoted to consciousness, the
subicular area would seem to be an unlikely possibility.
1. Attention and consciousness. Patients with unilateral ne-
glect after (right) parietal lesion ignore the affected (left) side of
space (e.g., papers in Robertson & Marshall 1993). They behave as
if the left half of the world had ceased to exist at a conscious level.
Neglect is associated with damage to the system(s) that direct
attention to the left side and, perhaps, to the vigilance system in
the right hemisphere (Posner & Dehaene 1994; Posner & Peter-
son 1990). Normal observers too may neglect stimuli in one
hemifield when attention is covertly directed to the periphery of
the other hemifield (Graves & Jones 1992).
There is ample evidence, however, that neglect patients show
normal processing of neglected stimuli in the affected, left side
(e.g., Robertson & Marshall 1993). For example, implicit knowl-
edge has been documented by Ladavas et al. (1993). Their patient
could not read aloud words presented to the left hemifield, nor
could he judge their lexical status or semantic content. He could
not even detect the presence of strings of letters in that hemifield.
However, response to a word in the intact hemifield was faster
when the word was preceded by a brief presentation of an
associated word in the neglected hemifield. Similarly, Berti and
Rizzolatti (1992) found implicit knowledge in patients with severe
neglect. In their study, a prime object presented to the neglected
hemifield facilitated responses to target objects presented to the
intact hemifield. This effect was also present when the prime and
the target were physically different but belonged to the same
category.
In conclusion, it would seem that neglect patients do process
information originating from the neglected side of space. They
ignore this information simply because they are unaware of it. In
other words, in the absence of attention, normally processed
information does not have access to consciousness. Thus, the role
of attention (and that of the neural mechanisms mediating its
deployment) must be taken into consideration in proposing a
neuropsychological model of consciousness.
2. A single neural mechanism for consciousness. Variants of
the dissociation between normal (or near normal) implicit knowl-
edge and severely impaired (or even absent) explicit knowledge
have been observed in a number of other neuropsychological
syndromes, besides neglect (see, e.g., Schacter et al. 1988; and
papers in Umilta & Moscovitch 1994). Among such phenomena
are "blindsight," in which patients with damage to the occipital
cortex lack the conscious experience of sight but can nonetheless
respond to visual stimuli; memory without awareness in patients
who are profoundly amnesic in tests that require conscious recol-
lection; and perception without awareness in prosopagnosic pa-
tients who cannot recognize faces at a conscious level but can do so
in indirect tests of knowledge.
Basically, three explanations were offered. The first is that intact
modules are disconnected from the higher level system(s) that are
necessary for consciousness. The second is that damaged modules
transmit degraded outputs to the consciousness system(s). The
third is that damaged modules are functionally replaced by other
modules that do not have access to the consciousness system(s).
Explicit/implicit dissociations are domain-specific, in the sense
that they always occur in one single domain only. This strongly
suggests that consciousness is not subserved by a unitary nervous
structure. If there were this unitary system, then lesions to it
should produce patients showing the explicit/implicit dissocia-
tions across a number of different domains. No such patient has
been described so far.
The explicit/implicit dissociation was shown to occur in le-
sioned neural networks (e.g., Farah et al. 1993, for face recogni-
tion). In a neural network there is no mechanism assigned to
consciousness, that is, one that is separate from the mechanisms
that subserve the (distributed) representations needed to perform
specific tasks. Nonetheless, the dissociation between overt and
covert recognition of faces showed by prosopagnosic patients was
simulated without the assumption of two (at least partly) dissoci-
ated mechanisms responsible for overt and covert recognition,
respectively. On the basis of Farah et al.'s study, one should
conclude that consciousness is linked to a certain minimal quality
of information representation within the visual system for process-
ing faces, rather than to a specific neural mechanism.
3. 77ie subicular area. There are at least two patients that
invalidate Gray's hypothesis of the subicular area as the localized
neural mechanism responsible for consciousness. Patient D. R. B.
(Damasio et al. 1985) suffered extensive bilateral damage to the
temporal lobe and basal forebrain. The mesial temporal lobes
were bilaterally destroyed, so that the lesion encompassed the
hippocampus, the parahippocampal and cingulate gyri, and other
components of the limbic system (like the amygdala). On the basis
of Gray's hypothesis, one would expect that the patient displayed a
"nonconscious" behavior. In fact, the patient, though densely
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
701

Commentary /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
amnesic, was alert, co-operative, behaved intelligently in a variety
of situations, and his speech was fluent and well articulated.
A second patient with lesions involving the anatomical struc-
tures considered by Gray to be the "hardware" of consciousness is
H. M. (Scoville & Milner 1957). This patient had a bilateral lesion
to the hippocampal formation, parahippocampal gyrus, and some
nuclei of the amygdala, as a result of bilateral ablation of most of
the medial temporal cortices. This patient was also densely amne-
sic, but his consciousness did not seem to be even slightly im-
paired.
It is interesting to note that patient D. R. B. "formulated no
plans for the future and showed no anticipation of events or
responses" (Dainasio et al. 1985, p. 256). This observation sup-
ports Gray's suggestion that the subicular area is a "comparator,"
that is, a system that predicts the expected events and compares
them with the actual (perceived) events. It is quite possible that
the results of the computations performed by the comparator
system (and possibly the computations themselves) are explicit
(i.e., they contribute to awareness). This fact, however, does not
imply that these representations are the contents of consciousness
per se.
In conclusion, if one is committed to the "localized mechanism"
hypothesis, the spared cognitive abilities of D. R. B. (and H. M.)
rule out the possibility that consciousness is linked to the neural
activity in the subicular area.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Preparation of this paper was supported in part by grant 9300752-PF41
from CNR.
The limits of neurophysiological models
of consciousness
Max Velmans
Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths, University of London, New Cross,
London SE14 6NW, England, mlv@gold.ac.uk
Abstract: This commentary elaborates on Gray's conclusion that his
neurophysiological model of consciousness might explain how conscious-
ness arises from the brain, but does not address how consciousness
evolved, affects behaviour or confers survival value. The commentary
argues that such limitations apply to all neurophysiological or other third-
person perspective models. To approach such questions the first-person
nature of consciousness needs to be taken seriously in combination with
third-person models of the brain.
What would a theory of consciousness need to explain? According
to Gray it would need to explain (1) how consciousness evolved,
(2) how it confers survival value, (3) how it arises out of brain
events, and (4) how it alters behaviour (Introduction, para. 5).
Much of Gray's target article deals with question (3), focusing both
on how consciousness relates to the neurophysiological structure
of the brain and to the brain viewed as an information processing
system. The research literature in this area is extensive (cf.
Farthing 1992 and reviews in Velmans 1996) - but Gray's closely
argued attempt to relate consciousness to the output of a subicular
comparator approaches the issues from an unusual direction in
that it draws on the blocking of latent inhibition in laboratory rats
and studies of schizophrenia in humans, whereas it is more
common in this area to draw on experimentally induced contrasts
between conscious and pre- or nonconscious processing in nor-
mally functioning human adults (cf. Baars 1988; Velmans 1991) or
on clinical dissociations between consciousness and nonconscious
functioning within neuropsychology (cf. readings in Milner &
Rugg 1992).
Gray's conclusions about the kind of information processing that
might support consciousness nevertheless in some respects con-
verge with those of other theorists. It is generally accepted, for
example, that any theory that relates consciousness to human
information processing needs to deal not only with the diversity of
the contents of consciousness, but also with how those diverse
contents are constructed into a coherent experience, already
integrated, assessed for its novelty or importance, and served up
in a way that allows adaptive interaction with the world. Whether
this is achieved primarily by a "comparator system," as Gray
suggests, or is best thought of in another way depends heavily on
the experimental phenomena one seeks to explain. Students of
preconscious versus conscious input analysis, for example, usu-
ally allocate such functions to either "pre-attentive" or "focal-
attentive" processing, whereas those concerned with conscious
versus nonconscious control of action tend to speak of a central
"executive," "monitoring," or "control" system. Gray's suggestion
that input stimuli take around 50 msec to become conscious (sect.
5.3) is also debatable, as there is converging evidence that the first
200 msec or so of input processing is preconscious, which would
allow time for analysis, identification, selection, and integration of
attended-to input before they enter consciousness (Libet 1993;
Neeley 1977; Posner & Snyder 1975). Many would also take issue
with Gray's association of consciousness with neurophysiological
activity in a. fixed location. But I will leave the fuller discussion of
such details to other commentators — and turn to the wider issues.
Although the bulk of Gray's target article is concerned with
neurophysiological modelling, he has a fine grasp of the limits of
neurophysiological accounts of consciousness. As he notes (sect.
4), biological forms are embodied in physicochemical processes,
but the evolution of biological forms cannot be fully understood in
terms of physics or chemistry. Rather, the combinatorial options in
the genetic code have a syntax and semantics that can only be
understood in terms of selection by consequences, following
biological laws of Darwinian survival and Mendelian genetics. In
similar fashion, emergent patterns of neural activity can only be
understood in terms of their wider adaptive consequences. The
syntax and semantics of language, for example, may be embodied
in neurophysiological activity, but can only be understood in terms
of the constraints required for successful communication between
individuals. In short, there is a nonmysterious sense in which
genetics does not reduce to chemistry and the higher-order
patterning of neural activity does not reduce to neurophysiology.
But in what way do such emergent properties relate to con-
sciousness? As Gray notes, one can give "a perfectly good material-
ist account of brain events, whether considered under a physico-
chemical or a syntactic (computational) description . . . without
recourse to the hypothesis of consciousness." The main reason for
bringing in consciousness is because it is there (sect. 4, para. 6).
However, he argues, there is one further level of organization in
the brain which is the same as the level of conscious experience. At
this level, "the semantically interpreted content of representations
plays a causal role in the unfolding of events." Following Pylyshyn
(1986), such semantically interpreted content is also "cognitively
penetrable." As with other levels of organization, this "conscious"
level does not reduce to lower levels, but again for nonmysterious
reasons.
There are difficulties in linking consciousness exclusively to
cognitive penetrability, however, as this would imply that sensa-
tions which are not cognitively penetrable (alterable by cognition)
are not conscious - which would seem to rule out bee-stings, the
smell of camphor, and the roar of a jet engine. But these sensations
clearly are conscious. And there is a more fundamental problem:
even if there were a distinct level of neural organization to which
consciousness corresponds, one would not need to refer to con-
sciousness to explain that organization. Cognitive penetrability, for
example, can be explained in information processing terms, with-
out reference to consciousness. In short, although Gray comes
closer than most other theorists to accepting the sense in which
consciousness seems to be tangential to information processing or
neural accounts, he shies away from the logical conclusion that it is
tangential to such accounts (cf. Velmans 1991).
The reasons, of course, have to do with the "dire" theoretical
consequences. The attempt to relate consciousness to neuro-
702
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

physiological activity or information processing in the brain is
unquestionably important because this will eventually reveal some-
thing about the necessary and sufficient conditions (within the brain)
for conscious experience, thereby providing an answer to question 3.
But if we can explain how such processing fulfills its adaptive
purposes without reference to consciousness we would seem to be in
trouble with questions 1, 2, and 4. And this would produce an
awkward gap in evolutionary theory. Gray is acutely aware of the
problem. As he notes, "if consciousness is a product of Darwinian
evolution, it must confer survival value and therefore must affect
behaviour." Rather than abandon this biological perspective, he
proposes to search on for what this influence might be (sect. 6).
In Velmans (1991), I suggest that the function to which con-
sciousness is most closely linked is information dissemination, a
late-arising stage of focal-attentive processing that enables the
brain to respond to the most pertinent, selected information in an
integrated way. Absence of information dissemination produces
dissociations of functioning, for example, in blindsight (where part
of the system has the ability to make visual discriminations but the
system as a whole does not "know that it knows"). Similar pro-
posals have been made by Baars (1988), Navon (1991), and Van
Gulick (1991). However, even if this were the most closely associ-
ated function, the problem outlined above would not go away.
Information dissemination, like cognitive penetrability, can be
explained in purely information processing terms without refer-
ence to consciousness - and the same would be true of any
function that can be described in information processing terms. If
so, a prolonged search for consciousness within an information
processing model of the brain is doomed to failure.
Yet, as Gray rightly points out, consciousness exists - and there
are aspects of consciousness (qualia, what it is like to be something,
how things appear from a first-person perspective) that do not
seem reducible to either a physical or a functional state of the brain
(see discussions between Dennett, Fenwick, Gray, Harnad, Hum-
phrey, Libet, Lockwood, Marcel, Nagel, Searle, Shoemaker,
Singer, Van Gulick, Velmans, and Williams in Marsh 1993). Given
this, it is time for radical measures.
My suggestion is that we should stop trying to reduce conscious-
ness to a physical or functional state of the brain and start to take
consciousness in the form that we normally experience it seriously.
That is, we need to reincorporate the first-person perspective into
psychological science in order that we may properly come to
understand its relation to traditional third-person perspective
science. There are many arguments in favour of this, and the
consequences which follow for our understanding of how con-
sciousness relates to the brain and physical world are radical. I
cannot go into these matters in the limited space available for
commentaries (but see Velmans 1990; 1991; 1993a; 1993b). In
passing, however, it is interesting to note that Gray's questions 1,2,
and 4, which seem to be unapproachable from a purely third-
person perspective, seem to be more tractable when they are
simultaneously approached from a first-person perspective. For
example, if one accepts that given conscious states have correlates
that (viewed from a third-person perspective) take the form of
given neural representational states, then as neural representa-
tions evolve, their conscious correlates will also evolve (question
1). From a first-person perspective, what we perceive, think, feel,
and so on has obvious effects on what we do - that is, conscious
states alter behaviour in an indefinitely large number of ways
(question 4). From a first-person perspective consciousness also
has an obvious "survival value," for without it, few human beings
would wish to survive (question 2). How such first-person facts
relate to some expanded evolutionary theory presents a new
challenge for science.
Kuhn (1970) has described normal science as a strenuous and
devoted attempt to force nature into the conceptual boxes sup-
plied by the existing paradigm. Our understanding of conscious-
ness has been blocked by the attempt to squeeze its manifest first-
person nature into a third-person information processing model of
the brain. It is time for the squeezing to stop.
Response /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
Authors Response
Consciousness and its (dis)contents
Jeffrey A. Gray
Department of Psychology, Institute of Psychiatry, De Crespigny Park,
Denmark Hill, London SE5 8AF, England, spjtjag@ucl.ac.uk
Abstract: The first claim in the target article was that there is as
yet no transparent, causal account of the relations between con-
sciousness and brain-and-behaviour. That claim remains firm. The
second claim was that the contents of consciousness consist,
psychologically, of the outputs of a comparator system; the third
consisted of a description of the brain mechanisms proposed to
instantiate the comparator. In order to defend these claims against
criticism, it has been necessary to clarify the distinction between
consciousness-as-such and the contents of consciousness, to widen
the description of the neural machinery instantiating the compara-
tor system, and to clarify the relationship between the contents of
consciousness in the here-and-now and episodic memory.
The target article considered essentially three issues: the
lack of a scientific, causal ('transparent') theory of the links
between consciousness, on the one hand, and brain-and-
behaviour on the other; a psychological hypothesis attribut-
ing the contents of consciousness to the outputs of a
comparator system; and a neurological hypothesis as to the
brain substrate of this system. This reply will deal with these
issues roughly in that order (Table 1); although, as in the
target article, they are closely intertwined.
R1. Metaphysical issues. The target article commenced
with the confident assertion that "the main debate (Marsh
1993) now centres on just how to go about determining the
way in which consciousness in fact relates to brain func-
tion." Judging from the commentaries, this was my first
mistake. Consciousness continues to ignite considerable
controversy of a more philosophical, indeed metaphysical,
kind.
The most general complaint was made by Diaz, who
believes that one has to get the epistemology of conscious-
ness right before tackling the science. He sees the target
article as being mired in metaphysical muddle, hovering
dangerously between an emergence notion of conscious-
ness, dual-aspect neutral monism, epiphenomenalism, psy-
chophysical identity, functionalism, and property dualism
(and possibly all or none of the above). Diaz notes that I
have not given these issues careful thought and that, sadly, I
am not much concerned about reconciling metaphysical
theories. He is right, but I am unrepentant. The history of
thought teaches us that metaphysics follows physics, rather
than the other way round: consider, as but one example,
the influence of Einstein's theory of relativity upon the
metaphysics of space and time. This is not to say that
conceptual confusion is not to be deplored. But the confu-
sions Diaz points to (especially in the terms used to depict
the relationship between brain function and conscious
experience, which range from the former "producing" the
latter to the two being two different "levels" of functioning
of the same system) arise, I believe, not (or not only)
because I am confused but because / don't know (nor does
anyone else) how brain function and conscious experience
are linked, only that they are. This state of ignorance,
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
703

Response /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
Table 1
Section
Commentators
Rl. Metaphysical issues
R2. The survival value
of consciousness
R3. The contents of
consciousness
R4. The comparator
R5. Localized vs. dis-
tributed processes
R6. Effects of temporal
lobe lesions
R7. Episodic memory
R8. Anatomy of the
comparator system
R9. Timing
RIO. Episodic memory
revisited: Clive
Wearing
Rll. Psychopathology
R12. Conclusion
Dennett; Diaz; Ellard;
Hurley; Ingvaldsen &
Whiting; Kinsbourne; Lloyd-
Jones et al.; Lubow; Merskey;
Rachlin; Schmajuk & Axelrad;
Shames & Hubbard;
Swerdlow; Velmans
Dennis & Humphreys; Ellard;
Frith; Hemsley; Hurley;
Lubow; Merskey; Reeke;
Schmajuk & Axelrad; Shames
& Hubbard; Stephens &
Graham; Swerdlow; Toates;
Velmans
Eichenbaum & Cohen; Frith;
Hemsley; Ivanitsky;
Kinsbourne; Merskey;
Newman; Reeke; Revonsuo;
Schmajuk & Axelrad; Shames
& Hubbard; Smith; Stephens
& Graham; Toates; Umilta &
Zorzi; Velmans
Dennett; Dennis &
Humphreys; Frith; Hurley;
Ingvaldsen & Whiting;
Kinsbourne; Merskey; Nelson;
Newman; Shames & Hubbard;
Toates; Umilta & Zorzi
Dennett; Foss; Kinsbourne;
Reeke; Smith; Swerdlow;
Umilta & Zorzi
Dennett; Eichenbaum &
Cohen; Foss; Kinsbourne;
Merskey; Newman; Reeke;
Revonsuo; Umilta & Zorzi
Dennis & Humphreys;
Eichenbaum & Cohen;
Kinsbourne; Merskey; Nelson;
Newman; Umilta & Zorzi
Hemsley; Ivanitsky;
Kinsbourne; Merskey;
Newman; Reeke; Revonsuo;
Swerdlow; Umilta & Zorzi
Eichenbaum & Cohen; Hem-
sley; Ivanitsky; Reeke;
Revonsuo; Velmans
Eichenbaum & Cohen;
Hurley; Kinsbourne; Merskey;
Nelson; Newman; Umilta &
Zorzi
Crider; Frith; Hemsley;
Swerdlow
Dennett; Kinsbourne;
Newman
indeed, was one of the main messages the target article
tried to communicate. Only when it is dispelled - and this is
likely to arise from theoretical and empirical advances
within science, not from developments in metaphysics -
shall we be able to develop a language adequate properly to
depict the relationship between brain function and con-
sciousness. Till then, maybe we should invent some suitable
nonsense word to clothe our ignorance (the brain "cons"
consciousness, perhaps?)
Of the metaphysical options that Diaz sees my terminol-
ogy as leaving open, the one I am keenest to reject is that of
epiphenomenalism (Harnad 1994). Ellard, in contrast,
accepts this possibility (though he finds it unattractive),
namely, that consciousness might have arisen as a by-
product of some other property of neural tissue, but with-
out consequences of its own; both Hurley and Velmans
likewise seem prepared to consider this option. I reject it,
not on philosophical but on scientific grounds: As stated in
the target article, given Darwinian theory (the cornerstone
of modern biology), consciousness must be a product of
evolution, so it must confer survival value, and therefore it
must affect behaviour. As Hurley puts it, I am claiming that
consciousness must confer "added value" in evolutionary
terms. According to S. Harnad (personal communication,
Feb. 23, 1995), this position is dangerously dualist (and
more unpalatable even than epiphenomenalism): By allow-
ing consciousness to possess causal properties (acting upon
and via behaviour) additional to those of the brain func-
tions to which they are linked (by which they are conned?),
I open the door to "an extra causal force in nature."
However, until we know the details of how the causal
properties of conscious events and brain processes, respec-
tively, link up with each other, the metaphysical implica-
tions of accepting the existence of the former remain
uncertain. Among the commentators, only Ingvaldsen &
Whiting charge me with dualism. The charge, however,
is one of misdemeanour rather than felony: methodo-
logical dualism, that is, the position that there are different
sets of data (those of consciousness and the rest) re-
quiring analysis in different ways, and they have no known
connection. To this charge I plead guilty, since such meth-
odological dualism simply reflects, once again, the state of
ignorance repeatedly affirmed in the target article. The
polar opposite of dualism is usually taken to be mind-brain
identity theory (Smart 1959); Lloyd-Jones et al. regard
the view presented in the target article to be an example. If
so, it is not a very good one, since (as noted above) the
argument from evolution leads me to suppose, in opposi-
tion to the usual form taken by mind-brain identity theory
(Gray 1971), that consciousness possesses causal properties
of its own. I suppose that being classified in this way as
simultaneously a dualist and a mind-brain identity theorist
shows once more that I am in a terrible metaphysical
muddle. However, as indicated in my reply to Diaz, I am not
too upset about this.
The view that there is no Hard Question (Kinsbourne)
about consciousness, or at any rate none that simple tricks
won't make go away, is to be found in a variety of forms
among the commentators.
Thus, Velmans advises us to talk about things in a first-
person way alongside the third-person way, and to accept
that both are legitimate. This is not only a reasonable
suggestion, but also what most people do most of the time.
However, it begs the question - the Hard Question - how
704
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

and why are organisms so constructed that both ways are
legitimate? That staunch defender of radical behaviourism
(or, in its most recent incarnation, "teleological" behaviour-
ism; Rachlin 1995), Rachlin, so totally ignores Velmans's
advice that he manages to talk about even his own experi-
ences in an entirely third-person manner. Thus: "to hear is
to consistently discriminate between sound and silence by
revealing over time . . . a correlation between overt behav-
ior and sound." Well, yes, that's the way I would determine
whether another person or a rat can hear. And, if that's all
there were, we would have no problem of consciousness.
But, as stated in the target article (and endorsed by Vel-
mans), that problem arises because conscious experiences
exist, for each one of us individually (and as reported by
each of us to others). Moreover, such experiences are
characteristically clearly located in time and space: They
are in the here and now. Rachlin, in contrast, affirms that
"conscious events (properly understood as behavioral pat-
terns) have no meaning at an instant of time." This startling
remark makes me wonder whether what-it-is-like-to-be a
Radical Behaviourist might be radically different from
what-it-is-like-to-be, well, me for one. Rachlin is, however,
at least consistent in his behaviourism: Conscious events
are "behavioral patterns" for people as well as for animals.
Lubow, in contrast, occupies a curiously mixed position.
Having allowed that one can empirically demonstrate that
human beings and pigeons have similar visual acuity, spec-
tral sensitivity curves, and so forth, he concludes that both
have "vision," but that only people have consciousness.
Why, from the same behavioural observations, should one
make different inferences for pigeon and person; and what
is "vision" anyway if it is nonconscious?
The philosophical counterpart of Rachlin's position is
stated by Ingvaldsen & Whiting, who appeal for authority
to Wittgenstein (1976) for the assertion that we cannot take
our own experience as an independent datum because we
lack criteria by which to evaluate it. As they admit, however,
this situation can be rescued by way of "collective dis-
course." Indeed it can, and, at the start of the target article, I
pointed to the edifice of psychophysics as testimony to this
Fact. Rachlin, however, is unconvinced by this testimony,
since in psychophysical experiments people make "judge-
ments about the presence or intensity of environmental
stimuli, not about conscious experience." That is a very
curious way of describing, for example, colour aftereffects
or the waterfall illusion. The natural way of stating what is
going on in these experiments is indeed that "collective
discourse" (standardised into experimental procedures) is
used to validate verbal reports of individual conscious
experiences. Starting from the stimulus, no Martian would
be likely to predict the waterfall illusion; though he might
very well have come to predict it (as Dennett would surely
hasten to point out) by appropriate observations on the
brain (cf. Newsome & Salzman 1993). So I remain uncon-
vinced that the privacy of conscious experience constitutes
a real problem either scientifically, experimentally, or philo-
sophically (despite the authority of Wittgenstein). Experi-
mentally, there is ample evidence that, under similar condi-
tions, conscious experiences are broadly similar in different
individuals; this should be sufficient also to settle the
problem of other minds (no longer, according to Hurley,
taken seriously by many) within philosophy.
As startling as Rachlin's statement of Radical Behaviour-
ism is Schmajuk & Axelrad's formulation of Strong AI
Response /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
(Searle 1980). They discuss a neural network model of
interanimal communication (involving Calls and Call Feed-
back), including a simulation of self-communications; they
take these to correspond to a form of inner speech, and the
latter in turn to constitute a part of the contents of con-
sciousness. This allows them to define Call Feedback as a
part of conscious processing. They then go on to make the
remarkable claim that, as the model generates and detects
its own calls, then "for that fleeting moment of simulation"
the model has one component of consciousness. "More
generally," they write, "just as learning models certainly
leam, and models of attention attend, a complete model of
consciousness would be conscious." Thus the Hard Ques-
tion of consciousness is neatly sidestepped in two major
respects. First, without the benefit of any experimental
study or theoretical justification, it is taken for granted that
consciousness goes along with the information processing
aspects of brain function, not with its neural aspects, its
links to behaviour, or its transactions with an environment
(see, e.g., the final paragraphs of the target article). Second,
no account is taken of the well-known problem (restated by
Hurley and Velmans, as well as at several points in the
target article) that, at least in the current state of our
understanding, any function to which we attribute con-
sciousness can in principle be accomplished by a system
that lacks consciousness. So there is no reason to suppose
that Schmajuk & Axelrad's neural network system does the
job of communication with conscious concomitants (nor,
conversely, any way of telling that it does not). In this
important respect, being conscious is quite unlike learning
or attending (so long as the latter terms are themselves
understood as referring to information processing minus
any conscious concomitants which, were we the learning or
attending organisms concerned, we might experience).
Unfortunately, sidestepping the Hard Question does not
resolve it.
The target article started from the position that there is a
Hard Question about consciousness: namely, why should
brain process + information process + behaviour + envi-
ronment (in whatever combination of specific tokens of
these general elements) come together to produce any
conscious experience at all rather than none? I took Den-
nett and Kinsbourne to be champions of the opposing
view - that there is no such Hard Question. I am relieved
(and apologetic) that I got Dennetts position wrong. The
target article attributed to him the view (supported here by
Merskey) that the problem of consciousness will be re-
solved by the mere gathering of more data. Not so, Den-
nett's commentary clarifies: he is concerned rather to attack
the view that no amount of scientific investigation ("data
plus theory" Dennett's italics) could ever eliminate the
mystery of consciousness. I share with Dennett the view
that although one cannot be sure of solving any scientific
problem in advance, and although the problem of con-
sciousness is unlikely to yield easily to analysis, there is
nonetheless no reason in principle why we should not
expect eventually to solve it; and we should certainly not yet
give up trying. Furthermore, the addition above of the
italicised phrase ("plus theory") closes the gap between our
respective views as to how the problem of consciousness
will eventually be solved. What is not clear, however, is the
nature of the new theory that will be required. I do not
myself see how this can come about just from developing
more and more detailed theories of particular phenomena,
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
705

Response/Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
each deploying already familiar theoretical principles (as
implied by Kinsbournes comment that Easy and Hard
Questions will simply merge). Though the target article
itself offered just such a minitheory, it also indicated its
sharp limitations as a way of approaching the Hard Ques-
tion. (My acknowledgement of these limitations was ig-
nored by Ingvaldsen & Whiting, Lloyd-Jones et al. and
Shames & Hubbard, who complain that I did not go
beyond brute correlations, nor demonstrate any principled
connections between the different levels of analysis em-
ployed - brain, information processing, conscious experi-
ence, and so on, but I did not claim to have done so.)
However, only time will tell what kind of theorising will
eventually prove successful.
Swerdlow turns the Hard Question on its head. He is
concerned that the target article provides no mechanism to
account for the "contents of the unconscious", given that
most psychiatrists and psychologists suppose the existence
of unconscious processes that direct behaviour and
thought. Certainly, I too make the latter supposition: Most
of behaviour appears to be controlled by processes of which
we have no conscious awareness. But this does not seem to
me to pose any particular scientific problem, since we can
understand in principle, and indeed in increasingly detailed
fact, how the brain does the trick. Swerdlow s commentary,
however, implies a particular analysis of these "unconscious
processes" - the psychodynamic version - which would
perhaps pose a problem, if it were correct, but for which
there is little empirical support (Eysenck 1985) or logical
necessity [See also BBS multiple books review of Grun-
hairen's Foundations of Psychoanalysis BBS 9(2) 1986]. In
this psychodynamic version, the unconscious is endowed
with "everything the conscious has, only minus conscious-
ness," in Searle's (1992, p. 169) succinct phrase. Searle gives
an excellent account of the difficulties of formulating this
view coherently. His account distinguishes between non-
conscious, nonmental processes (e.g., myelination of
axons), unconscious mental processes (e.g., the belief, not
at present consciously entertained, that Paris is in France),
and conscious mental processes (e.g., the same belief,
consciously entertained). His conclusion is that the con-
tents of the unconscious - its "ontology" - "is strictly
the ontology of a neurophysiology capable of generating the
conscious" (1992, p. 172). [See also Searle: "Consciousness,
Explanatory Inversion, and Cognitive Science" BBS 13(4)
1990.] This dispositional account of the unconscious is in
essential agreement with the view I expressed in the target
article that, beyond the level of neural processes, there is
only one other level of brain/mind events that needs to be
taken into account, namely, that of conscious processes. To
the extent that nonconscious neurophysiological processes,
short of becoming conscious, gain semantics or inten-
tionality (whether seen through the distorting prism of
psychodynamics or more neutrally), this is due to selection
by consequences during transactions with the environment,
in the relatively unmysterious manner outlined in section 4
of the target article.
R2. The survival value of consciousness. Apart from the
few commentators who accepted the possibility of epi-
phenomenalism (discussed in the previous section), there
was general acceptance that consciousness must have some
survival value (indeed, some were surprised that this could
be questioned), and a variety of suggestions were made as to
where to find it. Stephens & Graham make a valuable
distinction between two contexts for the behavioural differ-
ence that consciousness makes: the evolutionary (i.e., the
behavioural contribution made by consciousness to sur-
vival) and the epistemological (i.e., the behavioural signs by
which one would be warranted to infer that another is
conscious). As they say, there is no guarantee that the
solutions to these two problems will be identical, though it
would help if they were. At present, a solution to either
would be very welcome.
Lubow is a clear exception to the general consensus that
consciousness would be expected to have survival value.
Indeed, he sees the target article as taking a "disturbingly
teleological turn." Since I was merely applying general
Darwinian theory to consciousness, I find this charge puz-
zling; still more so when Lubow dismisses the notion that
consciousness might have a "function" by likening it to such
nonbiological phenomena as gravity. It is in application to
the biological world that the term "function" acquires
meaning, namely, the carrying out of some process or other
that aids the survival of a replicating organism. No one
would seek a function, in this sense, for gravity; biologists
would, however, generally seek one for any major charac-
teristic of a species and, whatever consciousness is, it surely
fits that description. This surprisingly unbiological position
is apparent again when Lubow supposes that consciousness
emerged, fully fledged and with no prehuman precursors,
when a critical mass of some type of neural tissue was
reached in our own species, "as though full-blown from the
head of Zeus." Although I cannot refute this possibility,
there is no parallel (so far as I am aware) in the rest of
biology for such a sudden and massive evolutionary leap.
Once consciousness has "emerged" from neural tissue in
this dramatic way, it then -according to Lubow - permits
many good things, like the building of cathedrals and the
writing of books. But these, and here Lubow and I agree,
are not the stuff of Darwinian survival. From this, Lubow
infers that consciousness is not a product of Darwinian
selection, whereas I infer that we need to find something
earlier and more basic than cathedral-building to provide
the missing survival value.
A rather high-level function for consciousness, that of
understanding and communicating with other animals,
is suggested in somewhat different ways by Frith and
Schmajuk & Axelrad.
For Frith, the survival value of conscious experience is
that it enables one to take an intentional stance toward
other agents, thus allowing better prediction of their behav-
iour in the current situation, a point of view previously
espoused by Humphrey (1983). It is very likely that con-
scious awareness is indeed a necessary prerequisite for the
taking of an intentional stance. But it is difficult to see how
this advantage (though undoubtedly conducive to survival)
could, any more than the building of cathedrals, provide the
initial spur to the evolution of consciousness (one of the
reasons that caused Humphrey, 1992, to abandon his earlier
position). For evolution to work, there has to be a genetic
change upon which Darwinian selection can act. Suppose
that this change is sudden (e.g., a mutation) and that, as
required by Frith s hypothesis, the consciousness to which
it gives rise confers the ability to predict the intentions of
others (by way of inferring or empathising with their states
of consciousness). Useful as this "mind-reading" capacity
might be, it can only be deployed if there are other
706
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

conscious minds to read. But this condition requires that
the genetic mutation responsible for the new capacity
should simultaneously strike a sufficient number of other
animals to cash in its survival value. This is such an unlikely
scenario thai it can, I think, be safely rejected. (A similar
argument, by the way, precludes saltatory evolution of
language capacity; see Pinker & Bloom, 1990.) Thus, we
need to seek a prior survival value for consciousness: only
when this has spread to large numbers of other animals can
the additional value of mind-reading do any work.
For Schmajuk & Axelrad, the basic building block
(instantiated in a neural network model) is the kind of
communication that might occur when one animal utters an
alarm call that is perceived and reacted to by another; this
part of interanimal communication is seen as involving
nonconscious processes. They then proceed to postulate
that animals are sensitive to feedback from their own calls,
and demonstrate that, in their model, this further capacity
confers a behavioural advantage in a simulated cooperative
avoidance task. (Dennis & Humphreys describe a neural
network model of a very different kind of behaviour -
learning the visual referent of a word. Interestingly, their
model too shows a clear behavioural advantage when the
model is equipped with the capacity to detect feedback
from its own vocal outputs.) On the basis that an important
part of conscious experience consists of inner speech,
Schmajuk & Axelrad finally link their model to conscious-
ness by supposing that the feedback from an animal's own
calls achieves awareness. If so, they argue, the behavioural
advantage of sensitivity to call feedback, demonstrated in
the neural network model, can provide the survival value
needed for consciousness to evolve. This argument proba-
bly avoids my criticism of Frith's position, that is, that
simultaneous evolution would be needed in many organ-
isms, provided that (as would no doubt be readily testable
within the model) behavioural advantage accrues when
only one of two cooperating animals is sensitive to call
feedback. What the model fails to do - a failure that applies,
mutatis mutandis, to all current hypotheses (as discussed in
Hurley's and Velmans's commentaries), including my own
- is to explain why sensitivity to call feedback should
require awareness. This postulate is simply imported from
introspective human knowledge that inner speech is an
important part of the contents of consciousness. But, even
on this basis, the postulate is curiously arbitrary, since we
are also aware of other people's speech (not to mention a lot
of other things). So why not declare everything (or nothing)
in the Schmajuk & Axelrad model to be conscious?
I am not sure why Schmajuk & Axelrad select inner
speech as the route by which to approach the problem of
consciousness; perhaps they regard this as relating primar-
ily to those things in our own awareness that others don't
know about (unless we tell them), as distinct from entities in
the external world of which others too are aware. Frith, in
contrast, is explicit in treating the contents of consciousness
as consisting above all of "shareable knowledge," which he
further defines as representations coded in allocentric
rather than egocentric coordinates. Let us call these con-
trasting aspects of consciousness "internalized" and "exter-
nalized," respectively. In agreement with Friths position, I
believe it to be highly unlikely that such internalized pro-
cesses as hearing one's own voice in subvocal speech,
imagining a previously observed visual scene, and so on,
could have developed without the prior capacity to con-
Response/Gray. Neuropsychology of consciousness
sciously appreciate the externalized auditory, visual, and
other characteristics of the world in which we move.
Several other commentators, however, follow a strategy
similar to Schmajuk & Axelrad's, focusing in their search
for the function of consciousness upon internalized pro-
cesses. Shames & Hubbard and Reeke, for example,
emphasise the contributions of conscious thought to prob-
lem solving and planning. Planning is also picked out by
Merskey, who comments on the role played by the visu-
alized outcomes of actions in this process. I see no problem
in accepting that, in these ways, conscious processes do
influence behaviour, and that this influence is beneficial to
survival (Reeke). Indeed, the target article itself suggests
that we should seek the function of consciousness not in
transactions with the environment as they actually happen,
but in the modification of such transactions for future use.
But, as indicated above, I do not see how such internalized
uses of conscious awareness could have arisen without
there first being qualia that are referred to the external
world. And these are not the consequence of any planning
(not, at any rate, of the conscious variety). On the contrary,
they just seem to occur, but - and this is where the problem
of survival value arises - they occur too late to be involved in
the processes of perception and action to which they are
apparently linked (Velmans 1991). This problem cannot be
completely solved by appeal to behavioural advantages that
accrue slowly and late as the result of internalized conscious
processes (as in Merskey's example of arrival at a destina-
tion as the result of planning the imagined journey), though
such behavioural advantages may ultimately provide part of
the solution.
Swerdlow goes even further in favouring internalized
over externalized aspects as providing the survival value of
consciousness. The target article (section 4) takes the view
that the contents of consciousness "must in general bear a
reasonably close relationship to states in the real environ-
ment, since they derive from a process of selection by
consequences." Swerdlow wonders, however, whether such
a close relationship to real states would necessarily be
favoured by evolutionary selection, suggesting in contrast
that such products of unconscious processing as creativity,
fantasy, denial, and rationalization may offer selective ad-
vantages despite, or indeed because of, their divergence
from reality. Such advantages, Swerdlow suggests, may be
found in improved social and interpersonal functioning and
reduced negative health events. While these advantages
may be real to some degree and/or in some instances, they
are not incompatible with the view that the contents of
consciousness must in general reflect rather accurately the
state of the external environment, or none of us would
survive for very long. One who is creative, fantastical,
denying, or rationalizing to the extent that his perceptual
world differs radically from that of others is normally
hospitalized as psychotic and usually has substantially re-
duced chances of procreation. Swerdlow also points to the
role of "preset expectations," genetically determined or
arising from early experience, in determining the outputs of
the comparator. The existence of such biasses is undenia-
ble. A good example is to be found in Hebb's (1946)
observation of laboratory-reared chimpanzees who respond
to a shaking rope as though it were a snake. But such
examples imply, precisely, that Darwinian selection has
built in a "snake template" that is well suited to the
recognition of real snakes, albeit with sufficient potency
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
707

Response /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
also to announce "snakes" when none are there. Such
exceptions to the rule are only possible given the rule,
namely, that perceptions are normally more-or-less well
adapted to reality.
The suggestion that the survival value of conscious expe-
rience lies in future transactions with the environment finds
favour with Hemsley, and Ellard and Toates each suggest
how this could be mediated by a (conscious) contextual set,
influencing subsequent rapid (nonconscious) reactions to
specific stimuli. (Swerdlow makes just the opposite point,
that unconscious contextual biasses may determine the
contents of consciousness. The two suggestions are not in
conflict; both types of biassing, with their mysterious com-
ings and goings between conscious and unconscious pro-
cessing almost certainly occur.) Ellard's suggestion is of
particular interest, since it concerns just that type of behav-
iour — risk assessment — in which the comparator hypoth-
esis set out in the target article itself originated (Gray
1982a; 1982b). Stephens & Graham, in a similar vein,
suggest that, though consciousness may not be essential for
the occurrence of a particular form of behaviour, it may
nonetheless increase its effectiveness (though Toates re-
minds us of the many instances in which conscious attention
to skilled performance can ruin it). These suggestions have
the merit that one can see how they might permit gradualist
evolution (pace Lubow, who dislikes this notion) of con-
sciousness - if we could only see how to get it into the
system in the first place.
R3. The contents of consciousness. The central hypoth-
esis proposed in the target article concerned not the nature
of consciousness itself, but the contents of consciousness:
namely, that these consist in the outputs of a comparator
system. Revonsuo points out that, in order to evaluate this
or any comparable proposal, it would help to have a system-
atic empirical phenomenology; Velmans similarly urges us
to take the phenomenology of conscious experience more
seriously. It is hard to disagree in principle with these
suggestions, but also hard to forget the scientific morass
that was the last wave of introspectionist psychology at the
turn of the century. So guidance is awaited as to how to
establish the missing systematic phenomenology. I was
under the impression that I had in any case taken the
phenomenology of conscious experience seriously, by test-
ing the comparator hypothesis against a range of features of
the contents of consciousness that were in many cases
derived from introspection; I am therefore puzzled by the
accusation (Shames & Hubbard) that I primarily ad-
dressed the neurological issues but failed to make a link
between them and the phenomenology of subjective expe-
rience. Certainly, I concur that such a link will be an
essential feature of any eventually successful theory.
The general notion that the contents of consciousness
consist of the outputs of a comparator was welcomed by
Toates, who agrees that consciousness has to do with
monitoring the disparity between expected and actual
events; by Newman, who points to the considerable sim-
ilarities (acknowledged in the target article; see section 3)
between this concept and "global workspace" theory (Baars
1988; Newman & Baars 1993); by Ivanitsky, who proposes
a rather similar neural underpinning for the comparator;
and by Hemsley. Kinsbourne, Smith & Hall, and Umilta
& Zorzi give more guarded approval to the target article s
view of the contents of consciousness, commenting that
the comparator might contribute to the selection of con-
tents for consciousness. Reeke, however, contrasts my
application of the comparator concept unfavourably with
Edelman's (1989) application to categorisation rather than
comparison. Merskey suggests that the contents of con-
sciousness appear to be the comparator's processing rather
than its outputs. But, in making this point, he is referring to
the internalized aspect of consciousness, that is, processes
of evaluation, appreciation, and decision making. As
pointed out above, these processes are probably derivatives
from the primary role of consciousness in reflecting the
external world; it is this role that the target article ad-
dressed.
Frith puts forward a view of the contents of conscious-
ness that he sees as different from that contained in the
target article, but that I see as very similar. He emphasises
the value of "contrastive analysis" (as do Newman and
Stephens & Graham), namely, establishing contrasts be-
tween information that is conscious and information that is
not. (Although perhaps not made explicit, this approach was
important also in developing the hypothesis proposed in the
target article; see, e.g., section 5.2.) On this basis, Frith
distinguishes between motor and cognitive representations:
the former being coded in egocentric coordinates, closely
linked to motor output, and unconscious; the latter being
coded in allocentric coordinates, conscious, and the basis of
knowledge that can be shared with others. The latter,
therefore, constitute the contents of consciousness, along
with awareness of possible actions that the subject can
undertake with regard to them. This view is highly compati-
ble with that of the target article. According to this, the
chief function of the comparator system is to check that the
outcomes of motor programs are as expected (section 2; and
see Gray, 1994). Friths distinction between motor and
cognitive representations appears to encapsulate essentially
the same point as the formulation in section 5.2 of the target
article, namely, that "we are not normally aware of either
the planning or the execution of movements as such, but
only of the end points (which may include kinaesthetic and
proprioceptive feedback making up the 'feel' of the move-
ment) that constitute the successive sub-goals of these
movements." Friths point that such subgoals are primarily
coded in allocentric coordinates is a valuable extension of
this formulation (although the elements contained in the
bracketed phrase also form part of the overall story). His
emphasis on allocentric coding is, in addition, consistent
with the role allotted in the target article to the hippocam-
pal system, given the well-established role of this system in
the analysis of allocentrically organised spatial information
(O'Keefe & Nadel 1978).
Several authors comment upon the role of reinforcement
in determining the contents of consciousness. Hemsley
takes up the difficulty I have in accounting, within the
theory, for the difference between those "match" outcomes
of the comparator that enter consciousness and those that
do not (see the discussion of the driving and music exam-
ples in section 5.14); he suggests that such outcomes may
only enter conscious experience when reinforcement sys-
tems are activated. In Schmajuk & Axelrad's model, the
contents of consciousness are said to be sensitive to both
reinforcement and novelty. Also addressing the same diffi-
culty, Toates proposes that one can choose to focus con-
scious awareness even upon a perfectly familiar stimulus if
one is motivated to do so (which may simply be another way
708
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

of saying "given sufficient positive reinforcement"). I wel-
come these attempts to get me out of my difficulty but
doubt their effectiveness. Within the conceptual frame-
work provided by reinforcement theory, a motor program
that is running successfully is, by definition, one that is in
receipt of positive reinforcement (for approach behaviour)
or negative reinforcement (for escape or avoidance behav-
iour; see Gray, 1975). Thus, one cannot account for the
difference between those outcomes of such a program that
do or do not enter consciousness by appeal to reinforce-
ment, as in Hemsley's suggestion. There is little point,
therefore, in translating Toates s proposal into the language
of reinforcement theory, as I did above. Toates himself does
not seem in any case to have intended it in that way. Rather,
he stresses the active nature of consciousness, which can
itself "choose" to focus upon a familiar piece of music. Al-
though I recognise, introspectively, the experience Toates
describes in this way, I am puzzled by the logic of an
attempt to explain a feature of consciousness by having
consciousness itself create the feature. Smith propose
more radical surgery to deal with the problem: In line with
what he correctly claims to be a long tradition (see his
references), he suggests that only mismatch outcomes from
the comparator reach consciousness (Eichenbaum &
Cohen, however, depart from this tradition and take ex-
actly the opposite view, namely, that "little of conscious
experience is concerned with novelty detection".) But the
Smith move simply lands us onto the other horn of the
dilemma, as instanced in the familiar musical example
(target article, section 5.14). So I am still left with the
difficulty of providing a principled account of the differ-
ence between those predicted outcomes of motor programs
of which one is or is not consciously aware.
R4. The comparator. Nelson too takes up the problem
posed by the difference between match outcomes of which
one is or is not aware, but believes it to be a pseudoproblem.
Why, he asks, do I suppose that conscious and nonconscious
comparator processes should differ anyway?
Both Nelson and Shames & Hubbard point out that
there are plenty of basic comparator processes that function
outside of conscious awareness (for some good examples,
see Shames & Hubbard and Umilta & Zorzi), and the
brain certainly contains multiple comparator systems
(Dennett, Merskey). Furthermore, as Shames & Hub-
bard remark, I have not demonstrated that the activity of
the comparator proposed in the target article is a sufficient
condition for the occurrence of conscious experiences.
Hurley, too, makes this point. Unlike (apparently) Shames
& Hubbard, however, she realises that, not only did I not
claim to have made any such demonstration, but (like her) I
do not see why any such "complex adaptive feedback
system" should generate conscious experiences. That, pre-
cisely, is (a version of) the Hard Question about conscious-
ness. So, even assuming that the target article is right in
assuming that a comparator process contributes in some
way to the contents of consciousness, there is nonetheless
no understanding of why the outputs of this comparator
(but not others) should achieve consciousness. We do not
even know whether the difference between comparator
outputs that do and do not achieve consciousness lies in the
comparator process itself (a possibility that Nelson implic-
itly rejects) or is due to other factors. Even within the
comparator process postulated in the target article, part of
Response/Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
it (the outputs) achieves consciousness, but part of it (the
comparison process) does not. Nor is this just an arbitrary
theoretical move. As Kinsbourne points out, supporting
this feature of the model, we do not first experience an
event and then its unexpectedness, so the match/mismatch
decision must itself be unconscious. Thus, in answer to
Nelsons question, we know, empirically, that there is a
difference: Some comparator processes achieve conscious-
ness, and others do not; even for those types of comparator
processes that do achieve consciousness, part of them does
and part does not. Clearly, these differences stand in need
of some explanation. Whether that explanation will turn out
to call upon differences in the underlying comparator
systems themselves is not yet known. This hypothesis can-
not at present be rejected, but, like Nelson, I doubt it.
It is accepted, then, that there is nothing about compara-
tor processes that requires consciousness. Nonetheless, the
notion that a comparator process might have something to
do with consciousness met with some approval. Hurley and
Nelson point out, indeed, that it is quite common in
current moves in this area to appeal to feedback devices and
comparator systems; Dennis & Humphreys indicate the
role played by a comparator in their computational model
of episodic recognition; and Newman points out that global
workspace theory, like the target article, treats perceptual
enitities that engage conscious attention as varying in some
degree from current expectations and as being relevant to
current goals.
More generally, Nelson takes me to task for not acknowl-
edging my debt to the overall cybernetic literature in which
the concept of the comparator has its origin (a debt pointed
out also by Ingvaldsen & Whiting), and especially to the
work of Powers (1973), whose relevance is indicated also by
Toates. I freely acknowledge that debt. Indeed, control
theory has been integral to my own thinking since as an
undergraduate I was exposed, even before Powers's work,
to the papers of Kenneth Craik (1943); it influenced my first
amateur attempt at quantitative theorising (Gray & Smith
1969). Powers's view of behaviour as the control of percep-
tion, cited approvingly by Nelson (and echoed by Hurley),
is highly congruent with the stance adopted in the target
article: It provides a rationale for the fact that the contents
of consciousness contain the goals, but not the program-
ming, of action - a key phenomenon that the comparator
hypothesis attempted to address. Also from the perspective
of cybernetics, Nelson suggests that I paid insufficient
attention to the fact that the brain consists of ^hierarchy of
self-regulatory feedback systems, while Toates proposes
that consciousness is associated with a high level of such a
hierarchy. Within a framework of this kind, Nelson points
out, the match-mismatch process would not be a simple
binary output, but rather would consist of a range of
discrepancies with respect to specifications at a variety of
levels of the hierarchy. These are all points I accept. In
addition, Nelson asks how the system I described deals with
the case of positive discrepancy, that is, when perception
exceeds expectation. I find this question intelligible only if
one supposes the excess to have a positive valence in
motivational terms, for example, more food or money than
was expected. I have discussed the behavioural and emo-
tional consequences of such positive discrepancies else-
where (Gray 1975), but I do not see them as throwing any
particular light upon the problems addressed in the target
article.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
709

Response!'Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
The comparator hypothesis is seen in especially interest-
ing ways by Hurley and Dennett. As Hurley comments, it
is widely agreed that a key feature of conscious experience
is perspective, that is, a point of view held by creatures who
are "agents and perceivers," actively moving through and
interacting with an environment. In its emphasis upon the
keeping of an ongoing record of the relationships between
motor output and perceptual feedback, the notion of a
comparator is able to capture some of the essence of this
point of view. Hurley also discusses a second key feature of
consciousness, "reflection," that is, the capacity to sustain
states that are in some way about their possessor. This
capacity is outside the scope of the comparator model, at
least as so far framed (though perhaps not beyond the
model advocated by Frith). Nonetheless, it seems possible
that further analysis of the comparator hypothesis may
serve to act as a bridge between philosophical, computa-
tional, and physiological approaches to the problem of
consciousness. Dennetts comment is couched quite differ-
ently from Hurley's, but points to the same possibility: "the
most interesting - if tacit - claim made by Gray's model . . .
is that this comparator task is so important that this is a place
in the brain to look for major convergence of the syntax and
semantics of the whole system." I am content that Dennett
has acted as midwife to this, indeed tacit, feature of the
model, and delighted to claim (joint?) parenthood. Be-
tween them, then, these two commentaries see the compar-
ator hypothesis as potentially valuable in the approach to
two of the hallmarks of consciousness: perspective and
semantic competence.
Dennett takes me to task, however, for ignoring the
possibility that in the functioning of the comparator process
(1) consciousness might be composed of lots of unconscious
elements, and (2) a sufficiently powerful combination of
"merely syntactic" phenomena might account for semantic
competence. In fact, I find both of these possibilities -
which Dennett implies, and I find likely (target article,
section 4), to be actually one and the same - perfect-
ly acceptable, so long as we do indeed regard them as
possibilities, not as certainties. That is to say, I can see no
reason in principle why consciousness and semantics
should not arise out of the operation of a comparator system
composed of nonconscious entities that instantiate a syntax.
Nobody, however, yet knows how the trick is done, so it is
risky to suppose that, when we do know, it will fit this
description.
R5. Localized vs. distributed processes. The target article
proposed not only that the contents of consciousness con-
sist in outputs from a comparator system, but also that this
system consists in a number of specific structures within the
brain. This attempt at localizing some of the processes
critical to conscious experience met with a number of
objections, even unto the dreaded bogeyword (Smith):
homunculus! For some reason, the attribution of a special
role in consciousness to only part of the brain rather than
the whole is seen by some as tantamount to inviting the little
chap in to listen to what the chosen part is saying. (Swerd-
low, in an interesting twist, suggests that it is the uncon-
scious brain that is doing the listening.) Thus Dennett
remarks that, by concentrating all the power of mentality
into the subicular system, I force this to be composed of
"wonder tissue." Reeke, similarly, states that, by postulat-
ing a single area where the outputs of the comparator are
interpreted to generate conscious thought, I invest the
theory with a "not-so-hidden homunculus." (Reeke himself,
in trying to account for some of Libet's curious experimen-
tal findings, goes on to propose that different aspects of
awareness might occur in different sequences "as perceived
elsewhere in the system." If I wanted to trade bogeyword
for bogeyword, this is homunculism in spades!). But one
might as well level the same charges about the brain as a
whole. Somewhere there is some wonder tissue, that is,
tissue that gives rise to conscious experience: Is the degree
of wonder inversely proportional to the amount of tissue? If
so, maybe we should seek for the physical substrate of
consciousness in the body, because it's bigger than just the
brain. There is nothing in principle that requires that an
account of conscious experience should appeal to "the brain
and the person as a whole" (Foss) or to global properties of
the entire system (Dennett, Reeke), though it may turn out
that way. Foss sweeps this whole issue away by appealing to
the analogy of the focal point of a lens: just as this is not
additional to the glass of which the lens is constructed, so
the "centre of consciousness" is just "a functional conse-
quence" of the organization of information streams avail-
able to consciousness. He may be right, but again we must
wait until we know how the trick is done. In short, the
homuncular insult is best ignored till it becomes obsolete
(as it will when we know what wonder tissue does).
The choice between the whole brain and some brain
subsystem(s) or other as "the seat of consciousness" (Den-
nett) has to be made, I believe, upon empirical, not
philosophical, grounds (for an interesting recent example to
do just this, see Crick & Koch 1995). In the target article
(section 3), I argued against Kinsbournes (1993) ecumeni-
cal view that any representation can contribute to con-
sciousness, partly on the basis of Jackendoff s (1987) anal-
ysis of the contents of consciousness as always being
intermediary constructions arising from interactions be-
tween bottom-up and top-down processing. Kinsbourne
sees this Jackendoffian analysis as compatible with his own
view, namely, that entry into consciousness is a function
merely of the strength and coherence of cell assemblies
momentarily in competition with each other to form a
dominant focus of neural activity, since those cell assem-
blies that cohere well will usually represent finished per-
cepts. [See Amit: "The Hebbian Paradigm Reintegrated"
BBS 18(4) 1995.] Although this is reasonable, it does not
address the other problem posed (target article, section 3)
for the ecumenical view, namely, the fact that the contents
of consciousness almost entirely exclude motor processes
(although, of course, they include the outcomes of motor
programs). There are surely intense, enduring, and coher-
ent cell assemblies shuttling round the motor cortex and
basal ganglia during, say, a game of tennis: Why do they not
produce some awareness of the signals that are being sent
to muscles? [See Jeannerod: "The Representing Brain"
BBS 17(2) 1994.] Facts like these lead inescapably to the
conclusion that the brain s consciousness is not egalitarian:
it attaches to some cell assemblies, but not others; and it
does so, not randomly or meritocratically (in terms of mere
quantity of firing), but systematically and qualitatively. This
conclusion does not, of course, entail the further inference
that conscious experience is linked to brain activity in only
one region or system; the privileged parts (while still not
encompassing the whole brain) could be widely scattered
(and even independent of each other, a position defended
710
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

by Umilta & Zorzi, but which I find unattractively compli-
cated).
R6. The effects of temporal-lobe lesions. The weakness of
Kinsbourne's and Dennett's ecumenical view, however,
does not necessarily imply that the processes responsible for
consciousness are located in the regions where the privi-
leged cell assemblies circulate. It remains an open question
whether the "wonder tissue" is there, somewhere else, or
everywhere. But it was not the purpose of the target article
to propose a hypothesis about the location or nature of such
tissue. That would be a hypothesis about consciousness-as-
such; such a hypothesis, able to meet Nagel's (in Marsh,
1993) requirement of transparency, has yet to be proposed.
The hypothesis in the target article, rather, was one about
the contents of consciousness.
The distinction between these two types of hypothesis is
especially important when one comes to consider the ef-
fects of lesions to those brain regions to which the compara-
tor function is attributed. The target article (section 3) cites
Libet's objection (personal communication, June 17,1993)
that the neuroanatomy attributed to the comparator pre-
dicts that "destruction of the subicular area should abolish
the contents of consciousness" and admits that there is no
evidence to support this prediction. Libet's point was en-
thusiastically echoed by the commentators (Dennett,
Eichenbaum & Cohen, Merskey, Newman, Reeke,
Revonsuo, Umilta & Zorzi). Upon rereading the section
of the target article in which I put Libet's objection, I see
that I did not myself clearly distinguish between the effects
one might expect after damage to (1) a region critical for
consciousness as such, or (2) a region responsible for
organising the contents of consciousness. It is not surpris-
ing, therefore, that some of the commentators (but not
Foss) also blur this distinction. Thus, Eichenbaum &
Cohen, Merskey, Reeke, and Revonsuo all point out that
bilateral loss of the hippocampus does not entail "loss of
consciousness" (Churchland 1994); Newman similarly
comments that the neuropsychological evidence rules out
the subicular region as "the sine qua non for primary
consciousness." I accept these facts and the conclusion
drawn from them, but deny that the target article predicts
anything different (though regretting that this point was not
made sufficiently clear before).
R7. Episodic memory. A move that several of the commen-
tators (Eichenbaum & Cohen, Kinsbourne, Merskey,
Newman, Umilta & Zorzi) urge upon me is to suppose
that damage to the comparator system eliminates only the
capacity to enter conscious experiences into episodic mem-
ory for subsequent recognition or recall. A move of this kind
is supported by the effects upon this type of memory of
hippocampal and other temporal-lobe damage.
Eichenbaum & Cohen, for example, agree with my
approach to hippocampal function in supposing that this is
concerned with comparisons between items and events, but
they suggest that this affects only memorial processes,
namely those creating and updating networks of cortical
memory representations. From a different point of view,
Dennis & Humphreys draw out some interesting parallels
between their neural-network model of recognition mem-
ory and certain functions (the generation of predictions, the
match/mismatch operation, and the prediction of the next
perceived input as analysed by the brain's sensory systems)
ascribed in the target article to the comparator system.
Response /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
Kinsbourne focuses upon episodic memory (a category to
which Dennis & Humphrey's recognition memory and
Eichenbaum & Cohen s declarative memory also belong),
defined as the conscious reexperiencing of an episode. This
commentary is particularly valuable, as it fills in an impor-
tant, and hitherto missing, link between the comparator
hypothesis and this form of memory. As Kinsbourne puts it,
to remember an episode one needs a retrieval cue that
uniquely characterizes it, so that "the memorandum can be
singled out from countless generically similar events." Con-
sider, therefore, a particular episode, say, walking along a
familiar street to carry out a familiar shopping routine. Even
if you have performed the routine hundreds of times before,
so that the comparator system is correctly predicting most of
the stimuli you observe along the way, there is also bound to
be much that has never before been put together in quite the
same way as now: There will be a particular combination of
weather, leaves on the ground, passing cars, your emotional
state, and so forth, that is unique to this occasion. The overall
output of the comparator system will be a moment-by-
moment multidimensional description of the passing scene,
each component tagged according to the degree and nature
(Nelson) of match/mismatch. As in Eichenbaum et al.'s
(1994) BBS treatment of the functions of the hippocampal
system, this output is used to update cortical memory stores,
and, as suggested by Kinsbourne, those parts of it that are
unique (carry a mismatch tag) are able to act as retrieval cues
for episodic (conscious) memory.
R8. The anatomy of the comparator system. An issue
raised by several of the commentators concerned the anat-
omy of the postulated comparator system and its relations
with other brain regions that have been linked to conscious-
ness.
Hemsley wonders why there is any need to include
feedback from the comparator to cortical perceptual sys-
tems, since all the necessary information is already present
in the comparator itself. Kinsbourne provides the answer
to this question: Although there are indeed projections that
feed into the hippocampus from all sensory and other
relevant systems, it is implausible that "any single region of
the brain might integrate spatially all the fragments of sen-
sory and motor activity necessary to define a set of unique
events" (cited by Kinsbourne from Damasio, 1989). Thus,
as argued in the target article (section 3), it is necessary to
include feedback from the comparator to those sets of
neurons in perceptual systems that have just provided input
to the comparator in respect of the current process of
comparison. Reeke finds such feedback insufficient, claim-
ing (1) that the comparator could not be located in the
hippocampal formation, and (2) that it would have to be
widely distributed throughout the cerebral cortex. The first
part of this statement is based upon the data from patients
with hippocampal lesions considered above (section on
temporal lobe lesions). I am not sure whether Reeke has
independent grounds for the second part of the statement;
they are perhaps those summarised by Umilta & Zorzi,
namely that lesions to specific cortical areas give rise to
domain-specific losses of conscious awareness. Finally,
questions were asked about the connection between the
comparator hypothesis, with its emphasis on the hippocam-
pal system, and work by others on (1) the extended
reticular-thalamic activation system (ERTAS), lesions to
which at either the reticular or the thalamic level produce
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
711

Response /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
coma (Newman); and (2) the thalamocortical loops linking
primary sensory cortices and thalamic relay nuclei (Revon-
suo). It is possible, I believe, to answer these questions,
while at the same time (1) satisfying Reeke's requirement
for proper inclusion of cortical structures in the compara-
tor; (2) providing a mechanism by which output from the
comparator system is able to intervene in Kinsbourne's
competition between cell assemblies for "prominence in
experience"; (3) clarifying further the vital distinction be-
tween consciousness-as-such and the contents of con-
sciousness; and (4) linking up with the various other scien-
tists whose work Revonsuo accused me of having ignored.
In part, the answer is provided by Newman himself, who
points to the projections from the hippocampus (via the
subiculum and fornix) to the thalamus as the route by which
the comparator process attributed to the hippocampal
system can influence the ERTAS. However, an important
additional route has recently become apparent from work
in Graces laboratory. Lavin and Grace (1994) have studied
what happens to the outputs from the nucleus (n.) accum-
bens (to which the subiculum also projects via the fornix)
further downstream. Using electrophysiological and tract-
tracing techniques, these workers have demonstrated that
the inhibitory GABA-ergic output from the n. accumbens
synapses, in the ventral pallidum, upon further GABA-ergic
inhibitory neurons that project to the nucleus reticularis
thalami (NRT). The NRT is unusual among thalamic nuclei
in that it consists mainly of inhibitory GABA-ergic neurons;
these project to a number of the surrounding thalamic
nuclei whose job is to relay impulses originating in periph-
eral sense organs to the appropriate sensory regions of the
cerebral cortex. The possible role of the NRT in the
selection of stimuli for attention and conscious processing
was first pointed out by Crick (1984) and has been incorpo-
rated into a neural-network model by Taylor (1992). Note
that, since the pallidal output to these neurons is itself
inhibitory, its activation has the effect of disinhibiting these
sensory relay pathways, that is, increasing the entry to the
cerebral cortex of those stimuli that are currently engaging
the thalamocortical loops. Figure 1 presents this circuitry in
diagrammatic form (a similar hypothesis, though different
in detail, has been applied to schizophrenia also by Carlsson
& Carlsson, 1990).
Let us consider how the circuitry of Figure Rl would be
likely to work under the conditions of an experiment in
which an indirect dopamine (DA) agonist, such as amphet-
amine or nicotine, is used to block latent inhibition (LI) by
causing DA release in n. accumbens (see target article,
sections 2 and 5.17, in which the relevance of such experi-
ments is outlined, and Gray et al., 1991a, and in press). The
basic phenomenon of LI consists in the fact that a preex-
posed conditioned stimulus (CS) is slow to enter into an
association with a Pavlovian unconditioned stimulus (UCS).
In line with the general argument pursued in the target
article, we can interpret this as reflecting a lack of access to
conscious processing by the preexposed CS. If, however,
presentation of this CS is accompanied by enhanced DA
release in n. accumbens (as induced pharmacologically, by
activation of the retrohippocampal input to n. accumbens,
or during acute psychosis), LI is overcome, indicating ex
hypothesi that the preexposed CS has regained the capacity
to engage conscious processing. The circuitry of Figure Rl
constitutes a mechanism by which this effect can be pro-
duced. DA release within n. accumbens inhibits (by acting
on DA D2 receptors; Robertson & Jian 1995) the GABA-
ergic pathway to the ventral pallidum, thus disinhibiting the
pallidal GABA-ergic pathway to NRT, which in turn inhibits
the GABA-ergic projections from NRT to the ascending
thalamocortical sensory relay projections, thus disinhibiting
the latter. In this way, accumbal DA release should lead to
an intensification of processing in whichever thalamocorti-
cal sensory relay projections were already operative in the
prior instant of time. In the LI experiment, this intensifica-
tion of sensory processing will allow the preexposed CS
(which otherwise would not have been fully processed) to
enter more readily into association with the UCS.
Given Revonsuo's request to relate the present model to
the work of others, I note that the proposal illustrated in
Figure Rl is similar to some of the ideas expressed, but in a
more general form, by Damasio (1989). Gaffan (1994), too,
proposes a similar hypothesis, but in relation to episodic
memory for scenes, or "snapshot memory," and utilising the
pathway returning from hippocampus to cortex via the
mammillary bodies and the anterior thalamus rather than
the route via n. accumbens; these differences apart, Gaf-
fan s approach has much in common with the one suggested
here. I hope also that Swerdlow will see Figure Rl (adapted
as it is from one of his own; Swerdlow & Koob 1987) as
somewhat mitigating his charge that many elements of the
circuitry proposed in the target article, and the earlier
papers cited therein (Gray 1982a; 1982b; Gray et al. 1991a),
reach beyond the established anatomy and physiology.
Swerdlow's charge is to a considerable degree justified,
though I have tried to take account of such features of the
relevant anatomy and physiology as are established. In my
defence, if theory does not attempt to extend beyond
established facts, it is unlikely to be of much use in the
search for new ones. Swerdlow particularly asks how the
subicular input to the accumbens interacts with the meso-
limbic dopaminergic input. This is indeed, as he points out,
a difficult issue, since there appear to be numerous differ-
ent such modes of interaction (see also Gray et al. 1991a;
1991b). One possibility, however, is the following: we have
shown that intrasubicular injections of excitatory amino-
acids, or of an antagonist (bicuculline) to the inhibitory
transmitter, GABA, give rise to DA release in the n. accum-
bens; and that this effect can be blocked by section of the
fimbria-fornix, which carries the subicular projection to n.
accumbens (S. Mitchell et al., in preparation). This effect
could be mediated by either or both of the routes that
Swerdlow sees as potentially in conflict with one another:
presynaptic activation of DA terminals in n. accumbens, or
a direct excitatory termination on accumbal cell bodies. The
second of these routes could involve (see Figures 5 and 6 in
the target article): (1) glutamatergic subicular activation of
accumbal GABA-ergic cells; (2) accumbal GABA-ergic
inhibition of GABA-ergic cells in the ventral pallidum, with
(3) consequent disinhibition of the A 10 dopaminergic cells
that receive the GABA-ergic pallidal output; and (4) in-
creased DA release from A 10 terminals in n. accumbens.
The further consequences of elevated intra-accumbal DA
release are specified in Figure 1. "Are we ready to apply
such shaky synaptology to questions of consciousness?"
Swerdlow asks. Perhaps not. But we are readier, I think, by
the year; and readier than we are to apply it to the psycho-
dynamic concepts (e.g., unconscious cognitive censorship)
chosen by Swerdlow himself for similar treatment.
Despite Swerdlow's cautionary remarks, I propose (as
712
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Response /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
Neocortical
sensory
processing
Thalamocortical
sensory relay
nuclei
Figure Rl. 
Connections from the subiculum (sub) and entorhinal cortex (ERC) to the n. accumbens (NAC) component of the motor
system (see Figures 5 and 6 in the target article), and from that system to the nucleus reticularis thalami (NRT) and thalamocortical
sensory pathways. LCX: limbic cortex, including prefrontal and cingulate areas. DM: dorsomedial thalamic nucleus. NAC: nucleus
accumbens (ventral striatum). VP: ventral pallidum. A 10: dopaminergic nucleus A10 in the ventral tegmental area. GLU, GABA and DA:
the neurotransmitters, glutamate, gamma-aminobutyric acid and dopamine. H—: excitation and inhibition. I, II, III: feedback loops, the
first two positive, the third negative.
an extension of the hypothesis proposed in the target ar-
ticle) that intensification of cortical sensory processing,
consequent upon the activity of the hippocampal system as
fed back to the thalamus via n. accumbens, constitutes the
neural machinery by which the outputs of the comparator
determine the contents of consciousness. (Ivanitsky makes
a similar, though less detailed, proposal.) In this way,
Reeke's requirement that the contents of consciousness
must comprise large portions of the activity of individual
sensory areas is met, and a neural basis is provided for the
selective facilitation of Kinsbourne's cell assemblies in the
competition for "prominence in experience." Furthermore,
the comparator theory is now able, as required by Newman
(to whose thoughtful commentary the extended hypothesis
owes much) and Revonsuo, to make proper contact with
the reticulo-thalamic core that (judging from the coma
caused by lesions thereto) provides the substrate for the
consciousness into which the comparator system inserts
(cons) the contents. This extended hypothesis can also
provide an answer to Merskey's question concerning the
anatomical location at which pain affects the comparator
system. Given the known involvement of the thalamus in
nociception (Melzack & Wall 1983), this is a region in which
pain could provide a signal to interrupt the ongoing com-
parator process (target article, section 5.4). Even suppos-
ing, however, that the extended hypothesis is correct, it
would, of course, still fall short of a transparent theory of
how the brain cons consciousness; but it may at least serve
to unify two unsolved problems into one.
R9. Timing. As in the target article, the extended hypothesis
takes an "instant" (i.e., the time taken for the output of
the comparator system to be computed and fed back to
thalamocortical sensory processing pathways) to be of the
order of 100 msec, consistent with the proposed overall
neural machinery and especially with the period of a hippo-
campal theta wave. This "timing" aspect of the model met
with a mixed response. Hemsley comments that the link-
age between the immediately preceding output of the
comparator machinery (used to generate an expectancy), its
current output (a comparison involving that expectancy),
and the subsequent output (to be based on a further
generated expectancy) is consistent with James's (1890;
1892) emphasis upon the continuity of the stream of con-
sciousness. Reeke, however, makes just the opposite infer-
ence from the theory - that it predicts a "chunkiness" in the
stream of consciousness, based upon the succession of
discrete comparator outputs (a point made also in the target
article, section 5.5). This may be an issue that would repay
careful investigation with the methods of modern experi-
mental cognitive psychology. It may also be possible to
investigate it by studying types of psychopathology in which
the stream of consciousness appears to be interrupted
(Hemsley).
Reeke argues that the lack of prominence of the theta
rhythm in primates rules it out as the main timing system.
But, though spectral analysis is needed to demonstrate it
clearly, theta is certainly present in the human EEG; the
reason it stands out clearly in recordings from, for example,
the rat, probably reflects morphological and experimental
factors rather than fundamental differences between the
rodent and primate brain (Gray 1982a). Ivanitsky presents
interesting theoretical arguments and data (psychophysical
and evoked-potential) consistent with the duration of an
instant proposed both by Edelman (1989) and in the target
article. Velmans, in contrast, believes that I have set its
duration too short; Eichenbaum & Cohen see the theta
cycle (oddly) as being shorter than the proposed theoretical
instant. However, the frequency of theta, though com-
monly about 7-8 Hz, can be as low as 4 and as high as 14 Hz,
giving "instants" ranging from 70 to 250 msec, centred on
about 130 msec. The phrase "of the order of 100 msec" was
not meant to be more precise than this; the known moment-
to-moment variation in theta frequency (Gray 1982a) in any
case rules out a fixed value to an instant. The issue is further
blurred by fact that the moment of occurrence of any
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
713

Response /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
particular stimulus varies with respect to the point within
the current timing cycle, thus also affecting the relations
between the timing of two successive stimuli. The major
contrast of the "theta" hypothesis is with the view (Reeke,
Revonsuo) that consciousness critically depends upon the
faster, c. 40-Hz rhythms favoured by Crick (1994) and
others (C. M. Gray & Singer 1989). While I accept that
these faster rhythms may play an essential role in binding
the different features of a single perceptual entity together,
they imply an instant (c. 25 msec) that is too fast to readily
account for entry into awareness. In contrast, as an order of
magnitude, the timing given by theta is about right. The
extended hypothesis, proposed above, can also account for
the much longer value of an instant (500 msec) suggested
by Libet et al.'s (1991; target article, section 5.3) experi-
ments: the thalamic stimulation in those experiments would
first need to establish appropriate reverberatory activity in
thalamocortical loops as a candidate content of conscious-
ness before this activity could be conned into conscious-
R10. Episodic memory revisited: Clive Wearing. As we
saw, several commentators (Eichenbaum & Cohen, Mer-
skey, Newman, Umilta & Zorzi) are willing to see the
comparator hypothesis applied to episodic memory, but
draw the line at conscious experience. Yet the difference
between conscious experience in the (apparent) here-and-
now and episodic memory may lie only in the duration of
the interval that elapses between the initial impact of
environmental stimulation and perception or memory re-
spectively. As illustrated in Figure Rl, the comparator
hypothesis supposes that, approximately 100 msec after
activity triggered by sensory stimulation has initially
reached thalamocortical sensory processing pathways, a
further signal arrives from the comparator system reflecting
the degree and nature (Nelson) of computed match/
mismatch relevant to the triggered cortical activity; and
that this match/mismatch signal, combined with the exist-
ing pattern of cortical activity, becomes (is conned into
being) the next content of consciousness. The lateness with
which the signal from the comparator reaches the thalam-
ocortical pathways implies that conscious experience is
already, in Edelman's (1989) term, the remembered pre-
sent. Later on, a pattern of activity, similar to the one
originally conned into consciousness, can be reinstated into
episodic memory by the occurrence of a feature (or fea-
tures) of the original input (initially novel, and so uniquely
able to define an episode; Kinsbourne). If the comparator
were damaged, then, one might expect to see alterations in
both episodic memory and in at least some aspects of
conscious experience.
A dramatic single case study (whose implications were
drawn to my attention by Nicholas Rawlins) supports this
view. This patient (Clive Wearing) was the subject of a 1986
U.K. television programme ("Prisoner of Consciousness,"
Equinox, Channel 4; and see Wilson et al. 1995; Wilson &
Wearing, in press). Magnetic resonance imaging shows
extensive bilateral damage (the result of herpes simplex
encephalitis) to both hippocampal formations, both amyg-
dalae, the substantia innominata on both sides, both tempo-
ral poles, the left fornix, the left inferior temporal gyrus, the
anterior portion of the left middle temporal gyrus, the
anterior portion of the left superior temporal gyrus, and
the left insula. In addition, there may be damage to both
mammillary bodies; the thalamus, however, is intact. Clive
Wearing has extremely severe anterograde and retrograde
amnesia, with essentially total loss of episodic memory. A
highly talented and successful professional musician, he has
extraordinarily intact musical skills, is capable of reading
and playing music and conducting a choir, has fluent, well-
articulated speech and writing, and is even still able to
translate from Latin to English.
It is Clive Wearing's own description of his condition that
is remarkable. He feels constantly that he has "just woken
up" and keeps a diary in which this feeling is repeatedly
recorded, at intervals of hours or even minutes. Upon so
"waking up," he regularly remarks upon the absence of
conscious experience in the preceding period of time and
the sudden reemergence of conscious experience in the
present moment (the following statements are transcribed
from the television programme): "I have been blind, deaf,
and dumb for so long"; "suddenly, I can see in colour"; "I
can hear traffic sounds now"; "today is the first time I've
actually been conscious of anything at all"; "none of my
senses are working at all"; "I have no sense of taste"; "I have
no sense of touch or smell"; "it's like being dead" (this
particular remark is repeated many times). Clearly, Clive
has consciousness in the sense that he is not in a coma and
enters a waking state that contrasts with the state of sleep.
Clearly, too, he retains enough of the normal contents of
consciousness to be able, from time to time and fleetingly,
to comment upon the loss of these contents of conscious-
ness during the periods between his "wakings up." But, if
we are to take him at his own words, equally clearly, he has
suffered a remarkable encroachment upon the normal
continuous richness of the contents of consciousness. Fur-
thermore, this encroachment is not modality specific, thus
providing a counterexample to the cases described by
Umilta & Zorzi, in which impairments of conscious pro-
cesses were always domain specific.
Wilson and Wearing (in press) describe an aspect of Clive
Wearing's experience that fits particularly well with the
argument advanced here.
Clive was not able to retain impressions for more than the
briefest moment. The effect was of course that the environment
appeared to be in a state of flux. On many occasions he would
comment, "You weren't wearing blue just now. No, no, it was
yellow or pink but it certainly wasn't blue." In response to the
constantly new appearance of the room Clive would keep
asking, "How do they do that?" One day he put this phenome-
non to the test. He held a chocolate in one hand and repeatedly
covered and uncovered it with the other. He could feel that the
chocolate never moved, yet each time he uncovered it, it
appeared to be a new chocolate, however quickly he looked
(Wilson & Wearing, in press).
This account suggests that damage to a comparator system
located in the temporal lobe prevents Clive from forming a
"neuronal model of the stimulus" (Sokolov 1960), with the
consequence, first, that his conscious experiences of the
here-and-now are radically altered; second, that those ex-
periences are forgotten so rapidly that each new moment
presents itself to him as a fresh awakening from a period of
total loss of consciousness; and, third, that he has complete
loss of episodic memory. Thus, contrary to the view ex-
pressed by many commentators (see above, section R6), it is
premature to rule out a contribution of this region of the
brain to the nature of conscious experience (though not to
consciousness-as-such).
Umilta & Zorzi consider in some detail another single
714
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

patient ("DRB"; Damasio et al. 1985), who had bilateral
damage to the hippocampus, the parahippocampal and
cingulate gyn, and other components of the limbic system.
They take (wrongly; see above, section R6) the comparator
hypothesis as predicting that such a patient should display
"nonconscious" behaviour, and present against this predic-
tion the fact that DRB, though densely amnesic, was "alert,
co-operative, behaved intelligently in a variety of situations,
and his speech was fluent and well articulated." This shows,
indeed, that DRB was not asleep or in a coma. But what
does it tell us about the subjective quality of his experience?
It is at this point, confronted by someone with deeply
compromised behavioural capacities and a severely dam-
aged brain, that we have to take seriously, I believe, the
"zombie" (Hurley) possibility, usually explored only as an
abstract theoretical gambit (Harnad 1994). It is a matter of
common experience that one can carry out highly complex
intelligent behaviour, such as driving (target article, section
5.14), for quite some time without conscious memory of
there having been any subjective experience accompanying
it. This is also true of speech, which can occur even during
behavioural sleep; I once observed this in a roommate, a
native English speaker, who regularly spoke German in his
sleep but had no knowledge of this when I woke him up. So,
given DRB's dense amnesia, the degree to which he has
qualitatively normal conscious experiences while manifest-
ing "intelligent behaviour" must remain in doubt.
Clive Wearing's condition is again revealing in this con-
nection. As noted, prior to his illness he was a gifted
professional musician. After the illness, despite his dense
amnesia, he was still able to conduct, sight-reading, a choir
singing a highly complex classical piece. But in the 1986
television programme, immediately after the piece has
finished, he is shown to lack any understanding of what has
just taken place, saying to the choir "when I waved, you
sang." Thus, the alteration in Clives conscious experience is
closely linked to an impaired grasp of intentionality. He
does not grasp that his waving his arms is used by the choir
to guide their singing, behaving in fact like the man in the
"Chinese room" in Searle's (1980) famous gedankenexperi-
ment, translating from notes to arm-waving without under-
standing the meaning of what he is doing. Note, in this
context, that the playing of music is typical of behaviour
that runs too fast for consciousness to be involved in the
inoment-to-moment organisation of the sequence of steps
in the motor program. Thus, despite the fact that, more
than any other human activity, musical behaviour is incom-
prehensible without qualia, it appears that Clive Wearing
was probably conducting the choir in automatic mode.
R11. Psychopathology. The theory presented in the target
article drew upon a previous attempt to model the positive
psychotic symptoms of acute schizophrenia (Gray et al.
1991a; 1991b). It is interesting to note, therefore, that
several of Clive Wearing s symptoms resemble those some-
times seen in schizophrenia, including perceiving the famil-
iar as novel (e.g., the episode with the chocolate, described
above), hallucinations of hearing his own music played, and
delusional beliefs about how he comes to be in his present
condition (Wilson & Wearing, in press). (The converse is
also true, in that schizophrenics show disturbances in mem-
ory; McKenna et al., 1990.) Hemsley extends the model to
the "sense of self," suggesting that this corresponds to the
consistent manner in which stored material normally oper-
Response/'Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
ates on sensory input; a breakdown in the functioning of the
comparator system would then lead to the disturbance in
the sense of self often seen as characteristic of schizo-
phrenia. Crider describes a number of further schizo-
phrenic symptoms (segmentalized consciousness involving
experiences of unreality and fragmentation) that he sees as
falling naturally out of the account of the contents of
consciousness given in the target article. He also notes that
these symptoms may be accompanied by a posture of
behavioural immobility and fixed attention, outputs that
one might reasonably expect if the behavioural inhibition
system (of which the proposed comparator system forms
part) were strongly activated by perceived mismatch. These
convergences are encouraging. However, they generate the
problem of then differentiating between the mechanism
that produces positive psychotic symptoms (thought to
occur, as pointed out by Hemsley, when mismatch signals
arise from malfunctioning of the comparator circuitry) and
the one that produces anxiety (which occurs when the
environment gives rise to genuine mismatch signals). As at
least a partial solution to this problem, Hemsley cites data
showing that anxiety is, as one might therefore predict,
prominent in the early stages of schizophrenia and associ-
ated with positive symptomatology (Penn et al. 1994). Thus,
differentiation between schizophrenic symptoms and anxi-
ety may only become clear-cut as the schizophrenic illness
proceeds (as outlined by Hemsley).
Swerdlow advises caution in relation to the Gray et al.
(1991a; 1991b) model of schizophrenia. As he points out, a
large theoretical edifice has been built on the basis of a very
small number of patients who have served in experiments
on latent inhibition (although data obtained with the Kamin
blocking effect are also relevant to the model; Jones et al.
1992). However, there are now three (not two) replications
of the basic effect, that is, absence of LI in acute schizo-
phrenics, provided either that they are in the first two
weeks of current neuroleptic medication (Baruch et al.
1988; N. S. Gray, Hemsley etal. 1992) or that they are in the
first year of a current unmedicated episode (N. S. Gray et
al., in press). Furthermore, the fact that, in the preexposed
condition, the acute schizophrenics actually outperform
normal controls provides strong evidence for a genuine loss
of the LI effect, even if it is sometimes also the case that
nonpreexposed patients learn less well than controls. None-
theless, further replication in laboratories other than our
own clearly remains of great importance. Swerdlow also
asks whether the difference between the performance of
patients in the first two weeks of a medicated episode is
properly attributed to dopaminergic hyperactivity, given
that neuroleptics should be counteracting this. There is, of
course, a general problem in understanding how and why
dopamine receptor blockers produce their delayed effect
on psychotic symptoms, of which the pattern of results with
LI is a further instance. But it is not the only experimental
paradigm in which this pattern is found. Both the Kamin
blocking effect (Jones et al. 1992) and negative priming (A.
Pickering, personal communication) show a similar disrup-
tion in the first two weeks of a current medicated psychotic
episode with normalisation later. This recurrent pattern
must reflect some underlying neural mechanism; at present
it seems likely that this includes in some way activity in the
mesolimbic dopaminergic system.
Frith finds even less of value in the Gray et al. (1991a)
model of schizophrenia. In accord with his view of con-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
715

References /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
sciousness as mediating high-level interactions with other
human beings (see above, section R2), he sees the aberrant
conscious experiences of the schizophrenic as reflecting a
breakdown in the mechanisms subserving such interac-
tions. Thus, whereas one might be able to account for
hallucinations per se along the lines of the comparator
model (Hemsley, indeed, sketches out one such account),
Frith claims that it would not be applicable to the content of
such hallucinations, since it would miss out an essential
component concerning the intentions and actions of other
people, for example, that hallucinated voices are emanating
from a powerful, controlling being. I regret seeing Frith
distance his current approach to schizophrenia (Frith 1992)
from both ours and his own earlier approach (Frith 1987);
the latter were in many ways compatible with each other.
Crider comments on the lack of emphasis in our model
upon frontal executive function, especially in the light of
evidence for frontal hypofunction in schizophrenia. In part,
our relative silence on this issue arose because we saw Frith
(1987) as having provided an account of the frontal contri-
bution to schizophrenic cognitive abnormality that was
complementary to our own (see discussion in Gray et al.,
1991a). There is certainly no contradiction between our
emphasis upon overactivity in dopaminergic transmission
in n. accumbens and, for instance, Weinbergers (Wein-
berger et al. 1986) upon frontal hypofunction, since it has
been shown in the rat that interventions in the temporal
lobe that enhance dopaminergic transmission in n. accum-
bens decrease such transmission in frontal cortex (Lipska et
al. 1992; 1993; Pycock 1980).
R12. Conclusion. The first claim made in the target article
was that there is an unsolved Hard Question (Kinsbourne)
about consciousness: namely, how to create a transparent
(Nagel 1993, p. 4), scientific, causal theory of the links
between consciousness and brain-and-behaviour. The com-
mentaries provide no reason to depart from that view; nor, I
fear, have we made any progress towards answering the
Hard Question (though I hope we have clarified some of
the issues that surround it). I was sorry to see no one
address the issue, raised in the penultimate paragraph of
the target article, of how one might attempt at least to
choose between the two quite different stances adopted by
those who believe that the answer to the Hard Question will
lie in the realm of information-processing or in the realm of
brain science, respectively. A successful turn at this choice
point would serve better to focus future efforts (a sugges-
tion as to how to go about choosing is made by Gray, in
press).
The second claim in the target article was that, psycho-
logically speaking, the contents of consciousness might
consist of the outputs of a comparator system; the third
consisted in a description of the neurology instantiating the
comparator system. Though these claims are logically dis-
tinct, a number of issues have been clarified as the result of
putting them up for commentary together. Most important,
the distinction between consciousness per se and the con-
tents of consciousness has been drawn more sharply, and I
have accepted that the neural machinery proposed to
instantiate the comparator process probably does not also
underlie the creation (connation?) of consciousness-as-
such. Drawing upon Lavin and Graces (1994) recent exper-
imental work, I have proposed an extension (Figure Rl) to
the model contained in the target article that links the
outputs of the comparator system to the reticulo-thalamic
core which, as set out in particular by Newman, seems
likely to underlie the generation of consciousness-as-such.
Also, I hope, clarified (especially in the light of Kins-
bourne's commentary and the description of the patient,
Clive Wearing, by Wilson et al., 1995, and Wilson &
Wearing, in press) is the relationship between the role of
the comparator system in generating the contents of con-
sciousness, on the one hand, and episodic memory, on the
other. These extensions to the model as initially outlined in
the target article have considerably widened the regions of
brain involved in the overall system for generating both
consciousness-as-such and its contents: This now includes,
besides much of the limbic system and basal ganglia, the
reticulo-thalamic core and the thalamocortical sensory pro-
cessing systems. Nonetheless, it is still clear that only some
brain processes end up represented in consciousness and
that the selection of those that do is not simply based upon
quantitative considerations such as intensity or coherence
of firing (contra Kinsbourne). Thus, there is still a bot-
tleneck of some kind, even though the neck is rather wide.
It is unclear whether this is a homuncular "appreciating
bottleneck" (Dennett) or not, but the Hard Question
about consciousness is no easier if it is the whole brain,
rather than part of it, that does the appreciating.
References
Letters a and r appearing before author's intials refer to target article and
response respectively.
Albin, R. L., Makowiecz, R. L., Hollingsworth, Z. R., Dure, L. S., Penney, J. B.
& Young, A. B. (1992) Excitatory amino acid binding sites in basal
ganglia of the rat: A quantitative autoradiographic study. Neuroscience
46:35-48. 
[NRS]
Amsel, A. (1962) Frustrative nonreward in partial reinforcement and
discrimination learning: Some recent history and a theoretical extension.
Psychological Review 69:306-28. 
[aJAG]
(1992) Frustration theory. Cambridge University Press. 
[aJAG]
Andreasen, N. G, Rezai, K., Alliger, R., Swayze, V. W., Flaum, M., Kirchner, P.,
Cohen, G. & O'Leary, D. S. (1992) Hypofrontality in neuroleptie-naive
patients and in patients with chronic schizophrenia. Archives of General
Psychiatry 49:943-58. [AC]
Anscombe, R. (1987) The disorder of consciousness in schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Bulletin 11:241-60. 
[AC, DRH]
Aosaki, T., Tsubokawa, H., Ishida, A., Watanabe, K., Graybiel, A. M. & Kimura,
M. (1994) Responses of tonically active neurons in the primate's striatuin
undergo systematic changes during behavioral sensorimotor conditioning.
journal of Neuroscience 14(6):3969-84. 
[NRS]
Baars, B. J. (1983) How does a serial, integrated and very limited stream of
consciousness emerge out of a nervous system that is mostly unconscious,
distributed, and of enormous capacity? In: CIBA symposium on
experimental anil theoretical studies of conciousness, ed. G. R. Brock &
J. Marsh. Wiley. 
[JN]
(1988) A cognitive theory of consciousness. Cambridge University
Press. 
[arJAG, JN, FT, MV]
(1993) A cognitive tlieory of amscimtsness. Cambridge University
Press. 
[AMI]
(1994) A global workspace theory of conscious experience. In: Consciousness
in philosophy and cognitive neuroscience, ed. A. Revonsuo & M.
Kamppinen. Erlbaum. 
[AR]
Baars, B. J. & Newman, J. (1994) A neurobiological interpretation of global
workspace theory. In: Consciousness in philosophy and cognitive
neuroscience, ed. A. Revonsuo & M. Kamppinen. Erlbaum. 
[AR]
Baddeley, A. D. (1993) Working memory and conscious awareness. In: Theories
of memory, ed. A. F. Collins, S. E. Gathercole, M. A. Conway & P. E.
Morris. Erlbaum. 
[TJL-J]
Bandura, A. (1982) Self-efficacy mechanism in human agency. American
Psychologist 37:122-47. 
[TDN]
Baruch, I. (1988) Differential performance of acute and chronic schizophrenics
716
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

References /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
in a latent inhibition task and its relevance for the dopamine hypothesis
and the dimensional view of psychosis. Ph.D. thesis, London University.
[aJAGl
Banich, I., Hemsley, D. R. & Cray, J. A. (1988) Differential performance of
acute and chronic schizophrenics in a latent inhibition task. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease 176:598-606. 
[arJAG, NRS]
Baxter, L. R., Schwartz, J. M., Bergman, K. S., Szuba, M. P., Guze, B. H.,
Mazziotta, J. C, Akazraju, A., Selin, C. E., Femg, II.-K., Munford, P. &
Phelps, M. E. (1992) Caudate glucose metabolic rate changes with both
drug and behavior therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder. Archives of
General Psychiatry 49:681-89. 
[NRS]
Bcchtel, \V. (1988) Philosophy of mind: An overview for cognitive science.
Erlbaum. 
[TJL-J]
(1994) Levels of description and explanation in cognitive science. Minds and
Machines 4:1-25. 
[AR]
Berti, A. & Rizzolatti, G. (1992) Visual processing without awareness: Evidence
from unilateral neglect. Jmirnal of Cognitive Neumscience 4:345-51. 
[CU]
Bickhard, M. II. (1991) Cognitive representation in the brain. Encyclopedia of
Human Biology 2:547-58. 
[GNR]
Blmnenthal, A. L. (1977) The process of cognition. Prentice-Hall. 
[AMI]
Bogen, J. E. (1995) On the neurophysiology of consciousness: 1. An overview.
Consciousness and Cognition 4(2): 137-58. 
[JN]
Bolun, D. J. (1986) A new theory of the relationship of mind and matter.
The journal of the American Society for Psychical Research 80:113-35.
[j-LD]
Borst, C. V, ed. (1970) The mind-body identity theory.. Macmillan. 
[aJAG]
Boulenguez, P., Joseph, M. H., Gray, J. A. & Mitchell, S. N. (1994) Dopamine
release in the nucleus accumbens after systemic and intrahippocampal
injections of 5MT-1 agonists which differentially affect attention in the rat.
British journal of Pharmacology lll[Suppl]:153R 
[aJAG]
Boiiycr, J. J., Park, D. 11., Joh, T. H. & Pickel, V. M. (1984) Chemical and
structural analysis of the relation between cortical inputs and tyrosine
hydroxylase-containing terminals in the rat neostriatum. Brain Research
302:267-76. 
[NRS]
Brazell, M. P., Mitchell, S. N., Joseph, M. II. & Gray, J. A. (1990) Acute
administration of nicotine increases the in vivo extracellular levels of
dopamine, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid and ascorbic acid preferentially in
the nucleus accuinhens of the rat: Comparison with caudate-putainen.
Nciirophannacology 29:1177-85. [aJAG]
Bridgeman, B. (1992) Conscious vs. unconcious processes. The case of vision.
Theory 6 Psychology 2:73-88. [CF]
Carlson, M & Carlsson, A. (1990) Interactions between glutamatergic and
monoamine systems within the basal ganglia - implications for schizophrenia
and Parkinson's disease. Trends in Neurosciences 13:272-76. 
[aJAG]
Carver, C. S. & Scheier, M. F. (1981) Attention and self-regulation: A control-
theory approach to human behavior. Springer-Verlag. 
[TDN]
Cassaday, II. J., Mitchell, S. N., Williams, J. II. & Gray, J. A. (1993) 5,7-
Diliydroxytryptainine lesions in the fomix-fimbria attenuate latent inhibition.
Behavioral 6 Neural Biology 59:194-207. 
[aJAG]
Cassaday, II. J., Hodges, II. & Gray, J. A. (1993) The effects of ritanserin, RU
24969 and 8-OH-DPAT on latent inhibition in the rat. journal of
Psijchopharmacology 7:63-71. [aJAG]
Chadwick, P. & Birchwood, M. J. (1994) The omnipotence of voices: A cognitive
approach to auditory hallucinations. British Journal of Psychiatry 164:190-
201. 
[CF]
Chapman, J. (1966) The early symptoms of schizophrenia. British Journal of
Psychiatry 112:225-51. [DRH]
Churchland, P. M. (1984) Matter and consciottsness: A contemporary
introduction to the philosophy of mind. MIT Press/Bradford books.
[TJL-J]
Churchland, P. S. (1994) Can neurobiology teach us anything about
consciousness? In: 77MS mind, the brain, and complex adaptive systems [SFI
Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Proc. vol. 20.], ed. H. Morowitz & J.
Singer. Addison-Wesley. 
[AR, rJAG]
Cohen, N. J. & Eichenbaum, 11. (1993) Memory, amnesia, and the hippocampal
system. MIT. Press. 
[HE, GNR]
Collicutt, J. R. & Hemsley, D. R. (1985) Schizophrenia: A disruption of the
stream of thought. Unpublished manuscript. 
[DRH]
Cooper, L. A. & Shepard, R. N. (1973) Chronometric studies of the rotation of
mental images. In: Visual information processing, ed. W. G. Chase.
Academic Press. [aJAG]
Craik, K. J. W. (1943) The nature of explanation. Cambridge University
Press. 
[rJAG]
Crick, F. (1984) The function of the thalamic reticular complex: The searchlight
hypothesis. Proceeding of the National Acadeviy of Science, USA 81:4586-
90 
[rJAG]
Crick, F. (1994) The astonishing hypothesis: The scientific search for the soul.
Scribncr. 
[AR, rJAG]
Crick, F. & Koch, C. (1985) Are we aware of neural activity in primary visual
cortex? Nature 375:121-23. 
[rJAG]
Crow, T. J. (1980) Positive and negative schizophrenic symptoms and the role of
dopamine. British journal of Psychiatry 137:383-86. 
[aJAG]
Cutting, J. (1985) The psychology of schizophrenia. Churchill Livingstone. 
[AC]
Damasio, A. R. (1989) Time-locked multiregional retroactivation: A systeins-Ievel
proposal for the neural substrates of recall and recognition. Cognition
33:25-62. 
[MK, rJAG]
Damasio, A. R., Eslinger, P. J., Damasio, M., Van Hoesen, G. W. & Cornell, S.
(1985) Multimodal amnesic syndrome following bilateral temporal and basal
forebrain damage. Archives of Neurology 42:252-59. 
[CU, rJAG]
Davies, M. & Humphreys, G. W. (1993) Introduction. In: Consciousness:
Psychological and philosophical essays, ed. M. Davies & G. W. Humphreys.
Blackwell. 
[SLH]
Dennett, D. C. (1979) On the absence of phenomenology. In: Body, mind and
method: Essays in honor of Virgil C. Aldrich, ed. D. Gustafson and B.
Tapscott. Dordrecht: D. Reidel. [DCD]
(1991) Consciousness explained. Little, Brown. 
[aJAG, DCD, AR]
Dennett, D. C. & Kinsbourne, M. (1992) Time and the observer: The where and
when of consciousness in the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 15:183-
247. 
[aJAG, DCD, GNR]
Dennis, S. (1995) Sources of error in connectionist models of cognitive processes.
Proceedings of the Sixth Australian Conference on Neural Networks. School of
Electrical Engineering, Sydney University, Australia. 
[SD]
Desmedt, J. E. (1981) Scalp-recorded cerebral event-related potentials in man as
point of entry into the analysis of cognitive processing. In: The organization
of the cerebral cortex, ed. F. O. Schmitt & F. G. Worden. M.I.T. Press.
Deutsch, J. A. (1964) The structural basis of behaviour. Cambridge University
Press. 
[aJAG]
Dewey, J. (1934/1980) Art as exi>erience. Perigee Books. 
[JDS]
Diamond, M. C, Schiebel, A. B. & Elson, L. M. (1985) The human brain
coloring book. Barnes & Noble. [JN]
Diaz, J. L. (1989) Psicobiologia y conducta. Rutas de una indagacidn. Mexico
City: Fondo de Cultura Econ6mica. 
[J-LD]
Dunn, L. A., Atwater, G. E. & Kilts, C. D. (1993) Effects of antipsychotic drugs
on latent inhibition: Sensitivity and specificity of an animal behavioral model
of clinical drug action. Psijchopharmacology 112:315-23. [aJAG]
Dure, L. S., Young, A. B. & Penney, J. B. (1992) Compartmentalization of
excitatory amino acid receptors in human striatum. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA 89:7688-92. 
[NRS]
Eckhorn, R., Bauer, R., Jordan, W, Brosch, M., Kruse, W., Munk, M. &
Reitboeck, H. J. (1988) Coherent oscillations: A mechanism of feature
linking in the visual cortex? Multiple electrode and correlation analyses in
the cat. Biological Cybernetics 60:121-30. 
[GNR]
Eclelman, G. M. (1987) Neural Dartvinism: The theory ofneunmal group
selection. Basic Books. 
[GNR]
(1989) The rememlicred present: A biological theory of consciousness. Basic
Books. [arJAG, AMI, JN, GNR]
Edelman, G. M. & Reeke, G. N., Jr. (1990) Is it possible to construct a
perception machine? Proceedings of the American Philosof>hical Society
134:36-73. 
[GNR]
Egger, V. (1904) La parole iniirieure. Paris: Alcan. 
[NAS]
Eichenbaum, H. T., Otto, N. & Cohen, N. J. (1994) Two functional components
of the hippocampal memory system. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 17:449-
518. 
[arJAG, HE]
Ellard, C. G. (submitted) Habituation and dishabituation of responding to
overhead threats in the Mongolian gerbil: Dissociating effects of stimulus
configuration and environmental context. 
[CGE]
Ellard, C. G. & Chapman, D. G. (1991) The effects of posterior cortical lesions
on responses to visual threats in the Mongolian gerbil (Meriones
unguiculatus). Behavioural Brain Research 44:163-67. 
[CGE]
Emrich, II. M. (1992) Subjectivity, error correction capacity and the
pathogenesis of delusions of reference. In: Phenomenology, language and
schizophrenia, eds. M. Spitzer, F. A. Uehlein, M. A. Schwartz & C. Mundt.
Springer-Verlag. 
[aJAG]
Eysenck, II. J. (1985) Decline and fall of the Freudian empire. Viking. 
[rJAG]
Farah, M. J., O'Reilly, R. C. & Vecera S. P. (1993) Dissociated overt and covert
recognition as an emergent property of a lesioned network. Psychological
Review 100:571-88. 
[CU]
Farthing, G. W. (1992) The psychology of consciousness. Prentice-Hall. 
[MV]
Feldon, J. & Weiner, 1. (1991) The latent inhibition model of schizophrenic
attention disorder: Haloperidol and sulpiride enhance rats' ability to ignore
irrelevant stimuli. Biological Psychiatry 29:635-46. 
[NRS]
Flaherty, A. W. & Graybiel, A. M. (1994) Input-output organization of the
sensorimotor striatum in the squirrel monkey. Journal of Neuroscience
14:599-610. 
[NRS]
Flanagan, O. (1991) The science of the mind, 2d ed. MIT Press. 
[DCD]
(1992) Consciousness reconsidered. MIT Press. 
[GLS]
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
717

References /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
Fleminger, S. (1992) Seeing is believing: The role of'preconscious' perceptual
processing in delusional misidentification. British Journal of Psychiatry
160:293-303. 
[AC]
Frecdman, B. J. (1974) The subjective experience of perceptual and cognitive
disturbance in schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry 30:333-40.
[aJAG]
Friston, K. ]., Liddle, P. F., Frith, C. D., Hirsch, S. R. & Frackowiak, R. S. J.
(1992) The left medial temporal region and schizophrenia. Brain 115:
367-82. 
[AC]
Frith, C. D. (1979) Coneiousness, information processing and schizophrenia.
British Journal of Pstjchiatry 134:225-35. 
[CF]
(1987) The positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia reflect
impairments in the perception and initiation of action. Psychological
Medicine 17:631-48. [arJAG]
(1992) Tile cognitive neuropsychology of schizophrenia. Erlbaum. 
[CF, rJAG]
Frith, C. D. & Done, D. J. (1989) Experiences of alien control in schizophrenia
reflect a disorder in the central monitoring of action. Psychological Medicine
19:359-63. 
[aJAG]
Fuster, J. M. (1989) The prefrontal cortex. Raven. 
[AC]
Gaffan, D. (1994) Scene-specific memory for objects: A model of episodic
memory impairment in monkeys with fornix transection. Journal of
Cognitive Neurosdence 6:305-20. 
[rJAG]
Callistel, C R. (1980) The organization of action: A new synthesis.
Erlbaum. 
[FT]
Geldard, F. A. & Sherrick, C. E. (1972) The cutaneous rabbit: A perceptual
illusion. Science 178:178-79. 
[aJAG]
Gerfen, C. R., Herkenham, M. & Thibault, J. (1987) The neostriatal mosaic: 2.
Patch- and matrix-directed mesostriatal dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic
systems. Journal of Neurosdence 7(12):3915-34. 
[NRS]
Gerfen, C. R., McGinty, J. F & Young, W. S. (1991) Dopamine differentially
regulates dynorphin, substance P, and enkephalin expression in striatal
neurons: In situ hybridization histochemical analysis. Journal of
Neurosdence 11:1016-31. [NRS]
Gibson, J. J. (1950) The perception of the visual world. Houghton Mifflin. 
[HR]
Cimenez-Amaya, J. M. & Graybiel, A. M. (1990) Compartmental origins
of the striatopallidal projection in the primate. Neurosdence 34(1):111-
26. 
[NRS]
Clobus, G. G. (1973) Consciousness and brain. Archives of General Psychiatry
29:153-76. 
[J-LD]
Good, M. & Honey, R. (1993) Selective hippocampus lesions abolish contextual
specificity of latent inhibition and conditioning. Behavioral Neurosdence
107:23-33. 
[aJAG]
Goodale, M. A. & Milner, A. D. (1992) Separate visual pathways for perception
and action. Trends in the Neurosciences 15:20-25. 
[CF]
Graves, R. E. & Jones, B. S. (1992) Conscious visual perceptual awareness vs.
non-conscious visual spatial localisation examined with normal subjects using
possible analogues of blindsight and neglect. Cognitive Neuropsychology
9:487-508. 
[CU]
Cray, C. M. & Singer, W. (1989) Stimulus-specific neuronal oscillations in
orientation columns of cat visual cortex. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sdences USA 86:1698-1702. 
[GNR, rJAG]
Gray, J. A. (1971) The mind-brain identity theory as a scientific hypothesis.
Philosophical Quarterly 21:247-52. 
[arJAG, MK]
(1975) Elements of a two-process theory of learning. Academic
Press. 
[arJAG]
(1977) Drug effects on fear and frustration: Possible limbic site of action of
minor tranquillizers. In: Handbook of psychopharmacology, vol. 8, ed. L. L.
Iversen, S. D. Iversen & S. H. Snyder. Plenum. 
[aJAG]
(1982a) The neuropsychology of anxiety: An enquiry into the functions of the
septo-hippocampal system. Oxford University Press. 
[arJAG, DRH]
(1982b) Precis of The neuropsychology of anxiety: An enquiry into the
functions of the septo-hippocampal system. Behavioral and Brain Sdences
5:469-94. 
[arJAG]
(1984) The hippocampus as an interface between cognition and emotion. In:
Animal cognition, ed. II. L. Roitblat, T. C. Bever & H. S. Terrace.
Erlbaum. 
[aJAG]
(1985) Memory buffer and comparator can share the same circuitry.
Behavioral and Brain Sdences 8:501. [SD]
(1987) The mind-brain identity theory as a acientific hypothesis: A second
look. In: Mindwaves, ed. C. Blakemore & S. Greenfield. Blackwell. 
[aJAG]
(1993) Consciousness, schizophrenia and scientific theory. In: Experimental
and theoretical studies of consciousness, ed. J. March. Ciba Foundation
Symposium 174. Wiley. [aJAG]
(1994) The neuropsychology of anxiety and schizophrenia. In: The cognitive
neurosdences, ed. M. J. Gazzaniga. MIT Press. 
[arJAG]
Gray, J. A., Feldon, J., Rawlins, J. N. P., Hemsley, D. R. & Smith, A. D. (1991)
The neuropsychology of schizophrenia. Behavioral and Brain Sdences
14:1-20. 
[arJAG, AC, CF, DRH, REL, NRS]
Gray, J. A., Hemsley, D. R., Feldon, J., Gray, N. S. & Rawlins, J. N. P. (1991)
Schiz bits: Misses, mysteries and hits. Beliavioral and Brain Sciences
14:56-84. 
[arJAG, DRH]
Gray, J. A. & Rawlins, J. N. P. (1986) Comparator and buffer memory: An
attempt to integrate two models of hippocampal function. In: The
hippocampus, vol. 4, ed. R. L. Isaacson & K. H. Pribram. Plenum. 
[aJAG]
Gray, J. A. & Smith, P. T. (1969) An arousal-decision model for partial
reinforcement and discrimination learning. In: Animal discrimination
learning, ed. R. Gilbert & N. S. Sutherland. Academic Press.
[rJAG]
Gray, J. A., Joseph, M. H., Hemsley, D. R., Young, A. M. J., Warburton, E. C,
boulenguez, P. , Grigoryan, G. A. , Peters, S. L., Rawlins, J. N. P., Tai, C.-T,
Yee, B. K., Cassady, H., Weiner, I., Gal, G., Gusak, O., Joel, D., Shadach, E.
Shalev, U., Tarrasch, R., & Feldon, J. (in press) The role of mesolimbic
dopaminergic and retrohippocampal afferents to the nucleus accumbens in
latent inhibition: Implications for schizophrenia. Behavioral Brain Research.
[rJAG]
Gray, J. A., Williams, S., Nunn, J. & Baron-Cohen, S. (in press) The possible
implications of synaesthesia for the Hard Question of consciousness. In:
Synaesthesia, ed. S. Baron-Cohen & J. Harrison. Blackwell. 
[rJAG]
Gray, N. S., Hemsley, D. R. & Gray, J. A. (1992) Abolition of latent inhibition in
acute, but not chronic, schizophrenics. Neurology, Psychiatry and Brain
Research 1:93-89. 
[arJAG, NRS]
Gray, N. S., Pickering, A. D., Hemsley, D. R., Dawling, S. & Gray, J. A. (1992)
Abolition of latent inhibition by a single 5 mg dose of amphetamine in man.
Psychopharmacology 107:425-30. 
[arJAG]
Gray, N. S., Pilowsky, L. S., Gray, J. A. & Kerwin, R. W. (in press). Latent
inhibition in drug naive schizophrenics: Relationship to duration of illness
and dopamine D2 binding using SPET. Schizophrenia Research. 
[arJAG]
Graybiel, A. M. & Ragsdale, C. W. (1980) Clumping of acetylcholinesterase
activity in the developing striatum of the human fetus and young infant.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sdences USA 77:1214-18. 
[NRS]
(1983) Biochemical anatomy of the striatum. In: Chemical neuroanatomy, ed.
P. C. Emson. Raven. 
[NRS]
Craybiel, A. M., Ragsdale, C. W, Yoneoka, E. S. & Elde, R. P. (1981) An
immunohistochemicaJ study of enkephalins and other neuropeptides in the
striatum of the cat with evidence that the opiate peptides are arranged to
form mosaic patterns in register with the striosomal compartments visible by
acetylcholinesterase staining. Neurosdence 6:377-97. 
[NRS]
Groenewegen, H. J., Vermeulen-Van der Zee, E., Te Kortschot, A. & Witter, M.
P. (1987) Organization of the projections from the subiculum to th'e ventral
striatum in the rat. A study using anterograde transport of Phaseolus
vulgaris leueoagglutinin. Neurosdence 23:103-20. 
[NRS]
Groves, P. M. (1983) A theory of the functional organization of the neostriatum
and the neostriatal control of voluntary movement. Brain Research Reviews
5:109-32. 
[aJAG]
Haken, H. (1983) Synergetics, an introduction: Non-equilibrium phase transitions
and self-organisation in physics, clietnistry and biology, 3d ed. Springer-
Verlag. 
[RI]
Harnad, S. (1994) Why and how we are not zombies. Journal of Coneiousness
Studies 1:164-67. 
[rJAG]
Hebb, D. O. (1946) Emotion in man and animal: An analysis of the intuitive
processes of recognition. Psychological Review 53:88-106. 
[rJAG]
Heilman, K. M., Watson, R. T. & Valenstein, E. (1985) Neglect and related
disorders. In: Clinical neuropsychology, ed. K. M. Heilman & E. Valenstein.
Oxford University Press. 
[JN]
Heimer, L., Zahm, D. S., Churchill, L., Kalivas, P. W. & Wohltmann, C. (1991)
Specificity in the projection patterns of accumbal core and shell in the rat.
Neurosdence 41:89-125. 
[NRS]
Hemsley, D. R. (1987) An experimental psychological model for schizophrenia.
In: Search for the causes of schizophrenia, ed. H. Hafner, W. F. Cattaz &
W. Janzavik. Springer-Verlag. 
[aJAG]
(1993) A simple (or simplistic?) cognitive model for schizophrenia. Behaviour
Research and Therapy 31:633-45. 
[aJAC, AC, DRH]
(1994) Cognitive disturbance as the link between schizophrenic symptoms and
their biological bases. Neurology, Psychiatry and Brain Research 2:163-70.
[DRH]
Hirsh, R. (1974) The hippocampus and contextual retrieval of information from
memory: A theory. Behavioural Biology 12:421-44. 
[aJAG]
(1980) The hippocampus, conditional operations and cognition. Physiological
Psychology 8:175-82. 
[MK]
Horgan, T. (1993) From supervenience to superdupervenience: Meeting the
demands of a material world. Mind 102:555-86. 
[J-LD]
Humphreys, M. S. & Bain, J. D. (1983) Recognition memory: A cue and
informational analysis. Memory and Cognition 11(6):583-600. 
[SD]
Humphreys, M. S. & Dennis, S. (1994) Going from task descriptions to memory
structures. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 17:483. [SD]
Humphreys, M. S., Wiles, J. & Dennis, S. (1994) Towards a theory of human
718
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

References /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
memory: Data structures and access processes. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 17:655-92. 
[SD]
Humphrey, N. (1983) Consciousness regained. Oxford University Press. 
[rJAG]
Humphrey, N. (1992) A history of the mind. Chatto & Windus. 
[CGE, rJAC]
Hurley, S. L. (in press) The reappearing self'. Harvard University Press. 
[SLH]
Impcrato, A., Honore, T. & Jensen, L. H. (1990) Dopamine release in the
nucleus caudatus and in the nucleus accumbens is under glutamatergic
control through non-NMDA receptors: A study in freely moving rats. Brain
Research 530:233-228. 
[NRS]
Ingvaldsen, R. P. & Whiting, 11. T. A. (1993) The two faces of motor (skill)
learning. In: Learning motor skills, ed. C. A. M. Doorenbosch. Amsterdam:
Free University Press. 
[RI]
Ivanitsky, A. M. (1976) The brain mechanisms of signal evaluation. Medicina
Publishing House (in Russian). 
[AMI]
(1993) Consciousness: criteria and possible mechanisms. International Journal
of Psychiyhysiology 14:179-87. 
[AMI]
(1994) Brain mechanisms of the mind: Information synthesis in dominant
cortical areas. In: Seventh International Congress of Psycliophysiology
Al>stracts 53. [AMI]
Ivanitsky, A. M., Korsakov, I. A. & Strelets, V. B. (1989) Perception as a result of
synthesis of the sensory and the emotional. In: Systems approach in
physiology: vol. 2. Emotions and behaviour: A systems approach, ed. K. V.
Sudakov. Gordon and Breach. 
[AMI]
Ivanitsky, A. M. & Strelets, V. B. (1977) Brain evoked potentials and some
mechanisms of perception. Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophijsiology. 43:397-403. 
[AMI]
Ivanitsky, A. M., Strelets, V. B. & Korsakov, 1. A. (1984) Brain information
processing and mental activity. Moscow: Nauka (in Russian). 
[AMI]
Jackendoff, R. (1987) Consciousness and the computational mind. MIT
Press. 
[aJAG, CGE, DRH, TJL-J, CNR, VAS]
James, W. (1890) The principles of psychology. Macmillan. 
[DRH, rJAG]
(1890/1952) The principles of psychology [vol. 53 of Great Books of the
Western World]. University of Chicago Press. 
[JDS]
(1892) Textbook of psychology. Macmillan. 
[DRH, rJAG]
Jaynes, J. (1976) Origins of consciousness in the breakdown of the bicameral
mind. Houghton-MifTlin. 
[REL]
Jeannerod, M., ed. (1987) Neunt)ihysiological and neuropsychological asj>ects of
spatial neglect. Amsterdam: North Holland. 
[aJAG]
Johnston, W. A., Hawley, K. J., Plewe, S. H., Elliott, J. M. G. & De Witt, M. J.
(1990) Attention capture by novel stimuli. Journal of Experimental
Psychology 119:397-411. [aJAG]
Jones. S. H., Cray, J. A. fit Hemsley. D. R. (1992) Loss of the Kumin blocking
effect in acute but not chronic schizophrenics. Biological Psychiatry
32:739-55. 
[arJAG]
Jordan, M. I. (1990) Motor learning and the degrees of freedom problem. In:
Attention and performance, ed. 13th, ed. M. Jeannerod. Erlbaum. 
[SD]
Jordan, M. I. & Jacobs, R. A. (1990) Learning to control an unstable system with
forward modelling. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 2,
ed. D. S. Touretsky. Morgan Kaufmann. 
[SD]
Jordan, M. I. & Rumelhart, D. E. (1992) Forward models: Supervised learning
with a distal teacher. Cognitive Science 16:307-54. 
[SD]
Joseph, M. A., Peters, S. L. & Gray, J. A. (1993) Nicotine blocks latent inhibition
in rats: Evidence for a critical role of increased functional activity of
dopamine in the mesolimbic system at conditioning rather than pre-
exposure. Psycliopharmacology 110:187-92. 
[aJAG]
Kelly, P. K., Seviour, P. W. & Iverson, S. D. (1975) Amphetamine and
apomorphine responses in the rat following 6-OHDA lesions of the
nucleus accumbens septi and corpus striatum. Brain Research 94:507-
22. 
[aJAC]
Kihlstrom, J. F. (1990) The psychological unconscious. In: Handbook of
personality: Theory and research, ed. L. A. Pervin. Guilford. 
[VAS]
Killcross, A. S. & Robbing. T. W. (1993) Differential effects of intra-accumbens
and systemic amphetamine on latent inhibition using an on-baseline,
within-subject conditioned suppression paradigm. Psychopharmacology
110:479-89. 
[aJAG]
Kim, J. (1993) Supervenicnce and mind. Cambridge University Press. 
[J-LD]
Kinsboume, M. (1988) Integrated field theory of consciousness. In: The concept
of consciousness in contemporary science, ed. A. J. Marcel & E. Bisiach.
Oxford University Press. [MK]
(1989) The boundaries of episodic remembering: A commentary. In: Varieties
of memory and consciousness: Essays in honour of Endel Tulving, ed. F. I.
M. Craik & H. L. Roediger. Erlbaum. 
[MK, rJAG]
(1993) Integrated cortical field model of consciousness. In: Experimental and
theoretical studies of consciousness, ed. J. Marsh. Ciba Foundation
Symposium 174. Wiley. 
[arJAC, DCD]
(in press a) What qualifies a representation for a role in consciousness? In:
Scientific approaches to the question of consciousness, ed. J.D. Cohen &
J.W. Schooler. Erlbaum. 
[MK]
(in press b) Representations in consciousness and the neuropsychology of
insight. In: Insight and psychosis, ed. X. F. Amador 6c A David. Oxford
University Press. 
[MK]
Koch, C. & Crick, F. (1994) Some further ideas regarding the neuronal basis of
awareness. In: Large-scale neuronal theories of the brain, ed. C. Koch &
J. L. Davis. MIT Press. [AR]
Kosslyn, S. M., Flynn, R. A., Amsterdam, J. B. & Wang, G. (1990) Components
of high-level vision: A cognitive neuroscience analysis and accounts of
neurological syndromes. Cognition 34:203-77. 
[TJL-J]
Kuhn, T. S. (1970) The structure of scientific revolutions. University of Chicago
Press. 
[MV]
Ladavas, E., Paladini, R. & Cubelli, R. (1993) Implicit associative priming in a
patient with left visual neglect. Neuropsychologia 31:1307-20. 
[CU]
Lahav, R. (1993) What neuropsychology tells us about consciousness. Philosophy
of Science 60:67-85. 
[CLS]
Lashley, K. S. (1956) Cerebral organization and behavior. In: The brain and
human bcluivior, ed. H. Solomon, S. Cobb & W. Penfield. Williams &
Wilkins. 
[aJAG]
Lavin, A. & Grace, A. A. (1994) Modulation of dorsal thalainic cell activity by
the ventral pallidum: Its role in the regulation of thalainoeortical activity by
the basal ganglia. Synapse 18:104-27. 
[rJAG]
Libet, B. (1985) Unconscious cerebral initiative and the role of conscious will in
voluntary action. Beliavioral and Brain Sciences 8:529-66. 
[aJAG]
(1993) The neural time factor in conscious and unconscious events. In:
Exj)crimental and theoretical studies of consciousness, ed. J. Marsh. Ciba
Foundation Symposium 174. Wiley. [aJAG, GNR, MV]
Libet, B., Pearl, D. K., Morledge, D. E., Gleason, C. A., Hosobuchi, Y. &
Barbara, N. M. (1991) Control of the transition from sensory detection to
sensory awareness in man by the duration of a thalamic stimulus. Brain
M4:1731-57. 
[arJAG]
Lipp, O. V. & Vaitl, D. (1992) Latent inhibition in human Pavlovian differential
conditioning: Effect of additional stimulation after preexposure and relation
to schizotypal traits. Personality and Individtuil Differences 13:1003-12. [aJAG]
Lipska, B. K., Jaskiw, G. E., Chrapusta, S., Karoum, F. & Weinberger, D. R.
(1992) lbotenic acid lesion of the ventral hippocampus differentially affects
dopamine and its metabolites in the nucleus accembens and prefrontal
cortex in the rat. Brain Research 585:1-6. 
[rJAG]
Lipska, B. K., Jaskiw, G. E. & Weinberger, D. R. (1993) Postpubertal emergence
of hyperresponsiveness to stress and to amphetamine after neonatal
excitotoxic hippocampal damage: A potential animal model of schizophrenia.
Neuropsychopharmacology 9:67-75. 
[rJAG]
Lishman, A. (1987) Organic psychiatry. Blaclswell. 
|aJAG]
Llinas, R. &: Pare, D. (1991) Of dreaming and wakefulness. Neuroscience
44:521-35. 
[AR]
Llinas, R. & Ribary, U. (1993) Coherent 40-Hz oscillation characterizes dream
state in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
90:2078-81. 
[AR]
(1994) Perception as an Oneiric-like state modulated by the senses. In:
Large-scale neuronal theories of the brain, ed. C. Koch & J. L. Davis.
MIT Press. (AR]
Lockwood, M. L. (1989) Mind, brain it the quantum. Blackwell. 
[J-LD]
Lubow, R. E. (1973) Latent inhibition. Psychological Bulletin 79:398-407.
[aJAG]
(1981) On animal analogies to human behavior and the biological bases of
value systems. The Journal of Mind and Behavior 2:195-207. 
[REL]
(1989) Latent inhibition and conditioned attention theory. Cambridge
University Press. [aJAG]
Lubow, R. E. & Josman, Z. E. (1995) Latent inhibition defects in hyperactive
children. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry. 
[aJAG]
Lubow, R. E., Ingberg-Sachs, Y, Zalstein-Orda, N. & Gewirtz, J. C. (1992)
Latent inhibition in low and high "psychotic-prone" normal subjects.
Personality and Individual Differences 13:563-72. 
[aJAG]
Macdonald, C. (1989) Mind-hody identity theories. Routledge. 
[TJL-J]
MacDonnell, M. J. & Flynn, J. P. (1966) Control of sensory fields by stimulation
of the hypothalamus. Science 152(3727):1406-8. 
[CGE]
Mandler, G. (1984) Mind and body. Norton. 
[aJAG]
Marcel, A. J. & Bisiach, E., eds. (1988) Consciousness in contemporary science.
Clarendon. 
[aJAG]
Marr, D, (1982) Vision. Freeman. 
[aJAG, TJL-J]
Marsh, J., ed. (1993) Exj)erimental and theoretical studies of consciousness. Ciba
Foundation Symposium 174. Wiley. 
[arJAG, MV]
Matussek, P. (1952) Studies in delusional perception. Psychiatrie and Zeitschrifi
Neurologic 189:279-318. [Transl., 1987, in: The clinical roots of the
schizophrenia concejit, ed. J. Cutting & M. Shepherd. Cambridge University
Press.] 
[aJAG]
McKenna, P. J., Tamlyn, D., Lund, C. E., Mortimer, A. M., Hammond, S. &
Baddeley, A. D. (1990) Amnesic syndrome in schizophrenia. Psychological
Medicine 20:967-72. 
[rJAG]
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
719

References /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
Meehl, P. E. (1966) The compleat autocerebroscopist: A thought-experiment on
Professor Feigl's mind-body identity thesis. In: Mind, matter and method,
eds. P. K. Feyerabend & G. Maxwell. University of Minnesota Press.
[aJAG]
Melzack, R. & Wall, P. D. (1983) The challenge of pain. Basic Boob. 
[rJAG]
Mesulam, M.-M. (1985) Principles of behavioral neurology. F. A. Davis.
[JN]
Miller, C. A., Galanter, E. & Pribram, K. H. (1960) Plans and the structure of
behavior. Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
[TDN, FT]
Milner, A. D. & Rugg, M. D., eds. (1992) The neuropsychology of consciousness.
Academic Press. [MV]
Minksy, M. (1985) The society of mind. Simon & Schuster. 
[GNR]
Mishkin, M. (1993) What is recognizing memory and what neural circuits are
involved? In: Thirty-second Congress of Physiological Sciences (Glasgow,
Scotland, August 1-6, 1993). Abstract 27.1/0:42-43. [AMI]
Mitchell, S. N., Yee, B. R., Feldon, J., Gray, J. A. & Rawlins, J. N. P. (in
preparation) Activation of the retrohippocampal region in the rat causes
dopamine release in nucleus accumbens; disruption by fomix section.
Modell, J. G., Mountz, J. M., Curtis, G. C. et a). (1989) Neurophysiological
dysfunction in basal ganglia/limbic striatal and thalamocortical circuits as a
pathogenetic mechanism of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of
Neuropsychiatry 1:27-36. 
[NRS]
Mowrer. O. H. (1960) Learning and behavior. Wiley. 
[aJAG]
Nagel, T. (1993) What is the mind-body problem? In: Experimental and
theoretical studies on consciousness, ed. G. R. Bock & J. Marsh.
Wiley. 
[AR]
Nauta, W. J. H. (1989) Reciprocal links of the corpus striatum with the cerebral
cortex and limbic system: A common substrate for movement and thought?
In: Neurology and psychiatry: A meeting of minds, ed. J. Muleller.
Karger. 
[NRS]
Navon, D. (1991) The function of consciousness or of information? Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 14(4):690-91. [MV]
Neely, J. H.(1977) Semantic priming and retrieval from lexical memory: Roles of
inhibitionless spreading activation and limited capacity attention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 106:226-54. 
[MV]
Neisser, U. (1976) Cognition and reality. Freeman. 
[aJAG, DRH, TDN]
Nelson, T. D. (1993) The hierarchical organization of behavior: A useful
feedback model of self-regulation. Current Directions in Psychological
Science 2:121-26. 
[TDN]
Newman, J. (1980) Cognition and consciousness. Gainesville, FL: Center for the
Applications of Psychological Type. 
[JN]
(1995) Review: Thalamic contributions to attention and consciousness.
Conciousness and Cognition 4(2):172-93. [JN]
Newman, J. & Baars, B. J. (1993) A neural attentional model for access to
consciousness: A global workspace perspective. Concepts in Neuroscience
4(2):255-90. 
[JN, rJAG]
Newman, J., Baars, B. J. & Cho, S.-B. (in press) A neurocognitive model for
attention and consciousness. In: Advances in consciousness research, ed.
G. G. Globus & M. I. Stamenov. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
[JN]
Newsome, W. T. & Salzman, C. D. (1993) The neuronal basis of motion
perception. In: Experimental and theoretical studies of consciousness, ed. J.
Marsh. Ciba Foundation Symposium 174. Wiley. 
[arJAG]
Norman, D. A. & Bobrow, D. G. (1976) On the role of active memory processes
in perception and cognition. In: The structure of human memory, ed. C. N.
Cofer. Freeman. 
[DRH]
Oatley, K. (1988) On changing one's mind: A possible function of consciousness.
In: Consciousness in contemporary science, ed. A. J. Marcel & E. Bisiach.
Clarendon. 
[aJAG]
O'Connor, T. (1994) Emergent properties. American Philosophical Quarterly
31:91-104. 
[J-LD]
O'Keefe, J. (1985) Is consciousness the gateway to the hippocampal cognitive
map? A speculative essay on the neural basis of mind. In: Brain and mind,
ed. D. A. Oatley. Methuen. 
[aJAG]
O'Keefe, J. & Nadel, L. (1978) The hippocampus as a cognitive map. Clarendon
Press.
Orbach, H. S. (1988) Monitoring electrical activity in rat cerebral cortex. In:
Spectroscopic membrane probes, ed. L.M. Loew. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press.
Papez, J. W. (1937) A proposed mechanism of emotion. Archives of Neurology
Psychiatry 38:725-43. [aJAG]
Penn, D. L., Hope, D. A., Spaulding, W. & Kucera, J. (1994) Social anxiety in
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research 11:277-84. 
[DRH, rJAG]
Penney, J. B. & Young, A. B. (1981) GABA as the pallidothalamic
neurotransmitter: Implications for basal ganglia function. Brain Research
207:195-99. 
[aJAG]
(1986) Striatal inhomogeneities and basal ganglia function. Movement
Disorders 1:3-15. 
[NRS]
Peters, S. U, Grigoryan, G. A., Joseph, M. H., Hodges, H. & Gray, J. A. (in
preparation) Facilitation of latent inhibition by 6-OHDA lesions of the
nucleus accumbens. 
[aJAG]
Fiaget, J. (1967) Six psychological studies. Random House. 
[NAS]
Pieron , H. (1960) La sensation. Presse University France 
[AMI]
Pinker, S. & Bloom, P. (1990) Natural language and natural selection. Bcliavioral
and Brain Sciences 13:707-84. [rJAG]
Polanyi, M. & Prosch, H. (1975) Meaning. University of Chicago Press. [aJAG]
Posner, M. I. & Dehaene, S. (1994) Attentional networks. Trends in
Neuroscience 17:75-79. 
[CU]
Posner, M. I. & Peterson, S. E. (1990) The attention system of the human brain.
Annual Review of Neuroscience 13:25-42. [CU]
Posner, M. I. & Snyder, C. R. R. (1975) Facilitation and inhibition in the
processing of signals. In: Attention and Performance 5., eds. P. M. A.
Rabbitt & S. Dornick. Academic Press. 
[MV]
Powers, W. T. (1973a) Behavior: The control of perception. Aldine de
Gruyter. 
[TDN, rJAG]
(1973b) Behaviour: The control of perception. Wildwood House. 
[FT]
(1980) A systems approach to consciousness. In: Psychology of consciousness,
ed. J. M. Davidson & R. J. Davidson. Plenum. 
[TDN]
(1989) Living control systems. Control Systems Group. 
[TDN]
Pulvirenti, L., Swerdlow, N. R. & Koob, G. F. (1991) Intra-accumbens infusion
of an NMDA antagonist reverses the psychomotor effects of cocaine, heroin
or intra-accumbens dopamine, hut not cafleine. Ptiartnacol Biochein Bctiau
40:841-45. 
[NRS]
Pycock, C. J., Kerwin, R. W. & Carter, C. J. (1980) Effect of cortical dopamine
terminals on subcortical dopamine receptors in rats. Nature 286:74-77. [rJAG]
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1980) Cognition and computation: Issues in the foundations of
cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3:111-32. 
[aJAG]
(1984) Computation and cognition: Toward a foundation for cognitive science.
MIT Press. 
[GNR]
(1986) Computation and cognition. MIT Press. [aJAG, MV]
Rachlin, H. (1985) Pain and behavior. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
8:43-83. 
[HR]
(1994a) Behavior and mind. Oxford University Press. 
[HR]
(1994b) From overt behavior to hypothetical behavior to memory: Inference in
the wrong direction. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 17:147—48. [HR]
(1995) Self-control: Beyond commitment. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
18:109-21. 
[HR, rJAG]
Ragsdale, C. W. Jr. & Graybiel, A. M. (1990) A simple ordering of neocortieal
areas established by the compartmentai organization of their striatal
projections. Neurobiology 87:6196-99. 
[NRS]
Rawlins, J. N. P. (1985) Associations across time: The hippocampus as a
temporary memory store. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 8:479-528.
[aJAG, SD]
Reeke, G. N., Jr. (1991) Book review: Marvin Minsky, The society of mind.
Artificial Intelligence 48:341-48. 
[GNR]
Reeke, G. N., Jr. & Edelman, G. M. (1988) Real brains and artificial
intelligence. Daedalus, Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences 117:143-73. [GNR)
Revonsuo, A. (1993) Cognitive models of consciousness. In: Consciousness,
cognitive schemata, and relativism, ed. M. Kamppinen. Kluwer. [AR]
(1994) In search of the the science of consciousness. In: Consciousness in
philosophy and cognitive neuroscience, ed. A. Revonsuo & M. Kamppinen.
Erlbaum. 
[AR]
(1995) Conciousness, dreams, and virtual realities. Philosoj)hy Psychology
8:35-38. 
[AR]
Robb, M. D. (1972) The dynamics of motor-skill acquistion. Prentice-Hall. 
[RI]
Robertson, G. S. & Jian, M. (1995) D, and D2 dopamine receptors differentially
increase fos-like immunoreactivity in aecumbal projections to the ventral
pallidum and midbrain. Neuroscience 64:1019-34. 
[rJAG]
Robertson, I. H. & Marshall, J. C, eds. (1993) Unilateral neglect: Clinical and
experimental studies. Erlbaum. 
[CU]
Rolls, E. T. & Williams, G. V. (1987) Sensory and movement related neuronal
activity in different regions of the primate striatum. In: Basal ganglia and
behavior: Sensory aspects and motor functioning, ed. J. S. Schneider & T. 1.
Kidsky. Hans Huber. 
[aJAG]
Rose, S. (1993) The making of memory. Doubleday. 
[JN]
Rosene, D. L. & Van Hoesen, G. W. (1977) Hippocampal efferents reach
widespread areas of the cerebral cortex in the monkey. Science 198:
315-17. 
[MK]
Sass, L. A. (1992) Madness and modernism: Insanity in the light of modem art,
literature, and thought. Harvard University Press. [AC]
Schacter, D. L. (1987) Implicit memory: History and current status. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 13:501-18.
[VAS]
(1990) Toward a cognitive neuropsychology of awareness: Implicit knowledge
and.anosagnosia. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology
12:155-78. 
[AR]
720
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

References /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
Schacter, D. L., McAndrews, M. P. & Moscovitch, M. (1988) Access to
consciousness: Dissociations between implicit and explicit knowledge in
neuropsychological syndromes. In: Thought without language, ed. L.
Weiskrantz. Oxford University Press. 
[CU]
Scheier, M. F. & Carver, C. S. (1988) A model of behavioral self-regulation:
Translating intention into action. In: Advances in experimental social
psychology, ed. L. Berkowitz. Academic Press. 
[TDN]
Schmajuk, N. A. (1994) Behavioral dynamics of escape and avoidance: A neural
network approach. In: From animals to animats 3, ed. D. Cliff, P.
Husbands, J.-A. Meyer & S. W. Wilson. MIT Press. 
[NAS]
Schmajuk, N. A. & Axelrad, E. T. (1995) Animal communication: A neural
nettoork approach. Presented at the 66th Annual Meeting of the Eastern
Psychological Association, Boston, March 30-April 2. 
[NAS]
Schmajuk, N. A. & Christiansen, B. (in preparation) Haloperidol reinstates latent
inhibition impaired by hippocampal lesions. [aJAG]
Schmajuk, N. A., Lam, Y.-W. & Gray, J. A. (in preparation) Latent inhibition: A
neural network approach. 
[aJAG, NAS]
Schneider, W. & Shiffrin, R. M. (1977) Controlled and automatic human
information processing: 1. Detection, search, and attention. Psychological
Revicic 84:1-66. 
[aJAG, TDN]
Scoville, W. B. & Milner, B. (1957) Loss of recent memory after bilateral
hippocampal lesions. Journal of Neurological and Neurosurgical Psychiatry
20:11-12. 
[HM, CNH, CU]
Searle, J. R. (1980) Minds, brains and programs. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
3:417-57. 
[arJAG]
(1983) Intentionality. Cambridge University Press. 
[aJAG]
(1992) The rediscovery of mind. MIT Press. 
[DCD, rJAG]
(1993) The problem of consciousness. In: Exjxirimental and theoretical studies
of consciousness, ed. J. Marsh. Ciba Foundation Symposium 174.
Wiley. 
[aJAG]
Sechehaye, M. 91970) Autobiography of a schizophrenic giri. New American
Library. 
[AC]
Sesack, S. R. & Pickel, V. M. (1990) In the medial nucleus aecumbens,
hippocampal and catecholaminergic terminals converge on spiny neurons
and are in apposition to each other. Brain Research 527:266-79. 
[NRS]
Shakow, D. (1963) Psychological deficit in schizophrenia. Behavioral Science
8:275-305. 
[AC]
Shallice, T. (1988) From neuropsychology to mental structure. Cambridge
University Press. [AC, CF]
Shiffrin, R. M. & Schneider, W. (1977). Controlled and automatic human
information processing: 2. Perceptual learning, automatic attending, and a
general theory. Psychological Review 84:127-90. 
[JDS]
Sidman, M., Stoddard, L. T. & Mohr, ]. P. (1968) Some additional quantitative
observations of immediate memory in a patient with bilateral hippocampal
lesions. Neuropsychologia 6:245-54. 
[SD]
Skinner, B. F. (1953) Science and human behavior. Macmillan. 
[HR]
(1957) Verbal behavior. Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
[NAS]
Smart, J. J. C. (1959) Sensations and brain processes. Philosophical Review
68:141-56. 
[TJL-J, r]AC]
Smith, A. D. & Bolam, ]. P. (1990) The neural network of the basal ganglia as
revealed by the study of synaptic connections of identified neurons. Trends
in Neurosdence 13:259-65. 
[NRS]
Smith, B. H. (1994) Doing without meaning (adapted from Belief and resistance:
Dynamics of theoretical controversy, a work in progress). Presented at
Systems Theory and the Postmodern Condition, Indiana University,
September 22-25, 1994. [NAS]
Smith, J. D. Schull, J., Strote, J., McGee K., Egnor, R. & Erb, L. (in press) The
uncertain response in the bottlenosed dolphin (Tursiops truncatus). Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General. 
[JDS]
Sokolov, E. N. (1960) Neuronal models and the orienting reflex. In: The central
nervotis system and behaviour (transactions of the 3d conference), ed. M. A.
B. Brazier. Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation. 
[rJAG]
Solomon, R R., Crider, A., Winkelman, J. W, Turi, A., Kamer, R. M. & Kaplan,
I* J. (1981) Disrupted latent inhibition in the rat with chronic amphetamine
or haloperidol-induced supersensitivity: Relationship to schizophrenic
attention disorder. Biological Psychiatry 16: 519-37. 
[aJAG]
Solomon, P. R. & Staton, D. M. (1982) Differential effects of microinjections of
d-amphetamine into the nucleus aecumbens or the eaudate-putamen on the
rats ability to ignore an irrelevant stimulus. Biological Psychiatry 17:742-
56. 
[aJAG]
Staddon, J. E. R. (1993) Behaviorism: Mind, mechanism and society.
Duckworth. 
[HR]
Stevens, J. R. & Gold, J. M. (1991) What is schizophrenia? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 14:50-51. 
[AC]
Suddath, R. L, Christison, G. W., Torrey, E. F, Casanova, M. F. & Weinberger,
D. R. (1990) Anatomical abnormalities in the brains of monozygotic twins
discordant for schizophrenia. New England Journal of Medicine 322:
789-94. 
[AC]
Swanson, L. W. & Cowan, W. M. (1977) An autoradiographic study of the
organization of the efferent connections of the hippocampal formation in
the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology 172:48-49. 
[MK]
Swerdlow, N. R., Braff, D. L., Taaid, N. & Geyer, M. A. (1994) Assessing the
validity of an animal model of deficient sensorimotor gating in schizophrenic
patients. Archives of General Psychology 51:139-54. 
[AC]
Swerdlow, N. R., Caine, S. B., Braff, D. L. & Geyer, M. A. (1992) Neural
substrates of sensorimotor gating of the startle reflex: A review of recent
findings and their implications. Journal of Psychopharmacology 6:
176-90. 
[NRS]
Swerdlow, N. R. & Koob, G. F. (1987) Dopamine, schizophrenia, mania and
depression: Toward a unified hypothesis of cortico-striato-pallidothalamic
function. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 10:197-245. 
[arJAG, NRS]
Tai, C.-T, Cassaday, H. J., Feldon, J. & Rawlins, J. N. P. (in press) Both
electrolytic and excitotoxic lesions of nucleus aecumbens disrupt latent
inhibition in rats. Behavioral and Neural Biology.
Talbot, J. D., Marrett, S., Evans, A. C, Meyer, E., Bushnell, M. C. & Duncan,
G. H. (1991) Multiple representations of pain in human cerebral cortex.
Science 251:1355-58. 
[HM]
Tarrasch, R., Weiner, I., Rawlins, J. N. P. & Feldon, J. (1992) Disruption of
latent inhibition by interrupting the subicular input to nucleus aecumbens
and its antagonism by haloperidol. Psychopharmacology (abstract)
6:111. 
[aJAG]
Thorpe, W. H. (1963) Learning and instinct in animals. Methuen. 
[NAS]
Toates, F. (1994a) Hierarchies of control: Changing weightings of levels. In:
Perceptual control theory, ed. M. A. Rodrigues & M. H. Lee. The
University of Wales, Aberystwyth. 
[FT]
(1994b) What is cognitive and what is not cognitive? In: From animals to
animats 3, ed. D. Cliff, P. Husbands, J.-A. Meyer & S. Wilson. MIT
Press. 
[FT]
(in press) Cognition and evolution: An organization of action perspective.
Behavioural Processes. [FT]
Tolman, E. C. (1932/1967) Purposive behavior in animals and men. Appleton-
Century-Crofts. 
[JDS]
Tononi, G., Sporns, O. & Edelman, G. M. (1992) Reentry and the problem of
integrating multiple cortical areas: Simulation of dynamic integration in the
visual system. Cerebral Cortex 2:310-35. 
[GNR]
Tranel, D. & Damasio, A. R. (1985) Knowledge without awareness: An
autonomic index of facial recognition by prosopagnosics. Science 228:
1453-54. [VAS]
Tulving, E., Schacter, D. L. & Stark, H. A. (1982) Priming effects in word-
fragment completion are independent of recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental. Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 8:336-42.
[VAS]
Umilta, C. & Moscovitch, M., eds. (1994) Attention and performance 15.
MIT/Bradford. 
[CU]
Van Gulick, R. (1991) Consciousness may still have a processing role to play.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 14(4):699-700. 
[MV]
(1995) Deficit studies and the function of phenomenal consciousness. In:
Philosophical psychopathology, ed. G. Graham & G. L. Stephens. MIT
Press. 
[GLS]
Van Hoesen, G. W, Rosene, D. L. & Mesulam, M. (1979) Subicular input from
temporal cortex in the rhesus monkey. Science 205:608-10. 
[DRH]
Velmans, M. (1990) Consciousness, brain, and the physical world. Philosophical
Psychology 3(l):77-99. 
[MV]
(1991) Is human information processing conscious? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 14:651-726. 
[arJAG, GNR, MV]
(1993a) A reflexive science of consciousness. In: Exiterimental and theoretical
studies of consciousness , ed. J. Marsh. Ciba Foundation Symposium No.
174. Wiley. [MV]
(1993b) Consciousness, causality, and complementarity. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 16(2):404-16. 
[MV]
Velmans, M., ed. (in press) The science of consciousness: Psychological,
neuropsychological and clinical reviews. Routledge. 
[MV]
Voom, P., Gerfen, C. R. & Groenewegen, H. J. (1989) Compartmental
organization of the ventral striatum of the rat: Immunohistoehemical
distribution of enkephalin, substance P, dopamine, and calcium-
binding protein. Journal of Comparative Neurology 289:189-201.
[NRS]
Wan, F. J., Geyer, M. A. & Swerdlow, N. R. (in press) Presynaptic dopamine-
glutamate interactions in the nucleus aecumbens regulate sensorimotor
gating. Psychopharmacology. 
[NRS]
Wang, J. K. T. (1991) Presynaptic glutamate receptors modulate dopamine
release from striatal synaptosomes. Journal of Neurochemistry 57:819-22.
[NRS]
Weinberger, D. R., Berman, K. F. & Zee, R. F. (1986) Physiological dysfunction
of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia: 1. Regional cerebral blood
flow evidence. Archives of General Psychiatry 43:114-25. [rj AG]
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
721

References /Gray: Neuropsychology of consciousness
Weiner, 1., Lubow, R. E. & Feldon, J. (1981) Chronic amphetamine and latent
inhibition. Behavioural Brain Research 2:285-86. 
[aJAG]
Weiskrantz, L. (1986) Blindsight: A case study and implications. Oxford
University Press. 
[aJAG]
(1988) Some contributions of neuropsychology of vision and memory to the
problem of consciousness. In: Consciousness in contemporary science, ed.
A. J. Marcel & E. Bisiach. Clarendon. 
[aJAG]
Williams, C. W. (1986) Learning and problem solving with multilayer
connectionist systems. Doctoral dissertation, University of
Massachusetts. 
[SD]
Williams, J. H., Wellman, N. A., Rawlins, J. N. P., Geaney, D. P., Cowen, P. J. &
Feldon, J. (1994) Haloperidol increases latent inhibition in high schizotypal
subjects. [Abstract of paper given at 6th Winter Workshop on
Schizophrenia, Les Diablerets] Schizophrenia Research 11:162. [aJAG]
Wilson, B. A., Baddeley, A. D. & Kapur, N. (1995) Dense amnesia in a
professional musician following herpes simplex virus encephalitis. Journal of
Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 17:1-14. 
[rJAG]
Wilson, B. A. & Wearing, D. (in press) Prisoner of consciousness: A state of just
awakening following herpes simplex encephalitis. In: Broken memories, ed.
R. Campbell & M. Conway. Blackwell. 
[rJAG]
Winocur, G. (1981) The amnesic syndrome: A deficit in cue utilization. In:
Human memory and amnesia, ed. L. Cermak. Erlbaum. 
[aJAG]
Wittgenstein, L. (1976) Philosophical investigations. Blackwell. 
[RI, rJAG]
Yee, B. K. , Feldon, J. & Rawlins, J. N. P. (1995) Latent inhibition in rats is
abolished by NMDA-induced neuronal loss in the retrohippocampal region
but this lesion effect can be prevented by systemic haloperidol treatment.
Behavioral Neurosdence 109:227-40. 
[aJAG]
Young, A. M. J., Joseph, M. II. & Gray, J. A. (1993) Latent inhibition of
conditioned dopamine release in rat nucleus accumbens. Neurosdence
54:5-9. 
[aJAG]
Zeki, S. (1978) Functional specialisation in the visual cortex of the rhesus
monkey. Nature 274:423-28. 
[aJAG, CF]
(1993) A vision of the brain. Blackwell. 
[TJL-J]
New from Cambridge
Comte After
Positivism
Robert C. Scharff
This book provides the only,
detailed, systematic reconsidera-
tion of the neglected 19th century
positivist Auguste Comte currently
available. Apart from offering an
accurate account of what Comte
actually wrote, the book argues
that Comte's positivism has never
had greater contemporary relevance
than now. Providing a lucid expo-
sition of Comte and informed by
considerable new scholarship on
his work, this book will be valuable
to philosophers, especially philos-
ophers of science, a wide range
of intellectual historians, and to
historians of science and
psychology.
Modern European Philosophy
47488-4 
Hardback 
$54.95
A Performance
Theory of Order and
Constituency
John Hawkins
In this major new book, John A.
Hawkins presents a new theory
of linear ordering in syntax. He
argues that processing can provide
a simple, functional explanation
for syntactic rules of ordering, as
well as for the selection among
ordering variants in languages
and structures in which variation
is possible. Insights from genera-
tive syntax, typological studies of
language universals, and psycho-
linguistic studies of language pro-
cessing are combined to show that
there is a profound correspondence
between performance and grammar.
Cambridge Studies in Linguistics 73
37261-5 
Hardback 
$69.95
37867-2 
Paperback 
$29.95
Explaining Attitudes
A Practical Approach to the Mind
Lynne Rudder Baker
According to the dominant
conception of belief found in the
work of Dretske and Fodor, beliefs
are represented by states of the
brain. Rejecting the view, this
work replaces it with "practical
realism", wherein beliefs represent
states of whole persons, rather like
states of health.
Cambridge Studies in Philosophy
42053-9 
Hardback 
$59.95
42190-X 
Paperback • 
$19.95
CAMBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY PRESS
40 West 20th Street,
New York, NY 10011-4211
Call toll-free 800-872-7423
Web site: http://www.cup.org
MasterCard/VISA accepted.
Prices subject to change.
722
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

