Mind & Society, 6, 2002, Vol. 3, pp. 1-12 
9 2002, Rosenberg & Sellier, Fondazione Rosselli 
A naturalistic perspective on intentionality. 
Interview with Daniel Dennett 
by Marco Mirolli 
Marco Mirolli You describe yourself as a philosopher of mind and you reject the 
exhortations to get more involved in the abstract problems of ontology and of 
philosophy of science in general, even if the problems of the philosophy of mind 
and those of philosophy of science are deeply mutually dependent. I think this is 
an important issue because, while you say that your philosophy presupposes only 
the standard scientific ontology and epistemology 1, it seems to me that what you 
really presuppose is rather a Quinean view of ontology and epistemology, which 
is not so standard, even if it may well be the one we should accept. 
Daniel Dennett Well, maybe so, let's see. Certainly I have seen almost no reason 
to adopt any other ontology than Quine's; and when I look at the work in the phi- 
losophy of science and more particularly at the work in science, I do not find any 
ground yet for abandoning a Quinean view of ontology for something fancier. It 
could happen, but I haven't seen any reason for doing this; so if you want to say 
that I am vulnerable on this, that's really true. I have stated that I don't see any 
of the complexities of science or philosophy of mind raising ontological issues 
that are more sophisticated than those a Quinean ontology could handle; but I 
may be wrong. You might show me where I am wrong. 
M.M. 
No, I also think that Quinean ontology and epistemology are the ones we 
should accept. The point I wanted to stress is that much of the discussion about 
the realism on intentional entities is due not to a substantial disagreement on 
intentionality itself, but rather to ontological assumptions. I mean, for example, 
your discussion in "Real Patterns ''2 about what you called 'mild realism' versus 
'strong realism' and so on. 
D.D. Well, in "Real Patterns" I presented what I thought the issues were and I showed 
what the difference was between my position and Davidson's, and between my 
Daniel Deimett: Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA 
Marco Mirolli: Dipartimento di Filosofia e Scienze Sociali, Universita di Siena 
1 Cf. Dennett, 1991a; 1993. 
2 Dennett, 1991 a. 

Mind & Society, 6, 2002, Vol. 3 
position and Churchland's. It's ten years since that piece came out and in those ten 
years I have not been shown any compelling reason to change my view on what 
the ontological issues are. Neither Davidson himself nor even the Davidsonians 
have shown - or even tried to show - that his position can handle problems that I 
can't. I mean: maybe they are not interested, maybe they see there is nothing much 
to divide us there. With Churchland it's only a matter of emphasis, I think. 
M.M.: 
And what about Ruth Millikan? You tend to minimize the differences 
between Ruth Millikan's account of intentionality and yours, but I think there is 
an important difference between the two. Both of you give a teleological account 
of functions, but it seems to me that while Millikan uses the notion of 'being 
selected for' to identify functions, you think that an appeal to selection (either 
natural or artificial) is to be used only in the explanation of the existence of what 
can be viewed as functions. The difference, if real, is quite important, because it 
brings Millikan to an essentialist notion of functions and so to a strong realism 
about intentional entities. On the other hand, you treat attributions of functions 
and intentional states as holistically relative to the observer and this leads you to 
a milder kind of realism. What do you think about this explanation of the differ- 
ences between your position and Millikan's? 
D.D. 
She thinks she can be more.., you say essentialist about function. Well, yes: 
in a way, I think you are right. I think that is the disagreement that we have. 
M.M. 
Let us go back to eliminativism: can you explain better why you think that 
between you and Churchland there is only a difference in emphasis? 
D.D. 
In the introduction to Brainstorms 3 I gave the example of fatigues. Imagine 
that we find people that when they are tired they say "We have so many fatigues". 
So those people think there are these things: fatigues. That is, their ontology 
includes fatigues. So, what about when they come to us and ask: "What are these 
fatigues?". Now, they are making a mistake, but what mistake are they making? 
The eliminativist - the Paul Churchland - says: "Oh, fatigues do not exist. We 
eliminated those things a long time ago. Go away, you are stupid. A certain sort 
of identity theorist went to tremendous lengths to identify fatigues and took on 
the task of trying to come up with a definition which could be proof against all 
kinds of counterexample and so forth. And that's a hopeless endeavour". 
Now what I would prefer to do is saying: "Well, look: your way of speaking is 
not really very perspicacious here. In one sense there are no such things as 
fatigues, but I can help you. See: there is a sort of sense in which there are. If you 
want to go on talking about fatigues, go ahead, but don't demand the sort of reduc- 
tion that the identity theorist are trying to give". Now, in a way this has been my 
message all through my career. In Content and Consciousness 4 1 gave the exam- 
3 Dennett, 1978. 
4 Dennett, 1969. 

Dennett & Mirolli - A naturalistic perspective on intentionality 
pie of 'voices'. I said: "Look, it would be insane to be an identity theorist about 
voices. It would also be insane to be eliminativist about voices. Just get used to 
the fact that the word 'voice' plays a certain role at a certain level in the way we 
speak, and there is nothing mysterious about voices". It seems to me that we have 
two artificial problems, problems that are only puzzles for philosophers who have 
too much time to waste. One of them is to give a counterexample-proof definition 
of voice in terms of the identity theory, and the other is to give a counterexam- 
pie-proof of eliminativism: you know, showing how to make all your business 
without ever referring to voices. It's very useful to refer to voices. I wouldn't 
advocate not referring to voices. So my ontological scruples: in a way I know this 
is very frustrating to many philosophers because I am just not playing this kind of 
ontology; I am just saying this is not a ball-game that I want to play, and I don't 
think there is a reason to play it. I think in the case of voices it's obvious. There 
is no deep puzzlement about voices. If there were interactionist voice-dualists, 
then we would have to start the game much more seriously on the ontology, for 
instance. But in fact people just get it: they see there is no problem here. Now in 
the case of mental entities in general it's much more puzzling, but I think that is 
like all of the scientific puzzles: the scientific puzzles are seriously infected with 
the confusions that arise in ordinary language. I think that after all the scientists 
get their puzzlement from everyday thinking and talking just the way most of us 
do; and these puzzles arise when they try to map folk psychology onto science. 
But what I want to say is that they should maintain that loose pragmatic attitude 
that they maintain with regard to voices to mental entities too. That is, they should 
not think that the only possible solutions to these problems lie with the identity 
theorist and eliminativist or the dualist. They rejected that trio for voices and for 
fatigues and they should reject that trio for qualia and beliefs too. 
M.M. Okay; but sometime you say you are a realist about beliefs, so sometime you 
accept to play the game, and playing this game from a Quinean point of view, as 
it is yours, means to say: "As far as we need to adopt the intentional stance in the 
cognitive sciences, we can and must be realists about beliefs". But if this is true, 
there is the possibility that the intentional stance would no longer be a scientific 
one. Actually, it seems to me that this is not a science-fictional hypothesis, 
because there are already some scientists who think, for example, that the best 
way of looking at human behavior is from a dynamical-system point of view. In 
that case, there would be no more space for the intentional stance within science. 
D.D.: Yes, good. So we do have some serious scientists and philosophers who think 
that eliminativism is a real and strong possibility. I think that's an excellent 
avenue down which a challenge might come: I want to see it. The road exists: if 
there is anything travelling on it, that is what I don't know. Tim Van Gelder, for 
instance, is an Australian philosopher who in the States pushed this idea very 
hard a few years ago. He was advocating that when we switch to the dynami- 
cal-system approach, this will revolutionize cognitive sciences: no more infor- 
mation-processing; we are all complex dynamical systems. He showed one or 

Mind & Society, 6, 2002, Vol. 3 
two examples of phenomena that one might suppose needed a cognitivistic 
explanation and he gave what one might accept was a non-cognitive dynami- 
cal-systems explanation. This was like Skinner saying: "Today the pigeon, 
tomorrow chess!" Well, yes: there is something you can train the pigeon to do 
that you don't need a cognitive science to explain. That is enough to establish the 
possibility that we might have a non-intentional science of human beings - let's 
not say a science of the mind because if it is really non-mental, if it's really 
dynamical-systems, we won't talk about the mind, we won't talk about informa- 
tion. But the fact remains that we have huge, uncontroversial repositories of 
robust predictive facts in terms of information... 
Let's speak about vision: if the dynamical-systems approach to vision is to 
establish itself, we won't talk about vision, we'll just talk about eyes; we'll talk 
about the complex, dynamical interrelationships between the eyes and the rest of 
the world. I challenge anybody in dynamical-systems theory to make any predic- 
tion at all using the dynamical-systems theory that will cover any of the facts that 
are incontrovertibly known about vision. They could try, but they haven't done it 
yet. I mean: as soon as you get away from simple things like the control of the 
limbs and following a wall by touching it and a few other very simple things, it 
seems to me that the dynamical-systems people just end up with not very much 
science at all! Now, I want to make another example. Suppose a physicist comes 
up, not a complex dynamical-systems physicist, but just an old-fashioned physi- 
cist, and says: "Look, basically what you have got here is a bunch of photons, you 
have got a bunch of atoms, so let's do it all in terms of photons and atoms, and 
let's cut out all that vision stuff'. You say: "Wait a minute, you mean depth per- 
ception? Are we not going to talk about depth perception? .... Right! No need to 
talk about depth perception; I can simply take every case of what you call 'depth 
perception' and I can analyse it in terms of photons and the motions of the atoms 
that make up the body." Well, in a certain sense we know that in principle he is 
right; and he might as well, whilst he is at it, include the stock market and just han- 
dle that in terms of particles. After all it's just made of matter. But the fact is that 
sciences have regularities at these higher levels and so the regularities of the social 
sciences seem to me to be uncontroversial, precisely in the sense that you get real 
patterns. That is, you could get rich betting on it if only you could get anybody 
stupid enough to take your bet. There are huge redundancies in nature that are 
describable from the intentional stance and from no other stance. 
M.M. The point I wanted to stress is that anyway you need a criterion for ontology 
in order to distinguish good abstract objects - that is scientific abstract objects - 
from bad abstract objects like 'Dennett's Lost socks circle', as you yourself say 
in "Real Patterns ''5. This is the point at issue, I think, for it is this criterion that 
we need in order to be able to assert whether intentional objects are real objects 
or not. And it seems to me that you, following Quine, take this criterion to be the 
usefulness in a scientific theory. This was the reason for me to introduce dynam- 
5 Dennett, 1991a. 

Dennett & Mirolli - A naturalistic perspective on intentionality 
ical-systems theorists: if they were right, then you would have to say that there 
are no things such as beliefs. 
D.D. Yes, if they were right! If they were able, using their dynamical-systems per- 
spective, to predict all the patterns that were predicted from my intentional stance 
and then more; and could also predict the failures of my pattern. Remember, for 
them to have a good pattern or a better pattern - one so that we should abandon 
our pattern and go to their pattern - it's not enough that we know that in princi- 
ple if we gave them etemity and a fine microscope they could do it. We know 
that in principle you could predict everything using the physical stance, but the 
question is that they are still leaving out patterns, patterns that can only be 
described from the intentional stance. And maybe they are going to say: "And 
there are also patterns that could only be described from the dynamical-system 
perspective". That's an interesting claim. Let's see if it is true. But until they can 
also predict the patterns that are predictable from the intentional stance, they 
haven't given us any reason to eliminate those as good entities. 
M.M. But there is another possibility, that is they can say that the patterns predict- 
ed from the intentional stance are not patterns that are worth including in science. 
The point is that there is an infinity of patterns, and some are worth explaining 
and some are not. After all, patterns are a matter that is relative to an observer. 
D.D. Uhmm. Not really so. Think about the example I give in "Two black boxes ''6. 
That's not a pattern that is relative to an observer at all. I made up the case so that 
there is a puzzling causal regularity between pushing a button on one box and a 
light going on on another box. That's a pattern that is not observer-relative and 
that can only be explained from the intentional stance (because the connection 
between the boxes carried information about the wider world believed by the 
designers of the two boxes). This would be an example I would present to the 
dynamical-systems people saying: "You know this phenomenon exhibits the fol- 
lowing deep regularity: whenever you press button A the red light goes on, and 
whenever you press the button B the green light goes on. Now, please explain 
this regularity to me". And I claim they could not explain this regularity without 
using the intentional stance. 
M.M. Can you explain better your position regarding the relationships between pat- 
terns and ontology? 
D.D. OK, let's see. We have got all these atoms, and then we have the patterns that 
we discern among these atoms and four dimensions: space and time. Now the 
question is: Do the patterns have ontological significance? And for me the 
answer is: That's what ontology is. What other criterion could you ever use? 
What other reason could you ever have for your ontological presuppositions? 
6 Dennett, 1991b; 1995. 

Mind & Society, 6, 2002, Vol. 3 
If an economist came running into the university and he said: "I found a new 
economic force: the 'Third of April Uncle force'". And we say: "What?" He 
says: "On the third of April uncles play a very special role in economics". We 
would say: "Wow! That's amazing! Show me that this is a real pattern". Now, if 
he can show me it's a real pattern, then I've got a problem because he has a good 
reason for saying there is a force, an up-to-now unimagined, unidentified force. 
If he can't show me that pattern, then he is just kidding himself, he is just fool- 
ish. That's what ontology is about, I think. There are lots of economic patterns or 
psychological patterns and we can also describe lots of non-patterns, like the 
'Third-of-April-Uncle' pattern, which I am sure doesn't exist. So I would say: 
any ontological point is to claim that there is a pattern. The reason that we are so 
sure that there is no 'Third-of-April-Uncle' force is that in spite of his efforts, in 
spite of his claims, he can never show anything happening which depends on 
what uncles do on the third of April. It turns out after severe examination to be a 
phantasm; that he is just crazy; that there is nothing, that is, no-thing there, no 
real pattern. So there is no ontology. If there was a real pattern, there would be 
ontology. 
I think this is a crucial issue, so let's take another example. An ontologist 
comes in and says: "I found out there is a kind of thing that nobody has ever 
imagined before". And we say: "What is it?" and he says: "It is a freebuz". And 
we say: "What's a freebuz?" So we want to know what convinced him that there 
was this thing. Now, if he says: "I have got one, I have one in my pocket. Here 
it is!", then I know what he is talking about. Or he could say: "I postulated this 
freebuz force and now I can make sense of something that we could never make 
sense of before". And if he can do it, I will take the freebuz seriously just as if he 
had taken it out of his pocket. But if he can't do anything like that then I think 
he is just a mad man. I don't know why he is talking of ontology to me. 
It's seems to me that ontology is always grounded in our sense of there being 
a regularity in our experience. This is my way of being a 'phenomenalist' with- 
out being a 'Phenomenalist'. There are two ways you could view a policy of this 
sort: you could view it as a proposal, as a normative recommendation for how we 
are to think; or you could view it as an observation about how in fact we have 
always thought, how ontological issues have been treated in the past. And quite 
frankly I am inclined to think that they are both true, that is to say: if we look at 
the history of ontology, look at what sorts of things people have included in their 
ontology throughout history, we would see that - because they have thought they 
had these patterns - that lead them to the ontological convictions they had. 
M.M. 
To accept the idea that the Quinean ontological criterion of existence must 
be relative to scientific theories, is to claim that we have to consider real, that is 
existent, everything that is - and only that which is - used in our best scientific 
theories of the world. So our theorizing seems to be, in a Kantian sense, the con- 
dition of possibility of ontology itself, and so of existence in general. It seems to 
me that if we put the matter this way, we are able to explain the special status that 
most people, and some philosophers as well, are inclined to give to our mind and 

Dennett & Mirolli - A naturalistic perspective on intentionality 
intentionality, but, at the same time, we are not compelled to the negation of the 
possibility of 'strong Artificial Intelligence' and to all the other obscurantist 
views on human beings. On the one hand, we can admit a special status to human 
intentionality in the sense that it's human language that gave birth to science and 
so that is the condition of possibility of every existence, in the only sense of 
"existence" that is worth considering. On the other hand, we can deny the inef- 
fability and unaccountability of our intentionality: nothing prevents us from giv- 
ing an evolutionary explanation for it. Do you think that this way of thinking is 
sound or is it still too mystic for you? 
D.D. What you say is close to what John Haugeland says in his new book, Having 
Thought, where he has some interesting lines of this sort. And this also reminds 
me Brian Smith's book On the Origin of Objects, especially when you say: "it's 
human language that gave birth to science and so that is the condition of possi- 
bility of every existence, in the only sense of 'existence' that is worth consider- 
ing". That's not quite what I would say, but I think Haugeland would say that. 
Actually he says something different too. He says we have to understand that it 
is not so much language as the normativeness of human social culture which is 
the condition of possibility of every existence. 
M.M. It seems to me that your theory of intentionality strongly depends on the the- 
sis of the normativity of intentional attributions, that is the thesis that such attri- 
butions presuppose the rationality of the object of the attributions. In fact, if 
Hume was right, and I assume he was, in saying that you can never get 
'ought-sentences' from 'is-sentences' then, if intentionality is a normative con- 
cept, it cannot be an essential feature of a system, but it must be relative to an 
observer. And from this fact, holism and your mild realism follow quite tacitly. 
But what are the reasons for believing that intentional ascriptions presuppose 
rationality? Are they only considerations about our ordinary language, or is there 
some other argument to support this claim? 
D.D. Well, I think evolutionary thinking can give good grounds for that claim: evo- 
lution makes agents with imperfect knowledge, but when those agents attempt to 
exploit their imperfect knowledge they treat other agents as rational, because this 
is the most efficient way for them to exploit their imperfect knowledge of the 
world. There is no better strategy for predicting the behavior of another agent 
than assuming that it is at least as rational as you are. 
M.M.: Can you say something more about the notion of rationality you are talking 
about? After all, there is less than universal agreement on what the word 'ratio- 
nal' actually means, and you have claimed that rationality is a intrinsically 
pre-theoretical notion 7. 
7 Dennett, 1987 (Reflections to Dennett 1981). 

Mind & Society, 6, 2002, Vol. 3 
D.D. Yes, that's what I think, and it doesn't embarrass me that I cannot define it. I 
think that it is the nature of it that proposed definitions are in effect proposed 
reductions of rationality; and since we always understand the hypothesis that 
they fail or that they might fail, we all just have to see whether this does justice 
to our notion of rationality. This shows that we are using the concept of rational- 
ity as a sort of normative maximum as yet undefined, because we can imagine 
somebody putting forward a definition of rationality which is substantially 
incompatible with our practice but on reflection we found was better, that gave 
better results. Isn't it true that wherever we find such a proposal, we adopt it, and 
we enlarge our notion of rationality to include it? When good probabilistic rea- 
soning is formulated that repairs the fuzzy, informal probabilistic reasoning that 
gave birth to it; from that moment, we understand that it is rational for us to rely 
on a calculus of probability, and so we add it to our vision of what rationality 
consists of. And I think we did the same thing earlier with logic. As it were 
Aristotle was the first to propose that sort of prosthetic device for rationality: the 
Tool, the Organon. And people say: 'yes'! That's a part of what it is to be ratio- 
nal. To be bound by this tool sharpened our notion of rationality. 
M.M. 
What are, according to you, the implications of this strong kind of natural- 
ism with respect to epistemology? Do you think there will still be a place for nor- 
mativity in epistemology? 
D.D. 
I have never thought that naturalized epistemology was entirely not norma- 
tive. No, I have thought that to say that it was naturalized was simply to say that 
it was going to begin with the assumption that we were cognizers that were nat- 
ural, that is, we were evolved biological beings; that we had limitations and that 
the epistemological problems that we face are the problems of living entities in 
a biological world. Now, that removes the sort of hyper-idealizations of some tra- 
ditional epistemology; it's a way of making it clear that we have to consider 
things like the cost-benefit calculus. You get a very different picture of episte- 
mology if you think of a sort of sultan protected in his court who has nothing to 
do all day but avoid error and is fed and protected from harm and can just devote 
every waking minute to mathematics. That man can be a cartesian because it 
doesn't matter how long it takes him to work out the problem and it doesn't mat- 
ter how much energy he has to spend to work out the problem and it doesn't mat- 
ter whether the problems are important. All that matters is that he doesn't make 
a mistake, that he gets certainty. Well, in one sense I don't think there is anything 
wrong with the vision you get of epistemology under that sort of assumption: it 
turns out to address many of the interesting epistemological problems that we 
actually face, but when you address epistemology in this pure cartesian aprioris- 
tic spirit, things puzzle you that are not puzzling from a naturalistic perspective, 
or so it seems to me. But I don't see naturalized epistemology as a way of aban- 
doning the normativity of epistemology. 
Let's take an example. Certainly, one can be interested in the norms of health: 
whether one ought to eat; whether one ought to exercise; whether one ought to 

Dennett & Mirolli - A naturalistic perspective on intentionality 
sleep and all these things. That's normative, but it won't be any good unless it's 
naturalized health theory, because if we really want to know what we have to eat 
and why, then you'd better to be a naturalist. Now, 1 think it's like that: natural- 
ized epistemology is just how to satisfy your epistemic hunger in the best possi- 
ble way. 
That's sort of funny. Imagine somebody who said: "My goal is to eat as much 
as possible, in my whole life". If it really is your goal, then we can stop and fig- 
ure out how best to eat as much as possible. We could take it that our summum 
bonum is eating as much as possible and we could ask: given the constraint of 
naturalism, what should you do? Now, switch from food to knowledge. You want 
to know as much as possible. Well, it looks like a much more reasonable goal 
than eating as much as possible, but we might ask: is it really? What are the goals 
of epistemology in the first place? What are you trying to maximize? What are 
you trying to optimise? I mean: that's the normative of epistemology. But I don't 
think we are just given what the right answers to those questions are without 
already going naturalistic. 
M.M. That's true, but I think that the point of naturalism is that you can never get 
outside the system and judge from an infallible point of view, so no kind of nor- 
mativity can be absolute. 
D.D.: Well, that's part of the point, I would think. I think there are many aspects. 
One of the points of naturalized epistemology I would stress is that if you don't 
do that, then, in spite of your pretensions to analytic rigour at conceptual analy- 
sis, you, in fact, have got blinkers. You're only letting yourself consider those 
aspects of human practice which are clearly consolidated in our everyday con- 
cepts. Suppose you want to know whether knowledge is justified true belief: this 
just becomes a battle of definitions and counterexamples. Now, the question is: 
well, where are you getting your premises? Get reflective about your methodol- 
ogy and ask yourself: what are the grounds for the conclusions that you're draw- 
ing about these various definitions and counterexamples? Well, just your sense 
of what the words mean: conceptual analysis, that's what you are doing... 
M.M. Could you explain which are, according to you, the relationships between the 
philosopher and the scientist from a naturalistic point of view? 
D.D. 
Well, I would say that the philosopher is just one more enquirer, one more 
investigator. I think that the distinction between a philosopher and a scientist is 
not deeper than the distinction between a chemist and a mathematician or a biol- 
ogist and a geologist; that is, slightly different methods and slightly different 
goals, but they are all asking questions critically and reflectively and trying to 
answer them, and they all have the goal of getting the fight answers. There is 
nothing that makes philosophy special. Well, I think that the issues are at least 
strongly suggestive of, if not entirely parallel to, the issue about the nature of 
mathematics. There is a strong case to be made for mathematics being acom- 

Mind & Society, 6, 2002, Vol. 3 
pletely autonomous field, only incidentally applied. There is also a case that 
could be made that mathematics didn't just get born out of surveying and count- 
ing and other worldly issues. But the fundamental concepts of mathematics are 
still anchored to the world through its various sources. So you should see math- 
ematics as a sort of limiting case of empirical enquiry. But it seems to me the 
same issue arises for philosophy as well: as you see, philosophy is just a sort of 
limiting case of empirical enquiry. The most general, the highest level. That's the 
way I tend to see it. I think the case for mathematics being an autonomous 
enquiry is better than that for philosophy. I think Plato aspired to make philoso- 
phy as autonomous as mathematics and philosophers ever since have taken math- 
ematics as their ideal. But it doesn't work! 
To conclude, I want to tell you a story: back in 1978 I met a mathematician 
who was getting very interested in logic and in philosophy. We would have lunch 
two or three days a week in those days and he got reading Quine on my sugges- 
tion. He loved and hated him. One day he said: "Whenever things get really 
philosophical in Quine's work he starts making jokes and becoming less serious. 
Why is that?" I know that it's not true, I mean: I had never found that till then, 
and I 'still think it is not true, but I said: "I think I know what you mean, and I 
think I know why. It's because even though Quine is a great philosopher, I think 
he's never quite been able to convince himself that philosophy is proper work for 
grown men. I think he is always a little bit embarrassed to be a philosopher, and 
he thinks it is not quite as serious or obviously worthwhile work as being a sci- 
entist. So when he finds himself being especially a philosopher he gets a little bit 
shy and embarrassed and starts telling jokes". Once I asked Quine, and he said 
there was some truth in this. He thought of himself as a logician first, and as a 
philosopher only by accident. 
Critical bibliography 
Dahlbom, Bo (Ed.) (1993) Dennett and His Critics (Cambridge MA, Basil Blackwell). 
An important collection of articles by Dennett's critics and his reply to them. The 'unhortodox' 
introduction by Dahlbom is of special interest because it is the best of the very few attempts to give 
a comprehensive analysis of Dennett's philosophy. 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1969) Content and Consciousness (London, Routledge & Kegan Paul). 
The PhD thesis of Dennett, written under the supervision of Gylbert Ryle. There are two main rea- 
sons to recommend the reading of this book: first, the most important ingredients of Dennett's phi- 
losophy are already present in this relatively short book; second, this is where both Dennett's debts 
towards Ryle and Quine and his very new ideas are more explicit. 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1978) Brainstorms (Montgomery VT, Bradford Books). 
The first collection of Dennett's articles, divided in four parts. The first is about the general 
assumptions of his philosophy, while the others are dedicated to the three particular themes in 
which Dennett has divided his work: intentionality, consciousness, and free will. 
10 

Dennett & Mirolli - A naturalistic perspective on intentionality 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1981) Making Sense of Ourselves, Philosophical Topics, 12, n. 1, special number, 
reprinted as J. Biro & S. Shanan (Eds), Mind, Brain and Functionalism, Norman, University of 
Oklaoma Press 1982; now in Dennett 1987. 
The response to Stephen Stich's "Dennett on Intentional Systems", Philosophical Topics, 12, 1981, 
reprinted in W.G. Lycan (Ed.), Mind and Cognition, Oxford - Cambridge MA, Basil Blackwell, 
1990, 4 th edition 1994. In this article - and in the reflections on it (appeared in Dennett 1987) - 
Dennett discusses in depth his thesis of the presupposition of rationality implicit in all intentional 
attributions. 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1984)Elbow Room: the Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting (Oxford, Oxford 
University Press). 
Dennett's book on free will. An interesting discussion on the notion of 'intuition pumps' and on 
their importance and dangerousness in the philosopher's methodology can be found here. 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1987) The Intentional Stance (Cambridge MA, The MIW Press). 
The book dedicated to Dennett's theory of intentionality. It's a collection of articles posterior to 
Brainstorms. I recommend "True Believers", "Three Kinds of Intentional Psychology", "Styles of 
Mental Representations", "Evolution, Error and Intentionality" and, especially, "Starting On the 
Right Foot", which is a sort of introduction where Dennett unusually makes explicit his theoreti- 
cal and methodological assumptions. 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1988) Prrcis of The Intentional Stance, Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 11. 
A sort of summary of Dennett 1987, followed by a collection of critics by a number of philoso- 
phers, cognitive psychologists, artificial intelligence researchers and evolutionary biologists, and 
by Dennett's response to them. 
Deimett, Daniel C. (1991a) Real Patterns, Journal of Philosophy, LXXXVIII (1), reprinted in Dennett, 
1998. 
Dennett's ultimate word on ontology of intentional entities (and on ontology in general). 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1991b) Two Black Boxes, http://ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/papers/twoblack.htm#1. 
An 'intuition pump' (that is a mental experiment) built in order to reveal the necessity of intentional 
language for describing and explicating some 'real patterns'. 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1991c) Consciousness Explained (Boston, Little Brown and Company). 
A deep, extensive, penetrating and illuminating book that try to resolve (or 'dissolve', or 'elude') 
the hardest problem (or 'pseudo-problem', or 'mystery') left to science: consciousness. 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1993) "Back from the Drawing Board", in Dahlbom (Ed.), 1993. 
The reply to Dennett's critics, which includes interesting defences of two Dennett's practices: his 
discomfort with giving labels to his theories and his denial of 'playing the game of ontology' too 
seriously. 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1994) "Self-Portrait", in S. Guttenplan (Ed.), A Companion to the Philosophy of 
Mind (Oxford, Basil Blackwell), reprinted in Dennett, 1998. 
Very important article, where Dennett self-analyses his work with an historical perspective. 
Together with Dennett 1969 and the first chapter of Dennett 1987 ("Starting On the Right Foot"), 
it is certainly the place in which Dennett is more explicit about his debts towards Ryle and Quine. 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1995) Darwin's Dangerous Idea. Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, 
Simon and Schuster). 
11 

Mind & Society, 6, 2002, Vol. 3 
An important book on the theory of evolution by natural selection and its upshots on philosophy 
of science, philosophy of mind, ontology, social sciences, and ethics. 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1996) Kinds of Minds: Towards an Understanding of Consciousness (London, 
Phoenix). 
A very useful introduction to Dennett's theory of mind: short, easy-to-read and fascinating. 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1998) Brainchildren (London, Penguin Books). 
A collection of the last most important articles by Dennett. They cover various subjects and disci- 
plines, such as philosophy of mind, artificial intelligence, artificial life, cognitive ethology and 
methodology for cognitive science. 
12 

