Darwin and the Emergence of Evolutionary Theories of Mind and Behavior by Robert J.
Richards
Review by: Daniel C. Dennett
Philosophy of Science, Vol. 56, No. 3 (Sep., 1989), pp. 540-543
Published by: The University of Chicago Press on behalf of the Philosophy of Science Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/188005 .
Accessed: 30/12/2014 09:48
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 .
The University of Chicago Press and Philosophy of Science Association are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Philosophy of Science.
http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Tue, 30 Dec 2014 09:48:57 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

540 
BOOK REVIEWS 
distributed memory networks could actually work, though these models are not explicitly 
discussed in the text. 
Several important themes are introduced early in the book and developed throughout. 
One is the idea that information storage and information processing are probably not car- 
ried out in anatomically distinct areas; rather, memories are probably stored in the very 
same networks that process the information. For example, visual recognition of objects 
appears to depend on neurons in a specific area of the temporal lobe (TE) which also 
process pattern and shape information. That processing and storage can be shared by a 
network is an idea radically at variance with the design of a serial digital computer, where 
the memory box is located in one place, and information processing is done somewhere 
else. This implies that we have to think very differently from traditional Al about both 
processing and storage if we want to understand how nervous systems accomplish these 
things. 
Another major theme concerns the diversity of kinds of plasticity, with distinct neuronal 
implementations. For example, lesion studies in humans and monkeys point to the exis- 
tence of one memory sysem subserving what Squire calls declarative memory-learning 
of events, facts, propositional knowledge, and images which are accessible to awareness 
and can be reported by the subject. A distinct system seems to function for the storage of 
procedures, and involves the acquisition of motor skills, cognitive skills, and perceptual 
skills, but is independent of the subject's awareness of the acquisition. Although the char- 
acterizations of the two categories of memory are as yet only rough and provisional, the 
evidence for the independence of procedural memory from declarative memory is com- 
pelling. Moreover, the hippocampus and amygdala turn out to be essential for learning 
new declarative knowledge, but are not essential for acquisition of some procedural knowl- 
edge. These data have provided the basis for intense research at all levels on the contri- 
bution of the hippocampus and related structures to learning, and their relation to the cor- 
tical structures that are presumed to store the information. Research is focused at many 
levels of organization from the level of the molecule (the role of neurotransmitters and the 
various peptides), the special NMDA receptors at synapses which may have a special role 
in learning, the level of the circuit in the hippocampus, the system comprising the various 
structures subserving declarative memory, and finally, the whole brain. 
This illustrates Squire's third theme, which is that as a result of research in the last 
several decades, we are embarked upon a period where we can begin to integrate research 
at various levels of organization in the brain in order to generate testable models of how 
the brain learns. Until quite recently, neuroscientists and psychologists have largely tended 
to ignore one another, since neurobiologists typically focused on cellular mechanisms of 
plasticity, while psychologists focused on behavioral parameters. But this has begun to 
change quite dramatically, and the co-evolution of high-level and low-level hypotheses 
represents the first stages of integration and the emergence of cognitive neurobiology. 
Learning, or more generally, plasticity, could well be one of the first places where we 
will figure out how the brain works; that is, where a coherent, integrated account of the 
biological mechanisms of psychological phenomena may at last be discovered. Since the 
nature of knowledge is the subject of epistemology, philosophers will want to understand 
these new developments. Patricia Smith Churchland, University of California at San Diego. 
ROBERT J. RICHARDS. Darwin and the Emergence of Evolutionary Theories of Mind and 
Behavior. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988, xvii + 700 pp. $29.95 (paper). 
To some tastes, the system of Darwinian ideas is one of the most beautiful constructions 
in the universe-elegant, 
powerful, fecund. Its creation demands explanation, a task that 
falls properly to the historian of science, just as the explanation of the creation of the 
marvelous designs of biology is the task for that other sort of historian of science, the 
evolutionary theorist. Robert J. Richards, in this magnificently researched book, proposes 
to use the theoretical outlook of the latter sort of researcher as his model for the former 
task. Lovers of reflexivity will savor the proposal: an account of the evolution by natural 
selection of the idea of evolution by natural selection. But it is more than just a clever 
This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Tue, 30 Dec 2014 09:48:57 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
541 
gimmick; Richards' larger goal is to vindicate the natural selection model of the devel- 
opment of scientific theories in general, and his demonstration of its virtues in his test case 
is impressive. 
Stephen Jay Gould is forever reminding us not to make the tunnel-vision error of looking 
back down the unbroken line of "successes" in a modern organism's lineage, thereby 
missing the bushy side branches of lineages without which we cannot make proper sense 
of evolutionary developments. If, for instance, we succumb to the error of viewing the 
contemporary organism as perfect, and then view its predecessors as crude approximations 
of the perfection to come, we create a treacherous illusion of progress (not that progress 
is never real), and judge the past by an anachronistic standard. The same moral exactly 
can be applied to the Just So Stories that pass for standard lore about how the Darwinian 
revolution conquered the intellectual world; Richards' antidote to these myths teems with 
insights and changes our perspective in many valuable ways. 
Darwin's idea is one of the greatest of all time, but it surely wasn't inspired: it was 
created by no miraculous saltation of genius, but rather painfully eked out by Darwin's 
laborious persistence, in a paradigm of gradualism. Richards charts Darwin's false starts 
and backsliding, along a trajectory that is no random walk, but no farsighted trek towards 
the truth, either; sometimes Darwin seems to have been quite blind to the virtues of his 
own expressions, as he struggled to escape from the false summits of Lamarckian alter- 
natives. This last vision is one of the most arresting in a book with more than its share of 
surprises: the central Darwinian idea, the progenitor of today's orthodoxy, only gradually 
emerged from a large pool of Lamarckian alternative genotypes-not 
one but a dozen, it 
seems-which 
persisted, in Darwin's own thought and writing and in that of his students 
and self-styled converts, well into the twentieth century. One sees hosts of other near 
neighbors, for instance in the associationist metaphors for gradualist learning, and the lure 
of sensationalist theories of mind. Distinguishing the best line in this crowd of near kin 
has been a process with about equal measure of the opposing errors: throwing out the baby 
with the bathwater, and snatching defeat from the jaws of victory. Again and again we 
see protagonists refusing to take seriously one good idea or another because of some slight 
perceived taint (of mechanism or of anti-mechanism, or romanticism or scientism), and 
on the other hand, sullying the stream of orthodox Darwinism with varieties of mentalism 
they could not quite bring themselves to foreswear. 
As Richards correctly stresses, Darwin saw from the outset that his theory had to include 
an entirely naturalistic account of the origins of the "mind" and more particularly the 
"moral sense" of our species, for if Man were to be the golden exception to Darwin's 
rule, the whole theory would be dismissable. And so the environment in which the ideas 
were tested has never been-to 
this day-the 
relatively cool environment of pure science, 
but, to use an archaic term that still leaves an important fossil trace in Cambridge Uni- 
versity, the hot and stormy region of the "moral sciences," where ethics, religion, an- 
thropology, and psychology come together and vie for control of the territory. Gradually, 
and not without some local reversals, the ideas got sorted out, and it is eye-opening to 
learn to what extent all of this was accomplished, by Darwin, Huxley, Spencer, Romanes, 
Baldwin, William James, and others, in spite of (maybe even because of) the residual 
mentalism/moralism of the thinkers. Here, for instance, is Baldwin, revealing that the 
motivation behind his discovery of the effect that bears his name was not to find a properly 
mechanistic alternative to Lamarckian processes but to secure within the Darwinian frame- 
work a place of importance for the mind: "First, complexity of organism is the reflection 
and not the cause of complexity of thought, the opposite of the position of materialistic 
evolution . . . our monism is a monism of mind" (p. 427). 
The monism avowed by Darwin and the early Darwinians was supposed to be an ac- 
ceptable alternative to the shocking reductionism of mechanistic materialism, but in spite 
of themselves they were mechanists under the skin; they held themselves to mechanistic 
standards throughout, and Richards shows quite conclusively how their monism did not 
lead them into positing miraculous mind-powers. Still, Richards is obliged to introduce 
the term "ultra-Darwinian" to refer to that set of strictly non-Lamarckian, mechanistic 
ideas that Darwin himself couldn't quite embrace, but which we today, with hindsight, 
might be tempted to call the "essence" or the "true" Darwinian idea. (As good Darwinians, 
This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Tue, 30 Dec 2014 09:48:57 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

542 
BOOK REVIEWS 
we should, of course, resist all such essentialist temptations.) 
In order to fill in the background, Richards' revisionist scholarship leads us through 
more than a few deservedly extinct theories and arguments, but along the way we are 
rewarded with delights and surprises: the convergent evolution of the Baldwin effect, si- 
multaneously discovered by Lloyd Morgan, Baldwin and Osborn; a heroic and persuasive 
exhumation of Herbert Spencer (who turns out to have been a proto-Marxist, of all things!); 
a somewhat less compelling exoneration of Konrad Lorenz for his Nazi sympathies; a 
fascinating comparison of Mill and Darwin, those two admirable and massive Victorians, 
like ocean liners nudging cautiously close to each other, but keeping their distance. Rich- 
ards uncovers the charming story of Darwin enlisting the assistance of his son to read over 
Mill's Utilitarianism to help him "get straight on his philosophy". 
Evolutionary history teaches us that there is nothing that new under the sun, and it is 
salutary to find some of one's "own ideas" clearly expressed in books a hundred years 
old. Richards shows that again and again, Darwin (and his critics) saw to the heart of 
issues that have recently engaged us. For instance, the very arguments that have recently 
been used (unsuccessfully) against sociobiologists were tried and rebutted in Darwin's own 
day. Darwin also had the germs of the concept of group selection, and recognized the 
theoretical importance of (apparent) altruism in the social insects (and homo sapiens). And 
Huxley himself, in his Romanes lecture of 1893, adumbrated all of the major lines of 
criticism of "evolutionary ethics". 
In the course of telling his evolutionary story, Richards provides useful correctives to 
various similar historiographic visions-those 
of Mayr, Lakatos, Toulmin, Popper and 
Kuhn-but also to less well-known hobby-horses of other historians of science. Like Dar- 
win, moreover, he also has a "moral" goal: to rehabilitate not just evolutionary ethics, but 
a version of it quite close to Darwin's own. And like Darwin, he exhibits more philo- 
sophical cunning than most of his philosopher opponents, even if, in the end, his defense 
shows serious flaws in need of repair. In particular, he and Darwin both seem to fall for 
subtle versions of the error Skinner exhibits in Beyond Freedom and Dignity, where a 
summum bonum is too casually identified with something like long-term "survival of our 
culture". (So if the survival of our culture were shown to depend, in some crisis, on the 
enslavement and torture of many innocents, this would be justified?) 
One final reflexive twist deserves mention. Richards notes that in order to take evolu- 
tionary models of science more seriously than other historians of science have done, we 
must look closely at the local mechanisms of idea-selection. What happens when a theory 
is replicated in a particular mind? Which books do particular theorists read, which get 
cited, etc.? It is an undoubted and depressing fact that important truths get published and 
buried, unread and uncited, while attention-grabbing near-truths replicate like rabbits. Even 
the wisest and most open-minded theorists can be deflected from taking seriously ideas 
that, however sound, are ill-equipped to compete in a particular intellectual niche. Richards 
is keenly aware that this fact applies not only to the ideas whose careers he is charting, 
but to his own work. He has been careful, for instance, to salt his discussions of such 
emotionally charged issues as social darwinism and sociobiology with stabs of sardonic 
wit that efficiently reveal his sympathy with contemporary sensitivities, thus avoiding pre- 
mature dismissal at the hands of hair-triggered critics. 
I conjecture that a similar motive lies behind his otherwise unaccountable omission of 
any discussion of Richard Dawkins' theory of memes (The Selfish Gene, 1976), which is 
to my knowledge the best-developed account of the very mechanisms of cultural selection 
and replication of ideas that Richards writes about. I think Dawkins' ideas about memes 
deserve to be taken seriously, and I think Richards thinks so too; he has, in effect, written 
a detailed account of the Dawkinsian evolution of the Darwinian memes. Why doesn't he 
discuss Dawkins? For two reasons, I suspect. First, Richards is almost as uncomfortable 
with "ultra-Darwinism" as Darwin was, and Dawkins is perhaps the most uncompromising 
ultra-Darwinian around. Second, Dawkins' works are often misperceived to be lightweight 
or mere journalism, so Richards, I suspect, has succumbed to some perceived social pres- 
sure and neglected to acknowledge a controversial ally-a 
familiar failing he often un- 
covers, and plausibly excuses, in his heroes. 
Richards does not, in the end, convince me of one of his major theses: that the Darwinian 
This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Tue, 30 Dec 2014 09:48:57 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
543 
strain of anti-materialism is still viable as anything more than a stalwart refusal to settle 
for simplistic reductions of mind to mechanism. His book does, however, triumphantly 
achieve the goal of all great scholarship: it not only informs us, but shows us why be- 
coming thus informed is essential to understanding our own issues and projects. Daniel 
C. Dennett, Tufts University. 
DANIEL C. DENNETT. Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting. Cam- 
bridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1984. x + 200 pp. $8.95 (paper). 
Elbow Room derives from the 1983 John Locke Lectures at Oxford. It is dedicated to 
the memory of Gilbert Ryle and is reminiscent of Ryle in its ordinary language style of 
philosophizing and its plaudits for common sense in opposition to "metaphysical" notions, 
but quite unRylean in its frequent allusions to scientific literature. The general thesis of 
Elbow Room is that scientific accounts of human nature, however mechanistic or deter- 
ministic, pose no threat to our free will. Its content will be generally congenial to com- 
patibilists (with reservations) but will be thought by libertarians to provide yet further 
evidence that compatibilists are not interested in real free will but only in a pale ersatz 
copy. 
Two themes run through the book: the first is a rejection of incompatibilism and the 
arguments used to support it; the second is a positive account, continuing Dennett's work 
in Brainstorms and elsewhere, of how a free, rational, deliberating agent might be con- 
structed out of mechanistic pieces. 
The first theme occupies most of the book. Dennett tells us that we are not in the clutches 
of the Invisible Jailer, the Nefarious Neurosurgeon, and other "bugbears" and "bogeymen" 
(chap. 1), that we have control over ourselves and are not controlled by our environment 
or the past (chap. 3), that it is not just a matter of luck that we are who we are but we 
can take some of the credit (chap. 4), that the future presents us with real opportunities 
for real deliberation and we must not succumb to fatalistic thinking about future events 
being inevitable and unpreventable (chap. 5), that free will does not imply that we could 
have done otherwise in some metaphysical and unverifiable sense but only that as a matter 
of empirical fact there are other possibilities open to us and we can improve if we want 
to (chap. 6), that responsibility is essentially forward-looking, a matter of deterrence and 
reform (chap. 7). 
Unfortunately, the second theme occupies less of the book. What Dennett has to say on 
the first theme, however unfamiliar in presentation, is generally familiar in content (with 
one notable exception, his epistemic analysis of "prevent" and "can", see below). What 
he has to say on the second theme is more original. In chapter 1 Dennett describes the 
bogey of "sphexishness", named after the digger wasp whose apparently intelligent be- 
havior can be unmasked and seen to be "merely mechanical". Sphex appeared earlier in 
Brainstorms. Here as there she represents the frightening possibility that we are not really 
intelligent but merely machines. Here as there Dennett's antidote is to remind us that it is 
the simplicity of mechanism, not mechanism as such, which is incompatible with intel- 
ligence. Dennett argues that reason, by jumping to a meta-level, a process that can be 
continued indefinitely, provides an escape from sphexishness while not transcending the 
mechanistic (chap. 2) and that a mechanism can be a self because being a self is a matter 
of internal organization; the self is not a unitary source or center within us (chap. 4). 
Dennett says that "if free will and responsibility requires absolute freedom from sphex- 
ishness . . ., then we must either overthrow the scientific vision of ourselves altogether 
or admit defeat" (p. 49). I think this is right, and the compatibilist must reject the ante- 
cedent. This leaves the disjuncts in the consequent to the libertarian and hard determinist 
respectively. 
Dennett writes: "my method will be to go slow where others go fast" (p. 17). Unfor- 
tunately he also goes fast where others go slow, and this makes his defense of compati- 
bilism less persuasive. However, the critical reviewer inevitably appears something of a 
spoilsport. If only Dennett had said more about this, if only he had considered this ob- 
jection, if only. . . . Ah, but then his book wouldn't have been nearly so much fun! 
This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Tue, 30 Dec 2014 09:48:57 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

