1 
The Future of Atheism: A Dialogue 
Daniel Dennett and Alister McGrath 
Opening Remarks 
Daniel Dennett 
First of all, I ' m  delighted to be here, and honored that you all came out 
here for this event, and I'm grateful for Mr. Heard and the New Orleans 
Baptist Theological Seminary for creating this occasion. I ' m  particularly 
happy to hear the opening remarks by President Kelley. I think, as you'll 
see, at the end of my brief presentation, I ' m  going to be seconding those 
in a very strong way. 1 
So I'm the atheist. ( The audience laughs.) 
I ' m  going to start with a very brief film by somebody that in a way 
you know. How many of you know Homer Simpson? Well, Homer Simp­
son 's creator is Matt Groening. Matt Groen ing's father is Homer Groen­
ing, now deceased. His father made films among other things, and at the 
[2006] TED Conference a year ago2 Matt showed a two-minute film that 
his father made in 1967. And I was th rilled with this film because it so per­
fectly expressed what to me was a very important idea. I actually have Matt's 
permission to show it here. I ' m  goi ng to share that film with you now, so if 
we could just run the video. 
Here 's Matt Groening, introducing the film . . .  
The short film shown by Drnnell is introdured by Matt Grnming, rreator of 
The Sim psons . Tiu! expnirnentalfilm bfgi.ns with thf titlR rrud reading, "Thefol­
lowinK is a public .wrvire announrnnrn t from Homer Groening. " The rarn.na ruts 
1 7  

18 
THE FUTURE O F  ATHEISM 
to a close-up of a dingy old soccer ball being kicked around in the dirt. The camera 
pans out to reveal three or four young mm, presumably in an African setting, play­
ing with the ball. Told entirely through titl,e slides, Homer Groening's text is a sort 
of naturalist hymn: 
There are millions of years in the past 
There are millions of years yet to come 
And here we are 
right in the middle 
There's also space 
there are miles and miles of universe in all directions 
And here we are 
right in the middle 
Sort of makes your eyes water 
We'd never find this moment again in a million years 
This is a big deal 
Being in the middle of time and space 
Man, this is our world 
Let's not blow it 
(The audience applauds.) 
I find that that message is, in its own way, both deep and beautiful, and 
it responds to a question that I'm sure many of you have. And that is, Can 
you possibly have a morality, can you have a sense of lire's meaning without 
religion? The answer is, yes, yes. You just saw a very succinct and, in its own 
way, beautiful version of that. Here we are, with time and space going off 
unimaginably in all directions, and here we are in the middle. This is our 
world; let's not blow it. It's not the St. Matthew Passion, but it's a beautiful 
piece of art in any case. And I wanted to share that with you. 
So now, let me get down to my talk. My title, "Taming the Wild Mernes 
of Religion," will be clear enough as we go along. Leaving off where Horner 
Groening stopped, I want to give you another perspective. Let's go back 
ten thousand years. This was after the dawn of agriculture, but thousands 
of years befure the beginning of Christianity, thousands of years befure 
the beginning of Judaism. At that point, the human population of the 
globe, plus their livestock and pets, amounted to a very small fraction of 
the terrestrial vertebrate biomass. The terrestrial vertebrate biomass does 
not include the invertebrates, the bugs, and what is in the ocean. But we 
were a minor primate, maybe a major primate, but that was a tenth of 
one percent. Wmld anybody hazard a guess at what percentage of the 

THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
19 
terrestrial vertebrae biomass-human beings plus their livestock and pets 
today-that it is today? W:mld anybody make a guess? Fifty? Do I hear any 
raise on fifty? Seventy? Do I hear any raise on seventy? Ninety-eight per­
cent. What a huge change in a biological instant-in ten thousand years! 
This is calculated by the visionary engineer Paul MacCready, and he came 
up with a really rather remarkable thing to say about it: 
Over billions of years, on a unique sphere, chance has painted a 
thin covering of lire, complex, improbable, wonderful, and fragile. 
Suddenly, we humans-a recently arrived species no longer sul> 
ject to the checks and balances inherent in natures-have grown 
in population , technology, and intelligence to a position of ter­
rible power. We now wield the paintbrush.5 
To appreciate how amazing this is, that we have inherited this earth in 
this way, it sometimes helps to take an alien perspective. So let's pretend 
we're Martians and we're coming to the planet, and we're wondering what 
we're going to find on this planet. What would happen if Martian scien­
tists came to earth? Well, here's a picture of something that might amaze 
them. This is approximately one million human beings gathered fur Maha 
Kumbh Mela in 2001 on the banks of the Ganges River, one of the largest 
convocations of bipedal mammals ever. That would impress Martian biolo­
gists. They would say, "Goodness, me! What an amazing event! This is a 
very remarkable gathering of animals." 
Here's another. That's Mecca, of course. Another: St. Peter's Square. 
The Martians would want to know what on earth explains these patterns. This 
is a pie graph that shows as of a rew years ago what the breakdown of the 
populations of the world are . You see that Christianity has about 33 per­
cent. Hinduism has about 16 percent, the same as nonreligious. Islam has 
about 18 percent. The fastest growing of these is probably Islam, mainly 
because of birth rate. The second fastest growing, or maybe fastest grow­
ing, is nonreligious. According to the World Christian Encyclopedia, the only 
major religion that is growing worldwide is Islam. Secularism and nonre­
ligion are growing even faster. Southern Baptists are now baptizing about 
300,000 a year according to the figures that I was able to get. That's about 
the same as you were doing in the 1950s. You're not growing any faster 
than you were then, but the population has doubled. 
I mention these facts because one often sees in the press the claim 
that there's a tremendous upsurge in religion in the United States and 
around the world, and it's not really true. Religions are making a lot of 
noise, and they're getting a lot of attention, but if you go and look fur the 
facts, if you do a careful study of the demographics, you'll find out that 
some of those claims are very misleading. Right now, there are roughly 7 49 

20 
THE FlITURE OF ATHEISM 
million atheists in the world, and that's a very conservative estimate. That 
is, there are twice as many atheists as Buddhists, rorty times more atheists 
than Jews, more than fifty times as many atheists as Mormons. (That's from 
Zuckerman, 2006.) 4 
In an October piece that many of you may have read in The New York 
Times, Laurie Goodstein wrote about the notorious "4 percent problem" 
that many people are worried about. Quoting her, "If current trends con­
tinue, only 4 percent of teenagers will be Bible-believing Christians as 
adults."5 It was this calculation that led the National Association of Evan­
gelicals to pass a resolution deploring the epidemic of young people leav­
ing the evangelical church. 
So it is simply not the case that religion is booming and that atheism 
is on the wane. Those are just facts. What to make of them, whether to 
deplore them or to be thrilled by them is another matter. First, we have 
to understand what the facts are. Gregory Paul, in a recent article in the 
Journal of Religion and Society, draws our attention to some interesting facts, 
because many people are very concerned that if a nation becomes more 
secular, family values will go down the drain. Well, let's compare the homi­
cide rate in the United States, which is not a very secular state, with Euro­
pean secular states. The homicide rate is much higher in the United States 
than in any secular democracy. But sexually transmitted disease rates, teen 
pregnancy, and abortion rates are also much higher in the United States 
than in "godless Europe. "6 
Now, our Martian scientists see this and say: "Well, these are interest­
ing facts, what explains them? What accounts ror all these patterns in the 
world?" Now this is the question that interests me. I'm a philosopher by 
training, but I work in and on the edges of science and evolutionary biol­
ogy, evolutionary theory, cognitive science, and psychology. I'm interested 
in knowing what happens when you put on your Martian glasses, which 
are the same as scientific glasses, and you look at these phenomena. They 
are fascinating phenomena; they are unmistakably important phenom­
ena. They are deeply important, amazing phenomena, and they are going 
to become more important as the century progresses. What do we make 
of them? 
To help us think about this, I want to draw a comparison. Here's a 
cow, a nice cow (not, I think, a sacred cow, but maybe ror some) . Here's a 
question: "Who designed this cow?" You're going to say: nobody designed 
this cow. Well, actually, a lot of people have spent a lot of time in the 
last few hundred years redesigning cows. This is a domesticated species, 
and they have tried to make the cow just right ror us. Let's consider its 
ancestor, the aurochs. About ten thousand years ago, people started keep­
ing aurochs and they began to domesticate them, but who designed the 
aurochs? The answer is evolution. Evolution by natural selection designed 

THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
21 
the aurochs over millions of years. No intelligent designer was responsi­
ble ror the aurochs. What were aurochs ror? They were ror making more 
aurochs. They were a wild species, and that's all they were ror. But now, 
we have domesticated the aurochs, and we've reverse-engineered it. We 
figured out how the parts work, and we've figured out how to optimize the 
parts and revise the parts. We've basically redesigned the auroch to serve 
our purposes. Who designed the cow? Well, natural selection designed 
the cow ror millions and millions of years, and now, ror about ten thousand 
years, we've been sometimes inadvertently and sometimes very deliberately 
redesigning the cow. The same thing is true of religion. 
Religions are brilliantly designed systems. They are tremendously 
robust, efficient, powerful, long-lived institutions. We can reverse-engineer 
them. They have an evolutionary history. They started off wild and then 
were domesticated. And many of the features of organized religions today 
are very different from the features of their wild ancestors, only some thou­
sands of years ago. And this we can study with the tools of science. We 
can reverse-engineer religion the same way we can reverse-engineer cows 
and television sets and just about any complex thing you see. Reverse-engi­
neering is the intellectual exercise, the scientific exercise, that intelligent 
design (if it were a real science) would use to come up with proofs to show 
that you just couldn't have this design without an intelligent designer. They 
haven't yet come up with any good evidence that that's true, but they are 
at least trying to do that. If you want to disprove evolutionary theory, that's 
what you want to look ror. You want to look ror something that couldn't 
have evolved. The process of studying these questions is really a variety of 
reverse-engineering. 
So, the Martians want to know how all this originated and when. 
What is it ror? How does it perpetuate itself? Well, we know that there have 
been hundreds of thousands of religions since the first religions. Hun­
dreds of thousands of religions and almost all are extinct. But religions are 
being born now so fast that the web site on new sects can't keep up with 
them. Most of them have a lire of only a rew weeks or months, sometimes 
a generation or two. Most religions that are started go extinct in short 
order. That's also true, of course, of biological species. Much more than 
99 percent of all the species that have ever existed on this planet have 
gone extinct. Those that go extinct, however, often pass on a rew themes to 
competitors that survive. So if we study the evolution of religions-seeing 
what's around today and where it came from-we can learn a lot about the 
sources of themes that we find in organized religions today. 
Well, what is it about the survivors that helps them survive? That is the 
question that you always want to ask. And one possibility is that one of them 
is simply the truth. And that presumably is what most of you believe-and 
it may be true. But you don't know it's true. Scientifically, we can explore 

22 
THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM 
the question. We can look at the history of religion and see if there might 
be in fact some other, better explanation of why this particular religion or 
these religions have survived. Notice, there are a lot of survivors out there 
still, and they can't all be true. So if your religion has survived because it 
is true, the other religions that are robust and healthy today have survived 
fur other reasons. What might those reasons be? These are the questions­
factual questions-that we can explore. And that's the point of my book 
Breaking the Spell. The "spell" I want to break is the taboo or prohibition 
against studying that very question. It's the idea that we shouldn't look so 
closely and intensely at religion, that we should avert our eyes from these 
phenomena. According to the taboo, it's not nice and it's not appropriate; 
there is something blasphemous or just immoral about studying religions. 
I say no. Religions can be studied as natural phenomena just fine. Let's 
look at them. Let's see what we can make of them. Now, some people are 
afraid of what they might learn. Maybe they're right to be afraid, or maybe 
they're not. 
My book is not a "virulent attack" on religion-as some critics have 
said. I do not hate religion. I am not an enemy of religion. I'm a student 
of religion. I'm an atheist, but that does not mean that I hate religion. If I 
were a Jew it would not mean that I hate Buddhism. I hope you agree. 
Here's something else that might really amaze a scientist from Mars, 
or it might amaze you. You go out in the field and you find an ant climb­
ing a blade of grass. And it climbs and it climbs and it climbs to the top 
of the blade of grass, and if it falls, it climbs again. And you think, What is 
this ant doing? Why is it wasting all this energy climbing to the top of the 
blade of grass? What's in it for the ant? What good is it fur the ant to climb 
to the top of the blade of grass? Is it lost? Is it showing off? Is it looking fur 
food? What is it doing? What good accrues to the ant? And the answer is: 
no good accrues to the ant at all. Is it just a fluke? Yes, it's just a fluke. It's 
a lancet fluke. A lancet fluke is a little parasitic worm. Now lancet flukes 
(Dicrocoelium dendriticum) , in order to complete their life cycle, have to get 
into the belly of a ruminant-a cow or a sheep. And they improve their 
chances of getting into the belly of a cow or sheep by commandeering a 
passing ant, climbing into its brain, and driving it up a blade of grass like 
an all-terrain vehicle, there the more likely to be eaten by a cow or a sheep. 
Incredibly smart. Of course the lancet fluke is stupid, but the strategy is 
brilliant. The lancet fluke doesn't even have a brain, really. It has the IQ of 
a carrot, roughly, I'd say. But the strategy that it engages in is very devious 
and very clever, and it's sort of spooky. Here we have a hijacker. We have 
a parasite that infects the brain and induces suicidal behavior on behalf 
of a cause other than one's own genetic fitness. Spooky. Gee, I wonder if 
anything like that happens to us! 

THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
23 
Well, let me remind you that the Arabic word islam means submission 
surrender of one's self to the will of Allah. Built right into the name of 
Islam is this idea that the individual should surrender his or her interests 
to the interests of Allah. And it's not just Islam; it's Christianity, too. This 
is a page from a music manuscript that I found in a Paris bookstall about 
fifty years ago. It says, Semen est verbum Dei; sator autem Christus. "The Word 
of God is a seed, and the Sower of the seed is Christ." And it goes on to say 
that all who hear this shall have eternal life; that is the quid pro quo. The 
idea of spreading the word, even at the risk of one's own life, of surrender­
ing one's own life to the will of God, is just as much in Christianity as it is 
in Islam. 
"The heart of worship is surrender."7 
"Surrendered people obey God's word, even if doesn't make sense."8 
Now where did I get those quotes? I got those quotes from Pastor Rick 
Warren, from his book The Purpose Driven Life, which many of you, I hope, 
know. It's an interesting book. It's sold over twenty-three million copies. 
It's an immensely influential book, and it is extremely well designed. And 
it can be reverse-engineered. And if you're interested in the reverse-engi­
neering of that book, there's a talk I did at the conference where Matt 
Groening spoke where I reverse-engineered Rick \o\arren 's book. 9 \o\arren 
was not amused. But as I say, it's brilliantly designed, and we can figure out 
what makes it work. In a way, I'm taking it very seriously. 
Well, here are some ideas to die for: Islam, Christianity. But many 
people have died for communism, and many people have died for democ­
racy. Many people have killed for communism. Many people have killed 
for democracy, for justice, for freedom. This is the New Hampshire license 
plate: "Live free or die!" Great sentiment. I'd like to point out something. 
The moose pictured on that license plate cannot share this sentiment. It 
is beyond the capacity of the moose's brain to appreciate this idea. We 
are the only species on the planet that has ever existed which can decide 
that an idea is more important than having more grandchildren than your 
neighbor. That sets us apart from all other species, but is itself a biological 
fact and one that has a biological explanation. 
Question: Is maximizing your progeny your highest goal, your summum 
bonum? Now, I'm a father and a grandfather. I love having grandchildren. 
My second grandchild is going to be born any day now, and I'm thrilled. 
Many of you are parents or grandparents, or you want to be parents. Hands 
up those of you who think that the most important thing in life is having 
more offspring than your neighbor. I do not see a single hand up. That 
makes us entirely different from the other species on this planet. For every 
other species, that's their highest imperative. Making more aurochs or 
making more ants. That's all. Every act they take is aimed at that purpose. 

24 
THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM 
But not us, because we have minds that can have ideas and we can decide 
to die fOr an idea. 
It's ideas, not worms, that hijack our brains-replicating ideas. Ideas 
that we rehearse and think about, and decide that we like, pass them on to 
somebody else, who passes them on to somebody else. They make copies; 
they spread like a virus. These themes are what Richard Dawkins calls 
memes. Dawkins, who wrote The Selfish Gene in 1976, introduced the idea 
that cultural items had an evolutionary history too. They could replicate. 
They could differentially replicate, and the fittest were the ones that would 
get us to make the most copies. He pointed out that they are analogous 
to genes or to viruses. What's a virus? It's not alive. It's just a big crystal, a 
macromolecule. It's a string of DNA with attitude. That is to say, it's got a 
shape that permits it, when it gets in the right place, to provoke its own 
reproduction by the replicating machinery of a cell. 
And Dawkins's brilliant idea was that ideas can do that too. They can go 
inside a mind and get that mind to make a copy of them and another copy 
and another copy and then send that copy out into the world where it makes 
more copies still. That's the idea behind "the W>rd of God is a seed and the 
sower of the seed is Christ." It's not an ugly idea; it's a beautiful idea. The idea 
that ideas themselves have their own fitness and that we are their hosts. 
The theologian Hugh Pyper said in 1998: "If 'survival of the fittest' has 
any validity as a slogan, then the Bible seems a candidate fOr the accolade 
of the fittest of texts. " 1 0  There are more copies of it in more languages all 
over the world than any other book, by a wide margin, but the Qur'an is 
picking up. These are fit cultural items. Independent of whether they are 
good fur us, whether they are true, whether they are false, they are fit in 
the biological sense because they have lots of offspring that have lots of off­
spring that have lots of offspring. Human culture is itself one of the fruits 
on the Tree of Life. 
Culture is composed of symbionts that are either good fOr us, neutral, 
or fitness-reducing. But remember, none of you cares about your biologi­
cal fitness. There wasn't a person in this room who thought their biologi­
cal fitness was the most important thing in life. So the fact that a particular 
idea in your brain might be fitness-reducing is neither here no there. 
Some of them, no doubt, are fitness-enhancing. The idea fOr making a 
better mousetrap, a better fishhook, a better plow, these give you more 
powers. But lots of ideas may be along fOr the ride, and some of them may 
even be detrimental. 
When I started working on my book on the evolution of religion, people 
said very often, "Oh, you're working on the evolution of religion. That's an 
interesting question. What do you think religions are tOr? Because after all, 
every human group that's ever been studied has some fOrm of religion, so 
it must be good fOr something." 

THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
25 
And I said, "Well, yeah, that's a possibility, but that's a false inference." 
"Well, why?" 
And I said, "Well, every human group that's ever been studied also has 
the common cold. What's that good fur?" It's good for itself. It replicates 
because it can. I'm not saying religion is like the common cold; I'm saying 
it might be. I'm saying that some religious ideas could be like the common 
cold; they spread because they can spread. They are fit, and we can't get 
rid of them any more than we can get rid of the common cold. It is one of 
the possibilities you have to bear in mind if you are going to be objective in 
studying this scientifically. You must not assume at the outset that "Gosh, 
it's got to be wonderful" or that some particular aspect has to be wonder­
ful. The fact that it's still here only shows that it is benefiting the fitness of 
something, but it might be only itself. 
How did human culture get started? If I had more time, I would go 
into that. It's in my book, but I'm not going to because I want to move 
ahead to one more idea. 
Here's a riddle: How are spoken words and folk songs like squirrels, 
rats, pigeons, and barn swallows? The answer is: these species are not 
domesticated species, but they have evolved to fit the human environ­
ment. They've evolved to coexist with us. They are beautifully adapted to 
live with human beings. Some of our ideas are like that too. They're not 
domesticated-they're wild-but they live with human beings. Now sheep, 
for instance, were very clever to acquire shepherds. They got to outsource 
all their problems. But it wasn't the sheep's cleverness, it was evolution's. 
Sheep are stupid. They're a little smarter than Dicrocelium dendriticum, but 
not much. The fitness move is evolution's move, not the sheep's. Sheep are 
fortunate to get themselves domesticated, and similarly the wild memes 
of religion were furtunate to get themselves domesticated because they 
acquired stewards-people who were prepared to devote their lives to the 
health and spreading of those very ideas. 
Now, there I might end, but I want to go to my final point. Religions 
are powerful forces in people's lives. Religions are brilliantly designed. 
When we understand their design, we can see better what we might do or 
should do to revise their design or improve them. Many of the attempts to 
reform religion have been misguided; they've been under-informed, and 
they have done more harm to their religions than good. If you want to save 
your religion, if you want to improve your religion, you better understand 
how it works. You better reverse-engineer it. 
In the meantime, I have one policy proposal. It surprises a lot of 
people, but I don't think it's going to surprise you. I think education on 
the world's religions for all of our children-homeschooled, private school, 
public school-should be required. We have the three Rs; we should have 
the fourth R. What am I talking about? I'm talking about the history, the 

26 
THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM 
creeds, the rituals, the music, the symbols, the ethical commands and pro­
hibitions of all the major religions and, for that matter, of atheism. Just 
facts, no values, no spin. Just lots of geography, basically. 
I'm completely laissezfaire about the rest of what you teach your chil­
dren. If you teach them this, you can teach them whatever else you want. 
Whatever else you want, with one little proviso: as long as it doesn't disable 
them from informing themselves further through, for instance, hatred or 
fear. That's child abuse if you do that. But if you teach them these facts, 
then you can teach them anything else you want. Why? Because when reli­
gions do go toxic-and we all know every religion has its toxic, fanatical 
forms that go off the rails and become lamentable human phenomena­
this depends always on the enforced ignorance of the young. So if you 
simply prevent that ignorance, you more or less guarantee as sort of a 
public health measure that only the benign, good religions can survive. 
A religion that can flourish in a world of mutual knowledge of the facts 
about world religions is a benign religion. So I think you can see why I'm 
not really an enemy of religion. I think we should study religions care­
fully, scientifically, objectively, so that we learn what makes them tick. Once 
we've reverse-engineered them, first of all, we'll understand better why 
they're good at what they're good at and how to make them better. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
Opening Remarks 
Alister McGrath 
Let me begin by saying what a great pleasure it is to be with you here 
in New Orleans tonight. And it is a special privilege to be able to have 
this dialogue with Professor Daniel Dennett. Although recovering from 
an operation, Professor Dennett is able to be with us tonight, and I am 
delighted to be able to engage in this provocative and important topic. 
There is so much that could be said on this topic, and so little time in 
which to say it. So where shall we start? 
I'm going to begin with the failure of prophecy-the great secular 
prophecies of the 1960s that religion was on its way out globally, as human­
ity entered a new, secular phase of its existence. Religion was meant to 
have disappeared years ago. For more than a century, leading sociolo­
gists, anthropologists, and psychologists have declared that their children 
would see the dawn of a new era in which the "God delusion" would be left 
behind for good. Back in the 1960s, we were told that religion was fading 
away, to be replaced by a secular world. 
For some of us, that sounded like a great thing. I was an atheist back 
in the late 1960s, and remember looking forward to the demise of religion 
with a certain grim pleasure. I had grown up in Northern Ireland, and had 

THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
27 
known religious tensions and violence at firsthand. The solution was obvi­
ous to my freethinking mind. Get rid of religion, and such tensions and 
violence would be eradicated. The future was bright-and godless. 
Two things have changed since then. In the first place, religion has 
made a comeback. It is now such a significant element of today's world that 
it seems strange to think that it was only a generation ago that its death 
was foretold with such confidence. The humanist writer Michael Shermer, 
perhaps best known as the director of the Skeptics Society and publisher 
of Skeptic magazine, made this point rorcefully back in 1999,11 when he 
pointed out that never in history have so many, and such a high percent­
age of the American population, believed in God. Not only is God not 
"dead," as the German philosopher Nietzsche prematurely proclaimed; 
God never seems to have been more alive. 
Second, and rather less importantly, my own attitudes have changed. 
Although I was passionately and totally persuaded of the truth and rel­
evance of atheism as a young man, I subsequently round myself persuaded 
that Christianity was a much more interesting and intellectually exciting 
worldview than atheism. I have always valued freethinking and being able 
to rebel against the orthodoxies of an age. Yet I never suspected where my 
freethinking would take me. 
I arrived at Oxrord from school a Marxist, believing that religion was 
the cause of all the world's evils. As an intellectual Darwinian, it seemed 
perfectly clear to me that the idea of God was on its way out, and would be 
replaced by fitter and more adapted ideas-like Marxism. I was a "bright," 
to use Dennett's language. 
But it didn't work out like that. At Oxrord-to my surprise-I discov­
ered Christianity. It was the intellectually most exhilarating and spiritually 
stimulating thing I could ever hope to describe-better even than chem­
istry, a wonderful subject that I had thought to be the love of my life and 
my future career. I went on to gain a doctorate ror research in molecular 
biophysics from Oxrord, and round that immensely exciting and satisfying. 
But I knew I had round something better-like the pearl of great price 
that Jesus talks about in the Gospel, which is so beautiful and precious 
that it overshadows everything. It was intellectually satisfying, imaginatively 
engaging, and aesthetically exciting. So I guess I became dim. 
But this discovery raised questions ror me. I had been taught that sci­
ence disproved God. That all good scientists were atheists. That science 
was good, religion evil. It was a hopelessly simplified binary opposition, 
not unlike George Orwell, in Animal Farm: Four legs good, two legs bad. 
But it suited me just fine then. 
Yet my newfbund Christian faith brought a new sense of fulfillment 
and appreciation to my studies and later my research in the natural sci­
ences. I saw nature as charged with the grandeur and majesty of God. 

28 
THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM 
To engage with nature was to gain a deeper appreciation of the divine 
wisdom. I gave up the sciences to read theology, but I still love the sciences, 
and rollow the literature, especially in evolutionary biology. And above all, 
I have a passion ror relating Christian theology to the natural sciences. 
Hence, my presence tonight. 
The first point that got me nodding my head in agreement comes 
very early in the book. People sometimes feel very defensive about religion. 
Religious people often get extremely defensive when challenged about the 
basis of their beliefs, which hinders any serious debate about the nature of 
their faith. I know what he means. The issue, I suspect, is that a challenge 
to faith often threatens to pull the rug from under the values and beliefs 
that have sustained someone's lik. But this is a general problem with any 
significant worldview, not just a religion. 
Since the publication of my book Dawkins' God in 2004, I am regularly 
asked to speak on its themes throughout the world. In these lectures, I set 
out Richard Dawkins's views on religion, and then give an evidence-based 
rebuttal, point by point. 
After one such lecture, I was confronted by a very angry young man. 
The lecture had not been particularly remarkable. I had simply demon­
strated, by rigorous use of scientific, historical, and philosophical argu­
ments, that Dawkins's intellectual case against God didn't stand up to 
critical examination. But this man was angry-in fact, I would say he was 
furious. Why? Because, he told me, wagging his finger agitatedly at me, I 
had "destroyed his faith." His atheism rested on the authority of Richard 
Dawkins, and I had totally undermined his faith. He would have to go away 
and rethink everything. How dare I do such a thing! 
As I reflected on this event while driving home afterwards, I round 
myself in two minds about this. Part of me regretted the enormous incon­
venience that I had clearly caused this person. I had thrown the settled 
assumptions of his lite into turmoil. Yet I consoled myself with the thought 
that, if he was unwise enough to base his lite on the clearly inadequate 
worldview set out by Dawkins, then he would have to realize someday that 
it rested on decidedly shaky roundations. The dispelling of the delusion 
had to happen sometime. I just happened to be the historical accident 
that made it happen at that time and place. 
Now I do not intend to imply that the very weak arguments I find in 
Dawkins's works recur in Dennett's. Let me put on record my belief that 
Breaking the Spell is a well-argued, thoughtful, and interesting work, which 
shows no signs of the rambling and ranting I kar I find, fur example, in 
Dawkins's The God Delusion. Dennett is right-beliefs are critical. We base 
our lives upon them; they shape our decisions about the most fundamental 
things. I can still remember the turbulence that I round myself experienc­
ing on making the intellectually painful (yet rewarding) transition from 

THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
29 
atheism to Christianity. Every part of my mental furniture had to be rear­
ranged. Dennett is correct-unquestionably correct-when he demands 
that we examine our beliefs-especially if we are naive enough to think 
that we don't have any in the first place. 
So how, I wondered, would Dennett clarify the distinction between a 
worldview and a religion? The dividing line is notoriously imprecise, and, 
many would say, is constructed by those with vested interests to defend. 
Here I must confess some puzzlement. In Breaking the Spell, Dennett tells 
us that "a religion without God or gods is like a vertebrate without a back­
bone." 12 Now if I were leading a sixth tOrm discussion 13 about how to define 
religion, this would be the first definition to be considered-and the first 
to be rejected, precisely because it is so inadequate. What about nonthe­
istic religions? \ertebrates fly definition have backbones. The concept of 
religion simply does not entail God. 
So why this unworkable definition? I initially thought that it was 
because Dennett seems to have American Protestant fundamentalism in 
his gunsights. (This is, if I might say so, a very American book.) After I 
had finished the book, I could see why he took this line. Dennett wants to 
explain religion in terms of evolutionary theory. The existence of God is, 
he asserts, a fantasy that once carried some kind of survival advantages. So 
religions that don't believe in God don't really fit the bill. 
I have to say that I was simply not persuaded by his account of what 
religion is, which most religious people will regard as unrecognizable. Per­
haps it tells us a lot about what leading figures in America's political and 
intellectual left think about religion, which is a rather different matter. 
So let me turn now to what I think is the most interesting aspect of this 
book-its appeal to science. This is an area that excites me, and Dennett's 
earlier book Darwin s Dangerous Idea shows that he has mastered some of 
the intellectual issues that he needs to address in this book. Dennett sug­
gests that that there is some kind of taboo against the scientific study of 
religion. The historian of ideas within me was puzzled by this, in that this 
has been going on-at least in Europe-since about 1780, with the emer­
gence of comparative mythology. But it's good to welcome a newcomer to 
the conversation. 
I would place Dennett in the broad tradition of naturalist explana­
tion of religion, which includes Ludwig Feuerbach, Karl Marx, and Sig­
mund Freud. Whatever the benefits of religions, Dennett and these writers 
believe that they arise entirely inside human minds. No spiritual realities 
exist outside us. Natural explanations may be given of the origins of belief 
in God. Now I hesitate to mention this, but this is clearly a rather circular 
argument, which presupposes its conclusions. 
So what models does Dennett propose tOr the origins of faith in God? 
I was delighted to find a rich range of explanatory approaches in this 

30 
THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM 
book. I read the first-the "sweet tooth" theory. On this approach, just as 
we have evolved a receptor system tor sweet things, so in a similar way we 
might have a "god center" in our brains. Such a center might depend on a 
"mystical gene" that was favored by natural selection because people with 
it tend to survive better. 
Just a moment, I thought. Where's the science? What's the evidence 
tor this? Instead, I round mights and maybes, speculation and supposition, 
instead of the rigorous evidence-driven and evidence-based arguments that 
I love and respect. These theories are evidence-free and wildly speculative. 
We are told, tor example, that-I quote from the jacket blurb-religious 
"ideas could have spread from individual superstitions via shamanism 
and the early 'wild' strains of religion." There's no credible evidence fur 
this. There's no serious attempt to engage with the history of religions. It 
reminds me of those TV ads, "This could help you lose weight as part of a 
calorie-controlled diet." CouUL The TV ad writers would love to be able to 
say their product was "clinically proven" to do these things. But they can't. 
There's no evidence. 
Now I wish I had time to engage with each of the major models that I 
noted in working through this book. Sadly, I do not have time. I thererore 
propose to deal with what I consider to be the strongest of these models in 
detail. This is the "meme" -a hypothetical cultural or intellectual replica­
tor. On this model, religions might be memes that infect our brains. They 
are not necessarily parasitic, but could be symbiotic, conferring advantages 
on those who are infected. It's an idea that Dennett put furward back in 
Darwin s Dangerous Idea, and needs exploration. So let's do that. 
Is belief in God a meme? It's an idea that Dawkins floated back in 
1976, and it lingers to this day. When I first came across the idea of the 
meme back in 1977, I was excited by it. I was beginning my career as an 
intellectual historian, fascinated by cultural development and the history 
of ideas. I thought that Dawkins's idea of the meme might explain some 
things far better than other models. And I know that others felt the same. 
Yet as I-and those others-began to check this idea out, we began to 
realize it just didn't work. 14 I abandoned the concept as unworkable about 
ten years later, after detailed work on intellectual developments in the 
Renaissance. 
But the real problems lie deeper than this. First, the meme is just an 
hypothesis-one that we don't need, as there are better models available, 
ror example, in economics, but also in anthropology. If genes could not 
be seen, we would have to invent them-the evidence demands a biologi­
cally transmitted genetic replicator. Memes can't be observed, and the evidence 
can be explained perfectly well without them. As Maurice Bloch, professor of 
anthropology at the London School of Economics, commented recently, 
the "exasperated reaction of many anthropologists to the general idea of 

THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
31 
memes" reflects the apparent ignorance of the proponents of the meme­
hypothesis regarding the discipline of anthropology, and its major suc­
cesses in the explanation of cultural development-without feeling the 
need to develop anything like the idea of a "meme" at aII.15 
And what about the cognitive model that underlies the meme? I would 
welcome some clarification here, as it seems to me that Dennett seems 
to buy into Dawkins's curious idea, set out in 1976, of memes "leaping 
from brain to brain." This seems to posit cognition as an essentially passive 
reception of these memes. But cognition is an active process. 
Anyway, has anyone actually seen these things, whether leaping from 
brain to brain, or just hanging out? The issue, it must be noted, has noth­
ing to do with religion. It is whether the meme can be considered to be a 
viable scientific hypothesis, when there is no clear operational definition 
of a meme, no testable model fur how memes influence culture and why 
standard selection models are not adequate, a general tendency to ignore 
the sophisticated social science models of infurmation transfer already in 
place, and a high degree of circularity in the explanation of the power of 
memes. 
At this stage, the issue is simply whether memes exist, irrespective of 
their implications fur religion. I say, and most active scientists say with me, 
that there is no evidence fur these things. As Simon Conway Morris, profes­
sor of evolutionary paleobiology at Cambridge, points out, memes seem to 
have no place in serious scientific reflection. "Memes are trivial, to be ban­
ished by simple mental exercises. In any wider context, they are hopelessly, 
if not hilariously, simplistic."16 Now maybe Simon is playfully overstating 
things here, just like Dawkins does in The God Delusion. (Sure, it's naughty, 
but it makes fur much more interesting reading.) But I cannot help but 
note that Conway Morris represents the majority report within the scien­
tists I hang out with at Oxfurd. 
I was slightly puzzled that the arguments of such leading critics of 
memetics were not identified and confronted, point by point. This book, 
in my view, makes a critique of religion dependent on a hypothetical, 
unobserved entity, which can be dispensed with in order to make sense 
of what we observe. Isn't that actually a core atheist critique of God-an 
unobserved hypothesis that can be dispensed with easily? The evidence 
fur belief in God is far better, in my view, than the evidence fur belief in 
memes. 
If I were an atheist, wanting to commend atheism to others on account 
of its intellectual excellence, I would drop this memetic approach, which 
merely weakens the case for atheism, and head back to the safer territory 
of Marxist dialectical reading of history, which is, in my view, much more 
intellectually rigorous and evidence-driven. But far be it from me, as a 
lapsed atheist, to tell those of you who still believe how to do your job. 

32 
THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM 
Anyway, what do memes do? Dennett tells us that they spread beliefs­
like beliefs in God. So are all beliefs spread by memes? Or just the ones that 
anti-religious critics don't like? Is there a meme 10r atheism? Dennett's 
"Simple Taxonomy"17 certainly suggests so. And since there is no compel­
ling scientific evidence tor these things, are we to conclude that there is a 
meme ror believing in memes?18 
This is certainly a problem 10r the originator of this notion, Rich­
ard Dawkins. As many of you will know, Dawkins makes an unsuccessful 
attempt to evade the trap of self-rererentiality by saying that his own ideas 
are different. God is caused by memes; atheism is not. Anyone familiar with 
intellectual history will spot the pattern immediately. My ideas are exempt 
from the general patterns I identify ror other ideas, which allows me to 
explain them away. My rear is that Dennett has fallen victim to this same 
weakness. So let me ask this question once more: Is it just belief in God 
that is a meme? Surely atheism is as well. And if it is, we seem to end up in the 
epistemological quagmire in which all theories, worldviews, and beliefs are 
determined by these mysterious biological drivers. 
But the real question is this: How could Dennett and I be able to settle 
this point scientifically? If we are not able to do so, then we have a nonsci­
entific debate about imaginary entities, hypothesized by analogy with the 
gene. And we all know how unreliable arguments based on analogy can 
be-witness the fruitless search 10r the luminiferous ether in the late nine­
teenth century, based on the supposed analogy between light and sound. 
That's why the Michelson-Morley experiment was so important-it showed 
that there was no evidence 10r this so-called "ether." It was analogically 
plausible-but nonexistent. Michelson and Morley exposed that analogy 
as invalid, however attractive or plausible it may have seemed to many at 
the time. Dawkins tells us that memes are merely awaiting their Crick and 
W:ttson, meaning that the clarification of their structure and mechanism 
is just around the corner.19 I think they are merely waiting 10r their Michel­
son and Morley to deliver the final deathblow to an unsatisfactory and 
unnecessary theory, of questionable relevance to our debate about God. 
Moving on, I was glad to see that Dennett and I share so much in 
common. We both love democracy, freedom, science, and lots of other 
good things. We both also abhor violence and oppression. Proressor Den­
nett argued that religion has on occasion encouraged both of those. I 
agree. That's a fact of history. Yet I have to say that I searched in vain in 
Breaking the 8pell 10r a mention of either Lenin or Stalin, each of whom 
launched violent programs of repression based on their atheist worldviews 
against Christianity and Islam. That's a fact of history as well. 
Now, Dennett might respond by saying that these are not typical of 
atheism. In fairness, I believe he would be right to do so. But neither, in 
equal fairness, are the excesses of violence and intolerance that he does 

THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
33 
mention typical of religion. I appreciate the need fur a bit of rhetoric and 
exaggeration to spice up an argument, and have to confess that I do it 
myself every now and then. But one cannot represent the pathological ele­
ments of any movement-religious or anti-religious-as if they were normal 
or typical Few of us in this audience tonight are in favor of fanaticism; 
but it is clearly perfectly possible to be a fanatical atheist, as much as a 
fanatical religionist. It's fanaticism that's the problem here, not religion or 
anti-religion. In Oxfurd at this moment, we are facing a threat from one of 
the most fanatical groups in British society today: animal rights protestors. 
They are not religious. They are driven by an ideology-by a worldview. 
Surely our common enemy is the fanatic, first and furemost. We need to 
reflect on how to control this phenomenon. But it is a clear factual error 
to assume that this is limited to, or necessarily characteristic of, religion. 
Our topic tonight is the future of atheism, and I fear that I have only 
begun to scratch the surface of this matter. So I will end by raising a ques­
tion that I believe to be important. Is science going to sort out the God 
question fur us? I'm sure that at least some of you here tonight remember 
early episodes of Star Trek. Classic Trek episodes from the period 1966-
1969 were strongly influenced by the humanist philosophy of their cre­
ator, Gene Roddenberry. As Roddenberry made clear in a 1991 interview 
with Humanist magazine, religion was simply "nonsense-largely magical, 
superstitious things." Early Trek episodes were saturated with an ethos of 
the excellence of science, the triumph of logic, and the inevitability of 
progress. Religion was one of the evils of the past-along with poverty, 
prejudice, and war-that progress would leave behind. Religious beliefs 
were to be expected among the primitive alien societies favored by a visit 
from the crew of the starship Enterprise. But there could be no question of 
these enlightened and thoroughly modem progressives themselves hold­
ing such beliefs. Religion was best left to the savages of the more backward 
parts of the galaxy. 
The beginnings of an answer are to be fuund in a wise book written 
back in 1984 by Sir Peter Medawar, who won the Nobel Prize fur Medicine 
fur his work on immunobiology. In The Limits of Science, Medawar reflected 
on how science, despite being "the most successful enterprise human 
beings have ever engaged upon," had limits to its scope. Science is superb 
when it comes to showing that the chemical furmula fur water is H20. Or, 
more significantly, that DNA has a double helix. 
But what of that greater question: What's life all about? This and others 
like it, Medawar insisted, were "questions that science cannot answer, and 
that no conceivable advance of science would empower it to answer. "20 
They could not be dismissed as "nonquestions or pseudoquestions such as 
only simpletons ask and only charlatans profess to be able to answer. "21 This 
is not to criticize science, but simply to calibrate its capacities. Medawar's 

34 
THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM 
point is that science is excellent when it comes to exploring the relation­
ships between various aspects of the material universe. But when it comes 
to questions of meaning or value, it doesn 't really get us very far. It's not 
a controversial point. For example, Dawkins made a very similar point 
recently, in emphasizing that "science has no methods fur deciding what 
is ethical. "22 
This deft analysis by a self-confessed rationalist, who had little time fur 
religion in his own life, casts light on why scientists hold such a variety of 
religious beliefs. It makes it clear that scientists are intellectually and mor­
ally free to believe (or disbelieve) in God, while at the same time challeng­
ing religions to take the findings of science seriously. It also shows that it 
makes little sense to talk about "proof' of a worldview, whether Christian 
or atheist. In the end, as Gilbert Harman pointed out decades ago, the 
real question is which offers the "best explanation" of things. And as there 
is no general agreement on how to decide which of these explanations is 
the "best," the argument seems certain to run on and on.23 
Christians will argue that their worldview represents a superb way of 
making sense of things, while accepting that this, like its atheist counter­
parts, is open to challenge by skeptics. "I believe in Christianity as I believe 
that the Sun has risen-not only because I see it, but because by it, I see 
everything else," as C. S. Lewis famously said.24 Christians know that they 
can't prove that God is there, any more than an atheist can prove that 
there is no God. The simple fact is that all of us, whether Christians or 
atheists, base our lives on at least some fundamental beliefs that we know 
we cannot prove, but nevertheless believe to be reliable and significant-in 
short, to be the best explanation of this highly complex undertaking and 
mystery that we call "life." 
But that just opens up another question-how on earth can we 
verify a worldview? But I have run out of time! I'm sure we'll come back 
to this one! 
A Dialogue 
Daniel Dennett and Alister McGrath 
DENNETT: Thanks, Alister, fur very eloquent and interesting comments, 
and as you pointed out, there's a great deal that we agree about. I'm going 
to respond to some of the challenges-the ones that struck me as the most 
important. Maybe I'll leave something out, and then if there is something 
you want me to respond to particularly, I will. 
One of the first things that Alister mentioned was my definition-my 
working definition-of religion as involving belief in a supernatural agent. 
He quoted my line, ')\ religion without a supernatural agent is like a ver­
tebrate without a backbone." Now, when I introduced that, I said, "This is 

THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
35 
just a working definition." I have to start somewhere, and this strikes me 
as the most central feature of religions through the ages, that they have 
believed in gods. Now, there are religions that apparently do not believe 
in gods or, if they believe in gods, the gods that they believe in are so dif­
ferent that a lot of people wouldn't call them gods. And what are those? 
Well, they're ronner religions. Or maybe they're honorary vertebrates. 
Now what's an honorary vertebrate? Well, in Great Britain, a vertebrate is 
where they draw the line on the law. You can throw an invertebrate on a 
hot grill. You can stomp on an invertebrate. You can do whatever you want 
to an invertebrate. They have no rights at all. You can eat a live oyster. But 
vertebrates are protected under the law; you can't do whatever you want 
with a live vertebrate. This gets a bit into the question about animal rights. 
The British make one exception, and I think it's a very wise one. They 
have one category of honorary vertebrates: the octopus! Just one species, 
Octopus vulgaris, a mollusk with a large head and prehensile tentacles-­
basically a smart clam, and it is protected by law even though it's not a 
vertebrate because it's so much like the vertebrates in so many ways. So it 
doesn't matter too much where we draw the line. We can have things that 
are so much like religions that we'll call them religions because they, in 
some sense, deserve to be called religions. I particularly want to resist Alis­
ter's request, but I can't resist quoting him, though: "What is the essence 
of religion?" What Darwin showed us is that essentialism is a mistake. Don't 
ever ask tor the essence of something because essence is something that's 
just pre-Darwinian thinking. So if we look at the history of the evolution 
of religion we see a gradual transition of phenomena. That's not religion; 
that's just superstition. That's not religion; that's just witch doctoring. And 
then, well, that's a religion. And then, that's obviously a religion. And then 
you have things which, well, they're not quite religions anymore, or maybe 
they're religions because they have the legal status of religion-a good 
reason to hang onto the tenn. Scientology is a religion because it says 
it's a religion, and it gets a tremendous tax break thereby. It's an honor­
ary vertebrate. So the issue has some real practical consequences, but not 
theoretical ones. In my book, I say that it doesn't make a difrerence where 
I draw the line, because I'm going to be looking at both sides of the line 
in any case, because I don't just have to explain the religions, I have to 
explain the sort-of-religions and the used-to-be-religions and the quasi­
proto-religions, too. If you're going to do the scientific study, you have to 
study all of them. 
Alister suggested that I was begging the question with my naturalism 
by ignoring the prospect or starting with the assumption that I was going 
to give a natural explanation of all religious phenomena. That's the sub­
title of my book: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon. The emphasis is upon 
natural as opposed to supernatural phenomena. Now, I want to point out to 

36 
THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM 
you that there's nothing illogical or circular in this. This is in fact not just 
the standard scientific method, it's the standard method of, ror instance, 
the Catholic Church. When somebody is up ror sainthood, what do they 
do? They appoint a devil's advocate. This is the person who is supposed to 
take the other side and say, "No, no, no miracles here. No miracles here!" 
That's just the method of finding truth. You start with the assumption of 
no miracles, of nothing supernatural, and then you try to explain certain 
phenomena naturally. If you can't explain something, if you're left with 
a silly grin on your face and the frank admission that you can't explain 
it, only then do you have any evidence for the supernatural. Now, if you 
believe in the supernatural but you recognize that it hasn't been proven, 
you should go with my method, because that's the only way it will ever 
be proved. The only way anybody will ever prove religions are not a natu­
ral phenomenon is by trying to prove that they are natural phenomena 
and failing. If there are some aspects of religious phenomena that this 
naturalistic approach is utterly baffled by, then that will be a skyhook, a 
miracle; that will be something that is real evidence ror the supernatural. 
So there's nothing biased or out of place or illogical in my starting with the 
assumption that all religious phenomena can be explained naturalistically. 
I haven't done it yet, but that's the quest. 
I'm really pleased that Alister rocuses on memes as what he thinks of 
as the weak point of my book, because I think it's, in fact, the strong point 
and that Alister's skepticism about memes is seriously misguided. First of 
all, he doubts the very existence of memes. I want just to check and see 
how obvious this is to some people. I'm going to ask you, how many of 
you believe in unicorns? Nobody. How many of you believe in atoms? How 
many of you believe in words? How many of you don't believe in words, 
you don't think words exist? Words are memes. \\brds are memes that can 
be pronounced. They're passed by copying; they spread; they have histo­
ries; and they've evolved. The (English) world table and the French word 
table both evolved from the Latin word tabula. We know the history of the 
evolution of these words. We know that it wasn't deliberate. We know it 
wasn't planned, and we know that it happened by differential replication 
of words. Words are memes. If you're baffled about whether memes exist, 
just ask yourself if words exist. If you think words exist, then the case ror 
memes is pretty clear. 
Now, what about the scientific case, though? Well, we have some sci­
ences of words. We have linguistics-both historical and theoretical. And 
so, it's quite possible to do science with those memes at least, but maybe 
not memetic science. It's still an open question just how much memetic 
science is going to prove useful. But he mentions two, he thinks, eminent 
critics: Maurice Bloch, the anthropologist, and Simon Conway Morris, 
the evolutionary paleontologist. He's right. I don't mention them in my 

THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
37 
book, because I don't think they're serious critics. They're opposed, but 
that is not enough. Maurice Bloch is certainly haughty in his dismissal of 
memes but he doesn't actually offer any arguments against them. Now, 
I do include in my book responses to all the good criticisms that I know 
of from such anthropologists as Dan Sperber and Scott Atran and some 
biologists, too. And if you're really pretty sure that the concept of memes 
is scientifically disreputable, which is the suggestion that Alister gives you, 
I'd just like to point out to you that the Encyc!,opedia of Evolutiorr-the two­
volume encyclopedia published by Oxford University Press-has a chapter 
called "The New Replicators" about memes, which I wrote-peer-reviewed 
by evolutionary biologists. This is the encyclopedia of evolutionary biology, 
and I include the chapter as an appendix in my book. So I really do take 
memes seriously scientifically. There's a lot of good evidence, and in fact, 
there's more good work just since I've written my book. There are new 
articles by evolutionary biologist David Haig, and by philosopher of biol­
ogy Kim Sterelny, who has authored a wonderful new piece called "Memes 
Reconsidered." There's new work by cultural anthropologists Peter Rich­
erson and Robert Boyd.25 There's a lot of work on memes, finally. It's taken 
a few years. It's been thirty-one years since Dawkins published The Selfish 
Gene, but the idea of memes is being taken more and more seriously by the 
relevant sciences all the time. That doesn't mean it's yet established, but it 
means that it's in pretty good shape. 
One more point, and then I'm going to turn it over to Alister. ls athe­
ism a meme? Of course it's a meme. And so is science. I mean, it's not 
as if memes are just the irrational, bad ideas. I don't know where Alister 
gets this. He's pushing on an open door here. Memes are infurmation 
packets that replicate whether they are true or false, sane or ridiculous, 
benign or toxic. The memes of calculus, you will notice, do not travel very 
well. They are domesticated. I don't know about you, but I've never fuund 
myself walking down the street thinking, "I just can't get those second 
differentials out of my head!" Unlike, say, a popular tune, or an advertis­
ing jingle, some memes only reproduce with eflOrt. They really depend 
on their stewards; others we can't get out of our heads. Peter Medawar 
says that science can't answer deep, important, ultimate questions about 
meaning, and he's right; I agree. That's why there's philosophy. We pick 
up where science leaves off. My definition of philosophy is, "That's what 
you're doing when you don't even know what the right questions are." 
Once you know what the right questions are, then you can turn them into 
scientific questions. And in fact, that's why it was a philosopher who wrote 
Breaking the Spell I'm trying to sort out the questions to help turn it into 
science. Alister's right. There's a lot of speculation. There are claims and 
hypotheses put furward without much evidence. And I say these are just 
a sketch, composed because I want people to see what a scientific theory 

38 
THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM 
of religion would look like. I want to give people something to fix. This is 
the best we can do now. Notice how the pieces work. Notice what we don't 
know yet. I'm trying to help people see which questions we need to answer 
next so that we can do a proper scientific study of religion. And I think we 
can do it. And I think, actually, that Alister agrees. And I agree with him 
that I don't do it in the book. It is not a book triumphantly announcing 
the results of a scientific theory of religion. It is a book saying, "Let's try 
to create a good scientific explanation of religion. Here are some of the 
problems. Here are some of the questions we can answer; here are some of 
the questions we can't. 
n 
He's particularly concerned with my suggestions about whether there 
might be a gene involved in making our response to say, shamanic ritual, 
more prevalent. This is actually a very nice scientific idea because it's paral­
lel to ideas we have now confirmed. How many of you are lactose intoler­
ant, you get sick to your stomach if you drink raw milk? Most of you are 
lactose tolerant. That makes you remarkably unlike other mammals. We're 
the only mammal that is lactose tolerant in adulthood after weaning. In 
general, mammals can only digest milk when they're babies. We know the 
genetics involved. We know how human beings who are lactose tolerant­
like most of us who can eat ice cream, whipped cream, milk, and so fi:>rth­
can eat this without getting ill. We know which genes have adjusted to 
create the proteins that permit Iactase, which is the enzyme involved, to 
be expressed in adulthood. We also know that this was a genetic response 
to a culturally transmitted practice of dairy herding, and that people who 
are not lactose tolerant are descendants of people that did not have dairy 
herding in their cultures. That's a slight oversimplification, but it's good 
hard science and it's well done. Could we do something similar with regard 
to the apparently wide variability and susceptibility to ritual? For some 
people, ritual really makes their hair stand on end; it gives them the hee­
biejeebies; and it fills them with joy and love. Other people have a sort of 
tin ear ror ritual; you may have noticed this. Could there be a genetic basis 
ror this? There could. Do we know yet? No. Can we find out? Yes. And if we 
find it, we will probably find the areas of the brain involved. (Dean Hamer 
thinks he's round them; I don't think he has, but he's written about this in 
The God Gene.) lfwe find the areas in the brain, and the neuromodulators, 
that are responsible ror this difference, then we will have a question that 
needs answering, and that is, Why are there these difrerences? Why are 
there some people deeply moved by ritual and other people not? We can 
get to the bottom of these questions. I do not purport to prove what the 
answers are, but I think I've articulated the questions quite clearly. 
McGRATH: Well, thank you very much, Dan. Let me begin by saying how 
much I appreciate not only the questions Dan has raised but also the very 

THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
39 
gracious way in which he has put them. So I had some questions that I was 
going to ask him, but they all seem to have been raised by Dan himself. I'll 
respond directly to him, which will make it more interesting fur you, but 
also it means we will have a genuine dialogue. 
The first point is, "What is religion?" I think Dan's point is good. He 
wants a "working definition" that can be more finely tuned as he goes 
along. The point that I was trying to make, though, is that this is extremely 
difficult to do. And the real difficulty is that there is a barrier, a dividing 
line, between what I'm going to loosely call a "religion" and a "worldview." 
Actually, it's difficult to make that distinction rigorously. And the difficulty 
is that sometimes people import preconceptions about what distinguishes 
a "religion" from the larger category of "worldview." Now, Dan has made 
some very kind comments about the United Kingdom; let me make one 
that may not enhance his esteem which he holds in my Kingdom. During 
the 1970s, some sectors of British religious education stipulated that athe­
ism should be studied as a religion. Now, many protested about that, argu­
ing that it was clearly not a religion. But those responsible fur the decision 
said, "Look, it seems to have a creed; it seems to have a set of ethical values 
that derive from that; there seems to be some practices. Therefure, opera­
tionally, in terms of how it functions, it seems to be a religion." Now, I think 
they were wrong, and I think maybe you think they were wrong as well. But 
it's interesting how for some people, atheism paradoxically could almost 
be treated in that way. Now, I think that was a wrong adjudication on their 
part, but it does emphasize this important point of definition. So what 
is religion? Well, I earlier used the word essence. Dan rightly raised some 
objections to that. But it's still fair to ask, What is it that makes a religion 
a religion? My point is that this is a very difficult and somewhat subjective 
judgment. And it does raise some questions for Dan's use of the meme 
elsewhere. If I could just give one very obvious example, is the essence of 
religion "belief in God" or "religiosity"? Is it something cognitive or is it 
something behavioral? Those of you who know different kinds of religious 
people will be aware that this is actually quite a significant issue. For exam­
ple, I am an evangelical Protestant, which means that for me, the ritualistic 
side of things has relatively little importance. But to others. as Dan was 
saying, it matters quite a lot. Therefore, if one is going to try and develop 
a memetic approach, there is a perfectly fair question here as to whether 
the religion meme has to do with belief in God, or certain patterns of 
behavior. And that seems to me to be an important point which really does 
need to be fullowed through. I think there is a very good case to be made 
for the evolution of human culture, of which religion is a part, and above 
all-and I think this is where I value Dan's work-the cultural shaping of 
religion. Yet again, this rests on some very difficult discriminations. When 
does something stop being "cultural" and start being "religious"? There is 

40 
1HE FUTURE OF ATHEISM 
a really interesting issue here ror me as a theologian-the extent to which 
various furms of Christianity are shaped by their cultural context. I think 
this may be an area in which Dan's approach is helpful. There's a serious 
issue here if you're a theologian, because one of the big problems is that 
sometimes Christianity morphs into its c:ulture and has to be (I don't know 
what the opposite is) "unmorphed" to try to recover its identity, which is 
what you see, fur example, in the Protestant Refurmation of the sixteenth 
century. So I think there's a very interesting issue there indeed. 
And so we come back to memes again. Dan is right, there are many 
who still support the idea of memes in some way or another, and therefure 
you could argue dearly that this is an idea which has survival potential. And 
certainly, Dan has given us some very interesting, illuminating examples: 
words, ideas, and others. I also believe in the power of words and ideas, but 
I don't reel the need to generate a portmanteau concept called a meme 
to embrace them. I think one can manage perfectly well without it. There 
is dearly a difference of opinion between us here, as indeed there is in the 
broader scientific community. In the end, one of the key scientific criteria 
is whether taking this away renders things unintelligible. Is this hypothesis 
necessary? My reeling is, it is not. And, therefure, I'm just nervous that as 
I read Dan, he seems to place a lot of weight on this. I think the research 
program he suggests we explore is actually a very, very good one, and I cer­
tainly would want to encourage that. One of the things that really interests 
me is why different people respond in different ways. And in a point that 
is maybe more psychological than cultural, why it is, ror example, that in 
different furms of worship, different people find different modes of worship 
elicit a different response. That's a very interesting question and I think it 
may well be a question about human nature that needs to be explored. So 
I think there is potentially a very interesting line of arguments here. 
Our conrerence is called "The Future of Atheism," and so I find myself 
asking how Dan's approach helps evaluate the future of atheism. So I'm 
going to reflect back, if I may, some ideas just to take us on a little further 
befure our time of questions. And certainly, Dan said (and I think that's 
entirely consistent with what I've read in his book Breaking the Spelf) ,  that 
atheism is a furm of a meme, if indeed you believe in memes. And so, 
if there are memes (now obviously, I'm stepping over to his position fur 
a moment) then, yes, atheism is one of them, and I'm sure you're right 
about that. I find that interesting because if Richard Dawkins was stand­
ing here and if I've understood him correctly, I think his view would be 
that belief in God is a meme whereas the belief that there is not a god is 
so self-evidently true that it doesn't actually require memetic explanation. 
So if atheism, religion, and belief in God and so on are all memes, where 
does this take us in terms of considering what the future of atheism may 
be? Dan made a point that I think is very true. Maybe science isn't going 

THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
41 
to give us the answers there. Maybe we do come back to philosophy-and 
in saying that I'm not in any way degrading or devaluing the sciences. I'm 
simply saying that there are questions that science generally has difficulty 
with. It may clarify many points by helping us understand how the human 
condition works, but in the end it doesn't tell us what's right and what's 
wrong. And therefure, I find myself in agreement with him that we need 
something over and above the sciences which might help us make these 
adjudications, some of which are philosophical, some of which are ethical, 
and some of which are also religious. Science may help us clarify things, 
but in the end, we have to go somewhere else to find those "big answers." 
And while Dan and I think we'll probably disagree about what that source 
might be, I think nevertheless that the general point is fair. Recognizing 
that there are general limits to science does not leave us defenseless or 
without any guidance, it simply means that we realistically and rightly 
begin to look somewhere else, but hoping that the science will help us as 
we try and wrestle with that. So I find Dan a very interesting dialogue part­
ner who has many interesting things to say to us in this context. 
DENNETT: I agree with Alister that the question of what's a religion and what 
is religiosity and what's spirituality and so furth, these are very interesting 
questions, and I talk about them in the book. Of course, on some accounts 
of religiosity or religion, one of the most powerful religions in America is 
the NFL. Well, ror other reasons we might want to rule it out. It certainly 
inspires a sort of passion and devotion and large expenditures of energy. 
We could have a Super Bowl crowd right up there with that crowd in St. 
Peter's Square as something that the Martians would take note of and say, 
"Whoa, this is interesting. I wonder what the explanation of that is." And 
there might be some important similarities between the explanation of the 
NFL religion and other religions. The important thing about memes is not 
whether there is a religion meme or an atheism meme. The interesting 
memes are smaller, more specific ideas. They are, in this regard, like words, 
but more specific words. Let me tell you in response to Alister's skepticism, 
the simple argument that convinces me. I'm going to restrict it here to 
religion, but I could apply the argument to some other topics, too. Mani­
festly, religions are brilliantly designed. They repay attention from reverse 
engineers on many, many levels: the music, the rituals, the creeds, the pro­
hibitions, the size of congregations, the hierarchies. The ones that are suc­
cessful are not successful by accident; they have been beautifully designed to 
do what they do. Now, that's premise one. Premise two: you never get design 
tor free. Some process has to do the designing. If your only two candidates 
are genetic evolution-you know, the "religion gene"-and let's say, clever 
priests, intelligent designers, you are missing a major trick. Many of the 
features of religion are much older than any deliberate redesigner. Yes, we 

42 
THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM 
have the Council of Trent, the Council of Nicaea, \atican II. We have occa­
sions when people sit down and ask very deliberately how best to design 
their religions. And I would guess that something like 5 percent of the evo­
lution we've seen in religion in the last two thousand Њars is due to those 
conscious, deliberate, toresighted, "intelligently designed" decisions. Most 
of the revision-and notice how very difrerent Christianity today is from 
what it was five hundred Њars ago or one hundred Њars ago or certainly 
two thousand Њars ago-most of the change is so gradual and unheralded 
that you cannot find an author of that change. Christianity has changed in 
the Darwinian way, by differential replication of ideas. For that, you need 
the memetic perspective. You also need the memetic perspective because 
you want to be neutral as a scientist among all the possibilities tor who is the 
beneficiary of this replicative process. Is it good tor the host or is it good tor 
the symbiont? If you don't have that role tor the symbiont, you're left having 
to concoct bogus benefits tor the hosts. And believe me, there are theories 
of cultural evolution, theories of religious evolution, that make the mistake 
of not adopting the memetic approach, and then they're left with many 
inexplicable features of religions. They think of cultural evolution as simply 
an adjunct to genetic evolution, where it's basically a matter of parents 
teaching their children things. Instead of passing on the wisdom through 
the genes, they pass it on through early upbringing. Such theories can be 
very good at explaining adaptations that are good tor you, but they can't 
explain all the things that probably aren't good tor you. And they have to 
treat a great deal of cultural difrerence as just noise. Scientifically, it's called 
noise because they can't explain it on their theory. If you have a theory 
which can treat that noise as signal and say there's pattern in here, that's a 
scientific advance. And in order to find that advance, you have to take the 
memetic approach. It's still in its infancy, but it's going somewhere. 
One last point: Alister says he's glad that I agree with him that science 
doesn't give all the answers. Indeed not. He says we have to look somewhere 
else and that we may not agree. I think we can even agree on that if he'll 
agree to one more thing. I would say that where we look when we want to 
answer those deep questions that science doesn't answer, the answer to that 
was tound in that film I showed at the beginning: where we look is to each 
other. We look to the community, to use the old-fashioned word man, to the 
community of human beings. And it's ultimately not just a philosophical 
issue, but in a deep sense, in a nonpejorative sense, it's a political issue. What 
can we, by intorming each other and persuading one another, agree is right? 
Morality has changed a lot in the last two thousand Њars, and in every case, 
it's because people became better intormed and looked around and just 
decided either this act wasn't as bad as we used to think or it's worse than we 
used to think. And they've adjusted their ethical views. Nobody here would 
be comfi:>rtable living under the ethical prohibitions and requirements of 

THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
43 
the Old Testament. Nobody. Now, we the people have worked out in open 
conversation what we think makes the most sense morally. That's not sci­
ence. And if you agree, then there's only one more thing we have to agree 
on that matters here, and that is, when we do that, religious beliefs come 
very much into the fray. And I agree and I welcome them and think there's 
a tremendous amount of wisdom to be round in the texts and traditions of 
religions. If we're going to have a genuinely open furum, we have to agree 
on the rules. And there's one rule I would insist on, and that's, there's one 
card you cannot play, the faith card. The faith card is when you say, well, no, 
we don't talk about that, that's a matter of faith. I'm a Hindu and Hindus 
don't believe that, and that's all there is to it. If you say that-and I talk about 
this in the book-if you play the faith card, if you say, "I am sorry, my religion 
does not permit me to discuss this," you are actually declaring your disability 
fur this political discussion. You are saying, "I am sorry, my mind is closed on 
that. I am not able or I am not willing to give you reasons." Because it's always 
about giving reasons. If you will agree not to play the faith card, then you can 
use all the wisdom in your religious tradition and support it and spread it to 
others and get them to see why that's right. And if you say, "No, no, I have no 
obligation to defend or explain it. It's in the book, and that's it," you're basi­
cally letting your religion down. You're saying, "I can't defend this. I can't 
explain this. I'm just going to take my marbles and leave the game; I'm not 
going to play." Don't play the faith card, but join the conversation. 
McGRATH: To respond very briefly because we need time fur questions. The 
last point is a good point, but if you think Alasdair Macintyre is right in his 
analysis of faith and of tradition-mediated rationalities, then we all reflect 
these, whether we are secular or religious. The important thing is to iden­
tify these and try to make sure that we don't have unacknowledged taboos 
that we bring into the discussion. Some are religious, some are cultural. 
Then you made some interesting point at the beginning about reli­
gions being designed, which I round intriguing. If you look at the way 
certain furms of Christianity have emerged, there is no doubt that they 
are now recognized to have certain benefits that I do not believe were 
recognized at that time at all. I think, therefure, one has to say that if one 
does use the language of design, it has to be used in a very cautious, very 
restrained way. That's a bigger discussion, and I'm afraid that time has 
rather run out. But thank you anyway. 
Questions and Answers 
ROBERT STEWART: You may make your way to the microphones now. I'm very 
confident that due to time restrictions some of you will be left standing at 

44 
THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM 
the microphone. Let's run over the procedure again very quickly: thirty 
seconds to frame your question, make sure your question is a question, and 
after you've asked your question, sit down and let our speakers reply. We 
don't have time for follow-up questions. This will ensure that we allow as 
many questions as possible in the time [ have left. 
KEITH PARSONS: I'd like to address a question to Professor Dennett. I notice 
that you've said that atheism and unbelief is one of the most rapidly grow­
ing of the various worldview positions that you had in your powerpoint 
slide. But how could that be, if indeed religion is a natural phenomenon 
and explicable in scientific/naturalistic terms as you say? It seems to me 
that the number of unbelievers vis-a-vis believers would always be low and 
quite constant. For instance, I would imagine that the number of adult 
human beings who are uninterested in sex is quite small and remains quite 
small by comparison. So how then could it be that the number of unbeliev­
ers as in fact your evidence indicates is growing? Thank you. 
DENNETI: Well, things that are natural are natural because they are main­
tained by differential replication in the conditions that exist. And when 
conditions change, they either go extinct or they evolve. And if the world 
has evolved-think of the difference between the world ten thousand years 
ago and the world now-there's a tremendous difference-and if the con­
ditions in the world today are no longer hospitable fur certain religious 
ideas, then it's not surprising that they don't replicate very well. Either 
they go extinct entirely or they get replaced by others. I think that natu­
ral doesn't mean in everybody. As you say, the love of sex is normal-and 
there is no mystery as to why that should be because its role in reproduc­
tion is quite clear-but aside from things that are that directly related to 
fitness-genetic fitness-we see variation arising in all sorts of ways. And so 
it should not surprise us that there are differences and similarities between 
people when it comes to the religious phenomena that they participate in. 
I don't know if that answers your question. 
QUESTION: I've enjoyed hearing both of you. I have a question. I've always 
been under the understanding that if you have an opinion you need to 
understand the opposing opinion also. It's obvious that both of you do 
this. I have one question, and that is, "ls there a future of atheism?" That 
was what we were here fur. I haven't heard that. And what I'd like to do is 
have you (addressing McGrath) say "No" and answer it emotionally without 
science, memes, or anything. And I'd like you (addressing Dennett) to say 
"Yes" and answer it emotionally. I have not heard emotion from either one 
of you. ( The audience l.aughs.) 

DENNEIT: Emotionally? 
THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
45 
QUESTION: Emotionally. Not scientifically, not statistics, but from emotion 
in your heart. No, there's no future, and yes, there is a future. 
DENNETT: Oh, that's easy. No, there's no future for atheism because we're 
going to destroy the planet before the future arrives. 
McGRATH: I would wickedly say yes, because people don't know a good 
thing when they see it. 
QUESTION: I've been reading your book, Professor Dennett, and I haven't 
quite finished it, but I get the sense that Professor McGrath's question 
about the definition of religion might be there in your book. You seem to 
have a number of phases or stages of religion that you've traced through 
the natural process. Can you speak to the development of religion, is that 
possible as a definition for religion? 
DENNETT: Well, there's a straight-man question. He's invited me to give 
another lecture, but I'm not going to do that. Well, very briefly, before 
there were domesticated religions-when they were just wild religions­
they were just responsive to the design (and perhaps I should use the word 
desig;n very cautiously) of natural selection itself. And indeed, as Alister 
says, features could persist although people had no idea why they were 
good because they weren't even thinking about it. Sometimes people were 
the beneficiaries of them, but they hadn't worked out why. We find these 
things all the time. Then when religions became domesticated, people 
began to meddle. And when they meddled, they had their reasons. And 
although their reasons were often very good reasons, sometimes their rea­
sons were very selfish reasons. And so, just as when the cow was domes­
ticated, some of the things that were adjusted were really not good for 
the cow at all but made life easier for the cowboy or the dairyman or the 
farmer. And similarly, when religions started getting adjusted, very often, 
for instance, it was the good of the priests, for instance, that was really 
being served. And we can trace that. Or it was good for the political rulers 
of the day. Once people started using religion for ulterior motives, all sorts 
of pressures were introduced that simply hadn't been there when religions 
were wild. 
WILLIAM LANE CRAIG: Professor Dennett, as I listened to your opening 
address, it struck me as an attack upon human rationality itself. On the 
view as I understood it, we don't adopt our ideas as a result of free, rational 

46 
THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM 
reflection and adjudication, but acquiring ideas is rather like catching a 
disease. You use the example of the common cold. In which case these are 
ultimately the product of nonrational factors. So my question is, Are you 
a determinist? And second, isn't this then self-defeating since your own 
ideas would then be the result of these arational processes? You've caught 
this disease from Richard Dawkins (audience erupts in laughter) , and as a 
result, you hold to these views. 
DENNETT: Well, first, let me answer your question, Am I determinist? Oh 
yes, I'm a determinist. And I've written two books on free will and deter­
minism and I've tried to show how free will and determinism are com­
pletely compatible. Free will in the sense that you mean, in the sense that 
it shows that we have the power to judge ideas, to evaluate ideas, to choose 
ideas, to make decisions, all of this is compatible with determinism. There 
is no magical exemption from causality in our brains. There is no little part 
of our brains which is somehow undetermined, but that doesn't mean 
that we don't have free will. I know that's a hard idea fur many people 
to understand. That's why I've taken two whole books-Fmedom Evolves­
surprise, surprise, and E/,bow R.oom, which I wrote back in 1 984. Now, if you 
read Origin of Species, (and I hope if you haven't, you will-we atheists read 
the Bible as literature; you should read the Origin of Species as literature. 
It's simply a great read. It's wonderful. He's a brilliant writer.) In the early 
going, he distinguishes three processes. First, he talks a lot about artificial 
selection. He calls it methodical selection. And he points out that all the 
animal breeders-the pigeon fanciers, the dog fanciers, the cattle breed­
ers-are making deliberate, conscious, thoughtful decisions about which 
of their animals they are going to breed. Then he points out as a segue 
that there was an earlier period (and it's still going on in some regards) 
when we had unconscious selection, by which he means people are favoring 
some of the dogs in the litter and not others. They are not trying to do 
anything, it just happens. It's not a rational choice but it leads to selec­
tion. He has some wonderful examples of this-the King Charles spaniel, 
which had grown much larger at the time of his day from what it had been 
in the days of King Charles. And this was not a deliberate process. And 
then there's natural selection. Notice what we have here is the gradual 
diminution of free, rational interference with the process. Eventually, he's 
showing how natural selection can do without the intelligent decision alto­
gether, but in fact, all three processes are instances of natural selection. 
The dachshund is just as much an instance of natural selection as the 
weasel is. It's just that the selection has been focused through the mind of 
a particular evolved biped, namely human beings. And I want to say that 
the same thing is true of memes. There are memes that can only replicate 
by making it through ferocious filters that have been established in the 

THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
4 7 
brains of, let's say, biologists. And if they can't get through those rational 
filters they are not going to be copied or passed on. That's called science. 
Scientific memes have to pass some very big tests of rationality before they 
get passed on. It doesn't mean that they're not memes, but it just means 
that they are memes that have been through the mill of rational evalua­
tion. Then we have memes that are unconsciously selected and we have 
memes that were completely wild-we didn't even know we were doing it. 
So there's no contradiction. And indeed, it's not self-contradictory to say 
that scientific ideas are memes. Did I catch the meme meme from Dawk­
ins? Yes I did. But did I put it through the rational mill before I caught 
it? I'd like to think I did. At least I show some evidence of that in that I 
have now written something like a dozen papers in the last twenty years on 
problems with memetics and whether or not they are soluble. It's rational 
evaluation that's the filter. 
QUESTION: Professor McGrath, in the discussion of Peter Medawar's obvi­
ous statement that there are things that science cannot answer for us­
purpose and meaning-you know, Professor Dennett mentions philosophy 
and you mentioned philosophy, ethics, and religion. And I'm wondering 
if there's kind of like a god of the gaps-science can't do it. Why is reli­
gion in this argument besides the fact that it might be the eight-hundred­
pound gorilla in the room? Thank you. 
McGRATH: Well, I think the first point is just to say that there is wide­
spread agreement that science does have limits. I say that not in any way 
because I'm a critic of science, but because I think it's simply important to 
calibrate it. In other words, if you are using any instrument, the first point 
is to establish the conditions under which it works well. And if it doesn't 
work well under certain conditions, you don't use it there. And I think that 
Medawar is just articulating a generally held consensus, that when science 
works it is very, very good. When it doesn't work it can't be relied upon. 
So the question that you were asking me is, Why should I then move on 
and try to bring religion or belief in God into this? Now, you have some 
American tax benefits here that we don't have in the U.K. but obviously 
it's an important point to make. One of the classic debates which lies unre­
solved but it is still extremely interesting is this-namely, whether there is 
something from which we can infer from looking at the world. I'm going 
to refer to this as God. In other words, we say we observe this, we observe 
this, we observe this, and we draw a conclusion and ultimately in order to 
make sense of what we do observe we posit a god. Now, of course, some 
would rightly want to challenge that. And I'm very open to that. One of the 
key poin ts here is that Christians-and I certainly speak here for myself­
don ' t just simply rush and say, "There's a gap in the argument here, let's 

48 
THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM 
stick God in there." That is not what Christians are saying at all. I think one 
of the key points here is if we look at what science does do, we find that it 
has a remarkable capacity to explain what may be observed. But the key 
point here is that explicability itself requires explanation. John Polking­
home, in a very interesting recent article in Science and &liffi,on published 
in 2005,just makes the point that there are many basic understandings of 
the epistemic virtues. You could make a very good case for saying that God 
is a very good explanation of what we observe in the world and culture and 
human experience. But of course, it could be a challenge. And that's why 
Christians would then begin to want to talk about the whole importance 
of divine revelation, not as a way of weaseling out of intellectual difficul­
ties, but rather as a statement about the kind of God that we believe we 
are involved with. In other words, not a God who leaves us on our own, 
wandering around, but rather tries to make himself known in ways that 
can really transform and transfigure the human experience. So the ques­
tion's point really was that I seemed to be saying that science explains this 
and that it leads to gaps and let's just fill the gaps with God. That certainly 
isn't what I want to do. Maybe some others do. If they do, then I would 
want to critique that. But for me I think a very good rational case could 
be made for arguing that the invocation of God is actually an extremely 
important explanatory agent. Again, if I could just briefly end my response 
with a quote I love from C. S. Lewis. He writes, "I believe in Christianity as 
I believe that the sun has risen. Not just because I see it but because by it I 
see everything else." So he's offering this vision of an intellectual sun that 
illumines the landscape and enables us to make sense of things. 
STEWART: This will be the final question. I'm very sorry that we do not have 
time for more but we do have a book signing, so Dan and Alister will be 
around for you to question. 
QUESTION: Professor Dennett, I just wanted to start by saying that I am 
eagerly anticipating your book on reverse-engineering of atheism. And on 
that line, I would like you to put yourself in the position of a thousand 
years in the future and atheism has grown and it is 90 percent of the popu­
lation. Their goal is to reverse-engineer atheism and explain it. Could you 
take that position? 
DENNETT: I'm sorry, I don't know . . .  
QUESTION: To reverse-engineer atheism? In the same way you reverse­
engineer religion, could you do the same for atheism? 

THE FUTURE OF ATHEISM: A DIALOGUE 
49 
DENNETT: Absolutely. Certainly. We reverse-engineer atheism and we see 
what is it about the tenets of the atheism that you are imagining a thou­
sand years in the future-when atheism goes without saying. And we see 
what is it that convinces people in that day that atheism makes sense. And 
also, what is it about those who are still not atheistic? Have they got some 
special insight, or special experiences, or do they have different genes? 
That is one remote possibility. Certainly. We can reverse-engineer anything 
complex. Now, Alister ended with a quote from C. S. Lewis. I'm going to 
end with a paraphrase-I can't quote it exactly-from my friend and his 
bite noire Richard Dawkins, who points out, we're all atheists about Baal, 
about Thor, about Zoroaster, so some of us just go one god more. 


First published in Great Britain in 2008 
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge 
36 Causton Street 
London SWlP 4ST 
Copyright © Fortress Press 2008 
Original edition published in the United States of America in 2008 
by Fortress Press, an imprint of Augsburg Fortress. 
Al rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. 
SPCK does not necessarily endorse the individual views contained in its publications. 
Scripture quotations are from the New Revised Standard Version, copyright@ 1989, 
1995 by the Division of Christian Education of the National Council of the Churches 
of Christ in the United States of America. Used by permission. Al rights reserved. 
Where indicated otherwise, Scripture quotations are from the Revised Standard Version 
of the Bible, copyright© 1946, 1952, 1971 National Council of Churches of Christ in the 
United States of America. Used by permission. Al rights reserved. 
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
ISBN 978-0-281-06106-8 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 
Printed in Great Britain by Ashford Colour Press 
Produced on paper from sustainable forests 

