Foreword
A smoothly running automobile is one of life’s delights; it enables you to
get where you need to get, on time, with great reliability, and for the most
part, you get there in style, with music playing, air conditioning keeping
you comfortable, and GPS guiding your path. We tend to take cars for
granted in the developed world, treating them as one of life’s constants,
a resource that is always available. We plan our life’s projects with the
assumption that of course a car will be part of our environment. But
when your car breaks down, your life is seriously disrupted. Unless you
are a car buﬀwith technical training you confront your dependence on a
web of tow-truck operators, mechanics, car dealers, and much more. At
some point, you decide to trade in your increasingly unreliable car and
start afresh with a brand new model. Life goes on, with hardly a ripple.
But what about the huge system that makes this all possible: the high-
ways, the oil reﬁneries, the auto makers, the insurance companies, the
banks, the stock market, the government? Our civilization has been run-
ning smoothly—with some serious disruptions—for thousands of years,
growing in complexity and power. Could it break down? Yes, it could,
and to whom could we then turn to help us get back on the road? You
can’t buy a new civilization if yours collapses, so we had better keep the
civilization we have running in good repair. Who, though, are the reliable
mechanics? The politicians, the judges, the bankers, the industrialists,
the journalists, the professors—the leaders of our society, in short, are
much more like the average motorist than you might like to think: doing
their local bit to steer their part of the whole contraption, while blissfully
ignorant of the complexities on which the whole system depends. The
optimistic tunnel vision with which they operate is not, Paul Seabright
argues, a deplorable and correctable ﬂaw in the system but an enabling
condition. The ediﬁces of social construction that shape our lives in so
many regards depend on our myopic conﬁdence that their structure is
sound and needs no attention from us.

xii • Foreword
At one point Seabright compares our civilization with a termite cas-
tle. Both are artifacts, marvels of ingenious design piled on ingenious
design, towering over the supporting terrain, the work of vastly many
individuals acting in concert. Both are thus byproducts of the evolution-
ary processes that created and shaped those individuals, and in both
cases, the design innovations that account for the remarkable resiliency
and eﬃciency observable were not the brainchildren of individuals, but
happy outcomes of the largely unwitting, myopic endeavors of those
individuals, over many generations. But there are profound diﬀerences
as well. Human cooperation is a delicate and remarkable phenomenon,
quite unlike the almost mindless cooperation of termites, and indeed
quite unprecedented in the natural world, a unique feature with a unique
ancestry in evolution.
Much has been written about “the social construction of reality” and
(much better) the “construction of social reality,” but most of it is writ-
ten by thinkers who—like naive car owners—are full of admiration for
the marvel they are describing but haven’t a clue about how this con-
struction actually has taken place, and why the parts intermesh the way
they do. These life-enhancing institutions are made of interacting, inter-
locking systems of beliefs—about what to expect, what not to expect,
what to worry about, what to take for granted, what is possible, and
what is (almost) unthinkable. We tend to take this structure as given, a
permanent fact of life, but it is in fact a quite recent development, bio-
logically speaking, and although it has some remarkable powers of self-
stabilization, it is not as invulnerable as common sense typically sup-
poses. As the biologist D’Arcy Thompson said, many years ago, “every-
thing is the way it is because it got that way,” and the deep idea behind
this truism is that a keen appreciation of the compromises and tensions
that have gone into this largely unwitting construction is a prerequisite
for understanding both the strengths and fragilities of the social vehicle
on which our life as human beings now depends. Seabright constructs
our economic world piece by piece, showing why there is money, and
banks, and ﬁrms, and marketing, and insurance, and government regu-
lation, and poverty, and political insecurity, and also showing how infor-
mation is generated, used, ignored, exploited in this complicated social
fabric.
Like other recent authors, Seabright sees the emergence of cooper-
ation as a truly world-altering phenomenon that requires ultimately a
biological—evolutionary—explanation, but he does not fall into the trap
of Panglossian optimism, as some have done. Cooperation depends, he

Foreword • xiii
argues, on trust, a sort of almost invisible social glue that makes pos-
sible both great and terrible projects, and this trust is not, in fact, a
“natural instinct” hardwired by evolution into our brains. It is much too
recent for that. Rather, it is a byproduct of social conditions that are
at once its enabling condition and its most important product. We have
bootstrapped ourselves into the heady altitudes of modern civilization,
and our natural emotions and other instinctual responses do not always
serve our new circumstances. By reverse engineering these social con-
structions, Seabright exhibits both the source of their power and their
very real and dangerous limitations.
The ﬁrst edition of this book was an eye-opener, an invitation to think
in a new way about our predicament, and this revised edition builds
more explanations on that base, demonstrating the power of the ideas
by applying them to our current economic crises, throwing a particu-
larly powerful light on the tempting mistakes we must avoid if we are
to prevent even more catastrophic future collapses. (For instance, pun-
ishing the crooks and removing the fools from power is only a ﬁrst and
relatively minor part of what needs to be done, since there are systemic
problems that even saints and geniuses could stumble over in the future.)
Like Jared Diamond’s Guns, Germs and Steel, this is a boldly ambi-
tious book, drawing on a breathtaking range of scholarship, from his-
tory and biology and sociology and psychology in addition to economics,
and challenging the blinkered visions of thinkers in all these ﬁelds, while
at the same time making excellent use of the fruits of their researches.
Seabright’s imagination is as powerful as his scholarship, providing fresh
perspectives on just about every page. He has a genius for arresting com-
parisons: how are being wealthy and being ticklish similar, and why are
there driverless trains, but not airplanes? He notes, startlingly, that he
doesn’t have to suppress an urge to kill the waiter and get his meal for
free—which is a temptation that would surely be hard for our cousin
the chimpanzee to resist. This book is the clearest and most persua-
sive demonstration of the power and importance of economic thinking
that I have encountered, and as such it is an ideal primer on economics,
utterly jargon free, with vivid and graceful explanations of all the key
concepts. He punctures popular convictions on almost every page and
elucidates easily misunderstood concepts with graceful examples. He
notes, for instance, that children are, on average, slightly less intelligent
than their parents; but their parents are, on average, slightly more intel-
ligent than their grandparents! How can this be? If this puzzles you, you
haven’t yet seen just how evolution works its inexorable trudge up the

xiv • Foreword
slopes of ﬁtness. He asks questions you never thought of asking, and the
answers are never obvious—except retrospectively.
Think of the termite castle again. We human observers can appreci-
ate its excellence and its complexity in ways that are quite beyond the
nervous systems of its inhabitants. We can also aspire to achieving a
similarly Olympian perspective on our own artifactual world, a feat only
human beings could even imagine. If we don’t succeed, we risk disman-
tling our precious creations in spite of our best intentions. Much of what
we take to be just “common sense” proves to be treacherous, so we need
to rethink the whole thing from ﬁrst principles. That is the task under-
taken by this very important book.
Daniel C. Dennett
Co-Director, Center for Cognitive Studies
Austin B. Fletcher Professor of Philosophy, Tufts University

The Company of Strangers
A N A T U R A L H I S T O R Y O F E C O N O M I C L I F E
R E V I S E D E D I T I O N
Paul Seabright
Foreword by Daniel C. Dennett
p r i n c e t o n u n i v e r s i t y p r e s s
p r i n c e t o n a n d o x f o r d

Copyright © 2010 by Princeton University Press
Published by Princeton University Press,
41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press,
6 Oxford Street, Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 1TW
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Seabright, Paul.
The company of strangers : a natural history of
economic life / Paul Seabright. – rev. ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-691-14646-1 (pb.: alk. paper)
1. Social capital (Sociology). 2. Economics–Sociological aspects.
3. Sociobiology. 4. Strangers. 5. Trust. I. Title.
HM708.S43 2010
306.3–dc22
2009049522
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
This book has been composed in Lucida using TEX
Typeset and copyedited by T&T Productions Ltd, London
Printed on acid-free paper ⃝
∞
press.princeton.edu
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

