Vol.:(0123456789)
Metascience
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11016-019-00450-w
1 3
SYMPOSIUM
Clever evolution
Samir Okasha: Agents and goals in evolution. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2018, xiv + 254pp, £30.00 HB
Daniel C. Dennett1
 
© Springer Nature B.V. 2019
Why and when did “teleology” become a dirty word in biology? I call it a dirty 
word because many think it refers to some forbidden practice which should not even 
be discussed, and by making the practice unmentionable, this opinion prevents us 
from examining it calmly and carefully to see whether or not it is as horrible as it is 
cracked up to be. Marx’s famous verdict about Origin of Species is ambiguous:
Not only is a death blow dealt here for the first time to ‘Teleology’ in the natu-
ral sciences but their rational meaning is empirically explained. (1861)
Does Darwinian evolutionary explanation banish all or vindicate some teleological 
thinking? In From Bacteria to Bach and Back I raised this question and went on to 
observe:
It is of course open to defend an intermediate position that forbids certain tele-
ological excesses but licenses more staid and circumscribed varieties of talk 
about functions, and philosophers have devised a variety of such views. My 
informal sense is that many scientists assume that some such sane middle 
position is in place and must have been adequately defended in some book or 
article that they probably read years ago. So far as I know, however, no such 
consensus classic text exists, and many of the scientists who guiltlessly allude 
to the functions of whatever they are studying still insist that they would never 
commit the sin of teleology. (2017, 34–35)
Samir Okasha’s 2018 book might well become the consensus classic text for biolo-
gists to fall back on when they find themselves unable to resist both function talk 
and agent talk in the course of their inquiries and explanations. It covers the ground 
with admirable clarity, caution and scholarship, delving in detail into the formal 
work by Hamilton, Maynard Smith, Grafen, Trivers and others, while also consider-
ing a wealth of theoretical and empirical research in behavioral ecology, cognitive 
 *	 Daniel C. Dennett 
	
Daniel.Dennett@tufts.edu
1	
Department of Philosophy, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA

	
Metascience
1 3
ethology, economics and psychology. And it concludes with the eminently sane and 
well-supported answer to its primary question, “whether the prevalence of agential 
thinking in evolutionary biology is a reflection of objective biological facts, or of the 
human predilection to anthropomorphise. The answer is ‘a bit of both’” (232).
Not surprisingly, my favorable evaluation of the book is enhanced by Oka-
sha’s insightful treatment of my claim (since 1983) that, since biology is inescap-
ably a matter of reverse-engineering the organisms that evolution has produced, 
it should adopt the intentional stance toward not just organisms, including plants 
and even bacteria, but toward the process of natural selection itself. While abjur-
ing all assumptions about foresight or purpose in natural selection, we should take 
very seriously wise Crick’s wise-crack, “Evolution is cleverer than you are.” Mother 
Nature is competent without comprehension (Dennett 2017), and manages by brute 
force algorithmic trial-and-error to accomplish feats of design that dwarf the efforts 
of intelligent designers.
Okasha finds merit in this perspective but goes on: “I find Dennett’s appeal to 
‘mother nature’ here under-motivated, and not necessary to capture the paral-
lel between adaptationist and psychological explanation that I take to be his main 
insight” (40). Okasha would prefer to restrict “agential thinking” to organisms, but 
he himself recognizes the difficulty with any criteria for agency: “it is unclear how 
much behavioral plasticity counts as sufficient” (27). Here is the bind for the biolo-
gist: the cactus, for example, is about as stolid and clueless as an organism can be, 
yet its dispositions and parts are fiendishly well designed for furthering its interests.
When we human observers/explainers/predictors confront this well-designed 
excellence, we automatically set about figuring out the reasons why plants and 
animals do what they do, reverse engineering them with the aid of the inten-
tional stance. And, as we have seen, when we do this it is common and natural 
to impute more understanding to an organism than it actually has, on the rea-
sonable grounds that the behavior is manifestly clever, and whose cleverness 
is it, if not the organism’s? Ironically, if we were creationists, we could com-
fortably attribute all the understanding to God and wouldn’t feel so compelled 
to endow the organisms with it. They could all be God’s marionettes. It was 
Darwin’s discovery and exposure of the mindless process of natural selection, 
with its power to generate free-floating rationales, that freed our imaginations 
to continue reverse engineering all Nature’s marvels without feeling an obliga-
tion to identify a mind that harbors the reasons we uncover. (Dennett 2017, 
339)
One good motivation, then, for adopting the intentional stance toward evolu-
tion itself is that it smothers the temptation to attribute understanding wherever 
we find design excellence. Organisms are genetically gifted with many talents 
they need not understand. Explaining why these are features (not bugs) entails 
saying what they are for, and why they are so good—the free-floating ration-
ales that do not have to be represented in any mind at all. The pendulum swing 
between romantic and killjoy interpretations of the clever behaviors of animals 
(Dennett 1983) can be damped with the recognition that the intentional stance 

1 3
Metascience	
will “work” up to a point (but don’t ask for a bright line) and that we can get 
a predictive and explanatory appreciation of the powers and foibles of organ-
isms without the burden of attributing human-like minds to them. What does the 
frog’s eye really tell the frog’s brain? Or should we ask, as Michael Arbib once 
suggested to me in conversation: what does the frog’s eye tell the frog? Do frogs 
really have beliefs? Do chimpanzees have beliefs about the beliefs of other chim-
panzees? For that matter, do we understand the reasons why we do many of the 
things we do? Do we, for instance, appreciate the complex Gricean conditions for 
utterance meaning? (Dennett 2017, 395) Once one begins to appreciate how ubiq-
uitous competence without comprehension can be, a host of largely sterile debates 
in ethology, psychology and the philosophy of mind and language can be allowed 
to evaporate.
Jean Piaget noted that “intelligence is what you use when you don’t know what 
to do: when neither innateness nor learning has prepared you for the particu-
lar situation” (see Piaget 2019). Guy Claxton, at a conference at New College 
of the Humanities in London (2018), came up with an improvement on Piaget’s 
observation:
Intelligence is knowing what to do when you don’t know what to do.
What is particularly bon about this mot is that it draws attention to the capacity 
of some minds to go beyond the gifts of genetic inheritance, culturally transmit-
ted techniques (memes), and personal experience, by engaging in something like 
problem-solving, generating new design in situ. Or, as one might say, intelligent 
design. It is this capacity, which is as rare as hens’ teeth in non-human species, 
that requires the attribution of high levels of comprehension. And it is only we 
human beings who have managed to find this exploratory platform from which to 
launch our inquiries into what happens and why in biology and the rest of the uni-
verse. Looking at the Tree of Life, we find only anthropoi anthropomorphizing, 
but with spectacular results.
I cannot resist pointing out that Okasha himself sometimes succumbs to the 
motivation to explain a point with the help of Mother Nature. “The moral here is 
that natural selection ‘cares’ about the variance in reproductive output, not just 
the expectation, so displays a kind of intrinsic aversion to risk” (212). See also, 
for example, his examination of bet-hedging by natural selection (221–9). These 
are wonderfully effective observations, and there are plenty more to be obtained 
by treating not only natural selection but genes themselves as intentional systems 
or rational agents.
Okasha has a sympathetic reading of Dawkins (and Burt and Trivers and Ham-
ilton and Haig) on genes as selfish agents and decides that “the real merit of the 
‘genes as agents’ concept, as I see it, is that it allows us to achieve an adapta-
tionist understanding of a class of phenotypic traits that would otherwise seem 
puzzling” (46). This is a huge understatement, in my opinion. Without this per-
spective, many features of the natural world and the cultural world are not just 
puzzling but bound to be misunderstood. One of the chief virtues of adopting the 
gene’s-eye perspective, or the meme’s-eye perspective, is that it enables one to 

	
Metascience
1 3
see the continuity of process, and of explanation, between all the different levels 
of evolution, from “outlaw” genes through individual organisms and lineages to 
“parasitic” memes: in every case we must ask: Cui bono?—who benefits? The 
first answer is always the same: winning replicators are the beneficiaries. There 
will usually be reasons why they have won up to now, but do not expect them, as 
a general rule, to understand these reasons. Stupid heirs are even more common 
in biology than in New York City.
References
Dennett, D.C. 1983. Intentional Systems in Cognitive Ethology: the ‘Panglossian Paradigm’ Defended 
(with commentaries). Behavioral and Brain Sciences 6: 343–390.
Dennett, D.C. 2017. From Bacteria to Bach and Back: the Evolution of Minds. NYC: Norton.
Marx, K. 1861, Letter to F. Lassalle. http://www.marxi​sts.org/archi​ve/marx/works​/1861/lette​rs/61_01_16.
htm. Accessed 16 Jan 1861.
Piaget, J. 2019. Jean Piaget Quotes. BrainyQuote.com. BrainyMedia Inc, 2019. https​://www.brain​yquot​
e.com/quote​s/jean_piage​t_75109​9. Accessed 26 Jan 2019.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional affiliations.

