
Deploying Microsoft System Center Configuration Manager
Manage complex and heterogeneous workloads with ConfigMgr 1706

Jacek Doktor
Pawel Jarosz
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

Deploying Microsoft System Center
Configuration Manager
Copyright © 2017 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the authors, nor Packt
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of
the companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of
capitals. However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this
information.
First published: September 2017
Production reference: 1130917
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street

Birmingham
B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78588-101-5
www.packtpub.com

Credits
Authors
Jacek Doktor Pawel Jarosz
Copy Editors
Stuti Srivastava Madhusudan Uchil
Reviewers
Rafael Delgado Rafal Kubiciel Ronni
Pedersen
Project Coordinator Virginia Dias
Commissioning Editor Kartikey
Pandey
Proofreader Safis Editing
Acquisition Editor Heramb Bhavsar
Indexer Aishwarya Gangawane
Content Development Editor
Sweeny Dias
Graphics Kirk D'Penha
Technical Editor Khushbu Sutar
Production Coordinator Aparna
Bhagat

About the Authors
Jacek Doktor is a Microsoft Certified Trainer. From 2008 to 2015, he held the
Most Valuable Professional title in Enterprise Client Management granted by
Microsoft. Apart from leading training sessions on System Center/Active
Directory, he also performs IT system implementations and provides support to
clients. His main scope of operation is Configuration Manager and all related
technologies. He works for large Polish companies, and participates in projects
led by Microsoft Poland. Apart from System Center, Jacek has enormous
experience in Windows 10 deployment, migrations to Windows 10, and
ConfigMgr report data usage.
 
Pawel Jarosz is an IT engineer with experience in various IT fields and
platforms, including Microsoft Exchange and ConfigMgr. He is a Microsoft
Exchange expert with experience in designing and maintaining hybrid
infrastructures. Pawel is a cofounder of the Polish PowerShell User Group, and
is passionate about automation, building monitoring solutions, and system
integration. He runs the paweljarosz blog on Wordpress, where with a good dose
of humor he shares his daily IT experiences.
Pawel believes that the most stunning projects comes not from the brain, but
directly from the heart.

www.PacktPub.com
For support files and downloads related to your book, please visit www.PacktPub.co
m. Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with
PDF and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.Packt
Pub.com, and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook
copy. Get in touch with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign
up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on
Packt books and eBooks.
https://www.packtpub.com/mapt
Get the most in-demand software skills with Mapt. Mapt gives you full access to
all Packt books and video courses, as well as industry-leading tools to help you
plan your personal development and advance your career.

Why subscribe?
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
On demand and accessible via a web browser

Customer Feedback
Thanks for purchasing this Packt book. At Packt, quality is at the heart of our
editorial process. To help us improve, please leave us an honest review on this
book's Amazon page at https://www.amazon.com/dp/1785881019.
If you'd like to join our team of regular reviewers, you can email us at
customerreviews@packtpub.com. We award our regular reviewers with free eBooks and
videos in exchange for their valuable feedback. Help us be relentless in
improving our products!
 

Table of Contents
Preface
What this book covers
What you need for this book
Who this book is for
Conventions
Reader feedback
Customer support
Downloading the color images of this book
Errata
Piracy
Questions
1. Design Planning
System Center Configuration Manager
When planning an upgrade
ConfigMgr hierarchy planning
Possible on-premise scenarios
Primary site
Primary site with secondary site
Central administration site with primary sites and secondary sites
Important servers roles
Management point server role
Distribution point server role
MS SQL Server role in ConfigMgr environment
Sizing and scaling of ConfigMgr

Site types
Central administration site
Primary site
Secondary site
Supported number of clients
ConfigMgr in Azure
ConfigMgr as a VM in Azure
Cloud-based distribution points
Planning for high availability with ConfigMgr
Reporting
Summary
2. Installing Configuration Manager
Configuration Manager installation process
System Center Configuration Manager 1706 requirements
Prerequisites for System Center Configuration Manager 1706
Environmental components
Granting permissions to the System container
Extending the Active Directory schema
Installing operating system components
Installing MS SQL Server
Installing Windows Assessment and Deployment Kit
ConfigMgr server installation
Checkouts after installation
Summary
3. Configure Sites and Boundaries
ConfigMgr server role types
Default roles
Optional roles

Roles installed during server deployment
Site server
Site system
Site database server
Service connection point
Distribution point
Management point
Methods of installing server roles
Create site system server
Add site system role
Fundamental optional server roles
Fallback status point
Reporting service point
Application Catalog
ConfigMgr server settings
Hierarchy site settings
Primary site settings
Discovery Methods
Active Directory Discovery Methods
Active Directory Forest Discovery
Active Directory User Discovery
Active Directory System Discovery
Active Directory Group Discovery
Heartbeat Discovery
Boundary and boundary groups
Configuring boundaries
Manually created boundaries
Automatically created boundaries

Configuring boundary groups
Default boundary group
Manual creation of boundary groups
Summary
4. Configuration Manager Agent Installation
Operating systems requirements
ConfigMgr client installation
Installation methods
Client push
Installing from the console
Manual installation on the operating system
Other installation methods
ConfigMgr client installation checkout
Troubleshooting client connectivity
Summary
5. Creating Client Settings for Servers and Workstations
Client settings
Default Client Settings
Creating custom settings for a device
Creating custom settings for a user
Assigning to a collection
Checkout of client settings
Collection settings
Summary
6. Compliance Settings
Compliance feature
Compliance Settings
Compliance Configuration Items
Compliance Configuration Baselines

Configuration Pack
Common tasks for managing compliance
Client setting for compliance
Deploying the compliance baseline
Viewing compliance results
Client reporting
Console reporting
Creating collections based on the compliance result
Managing resource and data access
Remote Connection Profiles
Company Resource Access
User Data and Profiles configuration
Summary
7. Software Distributions
Applications versus packages
Software distribution server roles
Application management features
Creating applications
Automatic application creation
Manual application creation
Global condition
Configuring application features
Supersedence
Application Catalog
References
Revision history

Deployment Types
Detection Method
Dependencies
Requirements
Application deployment
Simulating a deployment
Available deployments
Required deployments
Triggering an installation
Reporting
Invoking scripts on devices
Summary
8. Software Update Management
Software update features
Initial requirements
Server requirements
Client requirements
Client settings
Preparing ConfigMgr site for software updates
Installing WSUS
Software update point
The process of updates deployment
The process of synchronizing data with the WSUS server
The process of scanning for compliance
Scanning statuses
Updates deployment process
Integrating ConfigMgr server with Windows Update for Business and Windows 10

Supporting non-Microsoft Updates
Maintenance setting on collection
Update search
Server group
Deploying software updates
Deployment preparation
Manual update deployment
Windows 10 as a service
Office 365 Client Management
Monitoring software deployment
Software Update Reports
Software Update Dashboard
Summary
9. Endpoint Protection
Understanding Endpoint Protection
Endpoint Protection point
Client Settings for Endpoint Protection
Configuring a software update point for Endpoint Protection
Antimalware policies
Firewall policies
Windows Defender Advanced Threat Protection
Monitoring Endpoint Protection status
Endpoint Protection state
Endpoint Protection alerts
Summary
10. Operating System Deployment
Operating system deployment
Operating system deployment terminology

Windows Assessment and Deployment Kit
Windows PE
Operating system image
Deployment Image Servicing and Management
Windows System Image Manager
Windows image file format
System Preparation Tool
Windows Deployment Service
Microsoft Deployment Toolkit 2012
User State Migration Tool
Packages during operating system deployment
Unified Extensible Firmware Interface
Operating system deployment scenarios
Bare-metal installation
Operating system refresh
In-place upgrade
Side-by-side migration
Task sequences
Task sequence creation
Drivers
Installation of imported drivers
Driver installation using packages
Deployment types
Windows 10 servicing
Servicing plan
Windows Update for Business policies

Upgrade Readiness
Summary
11. Configuration Manager Assets
Data collection
Queries
Reports
Hardware inventory
Software inventory
Asset Intelligence
Collection queries
Console queries
Console reports
Summary
12. Role-Based Administration and Security
Introducing role-based administration and security
Hardening the infrastructure
Access to the console
Security scopes
Security roles
Granting permissions to the ConfigMgr console
Service accounts
Remote Tools
Client Settings
Securing remote control
Summary
13. Site Server Maintenance Tasks
Maintenance tasks

ConfigMgr backup
ConfigMgr server recovery
Other ConfigMgr server maintenance tasks
Environment monitoring
Summary

Preface
This book might differ from other publications related to System Center
Configuration Manager. It is not strictly for administrators and operators as we
do not go very deep into the details of the configuration and administration of
individual system components. In this book we put the emphasis on
understanding what circumstances ConfigMgr can be used in, what kinds of
function it may play in the environment, and what goals can be achieved.
ConfigMgr is not only a system used to deploy operating systems, updates, and
other software, but it is also a system of much wider scope and usage--and this is
what we intended to cover.
 

What this book covers
Chapter 1, Design Planning, covers basic topics regarding designing and deploying
a single ConfigMgr server as well as environments with more than one server.
You'll learn what important factors should be taken into consideration while
deploying a ConfigMgr server and its roles.
Chapter 2, Installing Configuration Manager, presents the process of preparing the
environment for a ConfigMgr server as well as the installation itself.
Chapter 3, Configure Sites and Boundaries, covers topics related to boundaries and
boundary groups as well as the configuration of roles typically used in
deployments.
Chapter 4, Configuration Manager Agent Installation, presents the ConfigMgr
client installation process, available installation methods, and information about
checkouts if installation goes successfully.
Chapter 5, Creating Client Settings for Servers and Workstations, covers creating
your own custom settings for ConfigMgr clients.
Chapter 6, Compliance Settings, discusses how ConfigMgr can be used to verify
computers' compliance with company standards.
Chapter 7, Software Distributions, covers topics related to software deployment.
Chapter 8, Software Update Management, presents the process of scanning, the
installation of updates, and the management of this process.
Chapter 9, Endpoint Protection, contains topics related to the deployment and
management of Endpoint Protection in order to better secure the environment
against malware.
Chapter 10, Operating System Deployment, covers basic concepts for operating
system deployment.

Chapter 11, Configuration Manager Assets, presents the process of collecting data
from clients, and many possible ways of using this data.
Chapter 12, Role-Based Administration and Security, discusses the configuration of
access to the ConfigMgr console.
Chapter 13, Site Server Maintenance Tasks, covers the topic of protecting the
ConfigMgr server against failure and administrative tasks related to daily
monitoring.

What you need for this book
In order to practice the scenarios from this book, you need the following
software:
Operating system:
Windows Server 2012 R2
Windows Server 2016
Software:
SQL Server 2016 Standard edition
System Center Configuration Manager 2701
Windows ADK 10 1607 version
Active Directory

Who this book is for
If you are a systems engineer and administrator planning to deploy Microsoft
System Center 2016 Configuration Manager, then this book is for you. This
book will also benefit system administrators who are responsible for designing
and deploying one or more System Center 2016 Configuration Manager sites in
their new or existing systems. It is also a book for those who would like to know
about the ConfigMgr possibilities and what benefits it can bring to the
organization.
 

Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of text styles that distinguish between
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles and an
explanation of their meaning. Code words in text, database table names, folder
names, filenames, file extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and
Twitter handles are shown as follows: "New items can be created under Asset and
Compliance\Compliance Settings\Configuration Items on the ConfigMgr console."
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the
screen, for example, in menus or dialog boxes, appear in the text like this: "The
Remediate noncompliant rules when supported and Allow remediation
outside the maintenance window options enable the repair of configuration
drift by the server."
Warnings or important notes appear like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.

Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think
about this book-what you liked or disliked. Reader feedback is important for us
as it helps us develop titles that you will really get the most out of. To send us
general feedback, simply email feedback@packtpub.com, and mention the book's title
in the subject of your message. If there is a topic that you have expertise in and
you are interested in either writing or contributing to a book, see our author
guide at www.packtpub.com/authors.
 

Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things
to help you to get the most from your purchase.

Downloading the color images of this
book
We also provide you with a PDF file that has color images of the
screenshots/diagrams used in this book. The color images will help you better
understand the changes in the output. You can download this file from https://www.
packtpub.com/sites/default/files/downloads/DeployingMicrosoftSystemCenterConfigurationManager_Color
Images.pdf.

Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content,
mistakes do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books-maybe a mistake
in the text or the code-we would be grateful if you could report this to us. By
doing so, you can save other readers from frustration and help us improve
subsequent versions of this book. If you find any errata, please report them by
visiting http://www.packtpub.com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the
Errata Submission Form link, and entering the details of your errata. Once your
errata are verified, your submission will be accepted and the errata will be
uploaded to our website or added to any list of existing errata under the Errata
section of that title. To view the previously submitted errata, go to https://www.packtp
ub.com/books/content/support and enter the name of the book in the search field. The
required information will appear under the Errata section.
 

Piracy
Piracy of copyrighted material on the internet is an ongoing problem across all
media. At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very
seriously. If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the
internet, please provide us with the location address or website name
immediately so that we can pursue a remedy. Please contact us at
copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected pirated material. We appreciate
your help in protecting our authors and our ability to bring you valuable content.
 

Questions
If you have a problem with any aspect of this book, you can contact us at
questions@packtpub.com, and we will do our best to address the problem.

Design Planning
Delivering services for an enterprise data center is a focal point of all System
Center family applications. The main idea is to ease maintaining the systems in
each stage of the life cycle.
To gain as much as possible from each solution, it is crucial to understand that
there is no such thing as one supported or preferred configuration. Having a
solution properly planned and well tailored to your needs will bring much more
value than a generic installation without proper planning and designing, which
may later bounce with an infrastructure hiccup.
This is the same as with a house, where a foundation is the most crucial part.
When badly planned or, for instance, if a construction project doesn't have
enough details and, as a result the house is not diligently enough isolated, the
repercussions might be really serious. Sometimes, you even need to cut the
house from the foundations in order to repair what has been done wrong during
the construction phase.
This chapter covers the fundamental topics related to architecture design on
ConfigMgr:
Why a well-prepared design is the most important part of each deployment
What the features of the ConfigMgr server are
Conditions and requirements when planning an upgrade to ConfigMgr 1706
ConfigMgr hierarchy types
Conditions that determine which hierarchy should be applied
Security for the ConfigMgr server
MS SQL Server roles in ConfigMgr deployments
What the functions of distribution and management points in ConfigMgr
deployments are

System Center Configuration
Manager
The history of managing operating systems reaches way back to 1994, when
Microsoft released Systems Management Server 1.1 version. Since that time,
Microsoft has systematically developed this tool until now. After the first one--
SMS 1.1 version, other system versions that showed up were SMS 2.0, SMS
2003, ConfigMgr 2007, and ConfigMgr 2012. Additionally, three service packs
were prepared (R2 and the one and only in Microsoft history: R3) and an endless
number of cumulative updates and patches.
In the last 20 years, ConfigMgr has changed a lot, and it has been subject to a
real upturn. Earlier, it used to be called a slow message system because of many
limitations, which caused it to be slow and problematic.
Starting from ConfigMgr 2012, the server became really stable and efficient and
there were no huge problems as with the legacy versions. A lot of changes were
implemented, including the following:
Console build using .NET: previously it was based on Microsoft
Management Console 3.0. The console works faster and more firmly and
provides much more data than the previous ones.
Functional enhancements for many components such as the data
synchronization of software update data between the servers.
Saving data in the SQL database for each type of ConfigMgr server. This
has radically improved efficiency and the speed of synchronization between
the servers.
Introducing the application mode to natively support .msi files.
An endless number of updates for old features and introducing a large scope
of new features.
The possibility to install ConfigMgr clients on macOS, Linux/Unix.
The possibility of managing mobile systems with Windows, iOS, and
Android.
The ability to install applications on non-Windows systems.

ConfigMgr 2012 R2 and R3 were the next system versions where already
existing features underwent development and changes. One of the changes that
did not have an impact on functionality was the naming convention change. All
versions beyond ConfigMgr 2012 R3 were named after the year and month of
the release date. The first version that had this naming convention was
ConfigMgr 1511, which signifies that it was released in November 2015.
ConfigMgr 1511, when compared to ConfigMgr 2012 R2, had many important
changes.
The most significant changes were as follows:
Windows 10 servicing
Side loading app for Windows 10
Compliance settings for Windows 10
Preferred management point
Primary site support up to 150k clients
Support for SQL Server Always On
Native support for deploying updates for Office 365
Task sequences in-place upgrade for Windows 10
Multiple automatic deployment rules
Deploy Windows Update for Business
The current, and newest, version is 1706.
ConfigMgr brings the following significant changes:
Changes in managing updates
Improved clean up for old updates
Introducing Data Warehouse service point role
OMS connector
The ability to assign software update points to boundary groups
New compliance settings for iOS
Hardware inventory collects UEFI information
Converting BIOS to UEFI during in-place upgrade
Deploying Office 365 apps to clients
Managing express installation files for Windows 10 media
Support for Android for work

Note that it is always best and safest to use current branch versions instead of
the technical preview ones. Using the current branch version ensures you get
proper support from the vendor as well as from the community--so you can
actually get some support not only from your paid MS subscription, but also
from other engineers on the forums (and available MSFT engineers who are
often on these forums as well) on the internet.

When planning an upgrade
If you plan to upgrade servers ConfigMgr 1607 to 1706, first ensure that all of
the site servers the across the hierarchy run the same version of ConfigMgr. The
versions supported for upgrade to 1706 are 1602, 1606, and 1610.
Along with 1706 ConfigMgr, version support for a few systems got deprecated:
SQL Server 2008 R2 for site database servers
Windows Server 2008 R2 for site system servers and most site system roles
Windows Server 2008 for site system servers and most site system roles
Windows XP Embedded as a client operating system
ConfigMgr installer automatically installs .NET 4.5.2 on each machine if it is not
installed already:
Enrollment proxy point
Enrollment point
Management point
Service connection point
Remember that, after installing .NET 4.5.2 and before the reboot,
the server might experience some failures.
Apart from the prerequisites related to the operating system and .NET 4.5.2,
other important points are as follows:
Remember to install all critical and security updates on the machines
Remember to review the status of your Software Assurance (SA)
agreement because, if you plan to upgrade to/install ConfigMgr 1706, this
needs to be active
If you plan to deploy workstations, remember to ensure that Windows
Assessment and Deployment Kit (ADK) for Windows 10 is at least at
version 1703
Check your hierarchy for any ongoing issues and fix them before upgrading

to 1706
Ensure that replication between sites works without issues; to check it, you
might use Replication Link Analyzer
When planning an upgrade for a hierarchy containing the central
administration site and the primary site, the process needs to be
initiated from the top, which means the central administration
needs to be upgraded first. Next up are primary sites, and last but
not least, are secondary sites.

ConfigMgr hierarchy planning
As mentioned earlier, spending some time on planning and analyzing your
business may significantly help you in building a solution that will meet the
requirements without being an overkill. It is always good to include some
growth in your design plans, but there is a significant difference between
planned overhead and overkill in achieving the goal.
With ConfigMgr 2007 still in your environment, the administrator would need to
go through an upgrade process to migrate to the 1706 version. For 2012, there is
an in-place upgrade possibility. Note that upgrade process topics won't be
covered in this book.
When it comes to hierarchy planning, ConfigMgr gives a few possible options.
Since ConfigMgr 1511, Microsoft has supported running ConfigMgr on the
cloud.
When considering your design, be aware that as of now, there is no
support for using VM in Azure as a distribution point for WDS
deployments using PXE. In such cases, use the on-premise
distribution point.
SMS 2003 servers and ConfigMgr 2007 were supporting hierarchies made of
many levels. It was causing a lot more issues related to data synchronization
between servers. In ConfigMgr 2012, Microsoft introduced some significant
changes. Hierarchy might consist of only three levels, and data synchronization
is made directly between SQL Servers, which is a significant factor in improving
the functioning of the entire system.

Possible on-premise scenarios
When designing a ConfigMgr deployment, we may choose between a few server
types, and we also have the ability to combine these few servers together.
An important thing to keep in mind is that there is, in fact, the possibility of
changing the environment after the deployment. The administrator might start
with one server, and have a few of them at the end, or the other way--the number
of servers might go down.
ConfigMgr is a scalable solution, so it can be changed and might grow together
with the organization.
There is, however, one thing that cannot be changed--if we wish to
have two primary site servers, we need to have a central
administration site to connect them in one solid structure.

Primary site
Primary site is a fundamental ConfigMgr server type that manages the clients.
We start each deployment by installing this server. As you can see, the smallest
possible implementation is a single standalone server. This solution is often
chosen, not only by small and average sized companies, but also by big firms
with a dozen or so branches.
Even when you don't have the best connection between offices, you may use a
distribution point that will be a local repository for clients; the idea of
distribution points will be described later in this chapter.
In this scenario, all clients report to one single ConfigMgr server. So, simplified
administrations here are an undisputed benefit for both administrators and
workstations that have one point to report to. Having only one server eliminates
the need to replicate the database.
When installing the standalone/primary site server, the complete version of the
SQL database server is required. Being a primary site server, the machine
participates in database replication: 
Hierarchy with one sever primary site

Primary site with secondary site
This scenario goes a step further. With a secondary site, we tell the clients in
satellite offices/branches to report to the secondary site instead of the primary
one. The reason we want a secondary site is that our primary site has very bad
wide area network (WAN) connections with branches; additionally, during the
day, we prefer not to fill this link with ConfigMgr traffic.
Imagine a situation where we have New York, which is our primary site, and
Philadelphia, where we have an office with approximately 5,000 computers, and
we have a really slow WAN link between these two offices (which may be
considered any link slower than 10 MB) in addition to some latency issues.
Having computers reported to New York might be a real bottleneck, not just for
workstation to ConfigMgr communications, but it will surely impact applications
that try to send data over this WAN link, so it may have serious repercussions for
your business. Secondary sites come into play when one of the following factors
is important:
Traffic compression between sites
Scheduling time for data exchange between the primary and secondary site
Usually, you won't need a secondary site; as I mentioned, even in global
enterprise deployments, people often choose to have one primary site with
distribution points in satellite offices:

Hierarchy with one primary site and secondary site

Central administration site with
primary sites and secondary sites
This is the most complex scenario we can get. A central administration site
may coexist with one or more primary sites--it is the top-level site in the
hierarchy. You may consider using central administration if you have two or
more very big sites (where the sum of Windows clients, for instance, might be
bigger than 150,000), or you would like to separate clients from each site from
each other--the legal factor might come into play in this case:
Most complex structure of ConfigMgr
A central administration site does not play any role in managing the clients in
terms of actually having some clients assigned to it. You are not able to assign
any clients here. It does not process any client data; it just saves data about the
whole hierarchy.
Server central administrations might be added to the primary site
at any time. There is no need to install the central administration
site as the first server in the hierarchy.

With the central administration site and two primary servers connected to it, it is
possible--in the case of failure of one of them--to switch endpoints to report to
the working one. This feature is the easiest form of high availability provided for
endpoints. However, this switch does not happen automatically, and it needs to
be triggered from the server console.
There is always a possibility to add or remove servers from the
hierarchy and switch endpoints to report to the other server.

Important servers roles
The most important roles, which need to be considered when designing the
environment, are management point and distribution point.
If these roles are properly designed and deployed, the environment will work
swiftly, firmly, and in accordance with expectations.

Management point server role
Management point is the most important server role that needs to be deployed in
the ConfigMgr environment as it provides communication between the
ConfigMgr server and the clients. If the mentioned role is not functioning
correctly, clients will be unable to communicate with the server, which results in
an immediate break in managing the environment. It makes communication on
both sides impossible and clients won't be able to send any data to the
ConfigMgr server.
We might connect more than one management point to each
ConfigMgr server. This situation might be desired when one single
ConfigMgr server is servicing many clients or when endpoints are
located in various geolocations and the administrator wants to
provide good communication between the ConfigMgr server and
the clients.
Clients choose the management point they will connect to, based on the
boundary group, which will be described in more detail in Chapter 3, Configure
Sites and Boundaries. Incorrectly designed infrastructure, resulting in a badly
chosen management point by clients, might cause many unpredictable effects;
for instance, clients won't perform installations, won't send data to the
ConfigMgr server, or will connect and communicate with the wrong
management point.
In versions prior to 2012, it was not possible to tell the
workstations which management point should be used. Secondary
servers were used as a workaround, as it was possible to assign a
workstation to a particular secondary server. Starting from the
2012 version, there has been the option of setting the management
point as the preferred one from a certain site.
For better and more efficient usage of the network between the central office and
company branches, it is possible to place the primary site server or simply a
management point in these branches. In this scenario, all data targeting clients

will be sent only once--from the primary site server to the management point
from which clients will download the data using the local network.
This happens on the other side as well. When clients are making a hardware
inventory, they send all pieces of data to the management point server; it
aggregates the data and sends it at once to the ConfigMgr server. In this way, the
administrator is able to significantly lower the amount of information sent over
the network in the ConfigMgr environment.

Distribution point server role
Let's imagine a situation where we have a standalone server that is used as a
distribution point for the main office in New York. We would like to install a few
applications on 100 computers in Philadelphia, 200 computers in Washington,
and 50 in Pittsburgh. All these workstations will download content from the New
York server. To prevent such situations, we should use a distribution point that
will act as a local application repository for clients.
With distribution points, we may push binaries to the local servers at the most
convenient time of the day/or night--simply the quietest time from the network
perspective. Having said that, we may now go to our workstation configuration
and tell them to download binaries from the local distribution point server.
Starting from ConfigMgr 2012, each and every distribution point
associated with ConfigMgr might have different settings for data,
sending configuration such as the days and hours in which
ConfigMgr is allowed to distribute the content to the distribution
point.
The ability to configure separate settings for each distribution point is a major
ease when configuring the ConfigMgr environment. In this way, the
administrator can fully control the time, the way, as well as from where data is
being sent between ConfigMgr servers and clients.
If you're combining the aforementioned separated roles with a properly designed
structure management point role, the administrator will have a clean view of
which clients send data to which distribution points and management points.
Each distribution point supports connections from up to 4,000 clients and a
combined total of up to 10,000 packages and applications.

MS SQL Server role in ConfigMgr
environment
There have been a lot of changes in SQL Server use cases since ConfigMgr
2007. In all versions prior to 2012, SQL Server was only used for primary site
needs. Since version 2012, all server types--central administration site, primary
site, and secondary site, use SQL Server to store data.
For central administration site and primary site, we may use MS SQL
Standard or Enterprise Edition. Secondary sites support MS SQL in Standard or
Express versions:
The configuration of SQL Servers for ConfigMgr servers
When installing the secondary site server, SQL Express installation is conducted
automatically by the ConfigMgr server. If we are more likely to use SQL
Standard, we need to install SQL Server before starting the installation of the
secondary site server.

Because SQL Server is being used by all ConfigMgr server types,
to ease work, it is recommended that you use GPO to open
appropriate ports on the Windows firewall, allowing
communication between SQL and ConfigMgr servers.

Sizing and scaling of ConfigMgr
ConfigMgr can be scaled to a size that will accommodate any type and size of
organization. Keep in mind that we often split ConfigMgr installations and
create additional sites/sub-sites, not because we are reaching limits in
ConfigMgr, but to:
Ease administration/maintenance
Separate administrator access
Physically separate the data (for example, to meet regulations)
Put boundary lines between some instances

Site types
There are three types of ConfigMgr servers, and each has already
been mentioned in the context of designing the hierarchy. Each of the following
presented server types has a different role and way to be configured.

Central administration site
A central administration site is used to manage the whole hierarchy. All
connected primary site servers synchronize with it, so all information about what
is going on in the environment is available in one place. A central administration
site supports up to 25 child primary sites.
A central administration site does not support clients directly, neither does it
process client data. All this work is done by primary and secondary site servers
that send the data to the central administration site. Because the CAS role does
not support communication with clients, it is not possible to install management
point or distribution point roles on the server. Additionally, some of the server
roles are supposed to be installed only on a CAS server, such as a service
connection point.
 

Primary site
A primary site server is a fundamental server type deployed in the ConfigMgr
environment. The main difference between this server and central administration
is that it directly supports the clients as well as shares and receives data from
them. This is a reason why this server type supports installing server roles such
as management point and distribution point. It requires MS SQL and being
connected to a central administration site; it replicates its own data and data
received from the associated secondary site.
Each primary site can support up to:
250 secondary sites
15 management point
250 distribution points
The number of secondary sites per primary site is based on
continuously connected and reliable WAN connections. For
locations that have fewer than 500 clients, consider a distribution
point instead of a secondary site.

Secondary site
A secondary site server should always be considered an optional one. In many
cases, one primary site server is able to successfully serve the whole company.
However, once a company has many branches, low-quality network links and
lots of systems to manage, the secondary site server is what the administrator
should consider.
Secondary sites don't support child sites. This is the last level in the
ConfigMgr hierarchy.
Each secondary site supports a single management point that must be installed
on the secondary site server. However, despite installing a management point,
assigning clients to it will not be possible. Clients always need to be assigned to
the superior server, in this case, the primary site.

Supported number of clients
When talking about supported clients, we can outline three different types:
Client type 1: Windows Server, Windows Clients, and Windows
Embedded, Linux, and Unix
Client type 2: Devices managed by Windows Intune and those enabled for
Exchange Server connector
Client type 3: Devices enrolled by ConfigMgr and devices supported by
the mobile device legacy client, macOS clients
Central administration site:
Up to 700,000 type 1 clients
Up to 25,000 type 3 clients
Up to 100,000 devices that you manage using on-premises MDM or up
to 300,000 cloud-based devices
Standalone primary site: The overall number of devices managed by
standalone primary site is 175,000, where subdivisions are:
Up to 150,000 type 1 clients
Up to 50,000 type 2 clients
Up to 25,000 type 3 clients
50,000 devices that you manage using on-premises MDM or up to
150,000 cloud-based devices
Secondary site: Up to 15,000 type 1 clients
Management point: The overall number of devices managed by the
management point is 25,000, where subdivisions are:
25,000 type 1 clients
Up to 10,000 devices that are managed using on-premises MDM or up
to 10,000 type 3 clients


ConfigMgr in Azure
As you may already know, Azure is a public cloud computing platform created
by Microsoft. There are three main categories of computers that Microsoft Azure
offers, and they are as follows:
Infrastructure as a service (IaaS)
Platform as a service (PaaS)
Software as a service (SaaS)
ConfigMgr in an IaaS model is simply a VM with the ConfigMgr application
installed on it.
As for the PaaS model, there is no real scenario for ConfigMgr; however, the
SaaS approach has its use case for ConfigMgr in the form of cloud-based
distribution points.

ConfigMgr as a VM in Azure
As mentioned earlier, starting from the 1511 version, ConfigMgr supports
deployment in Azure. Leveraging this option, we get three options:
ConfigMgr might be placed in Azure and manage cloud-based VMs
ConfigMgr might be placed in Azure but manage on-premise VMs
ConfigMgr might be placed in Azure only to some extent, which means
only certain roles, such as distribution point, are deployed on the cloud
When it comes to the prerequisites, scaling, and sizing--the same applies to the
cloud as the on-premise deployments.
To start using Azure to deploy ConfigMgr VMs, you need a subscription that is
charged based on the number of virtual machines and Azure resource usage.

Cloud-based distribution points
A cloud-based distribution point is a slightly different approach. It is not a VM
but a service in Azure, which is automatically scaling for the needs. It supports
your internal and external (internet) clients. Similar to the preceding solutions,
you need an Azure subscription.

Planning for high availability with
ConfigMgr
As ConfigMgr does not provide data in real time, short intermittent down times
should not usually be considered a problem.
ConfigMgr does not support any high availability (HA) cluster
solution for the application node other than switching clients to a
different ConfigMgr server. However, you might use SQL clustering
or a feature that started to be supported with ConfigMgr 1602 by
Microsoft--Always On availability groups for SQL--to implement
HA on the database level.
Always On availability groups continuously synchronize transactions from the
primary replica to each of the secondary replicas. This replication can be
configured as synchronous or asynchronous to support local high availability or
remote disaster recovery.
The preceding mechanism cannot be used for secondary site databases, and
secondary site databases cannot be restored from the backup--this applies only to
the central administration site and the primary site. The only way to recover the
secondary site is to recreate it from its parent--the primary site.
Maintaining the central administration site and more than one primary site
allows the redirecting of clients to the other server while the first one is
inaccessible. The same is the case with management points and distribution
points.
By configuring the sites to publish the data about the site servers, and services in
Active Directory and DNS, it becomes available for clients to identify when new
site system servers that can provide important services, such as management
points, are available.

Reporting
Reporting is an important design factor when you plan to run long time period
reports across hundreds of nodes. However, running such a report might be a big
overhead for the machine processing the report.
The MS SQL database might be installed on the same server or on a separate
machine. The separation of SQL and the ConfigMgr server might significantly
improve the efficiency of both systems. It is also possible to move SQL Server
Reporting Services to another SQL on a different machine. This might
additionally improve the efficiency of the SQL Server and SQL Server Reporting
Services.
Additionally, ConfigMgr in version 1706 introduced the possibility of using the
Data Warehouse service point, which holds all long-term historical data of
ConfigMgr deployment. Data is synchronized with the ConfigMgr site database
and can hold up to 2 TB of data.
Data Warehouse can be installed only on the top of the hierarchy,
so it can be installed on the central administration or the primary
site. Keep in mind that, if you wish to expand the standalone
primary site, you need to remove the Data Warehouse service point
role from that site. After CA is installed, you can install the role on
the newly created top site.

Summary
The idea of this chapter was to give you a view of what the important factors are
when planning the deployment of ConfigMgr 1706. We went through a few
topics such as the following:
Software prerequisites when planning an upgrade
Description of available site roles and to what extent we can scale them
Important factors when planning a hierarchy
Possible hybrid scenarios with Azure
What the possibilities are for HA when planning the infrastructure
New features available for reporting
This chapter gave you a good overview of the available deployment scenarios,
so you can go ahead and install ConfigMgr in your environment.
As we've reached the end of this chapter, let's now go straight to the chapter
where you install your own instance of ConfigMgr 1706.
The following factors should always be considered when designing an
environment:
The number of endpoints managed by the environment
The number of locations where these endpoints reside
Features the environment should support
Administrative factors, for instance, separating the management of servers
and workstations
Political factors; for instance, each country has separate ConfigMgr server
Organizational factors; for instance, each AD domains should be managed
by separate hierarchy
Network latency and quality; the poorer the network conditions, the more
servers we need in the environment
Installing MS SQL Server on a separate machine to provide optimal
efficiency for the ConfigMgr database
ConfigMgr is a very complex product; consequently, this book focuses mainly

on fundamental configuration. It does not contain information about cooperation
with systems other than Windows.

Installing Configuration Manager
Well-thought hierarchy and properly planned configuration of the server is the
foundation of success while deploying ConfigMgr server.
This chapter covers the following topics:
The process of installing all prerequisites and configuring the environment
before installing the ConfigMgr server
Preparation for the ConfigMgr server installation
The ConfigMgr installation process in the primary site type

Configuration Manager installation
process
This chapter covers topics related to the installation of ConfigMgr in the primary
site type. Firstly, it will take you through all the prerequisites that the
environment must fulfill for the installation to be successful, and then it will
introduce the process of server installation.
The requirements that need to be met are not especially hard to achieve either.
Here are the core steps when installing ConfigMgr:
1. The installation of an operating system.
2. Configuration and updating the operating system.
3. Granting permissions for the creation of the System Management container.
4. Granting permissions for the computer account to save configuration in the
Active Directory database.
5. The installation of the Web Server (IIS) role and additional components.
6. The installation of Windows Assessment and Deployment Kit.
7. The installation of the ConfigMgr 1706 server.
Basic knowledge about the installation of Windows Server 2016 or 2012 is
desired for the ConfigMgr 1706 installation. Knowledge about creating,
configuring, and granting permissions in Active Directory will be also needed.
The environment in this book has been based on Windows Server 2016.
However, it doesn't matter if we talk about preinstallation steps, as preparing
Windows Server 2016 and Windows Server 2012 are almost alike in order to
install ConfigMgr 1706. The only significant differences are in the details; for
instance, for Windows Server 2016, .NET 4.5 is installed, whereas on Windows
Server 2012, the installed version of .NET is 3.5.

System Center Configuration
Manager 1706 requirements
As mentioned earlier, before we attempt to install the ConfigMgr server, certain
requirements need to be fulfilled.
The prerequisites for server systems are as follows:
ConfigMgr cannot and must not be installed on Windows Server 2008 or
Windows Server 2008 R2
ConfigMgr cannot be installed on Windows Server Core
ConfigMgr cannot be installed on Windows Server 2012 Foundation or
Windows Server 2012 R2 Foundation
Server ConfigMgr 1706 can cooperate with MS SQL Server 2014 or higher
Server ConfigMgr 1706 cannot be installed on Windows failover cluster
Only the ConfigMgr database can be installed with high availability using
SQL cluster or Always On availability
Prerequisites for a server handling the ConfigMgr server role are as follows:
Windows Assessment and Deployment Kit in version 1703
IIS server role
MS SQL
If we plan to install MS SQL Server and MS SQL Server Reporting
Services (SSRS) on one machine, it is worth checking that option
to be installed during MS SQL installation so it will be installed
and configured. If you plan to separate a database from SSRS, we
need to install (as well as configure) it separately.
Before the installation, we need to make choices for the following settings:
Site code: Three character strings identifying our installed server
Site name: Name of the location identifying our installed server

It is impossible to change the site code or name after the server has
been installed. The only way to change it is to uninstall and install
the server again from scratch.
Before starting the installation, we need to prepare AD user accounts and groups
that will be used for installation:
Prepare an administrative Active Directory installation account or accounts
for MS SQL Server. All of the accounts should have administrative
permissions on a machine where MS SQL will be installed.
Prepare an administrative Active Directory installation account for
ConfigMgr with administrative permissions on a machine where the
ConfigMgr server will be installed.
Apart from the preceding permissions, the mentioned accounts are regular
Active Directory domain user accounts.

Prerequisites for System Center
Configuration Manager 1706
Before installing the server, we need to prepare the environment. To prepare the
environment, we need to install all the required prerequisites on the server, as
well as configure the environment (such as Active Directory).
The configuration of the environment consists of the following steps:
Extending the Active Directory schema.
Granting the computer account permission to the System container in Active
Directory. These permissions are needed for ConfigMgr to create the System
Management container as well as save any future configuration.
Extending the Active Directory schema and integration with Active
Directory are not required either for installing ConfigMgr or for its
proper work. However, extending the schema eases daily
administration of the system, so it is always good to consider
whether or not to perform such an operation.
Installing software prerequisites consists of the following:
Windows Assessment and Deployment Kit: An essential tool set for
ConfigMgr installation. After the server is installed, these tools are used to
manage administrative tasks related to OS deployment.
The IIS server role and its components: This role is responsible for
servicing communication between clients and the ConfigMgr server.
Configuration of IIS components is done during the IIS role installation, so
there is no need to install it manually.
MS SQL 2014 or higher: SQL Server will be handling the ConfigMgr
database.
The order of the mentioned tasks is not important.

Environmental components
The environment described in the book consists of the following components:
Domain name: doctor.com
AD controller: DC01
ConfigMgr 1706 with MS SQL 2016 Standard: CM16.doctor.com
Domain functional level: Windows Server 2016
Location code: PA1
Name of the primary site server: CM16.doctor.com
Management point: CM16.doctor.com
Distribution point: CM16.doctor.com
Operating system: Windows Server 2016

Granting permissions to the System
container
The ConfigMgr server, after extending the Active Directory schema, is able to
save core configuration data in the Active Directory database inside the System
Management container. Thanks to these pieces of information, clients are able to find
the assigned ConfigMgr server and establish connection with it. Any changes
made to the management point role are also saved and stored in the Active
Directory database.
There are two ways of the System Management container creation:
The container can be created manually and grant permissions to the
ConfigMgr computer account
ConfigMgr creates it by itself thanks to the granted permissions
The presence of this container is not obligatory to go through the
ConfigMgr installation process. The container, as well as
permissions, might be created later after the server is installed.
To manually create the System Management container using the Active Directory
Users and Computers console, follow these steps:
1. Run the console, highlight the System container, right-click on it, and choose
Properties:

System container in Active Directory Users and Computers console
2. On the Security tab, click on Add... to add a computer account for the
ConfigMgr server:
Properties of System container

3. By default, the system does not show computer accounts when adding
permissions. To see them, we need to check Computers in the Object
Types... section and click on OK:
Adding computer accounts to searchable objects in Active Directory
4. We fill in the computer name, and to ensure that we typed it correctly, we
click on Check Names and then we click on OK:
Pointing ConfigMgr computer account
5. The next step is to add permissions to the computer AD account. Highlight
the computer account visible on the Security tab and click on Advanced:

Choosing a computer account for granting permissions
6. Windows Advanced Security Settings for System appears. Highlight the
ConfigMgr computer account and choose Edit:

Editing of permissions for the System container
7. On the Permission Entry for System tab, check Full control and change the
Applies to section to This object and all descendant objects:
Configuring permissions for a computer account
8. After granting permissions, click on OK thrice. At this point, the
environment is prepared for ConfigMgr to create the System Management
container on its own and save the configuration data in there.

Extending the Active Directory
schema
As mentioned earlier, ConfigMgr never has the ability to save its own data in the
Active Directory database. It is not essential; however, it significantly eases
administration effort.
The following information is being saved in the System Management container:
Information about the available management points
Information about the configured boundaries and boundary groups
ConfigMgr servers and location codes
Extending the schema can be performed only with Schema Admins permissions.
This can be achieved by adding an account to the Schema Admins AD group.
The actual extension of the schema is done using the extadsch.exe program from
the installation drive, placed in the SMSSETUP\BIN\X64 folder: 

Extadsch.exe--application to extend Active Directory schema
All we need to do is start the application and wait for a while. A successfully
finished operation should return a result similar to the following one: 
Result of extending the schema with extadsch.exe
After extending the schema and granting permissions to create the System
Management container, the server will save information about its configuration in

the mentioned container: 
Information saved by ConfigMgr in System Management container
Permissions to the System Management container must not be taken
away while the ConfigMgr server is working. The operation can be
performed after the server is uninstalled. Taking away these
permissions while the server is running will lead to a lack of
communication between the ConfigMgr server and its clients.
Extension of the Active Directory schema can be done before or
after the ConfigMgr server installation.

Installing operating system
components
Before performing the installation of the ConfigMgr server, the operating system
needs to be properly prepared. Firstly, we need to install the required roles and
features for the server: 
Installing Web Server (IIS) role When installing IIS role, the following components should be installed:
Application Development: ASP.NET 3.5, .NET Extensibility 3.5, .NET
Extensibility 4.5, ISAPI Extensions
Security: Windows authentication
IIS 6 Management Compatibility: IIS Management Console, IIS 6
Metabase Compatibility, IIS 6 WMI Compatibility, IIS Management
Scripts and Tools
Apart from server roles, a few additional features also need to be installed: 

Installation of additional features required by ConfigMgr This is a list of all the features required by the
ConfigMgr server:
.NET Framework 3.5 and all sub-features
.NET Framework 4.6 and all sub-features
Background Intelligent Transfer Service (BITS) and all sub-features
Remote Differential Compression

Installation of features required by ConfigMgr server After installing all the roles and features, bear in mind
to run the Microsoft update against the server to get all the required updates.
After having installed all the required updates, we can now go to the next stage--
installing MS SQL Server.

Installing MS SQL Server
MS SQL is a component required by the ConfigMgr server. This prerequisite
must be met regardless regardless of the server type. ConfigMgr requirements
for MS SQL are not that demanding. Even when planning to support a few
thousands of clients, installing MS SQL Server with default settings should be
fair enough. There is no need for SQL to be placed on a separate disk array.
There is no need for splitting the roles of ConfigMgr and SQL on two separate
machines.
An important thing when installing SQL Server is collation. The
ConfigMgr server supports SQL_Latin1_General_CP1_CI_AS collation.
Having a different collation won't allow the ConfigMgr database to
be installed.
ConfigMgr 1706 can use the SQL installed, starting from version 2014.
The following steps will show you how to install SQL in version 2016:
1. Run the MS SQL Server installer and choose the Installation option.
2. After choosing the Installation option, an additional window appears with
installation modes.
3. Choose New SQL stand-alone installation or add features to an existing
installation. The ConfigMgr server supports the SQL installed in the
failover cluster; however, this installation type is out of the scope of this
book:

Choosing the SQL installation mode
4. At the beginning of the installation, we need to provide the MS SQL
product key.
5. The next step is to accept the ConfigMgr license terms.
The ConfigMgr server contains the license for MS SQL in the
Standard version. There is, however, a condition that MS SQL
Server can only hold the ConfigMgr database.
6. After accepting the license terms, the installer checks whether there are any
updates for the installer itself. When found, it downloads and installs them.
In the next steps, it checks whether there are any problems that might
prevent MS SQL Server from being installed:

Checkouts of whether there are any problems preventing MS SQL server from being installed
7. If there are no impediments, the installer will go further. In the next step,
we decide what MS SQL components should be installed and in which
folders; ConfigMgr requires the following components to be installed:
Database Engine Services
Reporting Services - Native
8. It is not possible to install MS SQL Server Management Studio along with
MS SQL Server. This needs to be downloaded and installed separately:

Choosing MS SQL Server components for installation
9. After deciding and choosing the required SQL Server components, we need
to decide about the SQL instance name:

Naming MS SQL Server instance Leaving the Default instance name would be the best choice.
10. In the next step, we define an account that will be used by MS SQL Server.
We define it on the Service Accounts tab:

Choosing SQL Service Accounts ConfigMgr server cannot be installed on an MS SQL Server that uses NT
Service accounts or LOCAL SERVICE. The best way is to have a regular Active Directory account with
administrative rights to the SQL Server.
This is the moment when we need to remember about the Collation
tab: 

Choosing the right collation for the SQL server The ConfigMgr server supports only the
SQL_Latin1_general_CP1_CI_AS collation. If we install SQL Server using a different collation, ConfigMgr
will not be able to go through the installation process.
It is possible to change collation on the SQL Server after it is
installed. This process, however, does not always end successfully,
and hence it is important to choose the right collation while
installing the server.
The MS SQL installation automatically sets the collation based on
the server regional settings on which it is installed.
11. 
After choosing the Service Accounts and Collation on the Server
Configuration tab, we need to choose the way of authentication that will be
used for the SQL Server as well as the accounts we will use for
administration:

Choosing of administrative accounts or groups for SQL Server from Active Directory
12. 
On the Data Directories tab, choose the folders in which SQL Server will
create the database and log files:

Choosing folders for the database and logs
13. 
Choose the Reporting Services to be installed. During the installation, we
have a choice to either install it or install and configure it automatically
during the installation process. Choose Install and configure:

Installing Reporting Services Reporting Services might be installed either on the same server where SQL
Server resides or on a separate one. If Reporting Services has a negative impact on SQL Server in some
way, it is possible to move it later to a separate machine.
14. 
The last step is a summary of our configuration of SQL Server. After
checkouts, if all the settings are as intended to be, we may start the
installation process.
15. The installation of SQL Server shouldn't take long. It is important to check
whether Reporting Services works properly, as it often happens that it is
somehow not configured correctly. To do the checkout, simply enter the
URL http://cm16/reports and check whether the website looks similar to the
following one:

Reporting Services home page
16. After installing server roles and all features, running Windows Update and
installing all the pending updates is highly recommended.

Installing Windows Assessment and
Deployment Kit
The next step of environment configuration before installing ConfigMgr is the
installation of special tool set:
1. The Windows Assessment and Deployment Kit can be downloaded from
the internet: https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/hardware/windows-assessment-depl
oyment-kit. The mentioned tool set needs to be installed before starting with
the ConfigMgr installation.
Keep in mind that the version of ADK needs to be compatible with
the ConfigMgr server. For ConfigMgr 1706, we need to choose the
ADK in version 1703.
2. After downloading the files from the internet, we can start the installation
process. The installer will ask whether we would like to anonymously send
data about the way we use ADK to Microsoft.
3. The next step is choosing the folder we would like ADK to be installed in:

ADK folder location
4. The last step is choosing which individual tools from the tool set shall be
installed. ConfigMgr requires the following components:
Deployment Tools
Windows Preinstallation Environment (Windows PE)
User State Migration Tool (USMT)
5. Additionally, Imaging And Configuration Designer (ICD) and
Configuration Designer can be installed. These are responsible for
creating installation packages for various Windows systems:

Finalizing ADK installation
After the ADK installation is finished, the next step will be installing the
ConfigMgr server.
The Windows ADK is required while installing the ConfigMgr
server. Unfortunately, after the server is installed, the ADK
package may be uninstalled. The ConfigMgr server will continue to
work; however, not all features related to deployments will be
working properly.

ConfigMgr server installation
After all prerequisites have been fulfilled, finally, the ConfigMgr server will be
installed. Before we start the installation, a couple of matters need to be
considered:
Three-character location code
The name of the ConfigMgr server
These two are used to identify a server in the hierarchy. Why are these two
things so essentially important? That's because these cannot be modified after
the server is installed. The only way to change them is to reinstall the ConfigMgr
server from scratch:
1. After starting the installer, the type of installation needs to be chosen.
Choose the primary site and the Install a Configuration Manager
primary site option:

Choosing the installation type
2. The ConfigMgr license comes along with Software Assurance. The installer
asks for the license key and the date until which Software Assurance is
valid:
License key and expiration date of Software Assurance
3. The next step is accepting the license terms for the application used by the
ConfigMgr server:

Accepting the license terms
4. The ConfigMgr installer does the checkout of prerequisites--if some
prerequisites haven't been met, the installer will try to install the missing
components. These files are downloaded from the internet and saved in a
location chosen by us--it might be a network share or a local folder on a
ConfigMgr server. If we installed ConfigMgr server or client somewhere in
the past, we might point the installer to this folder so it can be used, for
instance, to install another ConfigMgr server, and there will be no need to
download the required binaries again.
5. The mentioned folder also handles the install files of SQL Express, which
are used when installing the secondary site:

Choosing the folder location for installation files
The mentioned folder needs to be accessible after the ConfigMgr
server is installed. If this folder gets deleted, the installation of the
clients will not be available, as well as installing the secondary site
which leverages SQL Express.
6. The installer downloads files from the internet; if the download operation
finishes with success, the installer goes further:

Downloading files by the server installer
7. Working with the server, there is an opportunity to use many different
languages for the console as well as for clients. During installation, the
installer asks which versions of languages for console and clients should be
installed during the installation procedure:

Choosing the language packs
The ConfigMgr server console will adjust the installing language
automatically, depending on the operating system language it is being
installed on. The same happens with the client. English is the default
installed language, and unfortunately, this cannot be changed.
8. Next, the language for the clients needs to be chosen:

Choosing the language version for clients of ConfigMgr
9. After choosing the language, the installer will ask for the location name, the
server name, and the installation folder. As mentioned earlier, these two
settings cannot be modified after the server is installed, so we need to be
sure we provide the right data:

Setting the location and server name
10. ConfigMgr can work as a standalone unit, or it can cooperate with other
servers in the hierarchy. The decision about which option to choose is done
at this moment by the administrator:

Installing the standalone server connected to the hierarchy
11. After choosing the standalone installation option, the installer shows
information that the server might later be connected to the hierarchy:

Information about connecting the server to the hierarchy
12. Each ConfigMgr server saves data in the SQL. During deployment, the
installer asks for the FQDN of the server and the SQL instance, a person
who will be maintaining the ConfigMgr database. The default ConfigMgr
database name is CM_{location_code}. If there is a need, the database name
might be changed later:

Configuration related to SQL and database
There is a possibility of installing a database in another instance
than the default one. However, this is not the recommended state as
there might be issues related to the Reporting Service Point role.
Despite a situation where MS SQL and ConfigMgr server are
installed on one machine, two firewall ports still need to be
opened: 4022 and 1433. Otherwise, the ConfigMgr server will report
a configuration problem even if the server is functioning correctly.
13. During the installation, there is a possibility to point to another location
apart from the default one, where the database and logs will be created:

Configuring database and logs location
14. Each administration console instance connects to the ConfigMgr server
using SMS Provider (FQDN). The complete FQDN of this server needs to
be provided during the server installation. SMS Provider can be installed on
one machine only:

Configuring SMS Provider
15. Starting with ConfigMgr 2007, the server might work using the HTTP or
HTTPS mode. Depending on the needs, the mode needs to be set up during
the configuration:

Securing the communication channel between the server and ConfigMgr clients
Before configuring ConfigMgr to work in HTTPS, the PKI
infrastructure needs to be prepared. The ConfigMgr server uses
various certificates to secure communication between the server
and the clients. There is a possibility to change the mode after the
server is installed.
Each ConfigMgr installation has one fundamental tenet that has two roles,
management point and distribution point, which need to be deployed.
Management point supports communication between the server and the clients,
whereas distribution point shares all the binaries needed for configured
administrative actions with clients, for instance, application installation:

Configuring management point and distribution point
Microsoft, as a part of its continuous improvement process, gathers some usage
data from all the ConfigMgr servers. This feature cannot be completely turned
off; the only option is to lower the amount of shared data.
Along with ConfigMgr 1511, Microsoft has changed its approach for patching
the server and upgrades to new versions. Similarly to Windows Server,
ConfigMgr works in the current branch mode, and it searches for new patches
and versions and shows information on the console. The server role is
responsible for checking whether there are any new patches for the server, called
service connection point. We may install it or not--there is no requirement:

Configuring service connection point
Some of the features related to managing mobile devices or the
Intune service require service connection point to be installed on
the ConfigMgr server.
After configuring service connection point, the installer will sum up the settings
on screen:

Configuration summary
After all of the required data has been provided to the installer, check all the
prerequisites and requirements related to the operating system. There are two
types of statuses that can be experienced:
Critical: The error makes ConfigMgr unable to install, a situation that may
cause an error, for instance, lack of Windows ADK
Warning: The error does not influence the installation of the server, but its
future operational status, for instance, lack of an installed WSUS server

Configuration summary--checking for prerequisites
The actual ConfigMgr server installation shouldn't take longer than an hour:

End of ConfigMgr server installation
After the server is fully installed, it is always good to perform a checkout and
review whether all the components are working properly.

Checkouts after installation
Installation of the ConfigMgr server can be divided into two steps--installation
of the core server functionalities and the rest of the components. Server console
might be run after the first step of the installation is finished. However, shortly
after the installation, the console will still show errors about some components
that have not been configured--these will be resolved after the second step of the
installation is finished.
Once the second step is finished, setup.log located on the C:\ drive of the server
might be reviewed for any errors. The first functional test of the server is console
connectivity, and the health status of each single server's components may be
checked once it's connected to the console.
The Component Status tab shows the status of all server components:
All ConfigMgr server components' states
The Site Status tab shows the statuses of each single server role deployed during
the installation process:

All ConfigMgr server roles' states
Green OK statuses on each tab mean that the ConfigMgr server deployment
finished with success. Having properly installed the server, it is time to start the
configuration of single server components.

Summary
This chapter covered how to properly go through the process of ConfigMgr 1706
installation, which is not a hard task if you're well prepared. Main tasks included
installing the operating system, MS SQL Server, and the rest of the prerequisites.
Some configuration data also needs to be prepared, along with a few
fundamental decisions that need to be made, which has been also covered in this
chapter.
The next chapter covers configuring sites, boundaries, and boundary groups.
Boundaries define networks for managed devices, while boundary groups are
logical groups of boundaries. Proper configuration of these components is a
cornerstone for successful installation and communication between server and
clients.
 

Configure Sites and Boundaries
Before ConfigMgr clients are able to perform any tasks, server roles, as well as
features, need to be configured according to the project prepared. As the
previous chapter covered the topic of ConfigMgr installation, this chapter covers
the following topics:
ConfigMgr server role types
Installation modes on ConfigMgr server roles
Server roles installed and configured for ConfigMgr server
Installation and configuration of basic server role essentials in each
ConfigMgr deployment
Boundary types and their role in the ConfigMgr environment
Boundary group types and their role in the ConfigMgr environment
This chapter should provide you with sufficient knowledge to configure the
ConfigMgr server in a way that it is discoverable to clients so they can be
properly managed.
There is a whole range of settings for particular ConfigMgr functions. All of
them will be covered in later chapters, describing each server function. This
chapter covers fundamental server configuration.
 

ConfigMgr server role types
Server roles used by ConfigMgr can be divided into three groups--default,
mandatory, and optional roles. Default mandatory roles are ones that are
deployed by the installer and cannot be uninstalled or added manually. Optional
ones are the ones that the administrator installs on a chosen server system or,
sometimes, client, to implement a certain functionality. Good examples of such
optional features are a Software Update point and an Application Catalog.
 

Default roles
While installing ConfigMgr server or any of its particular roles, the default roles-
-mandatory for the environment--are installed. This is the list of default
ConfigMgr server roles:
Site server: This provides fundamental functionalities for the ConfigMgr
server.
Site system: This is the server that provides specific ConfigMgr
functionalities. The role is automatically installed while installing some of
the optional roles or when installing the ConfigMgr role.
Component system: This is the server that runs the SMS Executive
service, which means the server holds a site system role.
Site database server: This is the role installed on a server that holds the
SQL installed for the ConfigMgr server.
SMS Provider: This is the role installed with the ConfigMgr server, and it
enables communication between the server and the SQL database.
The SMS Provider server role is not visible from the server console.
These roles are installed with some default settings, and the administrator has
limited options for adjusting this setting. All other roles are optional ones, which
means the administrator can install them on any system.
 

Optional roles
An optional role is one that should be installed along with the ConfigMgr server
to add certain functionalities. The number of optional roles depend on the
planned functionalities of the server. Each and every role needs to be properly
configured. Some roles, such as a distribution point, might need to be configured
differently on each server.
The following is the list of optional server roles that are added to the
environment after the server is installed:
Application Catalog website point: A role handling the communication
between software library and Application Catalog website point; a website
where users can browse applications that have been published for them.
Asset Intelligence synchronization point: A server role that gains data from
the Asset Intelligence catalog and sends all application signatures to the
Asset Intelligence catalog. It is installed only on a central administration
site or standalone primary site server.
Certificate registration point: The server role that provides and maintains
certificates used by the ConfigMgr client.
Distribution point: The server role that provides source files with clients for
tasks that have been created by an administrator. It's one of the roles that
might be automatically installed when installing ConfigMgr server.
Endpoint Protection point: The server role that manages the endpoint
system protection system.
Fallback status point: The role that saves data about the status of the
ConfigMgr client's installation. Thanks to this, it is possible to find clients
that are not able to connect to the management point.
Management point: The server role that enables communication between
clients and the server.
Data Warehouse service point: The server role that synchronizes data from
Configuration Manager database to Data Warehouse database.
Cloud management gateway connections point: The server role that
manages the endpoint system protection system.
Enrollment point: This provides complete mobile device enrollment.

Enrollment proxy point: This manages enrollment requests from mobile
devices.
Reporting services point: This provides reporting from the SQL server
database.
Software update point: This provides integration of the ConfigMgr server
with WSUS, which enables you to manage patching from the ConfigMgr
server.
State migration point: This keeps user profiles during the operating system
deployment.
Service connection point: This connects to Microsoft Cloud. Thanks to this
role, the server is instantly informed about new updates and new server
versions. This role can be installed directly during server deployment or
later.
The following are the roles that might be automatically installed when installing
the ConfigMgr server:
Distribution point: The server role that provides source files with clients for
tasks that have been created by an administrator.
Management point: The server role that enables communication between
clients and the server.
Service connection point: This connects to Microsoft Cloud. Thanks to this
role, the server is instantly informed about new updates and new server
versions. This role can be installed directly during server deployment or
later.
Please note that at least one distribution point and management
point need to be installed in the environment in order to enable
client management.
Now let's take a closer look at roles that are configured during server
deployment.

Roles installed during server
deployment
What follows is the description of all the server roles that might be installed
during the ConfigMgr server deployment.

Site server
The site server role is always installed during ConfigMgr deployment. It is not
possible to change preferences of this role or remove it.

Site system
The site system role is always installed on a computer that provides specific
functions for the ConfigMgr environment. It is installed by the ConfigMgr server
installer and if any ConfigMgr server role is going to be installed on an operating
system.
It happens, for instance, when the administrator installs a Reporting Service
point. During role installation, the installer configures the site system role as
well as the Reporting Service point role: 
Site system role configuration
The role might be installed on more than one operating system. It is most
common in larger environments where each server role is on a separate operating

system. In certain circumstances, we might change the configuration of this role.

Site database server
The site database role is automatically installed during the deployment of each
ConfigMgr server type, as each saves data in the database. This role cannot be
uninstalled.
Administrators managing environments with more than one ConfigMgr server
might change the configuration of this role, for instance, by enabling the
compression of data synchronized between SQL Servers: 
Site database role configuration
The administrator can also change the port used by the SQL service broker for
connection between SQL Servers. There is also a possibility of moving
ConfigMgr SQL database to another machine after the server is installed.

Service connection point
The service connection point is a fundamental role, but it's still optional. Why,
though? The administrator might install it during server deployment or after. It
can be removed anytime and the server will continue to work properly.
The role connects to Microsoft Cloud service and checks for any new updates
that might be applied and whether a new version of the system is available. This
role works under two modes. One is where the system checks for updates
automatically and the second where it needs to be triggered by the administrator
manually. The mentioned role is needed also for mobile device management
when using Microsoft InTune (it replaces the older, already depreciated
Windows Intune Connector role) and to manage on-premise devices with Mobile
Device Management. This role is installed for the whole hierarchy.
 

Distribution point
A distribution point provides source files to clients for tasks that have been
created by an administrator. These files are needed for operating system
installation, releasing patches, and software deployment. To make use of this
functionality, at least one distribution point server, assigned to proper boundary
groups, needs to be installed in the environment: 
Distribution point default settings
This role is configured depending on the functions distribution points needs to
provide. Additional configuration is also needed if the role is to support
Windows Deployment Services. The server might be installed and configured
during ConfigMgr deployment or later, being added to an existing deployment.

Management point
The management point role is the most important role in the whole ConfigMgr
environment. It enables communication between ConfigMgr and its clients. If
management point, or IIS, which handles the communication--is not working
correctly, clients instantly become unmanageable. Clients won't be able to
download policies or send any data to the server.
For this reason, it is an important administrator task to check whether the
management point works properly on a regular, daily basis. The verification
method is very easy--if at least one client communicates with the management
point, it ensures the role works correctly. If some of the other systems encounter
problems communicating with the server, the resolution needs to be searched on
the client side, not the management point: 
Management point default settings
To get alerts about management point accessibility issues, the
administrator might want to select the Generate alert when the
management point is not healthy option.
Each management point might have a different configuration; for instance, when

publishing a management point in the DMZ zone, it needs to be secured with a
certificate to work in the HTTPS mode. It might be installed and configured
during ConfigMgr deployment or added to the existing ConfigMgr server later.

Methods of installing server roles
Server roles might be added to an environment at any suitable time. The same
roles might be removed in the same way if the administrator no longer plans to
utilize them or the concept of usage of ConfigMgr has changed.
Adding new server roles isn't problematic; however, the installation of a new
role requires providing an account with local administrator rights; just having
access to the ConfigMgr console is not enough, and installation will not be
successful.
There are two installation methods:
Create the site system role: The wizard used to install server roles on a
computer that is not already handling any roles in the ConfigMgr
environment
Add site system role: The wizard that enables the installation of a new role
on a computer that already provides some roles in the ConfigMgr
environment
Whether the role installation has been successful or not can be
confirmed in the ConfigMgr console or by reviewing certain log
files.
Wizards differ among themselves, usually only with the first screen. In all
further settings, starting from proxy settings, all the steps are identical regardless
of which wizard has been run.
All of the wizard steps will be described later in the book.

Create site system server
The Create Site System Server Wizard that is used to install roles on the newly
added environment server, can be found in the tab under Administration\Site
Configuration\Sites.
As this wizard installs roles on the new server, there is a need to identify which
computer will provide the role and assign it to the appropriate site. This wizard
can be run on the standalone primary server, central administration site server, as
well as a primary site server working in a hierarchy:
Pointing computer on which certain server role will be installed
The Site System Installation Account option is used to provide the Active
Directory account that has appropriate permissions on the remote computer

needed to perform an installation. Clicking on the Next button moves the wizard
to the Proxy settings. The next steps, are to choose the server role and its
installation.

Add site system role
The Add Site System Roles Wizard can be run from the Administration\Site
Configuration\Servers and Site System Roles tab. The first step is to mark the chosen
server and chose the Add Site System Roles option.
In this particular case, there is no need to point to a specific server name on
which a role will be installed or assigned to a site; as this data is automatically
populated when choosing an existing ConfigMgr server already assigned to a
site, and this has been done in this example: 
Installing a server role on a server already existing in a hierarchy
The Site System Installation Account option is used to provide the Active
Directory account that has appropriate permissions on the remote computer
needed to perform an installation. Further steps look exactly the same as when
choosing the Add Site System Roles option.

Fundamental optional server roles
There are a few optional server roles that should always be installed. ConfigMgr
will be fully functional without them; however, administration and reporting will
be much more difficult.
These roles are as follows:
Fallback status point
Reporting service point
Application Catalog
Description and installation steps for the aforementioned roles are presented in
the upcoming section.

Fallback status point
Fallback status point is a server role that allows you to collect data about the
ConfigMgr client installation's progress as well as issues about assigning clients
to sites and communication with the management point. For these reasons, this
role is always highly recommended for installation.
Depending on where the role is installed, the administrators need to pick the Add
Site System Roles or Create Site System Server option in the wizard and choose
Fallback status point as a role to be installed. The configuration of this role is
fairly easy and comes down to choosing values for two options--how many
communications the role should process, and in what time intervals.
The installation of this role process is quite fast, and the status of the installation
process can be checked using Status Messages Queries in the Administration\System
Status\Status Message Queries tab. On the aforementioned tab, the administrator
needs to choose All Status Message and then Show Messages; the ConfigMgr
console should now show all status messages related to a particular server.
To check the status of SMS_FALLBACK_STATUS_POINT, the administrator needs to find this
component and then look for information that the component has been
successfully started.
The mentioned method might help in diagnosing a single server
and all its components.

Reporting service point
A reporting service point is an optional ConfigMgr server role; however, it is
hard to imagine daily work with a server without reporting the capability. The
console of ConfigMgr 1706 shows a lot more than what used to happen on
ConfigMgr 2007; however, it would still be difficult to operate with reports.
Reports have data that's useful not just for administrators or server operators;
often, default reports and reports created by administrators, in particular, are
shared with other employees. This is possible thanks to the option of providing
permissions for reading reports for Active Directory users or groups.
To install a role, the administrator should choose between Add Site System
Roles or Create Site System Server option and then select Reporting service
point as the desired role.
Information needed for the Reporting service point role installation is as follows:
The name of the SQL Server
The name of the ConfigMgr database for which Reporting service point is
installed
The folder name in which reports will be configured
The instance of Reporting Services
The username with permissions for Reporting service point installation
The Verify option helps in data validation, telling the administrator if all given
pieces of information are correct and all components are accessible: 

Reporting service point installation After having all the data validated, the next step is the actual installation
of the role: 

Settings for Reporting service point after validating data The actual installation shouldn't take long. If the
reporting services has been installed correctly, validation can be done by opening any report. Report
accessibility on the ConfigMgr server console means that the installation of the Reporting service point role
was completed successfully. All the reports are available in the Monitoring\Reporting\Reports tab. To
verify a successful installation, any report should be run and checked for whether it contains any data.
When running reports with large amounts of data, in cases where
the SQL Server shares the same machine with the ConfigMgr
server, it might significantly degrade the performance of the
ConfigMgr server. Separating Reporting Services is always worth
considering.

Application Catalog
In version 2007, ConfigMgr server was granting permissions to users to install
software based on collections. Starting with version 2012, this ability has been
developed and has improved. Users can now install an application assigned to
them using the server role called Application Catalog. It is an optional role;
however, the implementation of the mechanism for application assignment
management is important for company management. Therefore, this role--
despite being optional--is automatically installed during each ConfigMgr server
deployment.
To install a role, the administrator needs to choose Add Site System Roles or
Create Site System Server to run the wizard; next, it chooses the desired role,
which will be Application Catalog web service point and Application Catalog
website point.
First, settings that need to be configured are for the Application Catalog website
point. Usually, the protocol needs to be changed from HTTP to HTTPS: 
Application Catalog web service point settings.
The next step is to configure the settings of the Application Catalog website
point. Here, similarly to the previous step, the HTTP protocol needs to be

changed to HTTPS: 
Application Catalog website point settings ConfigMgr cannot work with more than one Application Catalog
role. It is acceptable to install one Application Catalog in the LAN network while having the second one in
the DMZ zone for external clients. HTTP/HTTPS settings might differ for these two configurations.
The last step in configuring this role, before the installation, is setting up a name
under which it will be published for the users in the Application Catalog, as well
as the theme color of this website. To check whether the role has been installed
correctly, the administrator can visit this website to check whether it is displayed
correctly: http://cm16/CMApplicationCatalog: 

Application Catalog website with apps assigned to the user Properly displaying the Application Catalog
website does not depend only on the ConfigMgr server role and its proper installation. To display the
content properly, the user will need Microsoft Silverlight installed.
All the other server roles are installed on the server depending on the role they
will play in the environment. The roles described here should always be installed
during each deployment.

ConfigMgr server settings
Apart from installing and configuring particular server roles, the administrator
needs to configure a few additional settings in various places that relate to the
whole environment. Places for these settings are as follows:
Hierarchy site settings: The place to configure settings related to
hierarchy. These settings need to be configured even when the environment
is contained from one primary site server.
Primary site settings: The place to configure settings for a single primary
site server.
The settings that are about to be discussed are important, not only from the
functional point of view, but they also play important role in securing the system.
 

Hierarchy site settings
Settings for the hierarchy are placed under the Administration\Site
Configuration\Sites tab. After choosing the site, the administrator needs to choose
Hierarchy Settings. The General tab is used for setting up the way clients will
cooperate with management points. The Use a fallback site option means that
clients might automatically switch to another site if theirs is unavailable. The
Clients prefer to use management points specified in boundary groups option
means that clients will be using the preferred management point. The Consent to
use Pre-Release features option means that, when installing a new version of
ConfigMgr or installing upgrades, new features will be enabled by default, even
if these features are still in the testing phase by Microsoft: 
Settings for hierarchy The Licensing tab provides the option of setting dates when Software Assurance is
bought. Until the date is reached, the server will automatically check for any new version or updates and
download them.
The Client Approval and Conflicting Records tab is very important for security
reasons and computers managed by ConfigMgr clients. By default, if the client is
in the same domain as the server, it connects to it automatically and will be

managed. Client approval methods set up a way in which clients will be accepted
by the server. The safest and most restrictive way is to set the manual acceptance
method by an administrator. Until the administrator accepts a new client,
communication will not be possible. The Conflicting client records is about
published duplicated entries about the same ConfigMgr client.
The most secure as well as the most restrictive way is to set the acceptance to be
performed manually by server administrators. Until administrators accept the
client, it will not be able to communicate and be managed by the server. The
Conflicting client records options are related to managing duplicated entries of
the same client; these conflicts can be resolved by the server or by the
administrator using the console.
Client Approval and Conflicting Records settings The last tab in the hierarchy settings is Client Upgrade.
After installing new upgrades to the server or installing a new version, there is a need to install a new
version of the client. This can be achieved in two ways, manually or automatically, after setting the proper
configuration on the server. By default, the server does not install new client versions automatically. This
kind of deployment needs to be prepared by the administrator. Settings for automatic deployment of the
clients are under the Client Upgrade tab.

The Upgrade all clients in the hierarchy using production client option enables
the automatic upgrade of all clients in the hierarchy. Upgrade all clients in the
pre-production collection automatically using pre-production client enables the
installation of new client versions on an endpoint based on a particular
collection. The Exclude specified clients from upgrade option allows you to
exclude specific computers from automatic settings. Automatically distribute
client installation package to distribution points that are enabled for prestaged
content allows you to send a package to the endpoint and the installation of the
client even if the distribution point works in a prestaged mode. When installing a
new client version, it is good to consider installing it first on the pilot group, and
later--if the pilot was successful--deploy this new version to production: 

Client Upgrade settings Remember that Hierarchy Settings work for a single primary site server as well as
for the whole hierarchy if these are configured on a central administration site server.

Primary site settings
Primary site settings are settings for a particular ConfigMgr site. The settings are
located under the Administration\Site Configuration\Sites tab; to view them, the
administrator needs to pick the site and then choose Properties. The Client
Computer Communication tab is used to configure a protocol that will be used
for communication between the server and clients. By default, it is HTTP: 
ConfigMgr communication protocol settings The Publishing tab is used to check whether the server
automatically publishes information about the management point in DNS. By default, this option is turned
on, and it's better not to turn it off. Having it on will let clients find management point more easily.
The Deployment Verification tab lets us configure very useful settings for the
server. ConfigMgr is a very useful and a powerful tool, but, if badly
administrated, it may cause some real harm, especially when talking about
operating system deployment. That is why the previously mentioned tab is so
important. In the Collection size limits tab, the Default size option sets the limit
for a collection beyond which the collection won't be visible when deploying

operating systems. Always hide collections that have more members than the
maximum size sets the maximum limit of the collection, beyond which it will be
hidden. The Collections with site system servers option forbids you from
deploying the operating system if at least one endpoint is a server: 
Deployment Verification settings Deploying operating systems using ConfigMgr is one of the most
dangerous server features. It is recommended that you perform all operations with due diligence.

Discovery Methods
All operations that clients perform are assigned to a collection. A collection is
nothing but a set of objects (devices, computers, AD groups, and AD users)
meeting the configured requirements. To use these objects to create a collection,
the administrator first needs to create these from the console or configure the
server in such a way that it will find the endpoints and save them in the database.
The database of the ConfigMgr server has nothing in common with
the AD database. If an object is deleted in the ConfigMgr console,
it will still remain in the AD database.
After installing the server, in the console, under Assets and Compliance\Devices, only
devices with a ConfigMgr server role are visible. Assets and Compliance\Users, also,
won't contain any objects.
The ConfigMgr server discovers objects based on built-in methods. Related to
types of Active Directory, Heartbeat Discovery and Network Discovery.
Heartbeat Discovery works a bit differently to other methods because it is the
ConfigMgr client that sends information and updates about the system it works
on. All the other methods are managed and run by the ConfigMgr server.
The following is a list of all the available methods:
Active Directory Forest Discovery: Discovers the forest and all domains in
the forest AD locations and sub-networks assigned to locations. It has the
ability to publish information about the ConfigMgr server in the AD. It's
turned off by default.
Active Directory Group Discovery: Discovers AD security groups and
basic information about these groups. It's turned off by default.
Active Directory System Discovery: Discovers AD computer accounts and
basic information about these accounts. It's turned off by default.
Active Directory User Discovery: Discovers AD user accounts and basic
information about these accounts. It's turned off by default.
Heartbeat Discovery: According to a certain schedule, clients send
information about the endpoint on which they are installed along with some

basic information about this endpoint. Based on this, ConfigMgr can
recognize that these clients are active. It's turned on by default.
Network Discovery: Discovers devices in the network by the IP address and
saves them in the database. As this method is rarely used, we won't focus on
it in this book. It's turned off by default.

Active Directory Discovery Methods
Discovery Methods related to Active Directory have a common configuration
set. All of these have the following settings:
Polling Schedule: This sets the schedule that tells how often objects
discovery should be performed
Active Directory Attributes: This sets additional AD object attributes that
will be saved in the ConfigMgr database
The Polling Schedule tab is used to set the schedule of the Active Directory
discovery; there might be a different schedule for each and every AD object
type. By default, the Enable delta discovery option is enabled; it means that the
ConfigMgr server in a given schedule goes through AD and saves information
about the objects it already knows, only for the attributes that it has changed: 
Active Directory scanning schedule setting The Active Directory Attributes tab helps set additional AD
object attributes that will be saved in the ConfigMgr data, apart from the ones saved by default: 

Active Directory Attributes settings All remaining settings are different for each type of Active Directory
object discovery.

Active Directory Forest Discovery
The Active Directory Forest Discovery method was introduced in ConfigMgr
2012. This method discovers the domain forest, all domains in this forest, AD
locations, and sub-networks assigned to this location. After discovering these
objects, the server might automatically create boundaries. It is possible to create
a schedule of how often such discovery will be performed, so, if there were some
changes in the environment, they would be included in the next scheduled
discovery cycle.
Apart from discovering data, this method also has the ability to publish AD
information for clients to let them find an assigned management point or
distribution point. This capability is very useful if the ConfigMgr server
manages clients from many different domains and AD forests--especially those
that are not trusted.
 

Active Directory User Discovery
The Active Directory User Discovery method can discover Active Directory user
accounts along with the set of attributes. The General tab is used to turn on the
method as well as to set where--for instance in which OU--the server will
discover objects.
The administrator can point to the whole domain, a certain OUs, or a couple of
them: 
Active Directory Container settings
After configuring discovery, proper configuration can be confirmed by looking
at the adusrdis.log log placed in the C:\Program file\Microsoft Configuration
Manager\Logs folder. Immediately after objects are discovered, these should be
visible on the console in Assets and Compliance\Users.
Active Directory User Discovery disregards disabled AD accounts;
these accounts will not be saved in the ConfigMgr database.

Active Directory System Discovery
The Active Directory System Discovery method allows you to discover
computer accounts in the Active Directory similarly to the previously described
method; also, a scheduler needs to be set along with a location where objects
will be searched. If the administrator would like to use this method, it needs to
be turned on in the General tab.
The ConfigMgr server does not check whether the discovered
object actually exists in the network. It just pools an AD controller
for objects and attributes.
It is possible to specify the whole domain, a particular OU, or a couple of OUs.
Specifying where the discovery should be run Starting from ConfigMgr 2012, some very important and
useful sets of settings were introduced. The ConfigMgr database will save only those objects in the database
that are actually used by users. In versions prior to 2012, the server was skipping objects that were turned
off, but all other objects were saved in the database.

In the Options tab, it is possible to specify additional attributes and their values
that need to be met to add an endpoint to the ConfigMgr database:
The Only discover computers that have logged on to a domain in a given
period of time option specifies the time span after which--if the endpoint
hasn't logged in the meantime into a domain--a particular endpoint won't be
added to the ConfigMgr database.
The Only discover computers that have updated their computer account
password in a given period of time option specifies the time span after
which--if the endpoint hasn't changed the domain password in the
meantime--a particular endpoint won't be added to the ConfigMgr database.
If both of these options are selected, then only endpoints that meet both
requirements will be added to the ConfigMgr database: 
Options--Active Directory System Discovery settings The same settings as for the Active Directory System
Discovery apply to the Active Directory Group Discovery method. After its configuration is finished, the
proper work can be checked in the adsysdis.log log file, placed under C:\Program file\Microsoft
Configuration Manager\Logs. Immediately after new objects are discovered by the server, they are visible
in the console under Assets and Compliance\Devices.
Active Directory System Discovery skips disabled computer
accounts; hence, these objects won't be added to the ConfigMgr
database.

Active Directory Group Discovery
The Active Directory Group Discovery method discovers security groups in the
Active Directory. As with other methods, it is possible to set a schedule and a
place where the ConfigMgr server will be looking for objects. In the case of this
method, the way of identifying the lookup location is a bit different--in the
General tab after clicking Add administrator can specify a group which will be
searched or a location which will have a wider discovery scope. ConfigMgr
might look for a certain place using the Locations option or some other groups
using the Groups option; it is also possible to combine these two options.
As with Active Directory System Discovery, this method also has the additional
ability of filtering by the conditions that the objects need to meet in order for
them to be saved in the ConfigMgr database. The first two options are the same
as for the computer accounts, and there is also a third option: Discover the
membership of distribution groups. The third option also adds members of the
discovered group to the database:
Active Directory Groups Discovery settings To confirm that discovery is working as expected, the
administrator can examine the adsgdis.log log file, located under C:\Program file\Microsoft

Configuration Manager\Logs. Immediately after new objects are discovered by the server, they are visible
in the console under Assets and Compliance\Devices.

Heartbeat Discovery
Heartbeat Discovery is a slightly different method compared to others. For all
those managed by the server, it is a server that does all the queries and discovery
in accordance with the settings. For Heartbeat Discovery, only the schedule can
be set, and clients are the ones who--according to the schedule--send data to the
server about them and their operating system state.
Despite it being possible, Heartbeat Discovery should never be
turned off. Turning it off will result in the absence of updates about
clients and their operating systems.
 

Boundary and boundary groups
Boundaries and Boundary groups are very important configuration elements,
as misconfiguration in this field will result in a lack of communication between
clients and the server and the impossibility of deploying new clients. This part of
configuration retains the same set of settings as it used in ConfigMgr 2007, with
just one significant difference. Starting from ConfigMgr 1706, just after the
server is installed, the default boundary group for ConfigMgr site is created.
Each site has defined its own default boundary group.
In the case of a small deployment, or deployments with only one site, all clients
can use only one boundary group. In the case of a larger number of endpoints or
many locations, additional boundary groups will be configured to manage access
to shares and client-server communication in a well-controlled manner.
The main objective of boundary groups is to tell clients about the server to which
they have been assigned. Apart from that, they help in finding other assigned
services/servers, such as the following:
Distribution point for content location
Software update point
State migration point
Preferred management point
The boundary group to which clients have been assigned is called current
boundary group. The client always tries to use the site system server to which it
has been assigned by the current boundary group. If it is possible, it will try to
use the process called fallback.
If the administrator assigns many site systems to many boundary groups, this
will provide an HA solution in case any of them are not accessible. For each
boundary group, the administrator can create a one-way link to the other
boundary group; this kind of link is called a relationship. A boundary group
assigned to a current boundary group is called a neighbor. Each of the boundary
groups might have many different relationships.

If servers in the current site system are not available, clients will try to
communicate with these in neighbor boundary groups. This process is called
fallback. The relationship can be configured in the Relationships tab, separately
for each boundary group. When configuring a boundary group, the administrator
can decide whether to allow a fallback mechanism or not.
Each boundary group created by an administrator has configured an implied link
to default-site-boundary-group. That link has the default fallback set to 120 minutes.
Clients who haven't been assigned to a boundary group always use default-site-
boundary-group to identify servers they need to cooperate with.
Boundaries, on the other hand, are used to specify what IP addresses need to be
managed by a particular ConfigMgr server, and by assigning them to the
boundary group administrator, they specify which management point or
distribution point is assigned to clients.

Configuring boundaries
When preparing for the creation of boundaries, the administrator needs to know
in which way it needs to determine IP scopes that would be assigned to the
boundary. There are a couple of boundary types, and each and every type has
some advantages as well as some disadvantages.
After being assigned to a boundary group, the ConfigMgr client knows with
which management point and distribution point it will cooperate. The following
types of boundaries are available:
IP subnet: This is a boundary defined with a subnet. It's easy in
configuration, but if the network administrator changes IP addressing--it
also brings changes to client assignment in ConfigMgr for the management
point or distribution point. Additionally, ConfigMgr does not support some
subnet types such as supernet networks.
Active Directory site: This is the boundary defined by affiliation to the AD
location. It has easy configuration, and its disadvantage is the same as that
for IP subnets.
IPv6 prefix: The boundary is defined based on the IPv6 prefix.
IP address range: The boundary is defined based on IP address ranges. It's
the most time consuming, but at the same time, it's the most precise as well.
It is possible to use all types of boundaries at once as well as using only one
type--it is an individual case and very much associated with the environment
where the deployment takes place.
In the majority of ConfigMgr deployments, the IP range method is
used. This method is more time consuming than the others, but
using it helps tell very precisely which IP address will be managed
by which ConfigMgr server.
If the AD schema is extended when installing the ConfigMgr server, then the
System Management container will store information about the following:
Information about which servers have a management point role installed

Information about the available domain/forest/sites for ConfigMgr
Ports used for client-to-server communication
Information about content deployment
Proper configuration of boundaries and boundary groups requires
cooperation between AD and network administrators, especially if
boundary ranges are set by a method other than the IP range.
In case clients are not doing their tasks or are facing
communication issues and if the information stored in System
Management was not deleted or changed/updated as an outcome of
environment configuration changes, it is good to start
troubleshooting from the boundaries configuration.

Manually created boundaries
Proper boundary configuration needs to be in place to ensure that clients can
discover a management point, distribution point, or software update point
correctly. Boundary creation is available under Administration\Hierarchy
Configuration\Boundaries. In the General tab, the administrator selects the type of
created boundary as well as filling in its Description. After choosing the right
type, the administrator needs to specify the range accordingly: 
Setting up a boundary with an IP range.
In the Boundary Groups tab, the administrator can add boundary to boundary
groups. This can also be done when creating a boundary group initially.
Even when there are a few ConfigMgr servers connected in one
structure, they do not share information about the created
boundaries on them. Because of this, it is not hard to set the same

boundaries on two different servers, which will certainly cause
clients to work incorrectly.

Automatically created boundaries
By turning on Active Directory Forest Discovery, boundaries will be created
automatically by the ConfigMgr server. It scans AD, and, based on that, it
creates the boundaries as well as updates them when a change is acknowledged.
There are no differences between them, and these are created manually by an
administrator; after boundaries are created, they need to be added to appropriate
boundary groups.
 

Configuring boundary groups
After creating boundaries, the next step is creating boundary groups. Boundary
groups are used to point the clients to their assigned management point,
distribution point, and software update point.
There might be more than one boundary assigned to a boundary group.
ConfigMgr 1706 introduces a new boundary group type: Site-Default-Boundary-
Group<site code>. It is automatically created when a server is installed. When no
boundary group is created, all boundaries are assigned to the default boundary
group. For this reason, for this group, a management point, distribution point,
and software update point should be assigned.
 

Default boundary group
For each ConfigMgr site, during installation, there is a default boundary group
created: Site-Default-Boundary-Group<site code> and a management point and
distribution point should also be assigned to it. As mentioned, when clients are
in a boundary that is not assigned to any boundary group, it will allow them to
connect to the ConfigMgr server.
Here is an example configuration of a ConfigMgr site with one default boundary
group and three boundary groups created by administrators. For each additional
boundary group, a distribution point has been assigned, including the default: 
Communication between boundary groups In this configuration, these are the points to remember:
The client in the current boundary group (BG-A) will try to communicate
with server distribution point (DP_A) from its own boundary group.
If communication fails, after 15 min--according to the set relationship--it
will add distribution point from boundary group (BG-B) to the list of
distribution points, and every 2 minutes, it will try to communicate with
both distribution points (DP_A, DP_B).
If there are issues still, after 30 min, it will add a distribution point from
boundary group (BG-C). Every 2 min, it will now try to communicate with
three distribution points from the list (DP_A, DP_B, DP_C).
Finally, if there is still no distribution point available, after the next 60 min,
the client will add a distribution point for the default boundary group to the
list, under the condition that the fallback option is enabled.

In the General tab, the administrator can check what boundaries are assigned to a
boundary group. The References tab allows you to add the site systems that are
related to it. The Use this boundary group for site assignment option is always
turned on for the default boundary group, which means that all endpoints within
this boundary will be assigned to this site: 
Adding site system server to the default boundary group In the Default Behavior tab, the administrator can
decide whether to allow fallback for the distribution point or management point and change the default
fallback time.
By configuring many different boundary groups and connections between them,
it is possible to decide precisely where a particular client will be looking for a
distribution point or management point.
To enable a client to connect to a distribution point outside of the
assigned boundary group, Allow clients to use a fallback source
location for content needs to be enabled. If this option is disabled,
clients not in a particular boundary will not connect to its
distribution point.
If there is no boundary group created by administrators, clients will

try to connect to the server from the default boundary group. It will
be possible under the condition that in Hierarchy Settings, under
the General tab, Use a fallback site will be enabled, and will point
to the particular ConfigMgr site.

Manual creation of boundary groups
The creation of boundary groups is done from Administration\Hierarchy
Configuration\Boundary Groups. In the General tab, the administrator adds the
previously created boundaries, and more than one boundary can be added here: 
Adding boundaries to boundary group In the References tab, the administrator adds the site system server
that will be assigned to this boundary group; the administrator can select more than one site system.
After creating a boundary group, it is possible to change its settings in the
Relationships tab by assigning a proper boundary. This is also the place where
the administrator can enable fallback and change its time to wait; this setting can
be provided separately for a Distribution Point and Software Update Point: 

Fallback configuration for boundary group

Summary
This chapter covered topics such as ConfigMgr server role types and installation
modes on ConfigMgr server roles. You could also learn about the server roles
installed and configured for the ConfigMgr server, as well as the installation and
configuration of basic server role essentials in each ConfigMgr deployment.
The chapter also covered topics related to the boundary and boundary groups
such as boundary types and their role in the ConfigMgr environment and
boundary groups types and their role in the ConfigMgr environment.
After installing the server and configuring its boundaries and boundary group,
the next step is to install clients on operating systems that should be managed by
the ConfigMgr server.

Configuration Manager Agent
Installation
Previous chapters described the fundamentals of ConfigMgr server installation
and configuration. To manage endpoints in the environments, the ConfigMgr
server needs to have the client installed on these computers. This chapter covers
how to prepare the environment to install ConfigMgr clients.
The list of the environment prerequisites when planning to install clients is as
follows:
Client operating systems need to meet all the prerequisites
An installation account or accounts in the Active Directory need to have
local administrator permissions on endpoints
An appropriate Group Policy Object (GPO) should be configured if the
plan is to deploy clients via GPO
Properly configured boundaries and boundary groups
At least one installed and working management point
Management points need to have at least one boundary assigned
The installation of ConfigMgr clients is not difficult. The most important factors
are to understand the process and check whether the installation of the clients
has been successful.
It is considered that the client's installation has been completed
successfully when the computer is able to communicate with the
assigned management point, which means that the endpoint is
manageable.

Operating systems requirements
As has been mentioned previously, the installation of the client is not a difficult
task. However, for installation to go smoothly, it is important to know one
important detail--an operating system on which the ConfigMgr client will work
needs to meet some prerequisites regarding the installed software.
The client installer checks for all the prerequisites; if these are met, the installer
starts its work.
Prerequisites for the operating system as follows:
Windows Installer version 3.1.4000.2435
BITS version 2.5 or higher
Windows Update Agent version 7.0.6000.363
Microsoft Remote Differential Compression
Components that--if missing--are installed by the ConfigMgr client installer are
as follows:
Microsoft Core XML Services version 6.20.5002 or higher
Microsoft Visual C++ 2013 Redistributable version 12.0.21005.1
Microsoft Policy Platform version 1.2.3514.0
Microsoft Silverlight version 4.0.50524.0 or higher
Microsoft .NET Framework 4 Client Profile
If the operating system is missing at least one of these components,
the installation will fail.

ConfigMgr client installation
The installation of the ConfigMgr client always include three steps regardless of
the chosen method:
1. Check whether the operating system meets all the initial requirements as
well as the additional software requirements.
2. The next step is the ConfigMgr client installation. Step 1 and step 2 are
completely separate tasks performed during installation.
3. Then, we find the assigned management point, which is searched based on
the information found in the Active Directory, or the information given in
the installer using the SMSMP switch.
Client installation is triggered by the ccmsetup.exe or ccmsetup.msi file when using
GPO.
The ccmsetup.exe file performs the first step of installation. If it completes
successfully, then it runs client.msi, which performs the actual client installation.
 

Installation methods
The ConfigMgr server provides various client installation methods.
This book describes the most common methods, which are as follows:
Client push installation performed automatically by the ConfigMgr server
Manual installation triggered by the administrator from the server console
Manual installation

Client push
The Client push installation is a very convenient method of deploying
ConfigMgr clients. As it is an automatic installation, it is important to configure
settings in order to avoid accidentally installing the client where it shouldn't or
mustn't be installed.
Client push installation is not enabled by default; it has to be enabled manually.
To configure it, the following actions need to be performed:
1. Enable client push installation.
2. Configure installation accounts for the ConfigMgr server.
3. Configure GPO for endpoints.
GPO should enable two firewall exceptions to be configured--File and Print
Sharing and Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI).
Client push settings are located in the console under the Administration\Site
Configuration\Sites tab and later Client Installation Settings | Client Push
Installation. In the General tab, installation should be enabled as well as being
placed to indicate the endpoints on which the client should be installed. The
available options are as follows:
Servers: Server systems
Workstations: Client workstations
Configuration Manager site system servers: Server systems with at least one
ConfigMgr server role installed
By default, the Never install the Configuration Manager client on domain
controllers unless specified in the Client Push Installation Wizard option is
turned on. Thanks to that, ConfigMgr clients will never be installed on the

domain controller: 
General client push installation settings The Accounts tab has settings used to configure accounts used to
install ConfigMgr clients on endpoints; there may be more than one account. The ConfigMgr server will try
to connect to endpoints using given accounts, and it will use them one by one while trying to connect: 
Accounts for client push installation When providing credentials for installation accounts, these are not
verified against domain controllers.
The Installation Properties tab is used to configure switches used for the
installation. By default, there is only one switch here, SMSISTECODE=<site name>; in
this example, it is SMSSITECODCE=PA1. It is always worth adding SMSFPS=<Failback Status
Point FQDN>; in this example, it is SMSFSP=CM16.DOCTOR.COM. There are a lot of different
switches used for client installation, but the two mentioned are the most

important: 
Installation Properties settings After enabling client push installation, the ConfigMgr server starts
installation of the clients according to the settings configured in Discovery Methods on endpoints that are
still missing the client. It connects to the administrative share $ADMIN and copies the ccmsetup.exe file and
runs it. This process can be monitored in the ccm.log log file, located in C:\Program
files\Configuration Manager\Logs.
During client installation, the following server roles are leveraged:
Management point: This is used by the installer to download the files
needed for the prerequisites and the client itself
Fallback status point: This discovers the installation status and saves it in
the MS SQL database
Software update point: This role is used if the client is installed by
leveraging WSUS
Distribution point: This is used by the client during client installation
Reporting service point: This is used to generate the report
Client Push Installation settings work for the whole ConfigMgr
site.

Installing from the console
Automatic client installation using client push is one of the available methods.
Installation can also be triggered manually from the server console. To install a
client, the administrator needs to highlight the endpoint (or endpoints) in the
console and use the Install Client option--the client installation wizard will
appear.
Installation settings can be configured in the Install Options tab. The Allow the
client software to be installed on domain controllers option allows the
installation of the client on a domain controller. The Always install the client
software option installs the client even if it is already present in the endpoint--
this method is often used to repair corrupted clients--it is one of the first methods
when trying to repair the client and it often helps.
The Install the client software from a specified site option is always enabled. It is
used to identify a site from which client installation will be performed: 
Install client options settings The outcome of the wizard or client push installation can be viewed in the

ccm.log file: 
Outcome of client install wizard If the ConfigMgr server cannot connect or find an endpoint in which the
client needs to be installed, it will try to connect to it every hour for the next 7 days.

Manual installation on the operating
system
Manual installation of the ConfigMgr client can be divided into two modes:
Running the ccmsetup.exe file without switches: This mode is used if the
client is installed on an endpoint in the Active Directory domain with
extended schema. The installer will get all the required information about
the assigned ConfigMgr server from the AD.
Running the ccmsetup.exe file with switches: This mode is used when the
administrator needs to, or would like to, provide the installer with the
required information. It is mostly used to install clients on computers in a
workgroup and operating systems other than Windows.
After the ConfigMgr server installation, all binaries needed for client installation
can be found under \\cm16\SMA_PA1\Client. To install the client manually, all the
administrator needs to do is run ccmsetup.exe from this share, and copy the whole
folder to the destination endpoint and run it from there:
Folder with ConfigMgr client binaries
After running ccmsetup.exe, the installer copies the required files to
C:\windows\ccmsetup. That folder remains unchanged for all Windows operating
systems, servers, as well as clients:

Folder with installation binaries of ConfigMgr client, used for installation
The C:\windows\ccmsetup\logs folder holds all logs related to client installation as
well as installation of all the components needed for the client to work:
Folder with client installation logs
Client installation, depending on the speed of the client machine, can take up to
15 minutes. It might take a while for the client to find its server and connect to it.
By default, each client that works on the same domain, such as
ConfigMgr, and is in the boundary accepted by the server, is
approved to connect to it.
However, this behavior can be changed so that each new client
would need to be approved for communication by an administrator

in the ConfigMgr console, so if the administrator does not accept
the endpoint, communication won't be available.

Other installation methods
There are a few more installation methods. Describing all of them is out of the
scope of this book, so they will be mentioned briefly. These methods are a
follows:
Group Policy: Installation leveraging GPO and using ccmsetup.msi instead of
ccmsetup.exe
Software update point: Installation leveraging WSUS
Logon script: Installation using a logon script when the computer starts
and someone logs in
Upgrade: Updating of already installed client using ConfigMgr server
Operating system deployment: Installing the ConfigMgr client during the
operating system deployment
Client Imaging: Installation from a ready image with the ConfigMgr client
embedded
Script: Manual installation using the script
The most common methods are client push, installation from the console, and
manual installation.
Client push installation might cause heavy load on the network
when provisioning clients to many endpoints at one time.
 

ConfigMgr client installation
checkout
During installation or after the client is installed, the administrator can check the
status of the installation. As has been mentioned earlier, the installation process
contains three steps. Steps 1 and 2 can be verified in log files under
C:\windows\ccmsetup\logs. To verify that the third step, establishing communication
with the server, was successful, the easiest way is to check it from the server
console under Administration\Device Collections\All Desktop and Server Clients.
This collection contains all of the computers with the ConfigMgr client installed
that have established connection and started to communicate:
All Desktop and Server collection
Just after the installation, the client tries to find its ConfigMgr server and
connect to it. Information about the discoveries clients have in finding their
assigned systems, can be seen in two log files--clientlocation.log and
locationservices.log located under C:\windows\ccm\logs on the client:

Information about the client finding the default management point
Each time the client gains information about the assigned management point
server, it checks whether it is compatible. If the client has the same or a lower
version than the discovered management point, it will try to connect to it.
However, if the client version is higher than the version in the available
management point, the client won't be able to communicate until both versions
are the same. This process is called compatibility check:

Information about client and server compatibility
After ensuring that the client has found its site and connected to it, the
administrator can check whether the client sends data to the server. The
administrator might also want to check whether the data from the hardware
inventory and software inventory is collected and is properly visible from the
console:

Outcome of hardware inventory task
Hardware inventory is enabled by default, so the first information about the
inventory should be available in about 7 days starting from the installation date:
Outcome of software inventory task
The software inventory is disabled after installation by default, so the initial data
appears as it is enabled in the console.

Troubleshooting client connectivity
The overall condition of the ConfigMgr server needs to be checked by the
administrator on a daily basis. The same applies to the client side. There can be
many reasons for the ConfigMgr client not establishing a connection. The most
common reasons for such a situation are as follows:
No boundary created
No boundary group created
Wrongly configured boundary or boundary groups
No management point assigned to the boundary, boundary group, or default
boundary group
Changed AD location or network IP address
Broken management point (operating system, IIS, corrupted files)
No management point installed in a ConfigMgr site
DNS errors
A type in a switch when installing the client manually
Deletion of the System Management container
No access for the ConfigMgr server to a System Management container in order
to save data
The need for manual acceptance of clients from the console
Blocking a computer on a console
Server ConfigMgr and the client contain many components. The
problem with the server or client can be due to various causes;
hence, it is not feasible to even mention them all. Troubleshooting
of client-server communication should always be started by
checking boundaries and boundary group configuration.
 

Summary
This chapter covered topics such as the ConfigMgr client installation process
and ConfigMgr client installation types. To properly maintain the installation
process, the chapter also covered topics related to how to check whether the
ConfigMgr client has been properly installed, and what the most common issues
related to client-server communication are.
After client installation is complete and a proper final check has been conducted,
it is important to configure what these clients will do, and when. This part is
covered in the next chapter.
 

Creating Client Settings for Servers
and Workstations
Previous chapters walked you through server installation and its basic
configuration, as well as the installation of the client. The focal point of this
chapter is the configuration of clients.
We will cover the following topics:
Configuring client settings
Deploying custom configuration to different collections
Creating a maintenance window for each important collection

Client settings
Until version 2007, ConfigMgr was not supporting different settings for different
computer collections of users. All of the settings were exactly the same for all of
the clients assigned to a particular ConfigMgr site. Starting from version 2012, it
has become possible to create your own set of settings and assign it to a certain
collection. Thanks to this solution, there is no need to keep a few ConfigMgr
servers, as it was once the only option to separate the scope of settings. This
provides the ability to swiftly manage servers that are on one ConfigMgr server
and have configurations different from each other.
Client settings are used for the following:
Enabling various settings for different collections of computers or users (for
instance, a different time for clients to pull policies)
Enabling/disabling server features for different computer or user collections
(such as software updates)
Creating your own configurations is not a hard task. In ConfigMgr 1706, it is
possible to see all effective client or user configurations that have been set on an
object. This possibility of viewing the permissions greatly eases administration
and troubleshooting.

Default Client Settings
After the server is installed, there is already an available default configuration
for computers and users. The administrator might continue using the default one
or configure their own settings.
Default Client Settings can be found under Administration\Client Settings. This
book will cover the most important options. Some of the additional options will
be covered in future chapters. Here are the most important settings for every
deployment:
Client Policy:
Client policy polling interval (minutes): By default, the client connects
to the server every 60 minutes and downloads policies telling what,
when, and how it ought to perform
Computer Agent:
Add default Application Catalog website to Internet Explorer trusted
sites zone: Yes
Install permission: All users
Show notifications for a new deployment: Yes
Hardware Inventory:
Enable hardware inventory on clients: Yes
Hardware inventory schedule: A schedule that informs how often the
client will be scanned regarding the hardware
Hardware inventory classes: The scope of data that will be collected
by the Hardware Inventory
Software Inventory:
Enable software inventory on clients: Yes.
Schedule software inventory and file collection: A schedule that
informs how often the client will be scanned regarding the software.
Inventory reporting detail: Yes, Software Inventory will contain the

exact data about the detected files.
Inventory these files types: This specifies which file types will be
inventoried. The overall condition of the ConfigMgr server needs to be
checked by the administrator on a daily basis.
Remote Tools:
Enable Remote Control on clients: Yes
Firewall exception profiles: The firewall profiles on which Remote
Tools will work
Prompt user for Remote Control permission: Yes; a user would need to
explicitly confirm that he/she allows access to the workstation using
Remote Control
Grant Remote Control permission to local Administrators group: Yes
Permitted viewers of Remote Control and Remote Assistance: A list
with objects allowed to connect to the client using Remote Control or
Remote Assistance
Software Updates:
Enable software updates on clients: Yes
Software update scan schedule: A scheduled software update scan
Enable management of the Office 365 Client Agent: Yes
Of course, there are many more settings, but the ones pointed out here are the
most important and fundamental. Include them all; exposing dependencies
between them is out of the scope of this book.

Creating custom settings for a device
The creation of settings for the user as well as for the computer is not a hard
task. To create your own settings administrator, go to Administration\Client Settings
and choose the Create Custom Client Device Settings option to create custom
settings for a device.
The settings creator will lead the administrator through all the configuration
settings that are available:
Deciding which parts of default policy will be changed
The next step will be to change the default settings to custom ones:

Changing the default policy values

Creating custom settings for a user
Creating settings for a user is as easy as it is for computers. To create their own
settings, the administrator needs to go to Administration\Client Settings and choose
the Create Custom Client User Settings option. The next steps would be similar
to the computer settings.
 

Assigning to a collection
For settings to actually work on the objects, they need to be assigned to
collections. This can be done by going to Administration\Client Settings and
choosing the Deploy option, where the administrator selects the collection and
assigns settings. As soon as the client downloads a new policy, it begins to work
according to the new settings.
By default, clients download policies from the server every 60
minutes.
 

Checkout of client settings
After assigning settings to a collection, it is possible to check the effective
settings in particular. This can be achieved by going to Assets and Compliance\Devices
on the server console, selecting a particular device, and choosing the Client
Settings | Resultant Client Settings option.
A new window with effective permissions for this particular client should
appear: 
Resultant Client Settings If the client has assigned more than one configuration, they are applied in a certain
order. The default custom settings have a constant priority value, which is 10000. Each next custom setting
created has a number starting from 1. The client applies settings starting from the one with the smallest
priority to the one with the highest.

If you are removing any custom setting, each policy with a smaller
number will automatically be given 1 for priority.

Collection settings
Effectively, many various settings configured in many different places affect
ConfigMgr clients. Additionally, settings from collections where, computer or
users belong also apply to them. To check these settings, the administrator can
go to Assets and Compliance\Device Collections, select a collection, and choose
Properties. The Power Management tab relates to the computer energy settings: 
Power Management settings The Maintenance Windows tab is for setting a suitable time when any
operation that interferes with an operating system, such as software deployment, updating, or operating
system deployment, can occur: 

Maintenance Windows settings When deploying operating systems, variables are often used to control the
installation process. These variables are to be set in many different places on the server console. One of the
places where the variables can be set is a collection where variables can be configured in the Collection
Variables tab. Here is an example of the OSDComputerName variable, which defines a name that will be
provided to the newly installed operating system: 
Collection Variables settings Starting from the ConfigMgr 2012 console, there is a feature of displaying
alerts on a console related to the collection. Alerts can be configured in the Alerts tab. There are three types
of alerts:

Client status: Information related to client statuses
Endpoint protection: Information about endpoint protection statuses
Membership: Information about whether the allowed membership limit for
a collection has been exceeded:
Alerts settings When deploying settings to a client using a collection, it is recommended that you use a
separate collection. It is not recommended to use a single collection for many purposes. Having separate
collections significantly decreases the risk of having a configuration mishap and hence wrongly working
clients.

Summary
This chapter covered ways in which settings can be applied to clients using a
prepared set of settings and a collection to which these settings can be applied.
The next chapter covers topics related to compliance so that the administrator
can ensure that clients are working according to the applied settings.

Compliance Settings
The previous chapter walked you through topics related to ConfigMgr client
settings.
This chapter covers the following topics:
Creating Configuration Items
Creating baselines
Deploying baselines to collections

Compliance feature
Starting from ConfigMgr 2007, the server can perform additional tasks to ensure
whether the operating system status is correct, if the operating system is
compliant with the policies, check the installed software against secure policies,
or configure some settings of the operating system.
Compliance Settings have been divided into certain areas:
Compliance Settings: Checking out the operating system or installed software
compliance and status reporting
User Data and Profiles: Managing user data as well as the user profiles
Conditional Access: Managing conditional access to platforms such as
Exchange and SharePoint
Company Resource Access: Managing access to company resources
Windows 10 Edition Upgrade: Managing the changing of the SKU for Windows
10
Two of the mentioned areas will be described in this book: Compliance Settings and
User and Data Profiles.
Compliance Settings can be used for the following:
Monitoring the installed operating systems
Verification of installed operating systems and applications and getting
them correctly configured
Reporting whether company devices are compliant with security policies
Checking out whether certain hotfixes have been applied to the operating
system or installed software
Setting up configuration on mobile devices
Enforcing settings for mobile devices
If possible, aligning the operating system and software settings to the
operational standard
Checking out the operating system and software settings against legal
standards
Configuration settings for the User Data and Profiles settings

Configuration settings for Company Resource Access
All settings of Compliance Settings are assigned to a collection on a
ConfigMgr server. Many of these can be applied by GPO as well,
although configuration management would be much harder in
cases where lots of different users need to have the same settings. It
is much easier to create a collection for managing users and
computers than to create an OU in AD and assign a GPO policy to
it.

Compliance Settings
The Compliance Settings are mostly used to check the correctness of the operating
system and application settings. Apart from Windows, this feature can be also
used for operating systems such as macOS and various mobile operating systems
such as Windows Phone, Windows RT, Apple iOS, and Android.
Capabilities of Compliance Settings are highly dependent on the
operating system that is about to be configured. It is not only about
different software vendors, but also about the differences between
software versions that come from one manufacturer. Settings for
iOS 10.3.2 would be different than for iOS 9.3; the same is the case
with any other software vendor.
Active Directory allows you to configure a lot of settings via GPO, but not all.
Of course, as GPO has many ready-to-use templates, it is highly recommended
that you use it and not replace it with other tools. However, despite doubtless
huge advantages, GPO has one downside. GPO policies are refreshed by the
clients every 180 minutes, under the condition, of course, that there is a
connection to a domain controller.
Knowledge about Windows registry allows you to configure the
system using compliance in any possible way. It may require some
more work at the beginning; however, eventually, benefits in the
form of a detailed view of system and software configuration will
be more than helpful.
Nowadays, a significant number of computer users are rarely connected to the
LAN network and do not have access to the domain controller. ConfigMgr
clients can be managed not only when clients are in the LAN network, but also
when clients are outside the local network--somewhere on the internet.
The ConfigMgr server is a perfect solution for instant system
management regardless of where a particular device is located. It
relates to portable computers as well as mobile devices.

Compliance Settings deployment is composed of two phases:
The creation of compliance Configuration Items
The creation of the compliance Configuration Baselines, composed of
compliance items, and assigning them to a collection of computers
Configuration Items related to a registry and created on server 2012
have a remediation function. If the ConfigMgr client detects
configuration that is noncompliant configuration, it might be
replaced with one defined by the administrator. It relates to new
registry keys as well as setting up a value on them.

Compliance Configuration Items
Compliance items are a unique value that will be compared with the pattern.
When creating compliance items, it needs to be specified what and where they
should be verified and which discovered values are considered the correct ones.
Compliance items can be created on Windows, macOS, and mobile devices.
Each item might relate to something else, such as a different platform or even
version of the operating system.
Items for Windows can be based on the following:
Active Directory query
Assembly
File system
IIS metabase
Registry key
Registry value
Script
SQL query
WQL query
Items for macOS can be based on these:
The macOS preferences
Script
Items for mobile devices are used to configure settings that might relate to the
following:
Password
Device
Email management
Store
Browser
System security

Windows server work folders
New items can be created under Asset and Compliance\Compliance Settings\Configuration
Items on the ConfigMgr console. The first step is a decision about what type of
item will be created. The Settings for devices managed with the
Configuration Manager client option creates a new item for systems managed
by ConfigMgr, while the Settings for devices managed without the
Configuration Manager client option creates items for mobile devices managed
by the Microsoft Intune service: 
Choosing the type of configuration item When choosing the type, the administrator needs to select a
platform or an operating system version for this particular item. The next step is choosing which settings
should be configured, for instance, password. The last step is configuring the actual values for requirements
that would need to be met, such as the password length or when it expires, and so on: 

Configuring the chosen option Both of the mentioned options allow you to edit the predefined settings
available on the ConfigMgr server, whereas the Settings for devices managed with the Configuration
Manager client | Windows Desktops and Servers (custom) option allows you to define your own
configuration items based on predefined types:
Active Directory query
Assembly
File system
IIS metabase
Registry key
Registry value
Script
SQL query
WQL query
This is a powerful tool in an administrator's hands. It allows you to examine
almost all settings on the operating system as well as the software installed: 

Defining checkout method for a registry value The item created using Settings for devices managed with
the Configuration Manager client | Windows Desktops and Servers (custom) needs to have configured the
following information:
Detection method information (only for Windows settings that check
applications)
Settings
Compliance rules
Supported platforms
Most of the settings are available for Windows operating systems.
Additionally, if the administrator has knowledge about the registry
and where to set a particular configuration for the operating
system or application, it is possible to use Compliance Settings to
check almost the entire computer configuration.

Compliance Configuration Baselines
Each configuration baseline might be composed of more than one:
Other configuration item
Software update
Configuration baseline
Baseline creation can be done under Asset and Compliance\Compliance
Settings\Configuration Baselines. The baseline creator will ask for the name and
configuration that a particular baseline should contain. That's it. The next step is
assigning it to a collection. Only after assigning it to a particular collection will
the clients start performing actions defined in the configuration baseline.
The computer is considered aligned with the configuration baseline
when it is compliant with all the configuration items contained in
this baseline. If a computer does not meet at least one from the
baseline, the state is reported as being noncompliant.

Configuration Pack
For ConfigMgr 2007 and 2012, there are sets of Configuration Baselines called
Configuration Packs. These might be prepared by Microsoft and the
community. Configuration Pack is nothing but the configuration baseline
exported from the server; it can simply be imported and you can start using it
right away.
Configuration Packs can be used as they are, can be aligned to your own needs,
or can simply be used to learn and help in configuring custom configuration
items.
 

Common tasks for managing
compliance
Clients checking their status send information about the status of Compliance
Settings to the server. This information can be used in two ways:
Reporting: After the server is installed by default, there are over 20 reports
available, showing data from Compliance Settings in a different way. It is also
possible to use a default report as a baseline for your own custom report.
Create collections: Based on the status data, it is possible to create
collections containing, for instance, computers that have been reported as
noncompliant for a particular configuration baseline assigned to a certain
collection.
Collections are created based on the outcome of Compliance Settings and can be
used for things such as triggering scripts that may correct inconsistency for
computer settings in order to make them aligned back with company policies.
 

Client setting for compliance
Creating and assigning Configuration Baselines to a collection is not all that needs
to be done. It is also necessary to configure the following two options:
Compliance Settings | Enable compliance evaluation on clients: Yes
Compliance Settings | Schedule compliance evaluation: Schedule reminders
for how often the client will check configuration consistency. This schedule
applies to computers that do not have contact with the ConfigMgr server. If
the client has contact with the server, then the effective schedule will be the
one set in a collection.
Compliance after a server is installed is enabled by default.
 

Deploying the compliance baseline
When the compliance baseline is ready, it can be chosen from Asset and
Compliance\Compliance Settings\Configuration Baselines and applied to a collection
using the Deploy option.
As has been mentioned, starting from ConfigMgr 2012, there is the option of
checking the configuration and, if it has drifted away from the standard, aligning
it automatically.
The Remediate noncompliant rules when supported and Allow remediation
outside the maintenance window options enable the repair of configuration
drift by the server. Apart from what has been mentioned, there is also a need to
select the collection to which the configuration baseline applies, and setting up a
schedule defining how the other client will check against the configuration drift: 

Configuration Baselines settings
The scheduler deployed with Configuration Baselines has a higher priority than the
scheduler set with Client Settings if the computer is on the LAN network and has
a connection to the ConfigMgr server.

Viewing compliance results
Statuses of Compliance Settings can be viewed in four different places:
On the tested computer
On the server thanks to the default reports accessible under
Monitoring\Reporting\Compliance and Settings Management
On the server if a collection based on Compliance Settings has been created
Under the Monitoring\Deployments section for Configuration Baselines

Client reporting
A status can be viewed directly on the client computer. Client properties show all
Configuration Baselines assigned to this computer on the Configurations tab. This
includes checking the computer status and enforcing the client to do certain
actions thanks to the Evaluate option and later viewing the report using the View
Report option. The option mentioned, together with the Evaluate option, can be
very useful for helpdesk support to review the computer configuration: 
Configuration Baselines results Running Configuration Baselines directly on a client computer is the
fastest way to control whether a certain computer is aligned with the requirements defined by the
administrator.

Console reporting
After installing Reporting Status Point server role, a few default reports are
created. Among them, there are over 20 reports related to Compliance Settings.
These can be found under Monitoring\Reporting\Compliance and Settings Management.

Creating collections based on the
compliance result
To control the statuses of computers, collections can be created based on the
Compliance Settings data sent by the client to the server. There can be four different
statuses:
Compliant: The computer is aligned with the requirements from
Configuration Baselines
Error: The computer has issues with checking requirements from
Configuration Baselines
Non-Compliant: The computer is not aligned with the Configuration Baselines
Unknown: The client has not reported the status of Configuration Baselines yet
Administrators can create collections by themselves or with the user for whom
this option has been enabled on the console. To do that, the administrator needs
to select a configuration baseline, choose Create New Collection under Deploy,
and select a status based on which collection will be created. The created
collection will be automatically updated accordingly with the schedule.
 

Managing resource and data access
Compliance Settings not only check out the operating system or enforce mobile
devices, configuration, but they also have the ability to configure the following
areas:
Redirecting user data from a particular collection to a network share
Configuring offline files so users can work on the network share, while
offline with no connection to the file server
Configuring connections to the company network for company computers
being outside of the Active Directory domain or working from the internet
Configuring VPN profiles, certificates, Wi-Fi networks, email profiles, and
Windows Hello for Business.

Remote Connection Profiles
Remote Connection Profiles allow users to connect to the company network, not
being domain joined or working from the internet. Connection profiles can be
created from the console under Asset and Compliance\Compliance Settings\Remote
Connection Profiles: 
Remote Connection Profiles
The profiles mentioned work for the following systems:
Windows
iOS
Android

Company Resource Access
Company Resource Access profiles are used to configure the connection to a company
network or configure some required components to a network connection.
Elements that can be configured are as follows:
Certificate Profiles: Used for automatic certificate deployment
Email Profiles: Automatically configured ActiveSync profiles on the
Exchange Server for Intune service
VPN Profiles: Automatic VPN profile configuration; transparent for the user
Wi-Fi Profiles: Automatic Wi-Fi profile configuration; transparent for the
user
Windows Hello for business Profiles: Configuration of two-factor authentication
for computers and mobile devices:
Configuration Wi-Fi Profiles
 

User Data and Profiles configuration
User Data and Profiles are used to configure settings responsible for user data or the
whole user profile. The following actions can be performed:
Redirecting particular folders to another location
Setting the configuration of offline files
Synchronizing user profiles on the network share after the user is logged off
Configuration User Data and Profiles

Summary
Compliance Settings are a very useful and helpful server feature, thanks to which,
ConfigMgr server administrators know exactly whether all of the computers are
aligned with company requirements and whether all the users got the required
configurations.
All you need to do for managing is to create a collection containing certain
computers or users and associate appropriate settings for the collections.
Keep in mind that a computer with the ConfigMgr client installed can be
managed by the ConfigMgr server, regardless of whether it is in LAN network
or\on the internet. A lot of these settings can be configured using GPO. However,
GPO configuration will only be applied if the computer is in the LAN network
with a connection to the domain controller. If the computer is managed by the
ConfigMgr server, only a connection to the management point is needed.
All of the Compliance Settings are saved in policies accessible in the
management point, and there is no need to send anything to the
distribution point, so it is enough if the management point is
accessible to ConfigMgr clients.
The next chapter covers software deployment. It contains information about:
How to properly prepare software deployment
How to configure server roles used for software deployment
How to configure software deployment and advanced options used for
software deployment

Software Distributions
Software distribution is an important role for the ConfigMgr server. Starting
from ConfigMgr 2012, it has been possible to deploy applications with different
settings for different platforms and users. The ConfigMgr server might also
check for requirements, and the deployment will take place only if these are met.
The server also discovers the operating system the user is working on and is
capable of releasing appropriate binary files on that computer.
Software distribution provides the following capabilities:
Applications: Deploy applications for operating systems such as Windows,
macOS, Android, and iOS
App-V virtual environments: Deploy applications App-V and manage the
virtual environment
Packages: Deploy packages to be compatible with earlier server versions
Approval requests: Manage the approval of applications requested by
users
Global conditions: Manage conditions that need to be met when deploying
applications
App configuration policies: Manage iOS application profiles
Application management policies: Manage profiles for iOS and Android
systems
Windows sideloading keys: Manage keys used for Windows Store
application installation
License information for Store Apps: Provide information about licenses
used when deploying applications from Windows Store for Business
This chapter covers the fundamental configuration of application deployment
with ConfigMgr.
Starting with ConfigMgr 2012, there is a possibility of deploying applications on
collections of computers as well as collections of users. The ability to deploy
applications on users' collections makes administration much easier nowadays,
as it provides a possibility to ensure that the user will have the same applications

available regardless of the platform they are logged into.
Main topics covered in the book are:
Create an application from .msi or .exe
Create deployment types
App detection methods for .exe
How to deploy apps
Troubleshooting software distribution
Before configuring an application, it is crucial to get to know how
the installer for that particular application works, what the
available switches are, and what prerequisites need to be met for
the installer to work. Lack of this information would make it really
hard to investigate the real root cause of the problem--whether it is
the system's fault, or maybe the application's.
Software distribution is not the only application deployment. With packages and
programs, it is possible to not only deploy a program but also to run any script or
program with a purpose other than it being installed. For this reason, the
software distribution function is a great solution for any task--not just software
deployment.
Users can install applications from various places--Software Center,
Application Catalog, and Company Portal. The availability of an application
depends on how it is deployed. An application that is deployed for mobile
devices is available under Company Portal, applications for computers are
available under Software Center, and applications for users are available under
Application Catalog.

Applications versus packages
Each previous ConfigMgr version had its own method of being deployed when
using packages. Starting from ConfigMgr 2012, there is a new mode,
applications, which is the deployment of applications based on application
installation files, such as .msi.
This chapter focuses on this second mode, and thanks to it, the administrator can
significantly ease daily deployment administration. However, it won't be
possible to leave out packages mode completely.
The packages mode is made mainly for running installations of Windows
systems. It is not always possible to run an installation using the .msi file. A lot of
applications use .exe, .bat scripts, or PowerShell scripts to get installed. In these
cases, there is a need to use the packages mode instead of applications.
The administrator should always try to use the application mode
whenever it is possible, but the packages option should always be
kept in mind, as in some circumstances, it might be the best choice.

Software distribution server roles
Usually, two standard roles are engaged in software distribution. The first is the
management point, of course, and the second is the distribution point. Both of
these roles are used along with all server features that are used for the
installation of operating systems, applications, or updates.
When talking about application deployment, there is one more role, which
enables users to access applications assigned to them personally and not to the
workstations. This role name is Application Catalog, and the installation of this
role has been covered in Chapter 2, Installing Configuration Manager.
 

Application management features
Starting with ConfigMgr 2012, when application management was introduced,
administrators could use many new features dedicated to application
deployment.
Application management features include the following:
Requirements: Checking before the installation whether requirements were
met
Global conditions: Checking before the installation whether the required
global conditions were met
Detection methods: Checking whether the application has already been
installed on the computer
Supersedence: The ability to automatically replace one application with
another
Deployment action and purpose: The ability to install or uninstall an
application, as well as set whether a particular deployment is mandatory or
not
State-based deployment: The ability to re-install the required application
if it is uninstalled by the user
User device affinity: Installing various types of the same application
depending on the logged on user
Monitoring: The possibility to check the console for deployment statuses
Installation per-user or per-device: The ability to use .msi files attributes
and install them on computers or for the user
Deployment types: For each application, it is possible to configure
different installation files depending on the operating system the user is
working on


Creating applications
Applications can be created in two ways:
Automatically, based on files such as .msi
Manually, using the built-in creator
The second option allows you to create applications even when using the .exe
files and scripts, which is not possible in an automatic way.
Automatic application creator gets the required information about
the application from the installation file, such as the .msi file. There
is always a need for checking whether all application properties
have been configured. It is a common scenario that, for instance,
an uninstall command is missing; in such cases, it needs to be
added manually.

Automatic application creation
Automatic creation of an application is possible under Software Library\Application
Management\Applications when clicking on the Create Application option. The next
choice is between automatic or manual application creation. The default choice
is the Automatically detect information about this application from installation
files option. After selecting the appropriate option, there is a need to precisely
specify what application types will be created and select the installation file by
specifying a UNC path: 
Application type choice
After selecting the installation file, the administrator is just a few clicks away
from the creator's end. All settings that were read from the file by the creator can
be changed later.
After the application is created and set up, it can be sent to a distribution point
and installed with the configuration accordingly.

Manual application creation
The manual approach is not as easy as the automatic one. All the required
settings to create an application need to be manually filled in. The most
important factors are that it is possible to create an application from the .exe file
and scripts. A complete review of the entire process of the manual approach is
out of the scope of this book.
 

Global condition
The global conditions are business and technical requirements that the computer
or user needs to meet so the ConfigMgr client can successfully perform
application deployment. After the server is installed, there are a few global
conditions that are already defined. It is also possible to create your own
conditions based on various setting types available in the wizard: 
The available global condition setting types
It is possible to assign global conditions to applications using the requirements
option after specifying exactly what ConfigMgr needs to check before
application deployment.
The global condition is checked by the client directly on the
working system and not on the ConfigMgr database. Using global
conditions can allow you to eliminate the need for creating a
collection, as an application--when using global conditions for
deployment--will be installed only on the systems that meet these

requirements.

Configuring application features
After creating an application, the next step is configuration. All the required
settings allowing installation have been read by the wizard when creating the
application on the server console. Information saved in the installation file, as
well as that saved by ConfigMgr, can be edited later, after the application is
created. The features described here are the new ones, and they are available in
this ConfigMgr version.
 

Supersedence
Thanks to the settings placed under the Supersedence tab, the administrator can
automatically replace one application with another. It is not important if the
newly installed application is the newer version of the old one or is a completely
different application. The following screenshot shows how to configure
application uninstallation before installing a new one.
In older versions of ConfigMgr, the administrator needed to prepare two
completely separate deployments. The first was uninstalling the application and
the second was with the installation. Usually, the client needed to wait until the
old application was uninstalled before the installation. Now it is possible to
combine two applications and prepare a new application deployment; the
ConfigMgr client will know that the deployment is combined out of two phases: 
Supersedence application

Application Catalog
The Application Catalog tab keeps configurational information for an
application when it is installed by Application Catalog. Here, the administrator
can set the application name, keywords for easier searches, and links to the
documentation, the manufacturer website, or the application icon: 
Application Catalog settings Application Catalog distributes applications that are deployed for users as
available applications, not mandatory ones. The deployment of mandatory applications is done by Software
Center.

References
The References tab is used to verify whether:
The application is related to any other application using Supersedence
The application depends on other applications
The application is deployed in the same App-V environment
References application tab

Revision history
It might happen that some applications get wrongly configured and saved. If the
administrator has no knowledge or has forgotten what has been changed, it is
possible to use the history option. The option mentioned allows you to do a
rollback to previous application settings.
It is also possible to review the settings in order to ensure that settings that are
just about to be set are correct: 
History of application version configuration
History is turned on by default for each application. Each and every change
made on the application on the console is automatically saved as the new version
in the history for this particular application.

Deployment Types
The most important feature of the applications mode is a capability to prepare
installation files for the application in such a way that the user can use the same
application regardless of the device or platform they have logged on. The
ConfigMgr client is able to recognize the operating system the user is working
on and check whether proper application installation files have been prepared.
Performing the mentioned configuration is possible under the Deployment Types
tab, where different installation types can be configured for one application. If
properly configured, the application can be deployed for a user regardless of
whether they work on Windows, Windows Phone, or an Android system: 
Different installation types for one application
Additional application types are created using a built-in wizard. This is the final
result of the wizard mentioned with detailed requirements of what needs to be
met for the client to start installation: 

Final results of the wizard used to create a new deployment type for application Assigning one application
to many different deployment types is a very good idea and very easy to maintain.

Detection Method
The packages deployment mode, which was available in previous versions of
ConfigMgr, was getting by pretty well; however, it had some disadvantages that
have been removed for the applications mode. Previously, there was a need for
deploying a package to a collection, and the administrator needed to ensure that
the collection contained only computers that met the defined requirements. That
model is also possible now, and the administrator can still create a collection and
assign a deployment to them, but it's not necessary. It is possible to assign the
deployment of an application to a root collection, and the application will be
deployed only on those systems where it is missing. This kind of approach is
called Detection Method.
For each application, at least one Detection Method rule needs to
be created. If there are none, the wizard won't allow you to save an
application on the ConfigMgr console. Each application can have
more than one rule configured.
The rule for Detection Method is automatically created when deploying an
application. It can be edited, and the administrator can add their own rules, check
the registry for certain keys, check for folders or files, or pass a script that will
check whether the application has been installed properly: 
Detection Method for an application Thanks to Detection Method, the ConfigMgr client always checks
whether a particular application is installed on the operating system, and there is no possibility to uninstall it
by mistake during a deployment.
Detection Method rules are run by the ConfigMgr client. If the

workstation meets the requirements, the client downloads the files
and starts the installation. If the workstation does not meet the
Detection Method rule, no action will be taken, and the application
won't be installed.

Dependencies
Dependencies can be configured for each application. It is a common scenario
when, before installation and application, some additional software is required
by the application to work correctly. Back in ConfigMgr 2007, there was a need
for performing at least two deployments to cover such scenarios. After installing
all of the required components, it was possible to deploy an application. It is not
a secret that this approach significantly extended the time required for
application deployment.
Starting from the 2012 version, it was possible to install an application and all
the prerequisites using only one deployment:
Dependency settings
An application can have one or more dependent applications. For each such
application, the administrator needs to define whether it should be automatically
installed. If an additional dependent application is being added, there is a need
for choosing between the AND and OR conditions to properly associate these
two dependent applications.
When deployment is done by the client, the installation of at least
one dependent application installation ends with a failure, and the
whole deployment will be reported as failed and the application
will not be installed.

Requirements
Until ConfigMgr 2007, there was no easy way to tell the client what
requirements needed to be met in order to start application deployment. As a
workaround, there was a need for creating a collection with all the computers
that met the requirements and deploying the application on that collection.
It is still possible to deploy an application as mentioned; however, it is worth
noting that the collection might contain computers that do not meet the
requirements, as the collection has its refresh interval, which may be shorter or
longer; such situation can cause a real concern sometimes.
To remediate the problem, in the Requirements tab, it is now possible to set
conditions that need to be met by the client for installation.
Here is an example application, which will be installed only when the operating
system is detected as a Windows 10 64-bit version. The deployment of such an
application might be assigned to a collection and the application will be installed
only on computers that meet the defined requirements:
Example of application requirements
As has been mentioned, after the server is installed, there are some predefined
global conditions that contain requirement definitions.
There are three main reasons why it is worth using Requirements:

To ensure that the application will be installed only on a primary device
computer and will not be installed for a user if they use something other
than a primary device computer
To check whether the computer meets the hardware requirements for an
application
To check whether the operating system meets all the defined requirements
for the application to be installed
The ConfigMgr client first checks whether all the requirements are
met by the client computer, and only after the checkout is positively
completed does it download files from the distribution point and
then start the installation. Thanks to this, there is no chance of
deploying an application on a computer that does not meet the
requirements, as each such try will result in a failure.

Application deployment
When deploying applications, there are some new features that were not
available until now. The administrator can choose between many deployment
types depending on how the installation should be done.
There are three available deployment types:
Simulate Deployment: A test deployment to check the condition set on an
application. It is used to check whether the ConfigMgr client that meets the
application requirements would be able to start the application installation.
It is a very useful feature in terms of checking whether the conditions set on
the application are correct.
Available Deployment: A deployment without a deadline. Hence, the
application will not be installed automatically on the computer. Users can
run such installation or not; it depends on them. All the available
deployments are available for users under Application Catalog and for
computers in Software Center.
Required Deployment: The application will be installed at a scheduled time
in the deployment or after the computer is on after being off for some time.
The user cannot stop the deployment of the application unless the
administrator allows the installation earlier than the deadline. All the
required deployments are available in Software Center.
The simulation of application installation does not actually install
the application on computers. The system only checks on which
computers the installation of the application is feasible.
Available reasons of deployments are as follows:
Install: Application installation
Uninstall: Application uninstallation--earlier, there was no such option
As each application has an installation string configured,
installation deployments are always available. However, not every
application has an uninstall string configured that would allow you

to uninstall it.
There are additional installation types when using the .msi files:
Per-user installation: The application will only be available for the user on
the account on which it has been installed
Per-device installation: The application will be installed on the computer
so all logged-in users will be able to use it
Each application can have different per-user and per-device
installation settings. It is recommended that you check them on the
console after each time the application is created.

Simulating a deployment
Each application and application type can have a requirement set, where
requirements need to be met for the application installation to start. This is
always good to ensure that the installation of a particular application will take
place. In earlier versions, there was a need for creating collections containing
users or computers that met the requirements. Membership of this collection is
based on data from the ConfigMgr database, as this data may be outdated or not
full. Since version 2012, there is a very easy way to check on how many
computers the application will install: an option that is called Simulate
Deployment. The option mentioned allows you to check whether an application
will be installed or uninstalled: 
Simulated deployment settings
Simulated deployment cannot be converted into a regular
deployment. It needs to be deleted and regular deployment needs to
be assigned to a collection. There is no technical possibility to run
simulated and regular deployment for the same application
simultaneously on a collection.

Available deployments
ConfigMgr has always had two application deployment modes available.
Available Deployment is one of them. This deployment type specifies which
application and which collection need to be deployed. The Schedule the
application to be available at option is used to specify the time from which the
application is available for users. There is no deadline set, apart from one
exception--if there is another application specified in Supersedence, then the
deadline set as a deployed application will replace the other one. To set this
deadline, the Installation deadline to upgrade users or devices that have the
superseded application installed option will be used: 
Schedule settings for available deployment User notifications is used to inform users whether there is a new
application available for them to install. There is a choice between informing users about each application
deployment or only about those that require the restarting of your PC: 

User notification settings Deployments assigned to users are available in Application Catalog, while
deployments assigned to computers are available under Software Center.

Required deployments
A Required Deployment is the one with a configured deadline; deadline refers to
the time when an application will be installed without interfering with the user.
The Purpose option is used to set a type of installation that is supposed to be
performed. When deciding on this type of deployment, there are some additional
and useful options available. The Pre-deploy software to the user's primary
devices option forces the ConfigMgr client to download the required files from
the distribution point after receiving information that the application is assigned
to the user. The benefit is that the client that's not connected to the LAN network
can install the required software without the need for connecting to the
distribution point, as it already has files pre-deployed.
The Send wake-up packets option is used to wake the computer on using the
Wake On LAN feature. The ConfigMgr client starts the installation instantly
after being turned on. However, to use this option, Wake On LAN needs to be
properly configured in the first place.
The Allow client on a metered Internet connection to download content after the
installation deadline, which might incur additional costs option allows the
ConfigMgr client to download files from the distribution point over a paid
internet connection: 
Required Deployment settings Required deployments force setting a deadline, after which the ConfigMgr

client performs installation automatically; the date is set using the Installation deadline option. It is possible
to set As soon as possible after the available time or Schedule at. The second option allows you to set the
start of installation on a certain date and time. The first option is used when there is a need for installing an
application as quickly as possible, which means as soon as the ConfigMgr client receives any information
about the new deployment: 
Required Deployment schedule settings The As soon as possible after the available time option does not
work instantly. Remember that the ConfigMgr client communicates with the management point on a certain
schedule with intervals. By default, intervals are 60 minutes, as only after 60 minutes will the clients start to
download the files, and after the download is done, they will start the required deployments.
Similar to the previous deployment type, there is a need to configure User
notifications. There are three options available; the first two are exactly the same
as in the Available Deployment, and there is also one additional--Hide in
Software Center and all notifications. The third option allows you to hide all the
notifications about downloading and installing the application; it is used mainly
to not distract the user at work. The System restart (if required to complete the
installation) option allows the client to restart the computer if required by the

application: 
Required Deployment user experience settings Starting from version 2012, it is impossible to create a
deployment for an application that hasn't been sent on at least one distribution point. It is a significant
enhancement, as in version 2007, it was possible to create a deployment of an application that was not
available on any distribution points, and hence clients were actually not able to perform such deployment.

Triggering an installation
Applications that are deployed are visible in two places. One of them is Software
Center, which is a part of the ConfigMgr client and allows users to run the
installation of applications available for the client computer or the applications
required for the user: 
Available applications in Software Center
Application Catalog, on the other hand, is a server role, where the user sees all
the available applications and not only those available for the user or computer:

Application Catalog view

Reporting
Along with the introduction of Application Management, Microsoft has significantly
improved the reporting feature related to application deployment. For each
deployment, it is possible to review client statuses in live mode. Apart from
three already known statuses, there is a fourth, Requirements Not Met, which
presents computers that haven't met the requirements: 
Deployment Status

Invoking scripts on devices
Packages and applications are not the only way for invoking scripts on devices
managed by ConfigMgr server. On the ConfigMgr console under Software
Library\Scripts it is possible to configure PowerShell scripts, and without the need
of creating a package or application--run it on the managed device.
The mentioned scripts need to be written leveraging PowerShell 3.0 or newer
and need to be approved by the server administrator prior to running them on the
devices. In this case, simplicity is a big plus--administrator imports script to the
console, approves it and creates deployment or certain collection. There is no
need to create package o application and sent it to a distribution point.
 

Summary
This chapter covered most important topics related to deploying an application
by the ConfigMgr client. If possible, it is always recommended that you use .msi
files for application deployment for the Windows operating system or the
installation of binaries in the case of other platforms.
A new way of working with applications has many advantages compared to what
has been available before ConfigMgr 2012. Options available for application
deployment can significantly speed up and enhance the application deployment
cycle.
The next chapter covers topics related to patching deployments, such as
configuring server roles responsible for update deployment, ConfigMgr and
WSUS synchronization, the process of scanning for missing patches, and the
updates installation process. There will also be a section on configuring features
such as updates deployment, automatic patch deployment, and Windows 10
servicing.

Software Update Management
The deployment of updates is a very important process, allowing you to protect
the managed environment. Administrators often use the Windows Server
Update Services (WSUS) server to deploy patches to the operating systems and
software.
Integrating the WSUS server with the ConfigMgr server significantly broadens
capabilities for software and operating system patching. And if there is a need, it
is possible to deploy patches not just for Microsoft software solutions using
System Center Updates Publisher. The mentioned solution would allow you to
publish third-party software updates on the WSUS server.
When managing updates, it is not that important what software is
used--whether it is WSUS, ConfigMgr, or Patch Manager. What is
important is knowledge of patches and when they need to be
deployed and on which workstations--this task is much harder than
knowing the technology.
This chapter will mostly be concentrated on deploying patches to Windows
systems, as it often happens that errors in patch deployment are the outcome of
lack of knowledge about the handled process. Of course, the essential topics
about preparing update deployment using ConfigMgr integrated with WSUS will
also be covered.
The administrator working on update deployment needs to know the three basic
phases of working with updates:
Synchronization of data between Microsoft Update and WSUS server and
between WSUS and the ConfigMgr server
Scanning systems by Windows Update Agent and saving this data in WSUS
as well as ConfigMgr database
Update deployment by the ConfigMgr client and Windows Update Agent
Getting to know these three processes makes update deployment much easier, as
well as speeds up any further troubleshooting.

The ConfigMgr client does not scan or install updates; it just has a
supervisor role. The scanning and installation operation is done by
Windows Update Agent, which the ConfigMgr client supervises.
We will cover the following topics in this chapter:
Creating a software strategy
Approving required updates
Distributing and deploying software updates
Automating the entire patching process

Software update features
Managing deployment using ConfigMgr provides a number of features that are
not available for the WSUS server alone. Additional available features are as
follows:
The outcome of update scanning can be used to deploy updates or used for
other tasks, such as Compliance Settings
An easy and straightforward way to install updates only on maintenance
window for each collection separately
Automatic deployment of updates that match the criteria set by the
administrator
Monitoring and reporting of scanning results as well as the deployment of
updates based on data from the ConfigMgr server
The capability to create your own reports related to update deployment
The capability to use Wake On LAN and power plans for deployments
Deployment of updates even on computers with no domain joined and
working on the internet
Deployment of updates using Windows Update for Business
Publishing updates for third-party software using System Center Updates
Publisher
Support for express installation files for Windows 10
Deployment of upgrades for Windows 10 using service plan
Before starting deploying updates, it is important to get to know some
requirements; otherwise, it will not be possible to use all of the features that the
integration of WSUS with ConfigMgr provides.
 

Initial requirements
There are some initial requirements that need to be met in order to update
deployment without an issue. The mentioned requirements need to be met on
both the server side as well as on the managed endpoints side.

Server requirements
The base requirement is to use the WSUS server in version 4.0, which is
available only on Windows Server 2012 or higher. The 4.0 version of WSUS
works properly when it comes to updating and upgrading Windows 10 and
Windows Server 2016.
Server WSUS (3.0), available on Windows Server 2008 R2, is not
capable of working with Windows Update deployments. It will not
be possible to deploy feature upgrades to new Windows 10
versions.
If this requirement cannot be met, it will not be possible to deploy all update
types available on Microsoft Update.
To properly deploy Windows 10 feature upgrades on WSUS
installed on Windows Server 2012 or 2012 R2, it is essential to
install two updates: KB3095113 and KB3159706.
Another requirement is to install the WSUS server console; it is always installed
with the console. After installing the software update point on the WSUS server,
the requirement is met by default. If the software update point is installed on
some other, separate server, there is a need for installing the WSUS console on
that server as well.
Of course, apart from the mentioned server features, the administrator also needs
at least one management point, distribution point and optionally a reporting
point.

Client requirements
The basic requirement for updates deployment to work correctly is proper work
of Windows Update Agent on the client machines, as well as proper settings
allowing to connect to WSUS server integrated with ConfigMgr. Stopping
Windows Update Agent service using GPO, for instance, causes the deployment
of updates to stop instantly.
System scanning for missing updates and their installation is done
by Windows Update Agent. The ConfigMgr client manages the start
time of scanning or deploying, but it does not run it. Hence,
Windows Update Agent always needs to be on, up and running.
GPO policies can configure the WSUS server address and port it is working on.
All the other settings need to be set to the Not Configured state.

Client settings
Integrating WSUS with the ConfigMgr server is not enough for ConfigMgr
clients to manage update deployment. One thing that needs to be checked is
whether software updates are enabled in Clients Settings; this option should be
enabled by default; however, it is always good to ensure this fact: 
Software update settings
Additionally, Software update scan schedule needs to be configured, so the
ConfigMgr client knows how often Windows Update Agent needs to initialize
operating system scanning.

Preparing ConfigMgr site for
software updates
Preparation of the environment to manage updates deployment consists of two
phases:
Installation and configuration of the WSUS server
Installation and configuration of the software update point server role

Installing WSUS
WSUS is a part of the server operating system. Its database can be installed on
the SQL server or using Windows Internal Database.
The WSUS server installed on Windows 2012 or higher uses 8530
and 8531 port numbers.
When installing the WSUS server, the administrator needs to point a local folder
where the server will store license information for updates.
There are many updates where it is necessary to get to know the
license agreement. Specifying the mentioned folder is not a must;
however, it is required for Windows Update Agent to also deploy
these updates that require accepting of license terms.
After the server is installed, there is a need to perform synchronization of the
server with Microsoft Update. The synchronization might take a while, and it is
very important to wait patiently until it ends, as this is the last phase of
configuring the WSUS server. After the synchronization is done, it is time to go
in for the next phase of application deployment-- installation of the software
update point server role.

Software update point
Software update point is a server role that integrates both WSUS and the
ConfigMgr server. Depending on where the role will be installed, there are two
options that install this role: Add Site System Roles or Create Site System
Server. After running one of them, the next step is choosing the Software update
point role. If the ConfigMgr environment uses the central administration site,
software update point should be installed on the server holding the mentioned
role.
ConfigMgr allows you to assign software update point to boundary
group. Thanks to that, clients of a boundary group will know which
server they shall connect to.
Installation of software update point is an easy task:
1. The first step is to point to a WSUS server that will be integrated with the
ConfigMgr server. If WSUS is installed on a Windows Server 2012 or
higher, the WSUS is configured to use ports 8530 and 8531 option should
be chosen:

Configuration of ports used by the WSUS server
2. The second step is specifying a proxy server used for the internet
connections, if it is used, and providing an AD account that will be used to
connect to the WSUS server. Specifying an AD account is important if the
WSUS server is installed on a separated machine, and the given account
needs to have administrative permissions on the WSUS server.
3. The third step is configuring the way in which data synchronization from
the WSUS server will be done. Software update point connects to the
WSUS server and asks it to perform Windows Update synchronization. The
default configuration is Synchronize from Microsoft Update, so the WSUS
server performs synchronization directly with the Microsoft Update
website. It is also possible to specify a different WSUS server that will be
used as a source for the synchronization automatically or the administrator
triggers it from the console manually:

Setting up synchronization
4. The fourth step is configuring the synchronization schedule; however, the
installer will allow you to finish the installation without having it set up. If
the scheduler is not set, there is a need to manually run the synchronization
from the ConfigMgr console.
5. The fifth step is configuring the time after which updates will be replaced
with new versions and will not be available for deployment. This is an
example of such updates:

Behavior for software updates that are superseded settings It is worth enabling the Run WSUS cleanup
wizard option. The wizard makes the server block the deployment of any old and superseded, by Microsoft,
updates. The mentioned option is available only for first software update point installed on the ConfigMgr
site.
6. The sixth step is configuring the file types, which will be downloaded from
the Microsoft Update website by the ConfigMgr server. Selecting the
Download full files for all approved updates option will force the
ConfigMgr server to always download the full version of installation files.
The Download both full files for all approved updates and express
installation files for Windows 10 option will make the ConfigMgr server
download the full version of installation files for all updates apart from
cumulative updates for Windows 10. If a cumulative update from the
previous month has been already downloaded, ConfigMgr will download
only those files that were not downloaded the previous time, so that's the
only the difference between both packages:

Express files usage configuration To fully use the express file, an administrator should enable support for it
in Client Settings\Software Updates.
7. The seventh step is specifying classifications of updates that will be
synchronized. If you're planning to use WSUS for Windows 10 upgrades,
there is a need for installing relevant KBs, and this task needs to be done
before initial synchronization with Microsoft Update. The wizard will
specify which KBs need to be installed. There is no need to install them if
the WSUS server is installed on Windows Server 2016:
Settings of classifications that administrator wants to synchronize

8. The eighth step is specifying products that need to be checked for available
updates:
Specifying products for synchronization against updates
9. The ninth and the last step is selecting what language version(s) for the
updates should be synchronized.
Remember that almost all updates have their own language
versions. If 10 languages are selected, each update is downloaded
from the Microsoft Update website in 10 different, separate files.
This can cause a serious load with unnecessary files in a
distribution point.
Language selection is the last step of the configuration, software update point
installation might take a while, and its progress can be tracked in the wcm.log log
file.
Software update point installed on the operating system along with
the other ConfigMgr roles can handle up to 25,000 clients
simultaneously. When installed on a dedicated server, this number
increases to 150,000 at the same time.

The process of updates deployment
An understanding of the updates deployment processes is the most important
task for the administrator. Here is a short description of these processes.

The process of synchronizing data
with the WSUS server
After software update point is installed, there is a need for performing data
synchronization. This operation can be done manually from the console under
Software Library\Software Updates\All Software Updates or automatically according to
the schedule: 
Process of synchronizing information about updates The installation process looks as follows:
1. 
On the ConfigMgr server, the administrator chooses product classes that
should be synchronized with Microsoft Update. The ConfigMgr server
connects to the WSUS server and triggers the synchronization.
2. The WSUS server connects to the Microsoft Update website and performs
synchronization according to the settings saved in the ConfigMgr console.
Synchronized data is saved in the database.
3. 
After WSUS synchronization is done and data is saved in the WSUS
database server, ConfigMgr performs synchronization with the WSUS
server and saves the data in its own database.
The synchronization status between these two servers can be checked in the
wsyncmgr.log log file.
There are two types of synchronization:
Synchronization according to the schedule: Complete data
synchronization. If classification or products are changed, this change is

saved in the WSUS database. After the synchronization is performed, there
might be more or fewer products or classifications for which
synchronization of updates is performed.
Manual synchronization: Synchronization is done only for products and
classifications that are visible to the ConfigMgr server. Synchronization can
be much faster as it is performed only for known, ConfigMgr products and
classifications. Newly added products or classifications are not
synchronized.

The process of scanning for
compliance
After synchronizing updates with the WSUS server, the ConfigMgr console
provides information about these updates. At this point, the administrator can
perform system scanning.
System scanning process The process of system scanning is as follows:
1. 
The client, according to the schedule, downloads a policy from the
ConfigMgr server that specifies when the client needs to initiate system
scan using Windows Update Agent.
2. Operating system scan begins. Windows Update Agent communicates with
the WSUS server, which is integrated with the ConfigMgr server and
downloads data about available updates.
3. By default, information about scanning is not saved in the WSUS database
server; it can be saved if the administrator configures it.
4. 
The ConfigMgr client saves data about scanning locally in the Windows
Management Instrumentation database. It sends it out also to a
management point as a state message; these messages are sent by default
every 15 minutes.
5. 
Management point sends data to the ConfigMgr server, which saves the
data in its own SQL database.
6. 
Data related to system scans can be viewed using the ConfigMgr console,

Software Update--D Scan and Software update--A Compliance reports.
The most important fact is that scanning is performed by Windows Update
Agent, not by the ConfigMgr client.

Scanning statuses
After the scan is performed and all relevant data is sent to a management point,
there are four statuses that the scanning result can get:
Required: An update is available for the operating system or software but is
not installed on the machine
Installed: An update is installed on the machine
Not Required: An update is not relevant for a particular machine operating
system or installed software
Unknown: The site server has not received any data about this particular
update
The status of the scanning can be seen on the ConfigMgr console or using
default reports.
 

Updates deployment process
The process of updates deployment is the last phase for managing updates.
Luckily, some of the tasks performed here by the ConfigMgr server are the same
as for the operating systems or application deployment, which at the same time
makes it easier to understand: 
Process of updates deployment The process of updates deployment is as follows:
1. 
On the ConfigMgr server console, the administrator creates a deployment
using the Deploy Software Updates Wizard.
2. The site server downloads installation files from the catalog specified in the
wizard. These files have been earlier downloaded from the Microsoft
Update website or from the local source.
3. The site server copies installation files to a distribution point, adding them
to the already existing software packages or by creating a new package.
4. 
The ConfigMgr client, according to schedule, downloads policies that
inform you about updates that are deployed for the client.
5. If some new updates were discovered since the last scan, the client triggers
Windows Update Agent, which performs a scan. If a deployment is
Required, the client downloads the installation files for relevant updates
from distribution point to a local cache folder. If the deployment is
Available, the client performs a download operation only after the user
triggers it manually.
6. 
After downloading files, the client sends a state message to management
point, and that one sends it further to the site server, which saves it in the
database.

7. 
If the deadline is reached, the client performs scanning again, checking
whether all updates marked as Required still have the same status. If there
are such updates, Windows Update Agent performs the installation of
updates, and ConfigMgr client sends information about the installation
status. If there is a restart required by an application, management point is
given the status that the machine is in the Pending system restart state.
The ConfigMgr client downloads only those update files that are
required on that particular client machine (it does not download
updates for all software on that machine). This significantly speeds
up an installation process and lowers the load on the network.

Integrating ConfigMgr server with
Windows Update for Business and
Windows 10
Windows Update for Businesses is a set of features that allows you to deploy
updates and upgrades for Windows 10. The deployment of updates in Windows
10 can be managed by the WSUS server or Windows Update for Business.
To enable Windows Update for Business for computers, the following
requirements need to be met:
A device needs to have Windows 10 Pro, Enterprise, or Education installed
Windows needs to be connected directly to Microsoft Update
Windows 10 needs to work in Current Branch for Business mode
Windows Update for Business enables the following deployment types:
Upgrades: Windows 10 version 1511 to Windows 10 version 1703
Updates: The deployment of regular updates for Windows 10
Other/not deferred: Updates, for instance, for Endpoint Protection and
Windows Defender
The ConfigMgr server can recognize which workstation is managed by Windows
Update, which is managed by business, and which is managed by WSUS.
Computers connected to Windows Update will always have the Unknown status
and will also not be contained in statistics related to updates deployment.
If computers managed by ConfigMgr are connected to Windows Update for
Business, some of the ConfigMgr features will not work properly:
All of the computers connected to Windows Update for Business have
Unknown status, which significantly constricts troubleshooting and
reporting
It is impossible to deploy updates for Office, IE, Visual Studio on these

workstations
It is not possible to deploy third-party software updates published on the
WSUS server
It is impossible to install the ConfigMgr client using software update point

Supporting non-Microsoft Updates
Since a long time ago, ConfigMgr has enabled the deployment of third-party
software updates using the WSUS server. These updates can be published on the
WSUS server using System Center Updates Publisher. It is an additional
software licensed along with the ConfigMgr server.
Thanks to the update, publisher administrator can do the following:
Import third-party software updates
Create and modify the updates definition
Export the updates definition to a catalog
Publish updates or updates catalogs on the WSUS server
Some of the vendors, such as Adobe, HP, Fujitsu or Dell, prepare ready-to-use
catalogs with updates that can be imported.

Maintenance setting on collection
All kinds of deployments are assigned to the collections. There is, however, one
important setting the administrator needs to remember, which significantly
affects performing deployments by clients--this setting is Maintenance
Windows. This option allows you to control at what time and day clients can do
tasks that interfere with operating systems, such as installing updates, software,
or operating system installation.
There are situations where the installation needs to be performed out of
scheduled Maintenance Windows. The client may disregard configuration of
Maintenance Windows when the Ignore maintenance Windows and install
immediately at deadline option is used when preparing the deployment. In such a
scenario, deployment will be performed as if there were no Maintenance
Windows configured for a particular client.
For Required deployments, if Maintenance Windows are configured
on the client, deployment will not be performed according to the
deadline but at the first suitable time, according to the
Maintenance Windows, unless it covers the deadline time; then, it
will be deployed as configured.

Update search
Since always, the list of the system updates has been measured in thousands.
Managing them can be considered really hard without the ability to filter them
out. Updates can be filtered by categories and classifications assigned to them by
Microsoft.
These two mentioned attributes allow you to filter updates that ease
administration, as the ConfigMgr console shows all updates together by default.
Here is an example of such a query, which searches only updates with particular
parameters: 
An example of searching updates on the ConfigMgr console
There is no need to create queries each time from scratch. Each
query can be saved, so it can be used later if there is a need.
One of the most common queries is one regarding updates where the release date
is less than 1 month. It is an easy way to get the newest Microsoft updates
released in the current month.

Server group
When managing server updates, it is important to know whether servers can be
restarted and in what order. The order of restart is sometimes essential when
dealing with applications on managed servers.
Previous ConfigMgr versions didn't provide such granularity in managing
updates, such as setting up the server restart order. Version 1706 allows you to
manage the order of software installation as well as restart within a server group.
It can be configured in collection properties by choosing the Server Group
option and later in the General tab using the All devices are part of the same
server group option and choosing Settings.
Settings contain three different ways in which a service group can be
maintained:
Allow a percentage of machines to be updated at the same time: This option
specifies what percentage of machines can be updated at the same time
Allow a number of machines to be updated at the same time: This option
allows you to hardcode the number of machines that can be updated at the
same time
Specify the maintenance sequence: This option allows you to configure a
custom order of software installation on a collection
Configured settings can be easily cleared using the Clear Server Group
Deployment Locks option after choosing the collection.
This option is very useful; however, it is still under evaluation by
Microsoft. To start using it, Consent to use Pre-Release features
needs to be enabled under hierarchy settings.

Deploying software updates
After getting familiar with all the processes that occur when deploying updates
and understanding them, the next step is deployment. The deployment phase has
two main modes:
Manual: All objects that require the deployment of updates are created
manually.
Automatic: Creating an automation, which will later be deploying updates
by itself. The wizard creates Software Update Groups as well as Deployment
Packages.
The manual mode in WSUS has had the ability to deploy updates in an
automated way and now, so does ConfigMgr.
Deployment always consists of the same objects, regardless of the mode:
Software Update Groups: An object that returns updates. The software update
group is assigned to a collection, which means all items assigned to it will
be deployed to a collection computer. A software update group can be
created using the console under Software Library\Software Updates\All Software
Updates where, after adding relevant updates, they can be added to an
existing software group or create a new one.
Deployment Packages: A package containing all binaries for updates that are
available on the distribution point. The ConfigMgr client downloads data
from it only for those updates that are installed. These are visible on the
console under Software Library\Software Updates\Deployment Packages; however, it
is impossible to create them from there as these are created when creating a
deployment. It is possible to assign updates to an existing deployment
package, though.
Adding updates to an existing software update group should be
done with due diligence, especially when considering a group that
already has some deployments assigned. Adding an update to such
a software update group creates the deployment of this update to
all other deployments assigned to this software update group.

To deploy updates, three different types of wizards can be used:
Download: A wizard used to download installation files, for instance, from
Microsoft Update, and saving them in the local repository, creating
deployment packages with these updates, and sending them to the
distribution point. At this point, binaries are not assigned to any collection;
all it does is just download the installation files.
Deploy: A wizard used to deploy updates to collections of devices. It is
possible to deploy only those updates that were downloaded to the server.
This wizard goes through the same tasks that Download wizard does; after
these steps, it is possible to go directly to the creation of a deployment.
Automatic Deployment Rules: A wizard used to create automatic update
deployment.

Deployment preparation
Software update deployment will be presented using a feature that has become
available in ConfigMgr 2012, Automatic Deployment Rules, as it fills the previous gap
in maintaining updates using ConfigMgr. At the end of this section, the main
differences between manual and automatic deployments will be outlined as well.
Automatic updates are always deployed in the Required mode, so there is a
deadline after which the deployment will be triggered. The user can only
postpone installation for certain short periods of time. There is a reason why it is
important to precisely specify what application types are going to be deployed
using this feature.
The most important difference between manual and automatic
update deployment is available installation modes. For the
automatic deployment type, it is not possible to choose the
Available mode. As for the manual deployment type, it is possible to
deploy updates in the Required and Available modes.
Of course there are products for which updates are deployed automatically;
otherwise, it would be a time-consuming task, such as Endpoint Protection.
Virus database updates are published a couple of times a day by Microsoft, and
manual installation, in this case, would be a big challenge for the administrator.
Therefore, automatic deployment is something that helps in such cases.
When creating an ADR, there are a few default templates that can
be used for automatic deployment.
The creation of Automatic Deployment Rules is not hard; the wizard for this can be run
from Software Library\Software Updates\Automatic Deployment Rules.
There are 12 main steps when creating an ADR:
1. The first step is naming the ADR, choosing whether it will be deployed
using one of the default templates, and assigning a collection to it. It is
possible not to run ADR straight after creation; the Enable the deployment

after this rule is run option is used to tell whether ADR should run
automatically after the wizard is done or not:
Initial configuration of Automatic Deployment Rules
2. The second step is the configuration of license agreements for updates.
Some of the updates require acceptance of the license agreement, hence it is
possible to approve them automatically, or not, but then only updates
without the need for accepting the agreement will be deployed.
3. The third step is a choice of which updates will be deployed automatically.
If default templates are used, this settings site is already configured. It is
worth checking, using the Preview option, how many this particular rule is
going to deploy:

Choosing update types for the rule Using the Preview option has two purposes. The first is checking for the
number of updates affected by the rule, and second is ensuring that the rule is configured for updates that
are supposed to be deployed.
4. The fourth step is checking how many updates are covered by this rule. If
there are too many of them, the rule will never work as its constraints have
been exceeded:
Preview of updates that are covered by the rule Automatic Deployment Rules will not work if there are
more than 1,000 updates applied.
5. The fifth step is the configuration of the synchronization schedule with the
WSUS server. A schedule is needed to automate synchronization and to

cyclically search for new updates published by Microsoft. The Run the rule
on a schedule option enables setting a separate schedule for each rule.
When the rule starts, it triggers synchronization with a software update
point about updates. This synchronization is independent of the
synchronization schedule set on software update point. The Run the rule
after any software update point synchronization option provides the ability
to run synchronization each time after finishing synchronization on
software update point. The Do not run this rule automatically option will
work only when triggered manually from the ConfigMgr console by the
administrator:
Rule run schedule settings
6. The sixth step is setting up a deadline for deployed updates. The
assumption of automatic deployment is that updates have to be installed on
the operating system. Because of this, there is a need for defining the time
for deployment. The Software available time option specifies the time
scope within which updates will be available for installation, and
Installation deadline is used to specify the ultimate time for installation:

Update installation time settings
7. The seventh step is specifying whether the user will be notified about
updates installation; this is controlled by the User notifications option;
when deploying updates automatically, it is worth selecting the Hide in
Software Center and all notifications option. Thanks to this, the user will
not be shown any notifications. There are two more important options, and
set Device restart behavior if automatic restart is required after applying
updates; it is possible to postpone such updates on both the server and
workstations. Deadline behavior specifies whether updates in this
deployment can be installed out of configured Maintenance Windows:

Settings for notifications and automatic restart after updates deployment
8. The eighth step specifies when the ConfigMgr client will download
installation files. By default, binaries are downloaded from distribution
points assigned to the default site boundary group if the client is not able to
download files from the current or neighbor boundary group distribution
point. If the client computer is out of LAN network, it might download
binaries directly from the Microsoft Update website if the If software
updates are not available on distribution point in current, neighbor or site
boundary group, download content from Microsoft Updates option is set:

Installation files download settings
9. The ninth step is the creation of deployment packages or adding
downloaded files to the existing deployment package:

Deployment packages settings Deployment packages might contain binaries for more than one software
update group. The ConfigMgr client downloads only the required files from the distribution point, not the
whole deployment package.
10. The tenth step is specifying a distribution point to which deployment
packages will be sent.
11. The eleventh step is specifying from where binaries should be downloaded.
The administrator can choose between Microsoft Update or a local resource
if it has been added earlier.
12. The twelfth step is configuring language packs in which binaries will be
downloaded.
When creating your own ADR, it is possible to create a template for
later use.

Manual update deployment
There are no major differences between manual and automatic software updates
deployment. All of these settings need to be configured manually, but eventually,
many of the settings will be the same in both deployment types.
Two basic actions need to be done to deploy updates manually:
Create a software update group and assign updates to it
Create a deployment for proper software update group assigned to a certain
collection
In the next step under Software Library\Software Updates\All Software Updates, the
administrator needs to select updates and create software update point. Then,
similar to automatic deployment, the Download or Deploy creator needs to be
used; there are three main differences between them. The first is choosing how
the updates should be deployed--in the Required or Available way: 
Deployment type settings The second difference is in the schedule settings. If Required is chosen, then
settings will be the same as for automatic deployment. For Available, it is necessary to set the date for
which updates are available for the computer to download: 

Schedule update The third difference is the possibility of enabling updates installation for the user. Display
in Software Center and show all notifications needs to be set in this case.

Windows 10 as a service
Along with Windows 10, Microsoft introduced a new way of installing updates.
Apart from regular updates, as usual, there are updates called upgrades: these
updates increase the system version. At the time of writing this, the newest
version for Windows 10 is 1703, so the upgrade will be updating it from, for
instance, 1607 to the 1703 version.
Updates can be deployed using new the ConfigMgr feature, which is a service
plan. In short, it is an Automatic Deployment Rules for Windows 10 upgrade
deployments. A service plan can be created under Software Library\Windows 10
Servicing\Servicing Plans. These rules will be discussed later in Chapter 10, Operating
System Deployment.
 

Office 365 Client Management
An important factor to secure systems and user data is to update Office 365.
Updating application Office 365 has been separated on the ConfigMgr server in
order to ease the management of this process.
Deployment for Office 365 can be created under Software Library\Office 365 Client
Management, and there are three options to choose from:
Creating a deployment of the Office 365 client
Creating Automatic Deployment Rules for Office 365 updates
Creating Client Settings
Managing updates for Office 365 is not enabled by default in Client
Settings. To make it available, Software Updates | Enable
management of the Office 365 Client Agent in the Client Settings
option should be enabled.

Monitoring software deployment
There are two ways to implement updates. The first is available on the
ConfigMgr server reports on the various stages of implementation of the update.
The second is the use of this way to show the status of the update--Software
Update Dashboard.

Software Update Reports
The advantage of integrated ConfigMgr with the WSUS server is reporting, as
the WSUS server doesn't have nicely developed reporting. After the server is
installed, there are a few available default reports divided into the following
categories:
Software Updates--A. Compliance: Reports that show data regarding
compliance based on a certain collection, software update group, or update
Software Updates--B. Deployment Management: Reports that show data
about updates in certain deployments
Software Updates--C. Deployment States: Reports that show data
regarding the status of each deployment
Software Updates--D. Scan: Reports that show data regarding clients
scanning for updates
Software Updates--E. Troubleshooting: Reports that show data about
errors regarding scanning or updates deployment
Apart from the default reports, there is a possibility to create your own reports.
 

Software Update Dashboard
On the ConfigMgr console under Monitoring\Security\Software Updates Dashboard
administrator can find information about update deployment status.
Dashboards contain:
Information about devices meeting the requirements
Information about the number of missing updates on the managed
computers, grouped by categories
Number of critical--related to updates--alerts
Information about missing updates
Date of last successful synchronization with WSUS server
Information about computers meeting the requirements and number of updates grouped by categories In
order to configure Devices Compliance Status, the administrator needs to click ellipses (...) in the upper-
right corner and configure available filters: 

Compliance Status filter configuration
There is also information about the last successful synchronization of ConfigMgr
with WSUS server: 
Time of last successful synchronization with WSUS
Last information is a diagram showing--depending on the chosen category in
Missing Updates by Category-- the number of computers which are missing a
certain update: 
Missing security updates
If update rollup category is chosen, the diagram will show information about this
particular update type: 

Missing update rollups

Summary
This chapter covered essential concepts related to updating deployment. The
most important point is to understand the process of updates deployment;
without it, it would be really had to manage updates and troubleshoot any issues.
Starting from the 2012 version, it is possible to deploy updates manually as well
as automatically. Automatic deployment is very handy; however, it needs to be
configured with due diligence to avoid any troubles.
The next chapter will show you how to secure managed computers that leverage
Endpoint Protection.

Endpoint Protection
Previous chapters covered topics about the essentials of installing and
configuring the ConfigMgr server, how to install clients, and how to deploy
application updates on the system.
This chapter will cover important topics that are related to protecting a managed
environment against malware.scep.
Specifically, we will cover the following topics:
Understanding Endpoint Protection
Deploying antimalware and firewall policies
Creating a software update point for Endpoint Protection
Monitoring Endpoint Protection

Understanding Endpoint Protection
Managing and configuring the environment are not all the capabilities provided
by the ConfigMgr server; a great feature is also fundamental protection against
unwanted software, and a component responsible for this is Endpoint Protection.
It is a part of the ConfigMgr used for hardening the environment against
malware threats and for firewall rules configuration.
The ConfigMgr server provides the possibility of performing deployments,
central management, and monitoring statuses of managed computers. In fact,
Endpoint Protection is Windows Defender, which is managed using the
ConfigMgr console. Endpoint Protection and Windows Defender have similar
interfaces and settings.
The ConfigMgr server license does not contain a license for
Endpoint Protection; it is necessary to buy the subscription
separately.
These are the steps that need to be taken in order to deploy the Endpoint
Protection feature:
1. Installation of Endpoint Protection point.
2. Creation of the device collection and assigning it to Endpoint Protection.
3. Client Settings configuration for Endpoint Protection in order to install the
Endpoint Protection client. By default, the Endpoint Protection client
installation is disabled.
4. Creation of your own antimalware policies if not intending to use default
ones.
5. Optionally, configuring firewall rules.
6. Optionally, configuring Windows Defender Advanced Threat Protection
policies.
After deploying Endpoint Protection, it is possible to control the system state
and the Endpoint Protection client.
The Endpoint Protection client is able to uninstall some antivirus

programs when installing itself. It is not possible to install two
different antivirus systems on one operating system.
Endpoint Protection capabilities:
Detect and remediate malware, rootkit, network, and spyware
vulnerabilities.
Automatically download updates for virus definition and the Windows
Defender engine.
Basic management of firewall rules.
Managing and monitoring Windows Defender Advanced Threat
Protection (ATP). Windows ATP is a cloud service used to detect, track,
and respond to threats found on the internet.
Integrating Endpoint Protection with the ConfigMgr server also provides the
following benefits:
An elastic way of distributing the Windows Defender definition and updates
using a software update point
Definitions can be downloaded from a software update point, from a local
UNC path, or from Microsoft Malware Protection Center
The Endpoint Protection client uses the ConfigMgr server infrastructure to
download settings for clients and report about the operating system status
Data sent to the ConfigMgr server can later be used in default reports
available on the console or to create your own custom reports

Endpoint Protection point
The process for Endpoint Protection installation is very short. The first step is to
choose between Add Site System Roles and Create Site System Server located
under Administration\Site Configuration\Sites, and the next step is choosing the
Endpoint Protection point role. Apart from the wizard, it is essential to provide
the installation of definitions and updates to the engine using a software update
point, and later automatic deployment rules: 
Choosing Endpoint Protection point role
Because Endpoint Protection needs an additional license, when installing the
role, there is a need for accepting a license agreement for this product: 

Accepting of license agreement for Endpoint Protection
Microsoft provides Cloud Protection Service, which associates Endpoint
Protection users. The wizard asks whether the administrator agrees to send data
to the service, and it is also possible to decide how much data will be sent: 
Sending data to Cloud Protection Service settings
The installation of the Endpoint Protection role does not take a long time, and
there are only three tasks that need to be done:
Client Settings allow Endpoint Protection client installation
Prepare and deploy a policy with custom Endpoint Protection settings if
you do not intend to use a default one
Deploy the automatic installation of Endpoint Protection definitions and
engine updates
In the ConfigMgr environment managed by the central
administration site, the Endpoint Protection role needs to be
installed on a CAS server.

Client Settings for Endpoint
Protection
As mentioned earlier, just installation of the Endpoint Protection role is not
enough. It is necessary to allow ConfigMgr clients to install the Endpoint
Protection client: 
Client Settings for Endpoint Protection settings
The Manage Endpoint Protection client on client computers option enables the
management of the Endpoint client.
The Install Endpoint Protection client on client computers option allows
automatic installation of the Endpoint Protection client on managed systems.

The Disable alternate sources (such as Microsoft Windows Update, Microsoft
Windows Server Update Services, or UNC shares) for the initial definition
update on client computers option is used to reduce net flow traffic when
definitions are downloaded for the first time. If this option is enabled, initially,
only the ConfigMgr server is allowed to deliver virus definitions.
There are three Endpoint Protection-related actions available from
the ConfigMgr console, which are quick scan, full scan, and
download definitions.

Configuring a software update point
for Endpoint Protection
After Endpoint Protection, the client is installed and there are a few more
configuration steps to be performed.
Microsoft prepares Endpoint Protection definition updates a few times a day. It is
possible to imagine a situation where the administrator manually deploys these
definition updates; however, it would be far too non-effective to work.
It is possible to configure automatic deployment using automatic deployment
rules and prepared by the Microsoft template that is used when configuring rules
for deploying definitions.
It is necessary to have the WSUS server integrated with the ConfigMgr server
using the server role software update point. When configuring what will be
synchronized, the administrator chooses certain classifications and products; in
this case, classification would be definition updates and produces Forefront
Endpoint Protection as well as Windows Defender.
After performing the synchronization, the automatic deployment rule needs to be
created using the template given by Microsoft, or from scratch: 

Endpoint Protection classifications and product synchronization
It is important to remember that there are two options that need to
be selected: Forefront Endpoint Protection as well as Windows
Defender.

Antimalware policies
The last step of Endpoint Protection configuration is configuring antimalware
policies for the Endpoint Protection client, which is also responsible for the
client behavior. The policies can be created in Asset and Compliance\Endpoint
Protection\Antimalware Policies.
Policies provide the following settings:
The Run a scheduled scan on client computers option: Enabling the
scanning schedule
The Scan type, Scan day, and Scan time options: The scanning type and the
day and hour of scanning
The Limit CPU usage during scan to (%) option: The allowed CPU load
when performing the scanning:
Options related to operating system scanning

The Check for Endpoint Protection definitions at a specific interval (hours)
option: How often the Endpoint Protection client will check for new
definition versions:
Endpoint Protection definition installation settings
The Set sources and order for Endpoint Protection definition updates
option: Selecting the location from which updates would be downloaded.
Depending on environment configuration, the proper source should be
chosen:

Endpoint Protection definition sources settings Similar to Client Settings, there is an option to create
custom policies and assign them to different collections. Thanks to that, depending on the need, it would be
possible to change Endpoint Protection settings. These are created in the same way as Client Settings
and further assigned to a certain collection.
If there is an antivirus software installed on the distribution point,
or any server containing binaries used by ConfigMgr server, it is
necessary to exclude these folders from antivirus scanning. As for
distribution point, it is necessary to exclude all folders used by this
server role.

Firewall policies
Endpoint Protection, additionally, has the ability to manage firewall settings on
the workstation. Firewall policies are created under Asset and Compliance\Endpoint
Protection\Windows Firewall Policies.
When creating a policy, it is necessary to establish which firewall ports the
policy will apply to. The Block all incoming connections, including those in the
list of allowed programs option, is used to control the connection that can be
made to the client. The Notify the user when Windows Firewall blocks a new
program option is used to notify the user when the firewall blocks a certain
software:
Firewall policies settings
After creating a policy, similar to other policies, it is necessary to assign it to a
certain computer collection.

Windows Defender Advanced Threat
Protection
The last optional step of Endpoint Protection configuration is to apply proper
settings on Windows Defender Advanced Threat Protection. These policies are
created under Asset and Compliance\Endpoint Protection\Windows Defender ATP Policies.
To create policies, there is a need for purchasing access to the service after which
it is possible to provide the configuration file when creating the policy.
 

Monitoring Endpoint Protection
status
Just like how each deployment is required to monitor its state, the case is the
same for Endpoint Protection as well.
The server provides a few ways to check operating systems' protection status:
Under Monitoring\Security\Endpoint Protection Status\System Center 2012 Endpoint
Protection Status, the console provides information about the operating
system protection status
Under Monitoring\Security\Endpoint Protection Status\Malware Detected, the console
provides information about the malware detected
Under Monitoring\Security\Windows Defender ATP Status, the console provides
information related to Windows Defender ATP
When selecting a device, the console provides information about current
antimalware policy and detected threats
Default reports created when installing the ConfigMgr server
Additionally, it is possible to configure alerts for Endpoint Protection separately
for each collection.
 

Endpoint Protection state
The ConfigMgr server console, starting from 2012, provides a lot of priceless
information. Previously, a lot of pieces of information were accessible only via
reports, but now a lot of information is also available on the console.
The data from Monitoring\Security\Endpoint Protection Status\System Center 2012
Endpoint Protection Status is divided into two data types:
Data Security State contains information about the Endpoint Protection
client state:
Data Security State Endpoint Protection
Data Operational State relates to definitions installed on the Endpoint
Protection clients and the ConfigMgr client state:

Operational State Endpoint Protection data
Data presented on the ConfigMgr console is only basic. Additional information
can be found in the reports under Monitoring\Reporting\Reports\Endpoint Protection.
Data available under Monitoring\Security\Endpoint Protection
Status\System Center 2012 Endpoint Protection Status is related to a
particular collection. Thanks to this feature, it is possible to easily
filter and display data.

Endpoint Protection alerts
Protecting the environment is a very important part of the administrator's work,
hence it is always worth setting up alerts on Endpoint Protection. These alerts
can be set in the collection properties under the Alerts tab.
There are three kinds of alerts:
Client status: Related to the general ConfigMgr client state
Endpoint protection: Regarding detected threats
Membership: For a computer collection exceeding the assumed number of
devices
Choosing the alert type After choosing the proper alert, there is a need to configure a threshold for it: 

Alert threshold settings Alerts can be viewed in two places on the console:
Monitoring\Alerts\Active Alerts shows all active alerts
Monitoring\Alerts\All Alerts shows all of the alerts that were triggered by the
server
Alerts can be viewed not just from the console. After integrating the ConfigMgr
server with the Exchange Server, an alert can be emailed to the administrators.
This can be done using subscriptions available on the console under
Monitoring\Alerts\Subscriptions.

Summary
This chapter covered how to protect the environment against malware. Endpoint
Protection, however, provides only basic protection against threats. If wider
protection is required, it is necessary to deploy third-party antivirus solutions.
The next chapter covers operating system deployment. Deploying operating
systems can bring a lot of great features with it; however, due diligence is highly
recommended as, if you're not cautious, it might be destructive as well.
ConfigMgr provides a lot of available options in terms of operating system
deployment. Hence, in order to be sure that the deployment goes smoothly and is
well-planned, it is essential to get familiar with all of them.
This chapter covers the most important topics related to operating system
deployment security as well as available scenarios.
To know more about Endpoint Protection, here are some useful sites with
interesting materials:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sccm/protect/deploy-use/endpoint-protection-configure
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sccm/protect/deploy-use/endpoint-protection
The next chapter presents essential concepts and technologies related to
operating system deployment, preparing and managing operating systems
templates, basic ConfigMgr settings helpful for operating system deployment,
and scenarios for operating system deployment.

Operating System Deployment
Previous chapters covered topics related to the installation and configuration of
ConfigMgr server. Also, almost all available deployment types were described,
such as application deployment, deploying updates, and compliance settings.
This chapter will be fully dedicated to operating system deployment.
We will discuss the following topics:
Operating system deployment
Operating system deployment scenarios
Task sequences
Drivers
Deployment types
Windows 10 servicing

Operating system deployment
Deployment of operating systems is the most sophisticated feature available on
the ConfigMgr server. To get all of the most useful functionalities out of that
feature, one would need to know not only ConfigMgr server, but also some
topics unrelated to ConfigMgr, such as:
The operating system installation process
Available possibilities of controlling the operating system installation
process
Creation and management of operating system templates
It doesn't really matter which operating system deployment tool we are talking
about, be it Windows Deployment Service, Microsoft Deployment Toolkit, or
ConfigMgr server--without having a knowledge base of the aforementioned
topics, it would be really hard to do anything related to operating system
deployment.
Only by having knowledge about the process itself is it possible to choose a tool
for OS deployment. This chapter covers essential terms related to OS
deployment and configuration, as well as, scenarios of OS deployment offered
by ConfigMgr server.
The methods of installing various versions of operating systems
differ from each other, but whether for Windows 10, Windows 8, or
Windows 7 deployments, there are still many things these
deployments have in common.
Straight after being installed, the ConfigMgr server is ready to deploy operating
systems in a basic scope. All the administrator needs to do before starting to
prepare operating system deployments is to import an OS template that has been
prepared manually or taken from an installation CD.
Of course, if there would be a need to use more advanced functions, such as
starting the installation using a network card, you would need to set additional
configurations on the ConfigMgr and Windows Deployment Services servers,

network, and firewalls.

Operating system deployment
terminology
It is not possible to manage an operating system deployment without getting to
know terms related to it. An administrator without this knowledge won't be able
to prepare any OS deployment.
As has been mentioned earlier, many topics related to OS deployment haven't
changed over the years. Administrators that already used to deploy operating
systems--even if it was Windows XP--will have it easy, as some phases of the
process are exactly the same.
The most important change in operating system deployment since
Windows XP is deploying operating systems using images.
Installation with images was introduced with Windows Vista. Since
then--regardless of the deployment method--it is always done using
the OS image.
We need to know the appropriate tools to properly deploy operating systems.
Almost all of them have nothing in common with ConfigMgr, and this might be
kind of an obstacle for administrators. The most important tools used for
operating system deployment are:
Windows Assessment and Deployment Kit
Windows Preinstallation Environment (PE)
Deployment Image Servicing and Management
Windows System Image Manager
System Preparation Tool
User State Migration Tool

Windows Assessment and
Deployment Kit
Windows Assessment and Deployment Kit is a set of tools essential to operating
system deployment. Some of the tools described shortly are part of this package.

Windows PE
When deploying operating systems manually, one may not be aware that for OS
deployment, one thing that is needed is Windows PE. The CD installer is
prepared in such a way that Windows PE is loaded at the beginning, and in the
next step, it runs the OS installer.
Hence, when deploying operating systems, the administrator needs to prepare the
Windows PE image as well as the operating system image. During the
installation process, ConfigMgr automatically creates images with Windows PE
x86 and x64. As has been mentioned earlier in the first chapter, Windows
Assessment and Deployment Kit is a required set of tools to install the
ConfigMgr server. Thanks to this toolkit, we can install prepared Windows PE
images. It is also possible to create your own custom images and add them to the
ConfigMgr console. Windows PE images are available under Software
Library\Operating Systems\Boot Images. These boot images are nothing different from
bootable CDs with Windows PE.
When preparing a task sequence for operating system deployment, it is important
to choose the proper Windows PE version for deploying the operating system.
For an x86 operating system, Windows PE x86 or x64 can be used, but for
deploying on an x64 operating system, Windows PE needs to be x64.
It might happen that the administrator needs to change the default Windows PE
configuration. This operation can be done manually using dism.exe or using the
ConfigMgr server console. The most common change is adding drivers to
Windows PE, mostly network card related. Windows PE has some default
network drivers, but there are situations where drivers need to be added
manually: 

List of drivers added to Windows PE
The second reason for such a change in the Windows PE configuration is for
adding components that are used for operating system deployment, and which
are not present in the default Windows PE configuration:
Available optional components for Windows PE
Regardless of the chosen operating system, Windows PE, and the
operating system are both needed for deployment.

Operating system image
With Windows Vista, Microsoft completely changed the way of installing
operating systems. All the previous versions of operating systems were installed
by copying files to the hard drive and extracting them, and only after this was
done did the installer start. Since Windows Vista, each operating system is
installed from the OS image prepared by Microsoft and placed on the installation
CD in the \Sources catalog.
While deploying operating systems using ConfigMgr, we might use the default
operating system or a custom one. To use a custom image, it needs to be
imported under Software Library\Operating Systems\Operating System Images in the
ConfigMgr console: 
Selecting a .wim file to be imported
After the file is imported to the ConfigMgr server, the most important
information about the operating system image can be viewed, including
information about the type of operating system, partition architecture, and size: 

Information about the operating system image contained in the .wim file
Information about what a particular .wim file contains might also be pulled out
using the dism.exe application.

Deployment Image Servicing and
Management
Deployment Image Servicing and Management--dism.exe--is a command-line
tool. The dism.exe file is a part of the Windows Assessment and Deployment Kit
package that has superseded imagex.exe, which was used to create OS images until
Windows 8.
While working with dism.exe, the following operations are available:
Capture and apply Windows images
Edit the .wim files, adding or removing operating systems from it
Prepare a Windows PE boot image
Mount images
View lists of drivers and information about drivers
View information about enabled features in the image
Enable/disable features in the image
Apply settings from an unattend.xml file
The dism.exe file is the most commonly used tool to create and modify operating
system images, as well as to add drivers to Windows PE.
Windows ADK is a required component for installing ConfigMgr
server. Unfortunately, it is possible to uninstall it after ConfigMgr
is installed. After Windows ADK is uninstalled, all functions on the
ConfigMgr console responsible for Windows PE image
modification and update installation will stop working.

Windows System Image Manager
Windows System Image Manager is a major part of Windows Assessment and
Deployment Kit and is leveraged to create the unattend.xml files which can be used
to control operating system installation and to change settings of the operating
system.
While deploying operating systems, the installation may vary depending on the
computer type--even if the OS installed is the same. For instance, when
installing the operating system on a computer with a Wi-Fi network adapter, the
installer will ask to which detected network it should connect. At such a
moment, the installer waits for user interaction and stays pending; tools like
ConfigMgr are supposed to automate the process and perform it without user
interaction.
The following is an example of an unattend file for Windows 10 installation that
skips the Wi-Fi connectivity step so installation can be performed automatically
unattended to the very end:
Unattend file settings example
The unattend.xml file might be used to control the installation processes of all
operating systems deployed using ConfigMgr. The unattend.xml file can also be
used to change the configuration of the installing system, such as adding some

system components.
There is no need to create a separate OS image for each and every
operating system and all the possible configurations. For instance,
if the firm is international and the operating system language is
English, regional configurations for each country can be changed
via the unattend file or GPO.

Windows image file format
Windows image files allow for saving data in operating system image files. One
.wim file can contain one instance of a regular or Windows PE operating system.
The .wim files contain the structure of saved files and folders from the template
machine. To reduce used space, all operating system files are saved in a .wim file
only once, so even if one file appears twice in the system, the .wim file will
contain only one copy of the actual file.
During installation, files are installed where they are supposed to be on the
template machine. Thanks to this deduplication process, the .wim files are much
smaller than the actual operating system.
Windows 10 contains a file called install.esd instead of install.wim.
ConfigMgr does not support .esd files, but they can easily be
exported using dism.exe.

System Preparation Tool
System Preparation Tool--syspre.exe--is a tool used to prepare a template VM to
be an operating system template. The whole process of template creation can be
done manually or in an automated way using ConfigMgr. The automated way is
possible after preparing a special CD on the ConfigMgr console, under Software
Library\Operating Systems\Task Sequences; the administrator should choose the Create
Task Sequence Media option and later Capture media.
If the console runs on a machine where a USB drive is inserted, the
administrator may select it and wait until all needed files are copied over. If the
console runs on the server, it is possible to choose a place where the server saves
its ISO files and choose that file instead, to be saved on the USB drive:
Capturing operation system settings
The USB drive can be plugged into the template machine, to process with the
creation and saving of the image.
Creation of the image consists of four phases:
Installing and configuration of a template machine
Running sysprep.exe
Running the Windows PE operating system
Creating the operating system image using dism.exe and saving it on the

network share
Using the capture media CD, all steps--apart from the first one--can be
performed automatically. All that needs to be done is to specify where the .wim
file should be saved and which credentials will be used.
Of course, if someone wants to, it is possible to perform the whole operation step
by step. It is not important how the OS image is prepared; it is important to have
it. However, using capture media, the operation is much easier.
The ConfigMgr client needs to be uninstalled before running
sysprep.exe on a template machine.

Windows Deployment Service
One of the methods used to install the operating system is starting the PC using
the network card and downloading all needed files over the network. The service
responsible for that is called Windows Deployment Service (WDS). It allows
you to send Windows PE over the network on the target computer, and in the
next step, the machine does a reboot and the computer starts using Windows PE,
starting the installation process.
WDS very easily integrates with ConfigMgr. To use it, on the console under
Administration\Distribution Points, after choosing one of the distribution points, the
administrator should open settings. The PXE tab is used to configure with WDS.
Enable PXE support for clients is used for WDS integration. Allow this
distribution point to respond to incoming PXE requests is used to enable PXE
requests. Once these two options are enabled, the distribution point starts
supporting the installation of operating systems with network cards. ConfigMgr
is able to install the operating system on a computer that is not in the database. It
is a very useful function, but can also be harmful.
The option allowing such installations is Enable unknown computer support. If
the administrator decides to enable this function, it is worth considering enabling
the Require a password when computers use PXE option, which enforces the
administrator providing a password on the computer where the installation will
take place. If the password is not provided, the installation won't be started.
Specify the PXE server response delay (seconds) should always be set to a value
lower than on the WDS server. If the value is lower, it will be WDS performing
PXE installation in the first place, instead of ConfigMgr:

PXE settings
After integrating the WDS server with ConfigMgr, it is ConfigMgr that takes
control over the WDS service. There is no need for any additional configuration
on the WDS side after integrating it with ConfigMgr.
While installing the WDS server, a RemoteInstall catalog is created, which--after
integrating with ConfigMgr--contains the additional catalogs and files needed for
PXE deployments:

WDS installation folder, along with ConfigMgr files

Microsoft Deployment Toolkit 2012
Microsoft Deployment Toolkit 2012 (MDT) is a free tool used to deploy
operating systems. It is always worth integrating ConfigMgr with this tool--it is
very easy. After installing Microsoft Deployment Toolkit, the administrator
needs to run a script prepared by Microsoft, available in the Start menu: 
Script integrating MDT with ConfigMgr server
This script copies MDT binaries to the ConfigMgr installation catalog, and
thanks to this, the console contains additional task sequence tasks which are not
available by default on ConfigMgr:

Additional MDT tasks in task sequence

User State Migration Tool
User State Migration Tool is a set of tools used to move user profiles between
operating systems, and is a part of the Windows ADK package. It can be used by
the administrator to move user profiles manually, or on a larger scale by
ConfigMgr during operating system deployment.
ConfigMgr has a built-in mechanism for migrating user profiles during operating
system installation:
Configuration of built-in mechanism for user profile migration
It is not possible to migrate user profiles between the systems if
these systems have different language versions.

Packages during operating system
deployment
During operating system deployment, apart from using two operating systems--
Windows PE and the operating system that is about to be installed--very often,
the administrator uses various additional packages. Some of them are created by
default by the ConfigMgr server, but sometimes, you need to create custom
packages manually.
The default packages, created during OS deployment, can be found under Assets
and Compliance\Packages. One of them will be used during operating system
deployment:
Configuration Manager Client Package contains the installation files of the
ConfigMgr client
User State Migration Tool for Windows contains files for the User State
Migration Tool described earlier in this chapter:
Default packages created during ConfigMgr server installation.
A package with installation files is always used during operating system
deployment, as it is the ConfigMgr client that installs drivers on the operating
system, applications, and updates.
Other packages--these default ones or those custom created by the administrator-
-are used depending on the requirement. A good example of such packages are
those containing unattend files for operating system installation or User State
Migration Tool files.

Unified Extensible Firmware
Interface
ConfigMgr has the ability to install operating systems using BIOS and Unified
Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI). When creating a task sequence, two
tasks are created--one for operating system deployment using BIOS and the
second one using UEFI. When installing an operating system--depending on
computer configuration--installation is done over BIOS or UEFI automatically.
No other action is required, unless there is a need for changing the size or
number of partitions: 
Configuration of the operating system using UEFI
It is possible to change the boot type from BIOS to UEFI after the system is
installed, but such tasks need to be created manually in ConfigMgr.

Operating system deployment
scenarios
Deployment of operating systems can be done using a few available scenarios. A
deployment administrator must keep in mind which scenario will be used, and
know how to prepare it.
In general, there are four scenarios of operating system deployment:
Bare-metal: Operating system deployment on a new computer or a
computer that needs to be reinstalled
Operating system refresh: Deployment of a clean operating system,
keeping user data
In-place upgrade: Deployment of a new operating system replacing the old
one, keeping user data
Side-by-side migration: Migrating user data from one computer to another
Task sequences are not only used for operating system deployment. Since
ConfigMgr 2012, they are used as a tool to deploy packages and applications.
Depending on the scenario, different roles of ConfigMgr will be used, but each
scenario leverages management point and distribution point roles.
Deployment of operating systems is much more complicated than it
seems. Usually, in these kinds of deployments, there are additional
things to be done, such as the configuration of the operating
system, installation of applications, and updates.
If operating system deployment is done on virtual machines, then preparation of
the installation is easier, as there is no need for preparing drivers. The topic of
drivers will be taken up later in this chapter.

Bare-metal installation
Bare-metal installation is the easiest scenario of operating system deployment.
The easiest as in, in this scenario, the administrator does not need to care about
the data on the target computer.
To be able to leverage this scenario, the GUID of the computer or MAC address
of the network card needs to be imported to the ConfigMgr operating system. If
importing such information to the database is not possible, the Enable unknown
computer option should be enabled in order to install an operating system over
PXE.
Roles leveraged in such scenarios are as follows:
Primary site, in order to import data about the computer and create
deployment on a collection that contains this computer or a default
collection, All Unknown Computer
Management point shares policy, for the client with information about the
operating system deployment
Distribution point from where all the data needed for operating system
deployment will be downloaded
A bare-metal scenario can be started using a network card or a USB drive, or by
leveraging an already installed ConfigMgr client.

Operating system refresh
The operating system refresh scenario is very similar to the bare-metal scenario.
The only difference is it is run by the ConfigMgr client installed on the
computer. ConfigMgr server roles are exactly the same as for the bare-metal
scenario.

In-place upgrade
In-place upgrade installs a new operating system for the user, keeping all his data
and applications. Deploying an operating system using this scenario is quite
sophisticated, as the administrator needs to take care not only of securing user
data from being removed, but also installing all the missing applications on the
new operating system.
It is always good to perform a backup copy of an operating system from a
computer that will be processed, but this might significantly extend the time
needed for deployment on a single computer. Deployment of that type is done by
the ConfigMgr client, so there is no need to import any data to the ConfigMgr
database.
Roles needed for such scenarios are:
Management point shares policy, for the client with information about the
operating system deployment
Distribution point from where all the data needed for operating system
deployment will be downloaded
State migration point where all the users' profiles will be kept
Users' migrated profiles can be saved over LAN on the state
migration point, or locally. The second approach definitely
shortens the time needed for the process on a single computer, as
data is saved locally.

Side-by-side migration
The side-by-side migration scenario is more complicated, as it contains two
phases. First, there is a need to back up all the users' profiles and next, on the
new computer, install the operating system and restore user profiles. It is not
possible to be done in one phase.
To tell ConfigMgr which profile from the old computer needs to be imported to
the new machine, it is necessary to connect two MAC addresses in the
ConfigMgr database. This can be done when importing information about the
new computer to the ConfigMgr database. The new machine is then described as
the destination computer, and the computer from which data was backed up is
called the source computer.
When backing up a user's profile from the source computer, data is
copied over the network to the state migration point, compressed,
and protected by a password, which is generated by the ConfigMgr
server.
Roles leveraged in such a scenario are as follows:
Primary site, in order to import data about the computer and create
deployment on a collection that contains this computer or default collection,
All Unknown Computer
Management point shares policy, for the client with information about the
operating system deployment
Distribution point from where all the data needed for the operating system
deployment will be downloaded
State migration point where all the users' profiles will be kept

Task sequences
A task sequence is a sequence of tasks that are going to be performed on a
computer. Tasks are performed from top to bottom.
During creation or editing of a task sequence, ConfigMgr does not
check if a particular task sequence is valid and makes sense. It only
checks if particular steps have proper configuration. The
administrator needs to know the proper order of tasks, as
ConfigMgr is not capable of verifying it.
If the administrator at the end of the deployment creates a task to format local
drives, ConfigMgr will perform the task, not checking if it makes sense.
When configuring a task sequence, it is worth remembering that it is possible to
use variables built into the ConfigMgr server or variables created manually by
the administrator. Leveraging variables and conditions available in TS allows us
to create a mechanism that will deploy operating systems depending on the
variables and current conditions.
A good example of a variable that is commonly used in a build is
OSDComputerName. It is used to configure the computer name; when used in
TS, each time it is used, it will give a different name to the computer.
Particular tasks or the whole groups of tasks can be performed or not by
checking conditions. There are countless possibilities of using conditions; the
most common one is reaching the WMI database asking for the computer model
on which the deployment is performed. If there are five different computer
models, it is possible to create five separate task sequences for each computer
model. However, it is also possible to create one task sequence and based on the
conditions, indicate which task groups should be performed depending on the
computer model.

Task sequence creation
Task sequences can be created manually or using a wizard available on the
ConfigMgr server console, which allows us to create a few basic task sequence
types. If ConfigMgr is integrated with Microsoft Deployment Toolkit, the
ConfigMgr console will contain an additional wizard that might be leveraged to
create the same task sequences as when using Microsoft Deployment Toolkit.
Task sequences can be created on the console under Software Library\Operating
Systems\Task Sequences. The administrator needs to choose the proper type of task
sequence and later configure it. In the following example, Install an existing
image package type has been chosen, so the fundamental operating system
deployment type is leveraging the imported OS image:
1. The first step in the configuration is setting up a name for the task sequence
and selecting the Windows PE image for the task sequence:
Setting up a task sequence name and Windows PE image
2. The second step is choosing the operating system that needs to be deployed.
The Image package option is used to specify the used .wim file, and the
Image index option is used to specify the OS image file. If the administrator
wants to rearrange partitions and format disks, Partition and format the
target computer before installing the operating system should be selected as
well:

Selecting the .wim file used in deployment, as well as operating system image
3. The third step is adding a computer to a domain or work group. Domain
allows us to specify to which domain the computer should be joined,
Domain OU specifies the particular organizational unit where the computer
account should be placed, and the Account option is used to indicate using
which account the computer will be joined to a domain:
Adding computers to AD settings
If the computer's OU is specified as the target OU, then the
computer will not be joined to a domain and deployment will end

with failure.
4. The next step is optional, and is about adding switches to the ConfigMgr
client installer, which are triggered after the operating system is deployed:
ConfigMgr client installed settings
The ConfigMgr client is not needed for a successful operating
system deployment. However, if the administrator plans to install
some applications, run scripts, or perform any other configuration
on the operating system, the ConfigMgr client will be needed.
5. In this example, as it is about installing a fresh operating system, the boxes
aren't selected. However, these are helpful in other deployment scenarios,
like in-place upgrade or computer refresh:

Computer to computer data migration settings
6. Step six is configuring update installation after the operating system is
installed. For this step to work, the computer on which the operating system
is installed needs to be placed in the collection for which update
deployment is configured:
Update installation settings
7. In step seven, the administrator specifies which application should be
installed on the operating system; apart from applications, packages can
also be used in this step:

Application installation settings
8. The last step is saving the created task sequence:
View of completed task sequence, creating using a wizard.
Of course, all created task sequences can be freely modified after they are
created. It is also possible to create them manually, not using a wizard.
It has been mentioned before that a task sequence is not only the installation of
the operating system; it is also its configuration after it is installed--such a
scenario is a very common thing. Modification of the installed system can be
done using, for instance, the Run Command Line task.
The following is an example of an easy task of adding certain AD groups to a
local administrators group on the computer:

Example of Run Command Line settings
The example shows that to properly configure task sequences, the administrator
needs to have wide knowledge about IT systems in general, not only about
ConfigMgr.
An administrator who has a good knowledge about operating
systems and their maintenance will create better task sequences
than an administrator that has knowledge only about ConfigMgr.

Drivers
Installing drivers during operating system deployment can be the most time-
consuming task. It might be considered as a standard that driver configuration
for one operating system and one computer model might take up to one working
day, sometimes even longer.
Driver installation on the ConfigMgr server can be performed in two different
ways:
By importing drivers to the ConfigMgr database using .inf files
By installing the drivers using an application prepared by the vendor
When installing operating systems, the only supported type of
installation is silent type.
Note that when installing the drivers, what is worth checking is the proper order
of installation. Each computer model might have a different supported driver
installation order.

Installation of imported drivers
Importing drivers to the ConfigMgr database is not a hard task. The
administrator needs to download drivers from the vendor site. On the server
console under Software Library\Operating Systems\Drivers, the administrator needs to
choose the Import Driver option by specifying the UNC path where the drivers
have been saved.
The administrator will then see a list of detected drivers:
Specifying drivers source folder
When importing drivers, it is worth giving categories to them, as it makes later
deployments easier. All of the imported drivers can be viewed on the console: 
List of imported drivers from the ConfigMgr database
Drivers need to be imported on the distribution point in order to be installed
during operating system deployment. This can be achieved using Driver Packages,

under Software Library\Operating Systems\Driver Packages. After the relevant package is
created, it can later be sent to a distribution point.
Unfortunately, during OS deployment, ConfigMgr does not check
whether the drivers are available on the distribution point. If the
drivers are not there, deployment will start and eventually fail,
reporting an issue related to missing drivers.
The previously mentioned categories can be used to specify exactly which
drivers shall be used by the installer. Normally, the installer checks what drivers
are available in the database and installs those that suit it the most. However, that
might extend the installation process, as the ConfigMgr database might contain
thousands of drivers.
Leveraging categories allows us to narrow down the number of drivers that
should be considered by the operating system installer. This can be performed in
the Apply Device Drivers step, using Limit driver matching to only consider in
selected categories: 
Configure install drivers for just the selected category

Driver installation using packages
Drivers can be installed as packages as well, using the installer. We need to
prepare the package with a relevant application that installs drivers. The
application needs to have the ability to run in silent mode. After the package is
configured, two more options need to be set; in the program properties on the
Environment tab, Program can run needs to be set to Whether or not a user is
logged on: 
Program environment settings The second option is on the Advanced tab; by enabling Allow this program
to be installed from the Install Package task sequences without being deployed, the administrator specifies
that that package can be used during operating system deployment: 

Program's advanced settings In task sequences, the administrator needs to choose Install Package, and, in
Select the software packages to install, the package to be installed: 
Task sequence configuration for package installation Preparing drivers for branded computers is a little

easier, as vendors often prepare drivers in the form of packages that are ready to import to ConfigMgr, or
ready to install as .exe or .msi files.
Still, the most time-consuming task is testing drivers on a physical computer and
checking whether all drivers have been installed properly and if all devices work
correctly. Often it might not be enough to just check if a device is visible in
device manager; it might need to be properly tested, for instance, by simply
using it.

Deployment types
Deployment of operating systems is very similar to the deployment of
applications and updates. There are, however, some differences which are a
result of the specificity of each process. Application and update installations are
always triggered by the ConfigMgr client; on the other hand, in the case of the
operating system, there are three other possibilities--starting the installation from
bootable CD, USB drive, or a network card.
Same as the other deployments, the deployment types available are available
deployment and required deployment.
Administrators of ConfigMgr server have full access to computers
added to the ConfigMgr server and all the data on them, because of
ConfigMgr clients installed on these machines. All the data can
easily be erased, even without having explicitly granted
permissions on those machines.
Operating system deployment needs to be conducted with all due diligence, after
ensuring that installation is performed in a controlled manner and strictly on the
machines it is supposed to be. The administrator needs to be sure that the tasks
sequence configuration is fully correct.
Over the last few years, there were a lot of well-documented
operating system deployments with incorrect configuration run by
administrators. Some results of improper configuration were even
the deleting of all the data from all the company computers after
preparing a deployment on the All Systems collection.
ConfigMgr does no more nor less than what the administrator tells it to do, on
the computers specified by the administrator, in the time span given by the
administrator.
When creating the required operating system deployment, the administrator
needs to--the same as for application or update deployment--specify a collection
on which the deployment will be applied, since when it should work, and what

the deadline is.
In the case of operating system installation, there is the additional option Make
available to the following: which decides the way the deployment can be
performed. The following options are available:
Only Configuration Manager Clients: Only the ConfigMgr client installed
on the operating system will be able to perform the deployment
Configuration Manager clients, media and PXE: The deployment can be
performed by the ConfigMgr client installed on the operating system, using
the USB drive, or using the network card and PXE
Only media and PXE: This deployment can be only performed using the
USB drive or using the network card and PXE
Only media and PXE (hidden): This deployment can be performed the same
as the previous one, with the difference that a special parameter needs to be
provided that will allow us to start it:
Setting up a way operating system deployment can be performed
The ability to reduce ways of starting task sequences significantly improves the
security, as even if the administrator makes a mistake, it will affect fewer

computers.

Windows 10 servicing
Windows 10 introduced a new way of operating system servicing. Since always,
the administrator was responsible for installing updates that have been prepared
for the operating system.
In order to properly maintain Windows 10, deployment of updates of two
different types needs to be prepared:
Standard updates, like for all the older systems
Updates that upgrade the operating system to a new version, for instance,
1607 to 1703
Microsoft has split the handling of these two update types in the console.
Standard updates are deployed along with all the other updates, but upgrades that
change versions of the Windows 10 operating system are maintained on the
ConfigMgr console under Software Library\Windows 10 Servicing.
Configuration and deployment have been described in Chapter 8, Software Update
Management. The topic, for now, is the deployment of Windows 10 upgrades.

Servicing plan
As has been mentioned, upgrades to Windows 10 are located under Software
Library\Windows 10 Servicing in the ConfigMgr console. Similar to other updates,
these are also deployed using Automatic Deployment Rules.
Data in Windows 10 servicing will be available only after the
WSUS server is synchronizing the Upgrades classification.
On the console, under Software Library\Windows 10 Servicing\All Windows 10 Updates, the
administrator can see all available Windows upgrades and feature updates: 
Information about available upgrades and feature updates for Windows 10
Information enclosed in there is exactly the same as for all the other updates. On
the console, under Software Library\Windows 10 Servicing, the administrator can see
information related to Windows 10 servicing:
Windows 10 Usage: Shows data about Windows 10 versions used in the
environment.
Windows 10 Rings: Shows information by branch and readiness state.
Release Ready is, in other words, Current Branch; Business Ready means
Current Branch for Business; and Long Term Servicing Branch is just a
Long Term Servicing Branch:

Information about Windows 10 discovered in the environment
Expired: Shows the percentage of Windows 10 devices that are on a build
of Windows 10 that is past its end of life. A build that is past its end of life
is no longer receiving monthly cumulative updates, which include security
updates.
Create Servicing Plan: Allows us to create a Servicing Plan. A Servicing
Plan is nothing different from normal Automatic Deployment Rules, with a
few additional options which are not available for regular updates.
Expire Soon: Shows the percentage of computers that will be at end of life
in 4 months.
Alerts: Informs if ConfigMgr console has any alerts related to Windows 10
servicing:
Servicing Plans can be created on the console under Software Library\Windows 10
Servicing\Servicing Plans. As has been mentioned earlier, they are created very
similarly to the Automatic Deployment Rules, but there are some additional options: 

Servicing Plan When creating a Servicing Plan, the administrator needs to decide whether there is a need
for delaying the deployment of new Windows 10 versions, and if so, for how long. It is possible to postpone
deployment to 120 days from the date it has been released by Microsoft: 
Postponing Windows 10 upgrade settings You also need to choose updates related to the Servicing Plan. All
the rest of the configuration is similar to Automatic Deployment Rules: 
Choosing updates related to Servicing Plan Servicing Plans are always configured as a required
deployment; it is not possible to create them as an available deployment.

Windows Update for Business policies
Starting from 1706, if managed operating systems are using Windows Update for
Business directly, it is possible to create policies delaying Windows 10 Feature
Updates or Windows 10 Quality Updates. Mentioned policies can be created on
the console under Software Library\Windows 10 Servicing\Windows Update for Business
Policies. Managed devices need to have an Internet connection in order to reach
the Windows Update For Business service.
The Branch readiness level option is used to set up a branch for a computer, and
Deferral period (days) is used to specify for how long the deployment needs to
be postponed; the longest possible time is 180 days. Options Pause Feature
Updates starting and Pause Quality Updates starting are used to stop receiving
updates for Windows Update for Business. In case of a feature update, the
longest available time is 35 days, the same as for quality updates. After that
time, the computer automatically connects to the service, checking for the
newest available updates: 

Policy for devices managed by Windows Update for Business After the policy is created, you need to
prepare deployments on proper collections.

Upgrade Readiness
Starting from 1610, it is possible to use the Upgrade Readiness service, which is
a cloud service that enables you to assess and analyze device readiness with
Windows 10. This data can be viewed on the ConfigMgr console under
Monitoring\Upgrade Readiness: 
Upgrade Readiness data is available on the ConfigMgr server console
To be able to fully use this feature, you need to have an Azure subscription.
Later, the administrator needs to create a Microsoft Operations Management
Suite workspace and integrate ConfigMgr with Microsoft Operations
Management Suite using Upgrade Readiness Connector.

Summary
This chapter covered the abilities of ConfigMgr for operating system
deployment, which is definitely; not an easy task. It requires very good
knowledge from the administrator of the operating system installation process,
methods, and tools to configure operating systems.
Operating system deployment should be maintained with due diligence, as it is
very easy to perform a deploy on an unintended group of computers, and
unfortunately, this means losing data.
In the next chapter, we will cover topics related to gathering various data from
the operating system, like for instance hardware and software inventory. It will
be presented how to create queries and collect data from Windows
Management Instrumentation (WMI) database, SQL and also how to create
relevant reports.

Configuration Manager Assets
Previous chapters led you through the server installation and configuration
process, as well as client installation and deploying of applications and updates.
All the operations that have been described in previous chapters are performed
by the clients, and this happens because a computer where the ConfigMgr client
resides has been assigned to a collection. All server deployments available on
ConfigMgr are assigned to a collection, and the collection might contain
computers, mobile devices, or user objects.
Collections are created based on data available in the Windows Management
Instrumentation (WMI) database, and this is the topic that is going to be
covered in this chapter. The chapter will explain how to gather data from the
client computers and how to use this data for creating queries, collections, and
reports. Not only WMI-related topics, but also some basic steps of how to use
data from SQL databases for report creation, will be covered.
Specifically, we will discuss the following topics:
Queries
Reports
Hardware inventory
Software inventory
Asset intelligence
Collection queries
Console queries
Console reports

Data collection
Before explaining how to set up data gathering, it is important to explain an
important issue related to available data sources in the ConfigMgr server. There
are two kinds of data and two databases: a WMI and an SQL database. While
creating reports, queries will reference different databases.
To show the same data in the query as well as in the report, you
need to perform two different queries, one to the WMI database
and the second one to the SQL database. It is especially fiddly for
new administrators, as you need to do the same work twice.
The ability to create queries and reports doesn't mean much if the administrator
will not be able to get to the interesting data. Sometimes it is fairly easy, as the
server collects a default set of data; however, there are moments when there is a
need for manually adding some data to be collected.
Topics related to gathering data are far beyond day-to-day server
administration, as administrators need to know where the data is
and how to get to it. It is also important to ensure that--if certain
data has been found--it is consistent with reality, as there are
situations where data is not consistent with the actual activities of a
user or computer. This type of knowledge is completely unrelated to
ConfigMgr.
Data sent by ConfigMgr clients is saved in the SQL database at the very end.
After being sent from the clients, data is first saved in the WMI database, and as
a next step in the SQL database.
To make use of data gathered in both databases, you need to have skills in
database query writing. The basics are relatively easy to learn, but later, when
you need to have much more granular and precise reports, you might need to
have a separate person whose job it is to create such queries and reports and
maintain them properly.
Performing a hardware/software inventory scan with the

ConfigMgr client can be monitored in the inventoryagent.log log file.
All client log files are available under C:\Windows\ccm\logs.
Hardware inventory gathers configuration data about the hardware and
operating system, including information about software installed; however, it is
only about the ones that leave a trace in the operating system. If there is software
deployed that is not installed, it will not be detected.
Software inventory gathers data about investigated files placed on the operating
system drives. This data has nothing in common with installed software,
something one would expect based on the feature name; however, thanks to this,
it is possible to search for certain files and detect software that hasn't been
installed and works, for instance, in portable mode.

Queries
Queries that create collections and are saved in the console are saved in the WMI
database on the ConfigMgr server. Clients send gathered data to the WMI
located in the management point, and then it sends them further to the site server.
On the internet, you can find many example queries that can successfully be
used, but it is important to distinguish them from reports. For instance,
something like the following is a query, not a report: select Name,
SMSAssignedSites, IPAddresses, IPSubnets,
OperatingSystemNameandVersion, ResourceDomainORWorkgroup,
LastLogonUserDomain, LastLogonUserName, SMSUniqueIdentifier,
ResourceId, ResourceType, NetbiosName from sms_r_system where Client
= 0 or Client is null
This query will show all computers without the ConfigMgr client installed. The
easiest way to identify a query is that in each query, there is a table that starts
with sms_; in this particular example, it was the sms_r_system table. This is how
tables are named in the WMI database.
It is a good practice to prepare additional queries for the console
besides the ones created for collection in order to get relevant
information faster. Such queries always return data faster than
queries prepared for collection. Information from collections is not
always available or might not refresh frequently enough.
An administrator that prepares queries and reports needs to know where the data
is located in the database. While creating queries, the following terms are used:
Type object: There are various types of objects in the WMI database; for
instance, System Resource is the computer object type
Attribute class: Each object type has an attribute class assigned to it; for
instance, the System class contains information about the operating system,
but not all of them are called what might be expected
Attribute: Each attribute class has attributes assigned to it; for instance,
System Type contains information about the particular operating system--

whether it is an x86-based PC or x64:
List of example attributes
There are a lot of attribute classes and attributes assigned to them. For a beginner
administrator, it might be tricky to find all the information he or she needs, even
if it is collected by the ConfigMgr server.
Searching for relevant information might be very problematic. For
instance, information about the system where the ConfigMgr client
is installed is saved in a few various places, like different attribute
classes and other attributes, but not how it might be expected--in
the System class.

List of example attributes of the System Resource class
When creating queries, the WMI Query Language (WQL) is used,
and the database that is queried is a WMI database.

Reports
Reports are also the queries to a database, but this time--unlike with WMI--the
administrator is working on data from the SQL database. The SQL database
contains data available in the WMI database as well as data related to the
ConfigMgr server and the whole environment. Here is an example of a report
showing the name of the operating system and the date of its installation:
SELECT v_R_System.Name0 AS [Machine Name], v_GS_OPERATING_SYSTEM.InstallDate0 AS [OS De
As has been mentioned before, you need to know certain things to create queries
and reports. When creating a report, the administrator needs to find relevant data
in a certain table and join it with another table. Unfortunately, there isn't an
available description of the ConfigMgr SQL tables, so administrators need to get
familiar with the ConfigMgr SQL database. Unfortunately, this is neither an easy
nor fast task.
When creating reports, the administrator uses SQL to query the
ConfigMgr SQL database.

Hardware inventory
The Hardware Inventory setting is enabled by default. The installer configures a
standard dataset that the ConfigMgr client will be collecting from the WMI
database and sending to the server.
By default, Hardware Inventory is done every 7 days; of course, it is worth
considering shortening or extending that time. While changing the schedule, it is
worth noting that the shorter the periods between scans are, the more data will be
sent over the network, and the management point will have more data to gather
from clients and send further to the server: 
Hardware Inventory scanning settings The second most important Hardware Inventory setting--apart from
the scanning schedule--is configuring the data that will be gathered by the ConfigMgr client. The Set
Classes ... option is used to configure what data should be collected just by selecting or unselecting classes
or their attributes: 

Configuration of gathered data It is possible to create your own classes in the WMI database and save data
in them. After the Hardware Inventory change, ConfigMgr clients will be able to read this data and send it
to the server.
Data gathered by the ConfigMgr clients can be viewed in the console using
Resource Explorer, by selecting a single computer and choosing Start | Resource
Explorer. If the administrator would like to see results for a larger number of
computers, the default or custom reports can be used for that purpose: 
Resource Explorer with Hardware Inventory results The ConfigMgr server client can perform only one type
of scanning at a time: Hardware Inventory or Software Inventory. Hardware scanning runs quite swiftly;
however, software scanning is rather slow, hence it is a good practice to set Hardware Inventory scanning to
happen more frequently than Software Inventory scanning.
The first scan done by the ConfigMgr client is a full data scan; each following

scan contains only a delta of data. This is a way to minimize the amount of data
sent by the ConfigMgr client to the server.

Software inventory
The Software Inventory setting is enabled by default, the same as Hardware
Inventory. The ConfigMgr client searches machine disks or catalogs looking for
files following a pattern, which needs to be specified manually. This is the
difference between hardware and software inventory. Of course, the same as for
Hardware Inventory, you need to specify a scanning schedule. The Inventory
these files types option is used to specify which files/file, and where, the
ConfigMgr client will search: 
Software Inventory settings Scanning can be configured to look for a single file or files with a certain file
type; for instance, .exe is shown in the following screenshot. The Location option can be used to specify
where these files will be searched, in all disks or only particular folders: 

File types inventory settings Software inventory results, the same as with hardware inventory, can be
viewed using Resource Explorer, or--for a larger number of machines--reports: 
Results of searching .exe files It is a common belief that searching for files on disks is not something that is
desired and there is no real reason it should be enabled--this is far from correct. Software Inventory is a
powerful tool, which can be used to:
Search for files that shouldn't be on computers
Search for legally forbidden materials, such as multimedia files
Search for software that resides on the computer as portable versions
Search for users that have the highest amount of multimedia files

Asset Intelligence
Asset Intelligence, in brief, is gathering additional information about installed
software. Asset Intelligence classes are kept in the WMI database and are not
enabled by default. This functionality can be turned on under Assets and
Compliance\Asset Intelligence using the Edit Inventory Classes option, where the
classes we need can be enabled. Each of these classes loads data to certain
reports; these can be found under Monitoring\Reporting\Reports\Asset Intelligence.:
Asset Intelligence classes in the WMI database
After relevant classes are configured, to get expected results, the administrator
needs to wait for the hardware inventory scanning to be done by clients. Data
will be available in the reports and on the console under Assets and Compliance\Asset
Intelligence\Inventoried Software.:

Asset Intelligence scanning results
In middle and enterprise environments, Software Inventory might contain a large
number of items, as the server reports all of the installed software, such as .NET
Framework. Even if the number of files is significant, it is relatively easy to spot
unwanted software on the ConfigMgr console.
Asset Intelligence data can be viewed in default reports prepared by Microsoft:
Default Asset Intelligence reports
Here is an example of one report, which shows the difference between
inventoried software and numbers of licenses. It is an easy way to find OS

license usage--whether more users have certain software installed than the actual
number of licenses the company has:
An example report showing information about missing licenses
Asset Intelligence gives information not only about the number of potentially
missing licenses but also workstations with this software installed.

Collection queries
As has been mentioned, Inventory is used to create collections and reports.
Collection queries can contain computer or user objects. A collection might
contain:
Objects that meet conditions from the WMI query: The number of
collection members might be dynamic and change over time
Objects added manually to the collection: The number of members will
always be constant unless someone adds one
Objects added manually that meet certain WMI query conditions: Such
collections will also be constant unless someone adds objects that meet the
requirements
It is not very important to know how to write Hardware Inventory
queries. It is important to know if data that is used in the report is
correct and if the results of the queries are relevant.
Let's assume that the administrator wants to prepare a collection containing all
workstation type computers. This seems to be an easy task, but only at first
glance, as all the workstation attributes are saved in the ConfigMgr database
during Hardware Inventory. Only computers that have ConfigMgr clients and
have done Hardware Inventory scanning will be in the collection. There won't be
computers that haven't done Hardware Inventory scanning, as the workstation
attribute is empty.
We, however, need a collection that will contain all workstations known to the
ConfigMgr server. To achieve that goal, the administrator needs to use
information from Heartbeat Discovery. According to the Heartbeat Discovery
schedule, the ConfigMgr client sends data to the management point about basic
system information--this data is sent separately from Hardware Inventory.
Device collection can be created under Assets and Compliance\Device Collections,
while for users it can be under Assets and Compliance\User Collections. In both cases,
first, the name and description of the collection need to be provided. The
description is not a mandatory field but significantly eases future maintenance.

Starting from ConfigMgr 2012, a mandatory option--Limiting collection--has
been introduced, to narrow down the number of objects on which the query will
work. If there is a need for a query to work on all objects, the All Systems
collection should be chosen:
1. The first step is specifying the name of the collection and the parent
collection that will be limiting the objects:
Initial set of collection
2. The second step is setting up a membership rule for this collection; there
are three main rules. A Query Rule is a query reaching the WMI database
and dynamically changing the number of objects in the collection. A Direct
Rule is a rule for manually adding single objects until the objects are
removed by the administrator. A Device Category Rule is a rule based on
the category of a device. Apart from these main rules, there are also Include
Collections and Exclude Collections, which are used to add to result objects
from different collections or to exclude them from results. In the following
example, Query Rule has been chosen:

Choosing a membership rule
3. The third step is providing a name for the query. A query can be created
from scratch, or you can import an existing one from the console as a
baseline and modify it:
Query name configuration
4. The fourth step is the actual configuration of the query. To do this, click on
the first icon on the right-hand side, and a query editor window will appear:

Editing query criteria
5. The fifth step is criteria configuration. First, the administrator needs to
choose the Criterion Type option and choose which type will be used. In
this example, the Simple value is chosen:
Choosing Criterion Type
6. The sixth step is choosing the attribute classes and the attribute that will be
used to search for objects. In the following example, System Resource and
Operating System Name and Version are chosen, as the goal is to create a
collection with Windows 10 computers:

Settings of attribute classes and query attributes
7. The seventh step is the configuration of logical operators used in the query.
As the goal is to look for all of the computers with a Windows 10 OS, the
operator is equal to will be used:
Logical operator configuration
8. The eighth step is providing a value that will be searched. It is possible to
provide this value manually or use values suggested by the server. When
using the Value option, ConfigMgr shows the first 100 values in the
Operating System Name and Version field:

Configuration of search criteria
9. The ninth step is accepting the query configuration:
Ready query in the editor window Membership rules assigned to the collection are in fact part of the
collection definition. If the administrator deletes the collection from the console, all currently defined
collection queries will also be deleted.
10. The tenth and final step is saving the collection configuration:

Collection configuration At every moment, it is possible to change membership rules on the collection, for
instance by adding a user or computer manually to that collection. To add a computer to a collection, the
administrator needs to select it and choose the Add Selected Items to Existing Device Collection option, or
Add Selected Items to New Device Collection to add the computer to a newly created collection: 
Adding computer to a collection After adding the computer to the collection manually, the configuration
looks as follows. The collection will always contain the computer CM16, or CM16 with other computers

that meet query requirements: 
Collection membership rule settings Creating a collection is a major and vital job for the administrator or
operator, as actual actions performed on the clients depend on their membership in a collection. To create
collections, it is good to know the WQL language to create queries and the WMI database.

Console queries
Queries can be created for two main purposes. Most often they are used to create
collections--just as shown previously. Queries can be created and saved for later
use on the console under Monitoring\Queries. After the server is installed, several
queries are created by default:
Default queries created after ConfigMgr server installation
Very often, queries are saved and later used when working with ConfigMgr
clients.
When using a query in the console, it works directly in the WMI database.
However, if the same query is applied on the collection, it might take longer to
see the actual effects. It might take a while because, for instance, ConfigMgr has
many collections, and these might have the Schedule a full update on this
collection option set up with a little-too-frequent refresh rate:

Query results on the console
Using queries on the console is a very practical and swift method of gathering
information from a WMI database.

Console reports
ConfigMgr has always provided the ability to run reports for managed
environments. Since ConfigMgr 2007, there have been a lot of important
changes.
The most important change, introduced in ConfigMgr 2007 R3, was the ability
of running reports using Reporting Services, and since ConfigMgr 2012, there is no
other way to run them. Thanks to this, the ConfigMgr server does not have
performance issues, and there is no limitation on the number of rows that can be
viewed. Unfortunately, as a result of these changes, creating reports is not as
easy as it used to be.
ConfigMgr has a report creator, but it only creates an empty file with a name and
connection to the ConfigMgr database. Configuring the query and a method of
returning results needs to be done in another tool. Created reports can be edited
using Report Builder--this tool is an SQL Server component and can be installed
on the ConfigMgr server or workstation.
Reports can be created under Monitoring\Reporting\Reports. After starting the creator,
the administrator must provide a name for the report and a catalog in which it

should be saved: 
Report name and path settings
If the administrator wants to create a custom folder and save the reports there,
this folder needs to be created using reporting services, as, on the ConfigMgr
console, this is not possible: 

Pointing to a folder in which the report will be saved
After the ConfigMgr console creator is done, the report is visible on the console.
However, it will not show any data, as there is no query assigned to it and
Reporting Services do not know how to display it: 
Created report on the console
To edit a report, Report Builder should be used. After opening a report in it, you
should see something like this:
An example report configuration visible in Report Builder
In order to finish the report, there are at least two more things to be done. A
dataset that the SQL database can query needs to be created, and you need a Data
source, providing it the SQL Server name for connection purposes: 

Dataset and data source settings
Configuring the query alone is not really enough. You also need to tell Report
Builder how the report should be displayed. Here is an example of the report
displayed as a simple table: 
Configuration of a report as a simple table in Report Builder
After configuring how the report should be displayed, it is possible to check
instantly how the report would look with data after it runs:

Report Builder allows you to check instantly how the report will look
After the report is configured, the administrator should save the changes. From
this point, the report can be run from the ConfigMgr console.
Creating reports in a ConfigMgr server is hard. First of all, it is
important to know where data is located in the SQL database, how
to connect to it, and how to write a good query. Secondly, you need
to know how to use Report Builder to create a file that is run by
Reporting Services and also how to properly configure how the report
should be displayed.

Summary
This chapter covered possible uses of data collected by the ConfigMgr server.
Data might be used for query creation, creating collections, and reports.
Data from the ConfigMgr SQL database can also be exported to third-party
software or to other applications from the System Center family.
One important thing to note is that queries always work on the WMI database,
while reports work on the SQL database. To show the same data in the query and
report, you need to create two separate queries on two separate databases.

Role-Based Administration and
Security
Previous chapters covered the most important ConfigMgr features. The
ConfigMgr server should be properly secured against unwanted access, and if
required, permissions should be granted only for particular users and groups; this
process is covered in this chapter.
We will cover the following topics:
Creating security roles
Assigning AD security groups to different roles
Assigning security roles to specific collections

Introducing role-based
administration and security
A ConfigMgr server as an automatic system in the hands of an inexperienced
administrator is a very dangerous tool, and, unfortunately, there have been cases
where unskilled administrators have erased all the data on all computers
managed by the server.
For this reason, when deploying the server, it is very important to properly
secure the server and grant access only to those people who should have access;
this needs to be well planned as well.
Securing the environment against unwanted access to data or the console might
be done by:
Turning on encryption of data that is exchanged between clients and the
ConfigMgr server
Turning on HTTPS instead of HTTP and securing the communication
between clients and ConfigMgr server using public key infrastructure
(PKI)
Granting proper permissions to the console for users and groups only in a
particular scope of objects with strictly defined permissions

Hardening the infrastructure
Hardening the environment by encrypting the data is an easy task from the
console-configuration side. However, using certificates is not as easy, as it
requires the deployment of PKI infrastructure and knowing how to prepare
certificates, which will be used by the clients and ConfigMgr server for
communication.
Encryption can be done by enabling signing and encryption for client-server
communication as shown in the following screenshot:
Enabling communication encryption for ConfigMgr server
The Require signing and Require SHA-256 options are enabled by default.
Additionally, it is possible to enable the Use encryption option to encrypt
inventory data sent from the clients to the ConfigMgr server.
To elevate the level of security of the entire environment, it is possible to
implement certificates and switch the whole environment to work on HTTP
mode regardless of whether the client is working in the LAN or is on the
internet. Configuring PKI for ConfigMgr server usage is out of the scope of this

book: 
Decision whether to choose HTTP or HTTPS for ConfigMgr server
Working in HTTPS mode efficiently secures the environment, but, as mentioned,
it is a configuration that requires the administrator to have knowledge not only
about the ConfigMgr server but also about PKI.

Access to the console
Granting permissions to users is seemingly an easy and straightforward task.
However, this is only a delusion, as often during deployment, there is a need to
create your own sets of permissions to meet particular project requirements. The
ConfigMgr console has some technical constraints, so it is not possible to create
a single permission model meeting every project's requirements.
Going to Administration\Security\Administrative Users in the ConfigMgr console is
useful when there is a need to quickly check who, and at what level, has access
to the console:
Users with their permissions on the ConfigMgr server
Additionally, there are a few default reports available under
Monitoring\Reporting\Reports\Administrative Security that visualize data regarding
console permissions, security scopes, and changes made by the ConfigMgr users
on the server.

Important factors when granting permissions on ConfigMgr server are as
follows:
Who: Who needs to have access to the console, a single user or a group.
What: What kind of permissions should be granted to the users, which
means what tasks users have permission to do. It is possible to leverage
default sets or create custom ones.
Which: Which security scopes will be assigned to the users, which means
what objects on the console will be visible to the users. It is possible to
leverage default scopes or create custom ones.
Where: Which collections will be visible on the console for particular
users.
Granting permissions on the console is done using one wizard, where the
administrator needs to define who access is granted to, and which objects in
particular are within the security scope and on which collections. If the user isn't
seeing objects in the console, it means that permissions were not granted for that
particular object.

Security scopes
Security scopes are used to select which object should be shown to the users in
the ConfigMgr console. By default, under Administration\Security\Security Scopes,
there are two scopes created: All and Default. It is worth creating our own
security scope and as the next step to add objects to it such as packages,
applications, and software update groups:
Listing of all available security scopes
Creating a security scope is easy. These can be created under
Administration\Security\Security Scopes; the first step is to define a name and who
will be assigned to it:

Security scope settings
Administrators assigned to the security scope All have, by default,
access to all old and newly created security scopes. Thanks to this,
they will have access to all objects on the ConfigMgr console.
After creating this, the administrator can start adding objects to it. One object
can belong to many scopes, and needs to be assigned to at least one. The console
will not save the data unless there is at least one security scope assigned:
Assigning security scope to an object
A security scope can be assigned to the following objects:
Boundary groups
Applications, packages, and deployments
Boot images
Operating system images

Task sequences
Queries
Sites
Custom client settings
Distribution points
Distribution point groups
Software update groups
Software metering rules
Compliance configuration items
Compliance configuration baseline

Security roles
Security roles are sets of permissions that can be assigned to users or groups. By
default, after server installation, under Administration\Security\Security Roles, there
are 15 built-in roles, which cannot be modified:
Built-in security roles
In a simple environment, these built-in scopes would be sufficient. However, in
real-life scenarios, there are situations where there is a need to grant permissions
that are not covered by the built-in scopes. The default scopes cannot be
modified, but can be used as a baseline for creating custom scopes by copying
them and editing later:

Copying of security roles
The next step is giving a name to the security role and granting proper
permissions:
Granting permissions to a security role
It is always worth checking if the given permissions provide the
expected access and if objects visible in the console are only those
that should be visible to users.

Granting permissions to the
ConfigMgr console
Granting permissions is easy. It is done using the Add User or Group wizard
under Administration\Security\Administrative Users. The wizard will ask for the user
or group that should be granted permissions; next, security scopes need to be
assigned, and, last but not least, we need to define which objects should be
visible in the console:
Granting permissions to the ConfigMgr console
After changing permissions for a user, the ConfigMgr console
needs to be reopened for the new permissions to work.
It is always possible to change the permissions back after granting them or

checking what the effective permissions for the user are:
Assigning security scope to the user
It is a good practice to check whether granted permissions align with the project
assumptions. This can be checked simply by running the console with certain
permissions and verifying visible objects and tasks that can be done on them by
the user.
After granting permissions as in the previous example, Application Management,
Software Updates, Windows 10 Servicing, and Office 365 Client Management will be the only
options visible to the user in the Software Library:

Objects on the console visible after granting permissions
However, under Assets and Compliance\Device Collections, there won't be any
collections visible/accessible to the user:
Visible collections on the console after granting permissions
If a non-administrative user creates objects on the console, the
administrator, by default, is granted full permissions to these newly
created objects.

Service accounts
When configuring the server and its single-server roles, an AD account with
proper permissions needs to be used; all these accounts are visible under
Administration\Security\Accounts on the console.
These default accounts cannot be deleted; the only option available is to set a
new password for the account--in situations where one account is used in many
places, having to change the password in only one place eases administration
and maintenance significantly: 
Listing of all the accounts used by the ConfigMgr server The Account Name tab shows the places in the
console where an account is used.

Remote Tools
Remote Tools is a ConfigMgr feature that gives you the ability to connect
directly to a managed computer. Depending on the settings, a user can connect to
an existing session on the remote computer with permissions to request control
over the mouse and keyboard, or connect with permission only to view the
screen.
Granting such permissions is rather easy. For this, the default security role
Remote Tools Operator can be used.
These Remote Tools are as follows:
Remote Control: This is used to remotely connect to the client operating
system. It is possible to connect remotely to an existing session in order to
provide help to the user, or log in to the computer with a separate remote
session.
Remote Desktop: This is used to connect to the remote computer using the
standard, built-in Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP).
Remote Assistance: This is used to connect to the remote computer using
the standard, built-in Remote Assistance.
Remote Control is the option used most often, as it has the widest scope of
usage--it is possible to connect remotely to the user's session and take control of
the mouse and keyboard to swiftly and efficiently resolve a problem.

Client Settings
Remote Control settings for the client are under Administration\Client Settings in
the ConfigMgr console. By default, these are not enabled: 
Remote Control settings In order to enable the usage of Remote Control by users, the following settings
need to be present on the console:
Enable Remote Control on clients: Yes. Additionally, it needs to be
specified on which firewall the profile settings will work.
Allow Remote Control of an unattended computer: Yes. This option enables
logging in to a computer that is locked or has no one logged in to it.
Prompt user for Remote Control permission: Yes. This option forces asking
the user whether he/she agrees to a remote connection to his/her session.
Grant Remote Control permission to local Administrators group: Enabled
by default. This grants local administrators group permissions to log in
remotely using Remote Tools.
Access level allowed: No Access, View Only, and Full Control. These

options allow us to define the access level when connecting remotely to a
user's sessions. By default, the option is set to Full Control.
Permitted viewers of Remote Control and Remote Assistance: This option
allows us to grant permissions to certain users to log in remotely to the
computer.
Show session notification icon on taskbar: This option allows us to show a
notification to the user if someone connects using remote control. By
default, it is enabled.
Show session connection bar: This option allows us to show a connection
bar to the user; by default, it is enabled.
There are two options for using Remote Control:
On the console--select the computer and choose the Remote Control option
Run Remote Control Viewer from the Start menu
Remote Control Viewer in Start menu If run from the console, the remote tool automatically grabs the
computer name and tries to connect; when run from the Start menu, you need to provide the name: 
Configuration Manager Remote Control After the computer name has been provided, a connection is
initiated and the user can connect to the machine: 

Initializing connection with the computer Depending on the mode the computer is working in, after
initializing the connection, the user might get a login screen or see an open session that a user is working
on: 
Result of connecting to a computer using Remote Control Remote Control Viewer is installed as a part of
the ConfigMgr server console.

Securing remote control
As Remote Control might lead to privacy violations when not configured
properly, there are few factors worth considering:
Using role-based security to grant access to remote control
Having as few people as possible in the permitted viewers list
Not disabling the Prompt user for Remote Control permission option
The user should always have a choice whether to agree for
someone to connect to his/her session.
In order to check who has used remote control, there are two default reports that
can reveal information:
All computers remote controlled by a specific user: A report telling who has
logged in remotely and to which workstations
All remote control information: All information regarding remote control
usage

Summary
This chapter focused on securing the server against unwanted access, hardening
communication between clients and the ConfigMgr server, and configuring
remote access to managed computers.
The security of the environment is composed of a few factors, not just properly
configuring and granting permissions on the console. Security also comprises
preventing server failure, making a backup copy, and checking if the backup is
correct and which can be used in the event of a breakdown.
To know more about role-based administration and security here is a very useful
link with very interesting materials from which you can start digging for more: ht
tps://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sccm/core/understand/fundamentals-of-role-based-administration.
Adding to these security topics, the next chapter will cover various useful
maintenance tasks that are available in the ConfigMgr console and can be very
important for the server to work.

Site Server Maintenance Tasks
The previous chapters covered all essential issues related to the design,
installation, and administration of a ConfigMgr server. This last chapter will tell
you about a very important topic related to the maintenance and monitoring of
the site server. There are various important maintenance tasks for a ConfigMgr
server; the most important ones covered by this book are as follows:
Creating a backup copy and restoring the server after a failure
Configuring maintenance tasks, especially ones related to cleaning the SQL
database
Monitoring the ConfigMgr server
Maintenance tasks can be configured for site servers as well as for the central
administration site.
 

Maintenance tasks
Maintenance tasks are tasks performed automatically by the server. Some of
them are configured and enabled during server installation, while others are
disabled by default and might be enabled after the server is installed.
The most important task, which must always be configured, is the backup. There
are a few ways to configure backup, but the one recommended, is leveraging the
built-in mechanism to create a backup copy.
In general, there are always three steps that need to be done for each project:
1. Installing the ConfigMgr server and configuring it according to the project
needs.
2. Immediately after the basic configuration is done, configuring the backup,
along with the schedule of performing a backup copy.
3. Starting the backup job and checking if the backup copy can be used to
restore the server after a failure.
This ensures that:
The environment is properly secured against failure and unwanted
administrative action
The backup is done correctly and can be used to restore the server after a
failure
Working in an environment that is properly secured is a lot easier, as the
administrator is aware that, if something goes wrong, it is possible to restore the
environment back to a running state.
Situations, where the ConfigMgr server fails, are really rare;
however, despite this, the basic task immediately after the server is
installed and configured, is performing a server backup and testing
recovery.
Server maintenance can be divided into the following tasks:

Configuring and creating the backup copy
Configuring the specified maintenance tasks
Monitoring server operation and performance or its individual roles
Monitoring the operation of the OS on which the ConfigMgr server
environment exists
The topics we will cover are restoring in the event of a failure, maintenance
configuration, and server monitoring.
A good practice is to prepare a maintenance plan and perform
tasks according to the schedule. This provides even better

ConfigMgr backup
Site server backup is the most important maintenance task available in the
ConfigMgr server; it is not enabled by default after installation, so it is also good
to configure it straight after the server is installed.
Apart from choosing the proper method of creating a backup copy, it is very
important for administrators to know how the backup copy is being made.
Generally, a server backup copy consists of two parts:
SQL database and logs
Server files and registry entries
The built-in mechanism stops the SMS_EXECUTIVE service prior to the backup job. As
the mentioned service is stopped while performing the backup copy, it will not
be possible to save any changes to the ConfigMgr server, the database, files, or
the Windows Management Instrumentation database. Such a prepared backup
copy can be used later to restore the server after a failure.
Securing the site server against failure can be done in a few ways.
However, it is recommended you use the built-in mechanism to
create a backup copy.
Maintenance tasks are available under Administration\Site Configuration\Sites in the
ConfigMgr console:
Backup Site Server is disabled by default

The Backup Site Server option allows us to configure proper server backup
options; this configuration is very easy. The Local drive on site server for site
data and database option is used to specify a local path in case the site server and
database server are installed on the same machine. The Network path (UNC
name) for site data and database option is used to specify a UNC path in the
same case as before. The Local drive on site server and SQL Server option is
used to specify a local path that exists on both the site server and SQL server.
Files will be saved in both locations:
Settings of the backup copy location
To properly secure the mentioned UNC path, it is worth
implementing the UNC Hardened Access feature in GPO or at least
minimize user permissions on the folder.
After setting up the backup copy location, it is important to set up a backup
schedule. Additionally, it is possible to decide the hours during which the backup
should be performed. The Start after option sets the earliest hour during which
backup can start, and the Latest start time option is used to set the latest possible
time:

Backup copy schedule configuration
It is worth using the Enable alerts for backup task failures option. In case the
backup copy task fails, a proper alert will be shown on the server console.
Backup-related services are installed along with the server installation. The
SMS_SITE_BACKUP service is used to manage a backup copy; it is disabled by default,
and its status becomes Running only when a backup is being performed.
It is a good practice to set up your backup window outside business
hours so that the backup task does not disrupt users' work.
The SMS_SITE_BACKUP service used to manage backups
In case there is a need to perform an unscheduled backup copy, all

it takes is to run the SMS_SITE_BACKUP service and wait till the copying
is done.
The backup copy is created in a specific folder, whose name is always like
<SiteCode>Backup; so, in our case, it will be PA1Backup:
The folder where the backup copy is created
The status of the backup copy can be checked in the server logs, where the
server saves the start time, backup information, and the end time.
Custom reports created in the reporting services are not part of the
backup; these need to be exported manually. In the case of a failure
and restoration, only the default reports will be restored.
Log entry informing about a finished backup job
A built-in mechanism to perform a backup copy has been available since
ConfigMgr 2007, although there are differences in the current branch version,

which makes it much better. Now, apart from all the files needed to restore a
server, a backup folder consists of a ConfigMgr installation CD, located in the
CD.Latest subfolder. It is important, as the restore process is managed by the
server installer, which is run from the installation CD:
Content of a backup copy
The ConfigMgr server backup copy consists of:
ConfigMgr server database and logs
The inboxes folder
The logs folder
The data folder
The srvacct folder
The install.map file
Registry entries related to the ConfigMgr server
The backup copy does not contain:
Configuration of the system site and secondary site
A custom report created in the reporting service point
Content libraries
Source files packages
Windows Server Update Services (WSUS) database
Custom updates created in System Center Updates Publisher
The built-in mechanism saves the backup copy to the provided
folder and overwrites it with the newest backup. This is why it is
important to back these up with another software or simply prepare
a mechanism that will copy the files to the other location each time
after backup.

ConfigMgr server recovery
Creating a backup copy is just one part of securing the ConfigMgr server. The
second part--and this might be even more important--is to check whether the
backup copy can be used for restoring. This is a very important step, which
makes the administrator sure that the backup they've taken is actually useful.
In environments with a central administration site, backup should start from that
server, followed one-by-one by all the servers that comprise the ConfigMgr
environment. Ideally, each backup job should be done at a different time.
A few components might get corrupted in the ConfigMgr server:
The SQL database might stop working
The site server might stop working, while the database remains untouched
The site server and the database might both stop working
The operating system on which the database and site server reside might
stop working
In each case, the restore operation requires a different approach. In the case of an
SQL database failure, we must restore using the Recover the site database using
the backup set at following location option. In case the SQL database is fine and
the site server is corrupted, restoring should be done using the Recover this site
server using an existing backup option. In case the operating system is corrupted,
the proper way of restoring is to freshly install the operating system, with the
same name and configuration of disks, IIS, and SQL according to the
documentation, and only after those steps have been performed should we
restore the ConfigMgr server. In this case, both options should be selected as
both the SQL database and site server are going to be restored.
Restoring can be done in two ways:
Starting setup.exe from the ConfigMgr server installation CD, for instance
when performing a database restore, or restoring both the database and site
server. The best option is to use the CD located at CD.Latest.
Starting Configuration Manager Setup creator in the menu, for instance,

when restoring the site server and not the database.
In both scenarios, the restoration procedure is similar:
1. The first step is choosing the task to perform. In the following example, it is
Recover a site:
Choosing recover site task
2. The second step is choosing what needs to be restored. In this example, the
SQL database has failed. It is worth mentioning that if the administrator has
made an SQL backup with a different tool than the built-in mechanism, it is
possible to use it to restore the SQL database:

Choosing the restore mode
3. The third step is selecting whether the site server or central administration
site is going to be restored. The available options depend on what has been
discovered by the installer:
Choosing the type of ConfigMgr server to restore
4. The fourth step is providing a license key or installing the evaluation
version:
Passing the license key
5. The fifth step is accepting the license terms.
6. The sixth step is selecting a folder with the installation files required for
client installation or pointing to a folder to which this data will be
downloaded:

Providing a path to the ConfigMgr client binaries
7. The seventh step is accepting server settings. All options are grayed out, as
these pieces of information have been retrieved from the backup copy:
Data of restored ConfigMgr server
8. The eighth step is selecting an SQL server, on which the restored database
and logs will be deployed:

Providing the SQL server where the ConfigMgr backup copy will be restored
9. The ninth step is providing a folder to which the database and logs will be
saved.
10. The tenth step is information about the diagnostic data send by Microsoft to
its infrastructure.
11. The eleventh step is a summary of all the restored ConfigMgr servers:
Summary of restored ConfigMgr server
12. The next step is checking whether the operating system meets all the
prerequisites for a ConfigMgr server installation:

Checking prerequisites for ConfigMgr server
13. The next step is starting the server restoration process:
Starting the server restoration process
14. The next step is waiting for the restore process to end:

Finishing the restore procedure
15. The last step might contain two additional tasks--providing passwords to all
the accounts used, and installing missing hotfixes:
List of post-recovery tasks that need to be fulfilled
After the server has been restored, taking a look at the ConfigMgr console will
tell you whether the restore process was conducted properly.

Other ConfigMgr server maintenance
tasks
Maintenance tasks can be found in the ConfigMgr console under
Administration\Site Configuration\Sites. Some of them are disabled and some
enabled by default. Most of them correspond to database cleanup. There are
various settings for erasing data from a ConfigMgr database; however, these
configurations need to be made carefully:
Available maintenance tasks
Deleting old inventory history from the site database is one of the available
tasks, which deletes data from the inventory that are older than 90 days; let's
assume that the hardware/software inventory is set to run every 7 days, and data
deletion is set to 1 day. The server will not alert you about this misconfiguration,
and it will keep on deleting items older than 1 day, which means that after 6
days, there will not be any data on the server until the next deletion cycle--6 days
later:

Inventory data cleanup settings
The settings of some maintenance tasks rely on others, and these
settings should be made carefully as the system has no possible
way of checking whether the settings applied by the administrator
make sense or not.
Apart from maintenance tasks available on the console, there are a few
additional options available in the installer. To see these additional options, the
administrator needs to choose Perform site maintenance or reset this site:
Available options of ConfigMgr installer
After choosing this option, additional tasks related to site maintenance appear.

The Reset site with no configuration changes option is used to reassign
permissions to files and registry settings related to the ConfigMgr server.
Additionally, all server roles will be reinstalled and reconfigured.
The Modify SQL Server configuration option is used when providing a new SQL
server to ConfigMgr. As a result, it is possible to move the SQL database to a
different location after the server is installed.
Modify SMS Provider configuration adds or removes the SMS Provider role for
the specified server; it is important as this server role is responsible for
connections to the ConfigMgr console and has no console of its own--this is the
only place where this role can be configured.
The Modify language configuration option is used to change the language
configuration of the server. Upgrade the evaluation edition to a licensed edition.
Enter the 25 character product key is used to provide a license key and switch
from the evaluation version to full:
Site maintenance options
Sometimes, you need to move the database from one SQL Server to another.
After the move, a new SQL database needs to be specified:

Changing the ConfigMgr SQL database
The SMS Provider role simplifies connecting to the ConfigMgr console. It is
configured by default during server installation. It is the only role that is not
visible on the server console and cannot be configured:
Changing settings for the SMS Provider role
As has already been mentioned, all the maintenance tasks need to be configured
carefully knowing exactly what can be expected with particular settings, as
misconfiguration might lead to data loss or un-fixable errors.

Environment monitoring
Monitoring the ConfigMgr server is a maintenance task that needs to be
performed daily by the administrator. There are many factors that impact a
ConfigMgr environment, and sometimes ConfigMgr administrators do not have
access to all the elements, which can make troubleshooting a difficult task.
Fortunately, ConfigMgr is a system that fails really rarely, although it should
always be properly monitored. This task contains the following elements:
Monitoring the inboxes folder in order to check backlog
Using State Message Queries to check what a server or its users do
Using Site Status and Component Status to check if all the servers and
components of a ConfigMgr environment work correctly
Checking synchronization status with WSUS
Checking the configuration state of distribution points and management
points
Searching logs for the root cause of failures and any server malfunction
Reviewing reports on the console to see whether all the ConfigMgr clients
connect to a management point and download policies with proper settings
Checking the hardware/software inventory status
Checking whether the boundary and boundary group are properly
configured
Checking whether all the proper ConfigMgr components are enabled
Reviewing client statuses
Most of the components have their own configuration files, which are saved in
various folders placed in the inboxes folder. The size of all these folders is more or
less constant when operating normally; in a case where the inboxes folder's size is
significantly different from the average, there might have been a component
failure:

Folders inside inboxes
Status Message Queries, which is available on the console, is a very powerful
tool when it comes to checking ConfigMgr status. After installation, there are
some default queries available that are quite enough at the beginning. It is also
possible to create custom queries:
Default Status Message Queries
The result can be viewed directly on the console, thanks to which the
administrator can check what tasks are done by which server. These pieces of
information are great to begin troubleshooting since--if they know which error to
look for--the administrator has a nice view of the logs:

The result of Status Message Queries
Starting with ConfigMgr 2007, there were two tabs available to check the status
of particular ConfigMgr environment components. Site server Status presents the
status of particular server roles, while Component status shows the state of all
the components:
Component status shows the ConfigMgr environment components' status
If the ConfigMgr server is used to deploy updates, it is also important to check
whether synchronization between WSUS and ConfigMgr works correctly:

Status of ConfigMgr synchronization with WSUS server
Deploying applications, updates, and operating systems depends on files that
should be placed on the distribution point, so it is important to check that the
distribution point operates correctly. Distribution Point Configuration Status
provides fundamental information about errors that are reported by distribution
points:
Distribution Point Configuration Status shows information about the status of all distribution points
Server logs are the great knowledge repository of server activity, or what it
should do, but doesn't, because of a failure. There are many logs in ConfigMgr,
and each and every one provides information about different pieces of the
environment:

Some of the ConfigMgr logs
You should not be worried about the number or size of the logs;
thanks to them, ConfigMgr is a top Microsoft product in terms of
documentation and useful information that can be found in logs
when troubleshooting.

Summary
This chapter covered essential maintenance tasks every administrator should be
aware of when it comes to a ConfigMgr server. The most important task for each
administrator should be properly securing systems in the environment he/she
manages. One of the ways to secure the server is to secure data with proper
backup and--what is probably even more important--ensuring that this copy is
reliable and can be used to restore a server.
A ConfigMgr server could be very useful and can provide a lot of benefits to the
company, but, in the wrong hands, it might do a lot of harm, so protecting and
securing the server is also important.
To know more about site server maintenance tasks here is a very useful link with
very interesting materials from which you can start digging for more: https://docs.mi
crosoft.com/en-us/sccm/core/servers/manage/maintenance-tasks.

