Designing and 
Implementing 
an E-Commerce 
System
Zinovy Radovilsky

Designing and 
Implementing an 
E-Commerce System
Zinovy Radovilsky
California State University, East Bay

Designing and Implementing an E-Commerce System
Copyright © Cognella Academic Publishing 2015
www.cognella.com
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means—electronic, mechanical, photocopy, recording, or any other
except for brief quotations, not to exceed 400 words, without the prior
permission of the publisher.
ISBN-13: 978-1-63157-210-4 (e-book)
Collection ISSN: 2156-8200 (electronic)
www.businessexpertpress.com
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks
or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and
explanation without intent to infringe.
A publication in the Business Expert Press Supply and Operations 
Management collection
Cover and interior design by S4Carlisle Publishing Services Private Ltd., 
Chennai, India 

Preface....................................................................................................v
Chapter 1	
What Is E-Commerce?.......................................................1
Chapter 2	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce................19
Chapter 3	
Management and ERP Systems........................................53
Index....................................................................................................83
Contents


E-commerce is mushrooming in both business-to-business and business-­
to-consumer sectors. It shakes the foundation of most industries, leads 
to entirely new kinds of businesses, and directly affects both our careers 
and the way we live. One of the most significant changes is the manner in 
which companies conduct business. Specifically, how they manage their 
resources, connect and communicate with customers, and negotiate and 
outsource from suppliers.
In many cases, the management of enterprise resources is based on 
e-commerce systems and applications. E-commerce may be defined in a 
variety of ways: as a technological tool for web development, as an online 
transaction between a buyer and a seller, or as an activity that adds value 
to business customers and consumers. The main goal of this book is to 
explain in a systematic way the managerial aspects of various e-commerce 
models and applications, as well as to demonstrate their value-added 
capabilities.
Designing and Implementing an E-Commerce System provides a ­detailed 
description and analysis of e-commerce business models, including their 
components, classification, and performance results. This book also 
presents managerial aspects of various up-to-date e-commerce models. 
Among them are:
• Demand-side e-commerce models associated with selling 
goods, services, and information to business customers and 
consumers.
• Supply-side e-commerce models used for purchasing and 
outsourcing from suppliers.
• Collaborative commerce models involved in sharing information 
and business data, and also providing collaborative decisions for 
new product design and development.
• Mobile commerce models that employ wireless devices 
and wireless communication for buying, selling, and 
collaborating online.
Preface

• Electronic payment models used for making payment 
transactions via the Internet.
• Electronic services employed for supporting and facilitating 
e-commerce.
Designing and Implementing an E-Commerce System provides method­
ology and practical examples of selecting and implementing e-commerce 
business models and associated online applications. It also emphasizes 
managerial aspects of enterprise resources planning (ERP) systems, which 
are considered an integral part of e-commerce management today.
I hope that after reading this book you will not only gain knowledge 
but also develop essential skills required for managing e-commerce mod­
els and applications. You will obtain a clear understanding of the current 
development and future trends in e-commerce. All this will better prepare 
you to take on responsibilities in managing and improving e-commerce 
models and applications.
Sincerely, 
Zinovy Radovilsky
vi	
PREFACE

1.1  The Internet ERA
In 2005, the CNN channel conducted a survey of the most important 
global innovations in the past quarter century. What do you think was 
the top-rated innovation? What would you rate as innovation #1? You are 
correct—the Internet was voted as the most important innovation in the 
past quarter century along with other important inventions like the cell 
phone, the personal computer, fiber optics, ­e-mail, and others[1].
The Internet’s infrastructure is networked computing that connects 
computers and other electronic devices by telecommunication networks. In 
the recent years, the Internet has become a global phenomenon that has 
profoundly changed the nature of communication between people and busi­
nesses. It has also become a major distribution channel, where transactions to 
purchase goods and services are made. The Internet has profoundly changed 
economics, markets, and even industry structures in many countries[2].
The World Wide Web, commonly abbreviated as WWW or the Web, 
is one of the main ways of accessing and utilizing information over the 
Internet. It is an information-sharing model that is built on top of the 
­Internet  [3]. The Web employs the Hyper-Text Transmission Protocol 
(HTTP), the main tools used in the Internet, to transmit Internet-based 
documents (data). It also uses browsers like Internet Explorer and Firefox 
to access and view documents called web pages (web sites) that are linked to 
each other via hyperlinks. Web documents also contain graphics, sounds, 
text, and video. The Internet, not the Web, is also used for ­e-mail, instant 
messaging, and file transferring (using file transfer protocol or FTP)[3].
The growth of Internet-related activities has been tremendous from the 
last decade of the 20th century to the modern time (see Figure 1.1) [4]. The 
number of Internet domain hosts (companies and consumers that have 
CHAPTER 1
What is ­E-Commerce?

2	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E COMMERCE SYSTEM
their own web pages and provide web site service to others) has grown, at an 
accelerated rate, from less than 10 million hosts in 1995 to near 550 million 
hosts in 2007[3]. This number will certainly continue to grow in the future.
What drives people and organizations to increase their utilization of 
the Internet and World Wide Web? Why is it so popular today? The an­
swers to these questions can be quite clear if we consider the Internet as 
an incredible medium that provides:
• Rich sources of information and news for different subjects 
that may not be available in other media.
• Quick access to this information and news at any time and 
at any place in the world, provided Internet access may be 
established.
• Easy search, selection, and retrieval of information and news.
• Easy communication and information sharing.
• Extensive business opportunities in terms of selling, buying, 
transacting, and communicating on the Internet.
The last point is in the core of developing commercial solutions on the 
Internet called “e-commerce.”
1.2  E-Commerce and ­E-Business Definitions
E-commerce has become a significant element in the modern global eco­
nomic environment. “E-commerce” is defined as the use of a computer 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
19951996 1997199819992000 2001200220032004 200520062007
Host Number, mln
Figure 1.1  Internet hosts’ growth

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
3
network, primarily the Internet, to buy and sell products, services, infor­
mation, and communication. However, ­e-commerce may also be con­
sidered as an application of technology using the Internet. It may also 
represent another aspect of being a tool for increasing efficiency and low­
ering costs in organizations. The three definitions of ­e-commerce are sum­
marized in Table 1.1.
All aspects of ­e-commerce are important and deserve in-depth expla­
nation. In this chapter and other chapters of this book, we will concen­
trate on the business side of ­e-commerce, considering ­e-commerce as a 
business phenomenon (second definition), and as a tool that adds value 
to business and customers (third definition).
As we mentioned before, ­e-commerce communication and transac­
tions are predominantly done through Internet-based web sites. These 
online web sites may be used to sell products through electronic store­
fronts, provide customer service, disseminate information, provide busi­
ness intelligence (for example, create recommendations of what products 
to purchase), and many other possible value-added offerings or activities 
(see Figure 1.2). Sometimes, the ­e-commerce web sites are available only 
to internal customers or employees of an organization, and are not to 
anyone outside the organization. Enterprise Intranet is usually an orga­
nization’s internet, which is accessible to employees of this organization 
and other responsible parties using the secure login environment. This is 
done to protect the organization’s sensitive information, and not allow 
Table 1.1  Definitions of ­E-Commerce
E-Commerce 
aspects
E-Commerce definitions
Technology
E-commerce is the application of technology used to automate 
and improve business transactions utilizing predominantly 
Internet-based web sites.
Business
E-commerce is used to provide the capability of buying and 
selling products, services, and information on predominantly 
Internet-based web sites.
Value
E-commerce is a tool that may be used by business customers 
and consumers to create value in the Internet-based transactions 
by increasing efficiency and cutting costs while improving the 
quality of goods and services.

4	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
all kinds of online “intruders” to access this information (see ­Figure 1.2). 
Companies are also required, in many cases, to have protected and safe 
connections between their web sites and those of their suppliers, dis­
tributors, logistics and financial services, and many others. Enterprise 
Extranet uses internet technology to establish a private network connec­
tion between a company’s ­e-commerce web site and its external suppliers, 
service, and information providers (see Figure 1.2). In some cases, an 
extranet may be regarded as a part of the company’s intranet that is ex­
panded to users outside the company.
In many cases, instead of “e-commerce” the term “e-business” is used. 
Are these terms different or the same? In general, these terms are, in fact, 
different. “E-business” is a broader concept than “e-commerce,” in that 
it does not only represent commercial applications of buying and selling. 
It is also associated with servicing customers and collaborating between 
business partners, as well as conducting Internet-related business transac­
tions within or outside an organization. However, in modern practice, 
these two terms are used interchangeably, and become almost like syn­
onyms. Most ­e-business web sites contain ­e-commerce-related activities 
like selling or buying online. At the same time, many ­e-commerce web 
sites have elements of collaboration with customers or business partners, 
as well as online service and support. In this book, we will be using the 
term “e-commerce” to designate both commercial and business activities, 
i.e., ­e-business and ­e-commerce on the Internet.
1.3  History and Current Development 
of E-Commerce
The “life” of ­e-commerce as a business system is relatively short as com­
pared with many other existing business and management systems. 
Figure 1.2  E-Commerce networking
,QWUDQHW
+XPDQ5HVRXUFHV
3URMHFW0DQDJHPHQW
.QRZOHGJH
0DQDJHPHQW
6XSSOLHUV
6HUYLFHV

([WUDQHW
,QWHUQHW
2QOLQH
6WRUH
DQG
6HUYLFH


	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
5
­E-commerce started around 1995, and since then has had an interesting 
and sometimes turbulent history.
The proliferation of Internet-based computer technology in the last 
five years of the 20th century triggered extensive development of differ­
ent kinds of ­e-commerce tools and applications. Many new ­e-commerce 
companies were born at that time. Their intention was to sell products 
to business and individual consumers, outsource/buy products from 
businesses, or provide a virtual environment to facilitate the exchange 
of products and services between the companies. It was a time of “ir­
rational exuberance,” when every day several Internet-based companies 
started their ­e-commerce business online with great expectations of soon 
becoming a publicly traded company and earning a tremendous amount 
of cash after its initial public offerings (IPO) in the stock market. The 
notion behind this was that the stock market would quickly appreciate 
almost any new ­e-commerce development. This was the era of the so 
called “dot-com bubble” of ­e-commerce. The term evidently came from 
the point that most of these companies had an Internet name of their web 
site ending with “.com.”
By the year 2000, the dot-com bubble reached its peak, from which 
started an almost freefall of the dot-com stock prices, overall customer 
excitement and expectation, and venture investments in ­e-commerce. 
Between 2000 and 2003, a significant number of dot-com companies 
closed, were acquired, or merged with other businesses. The many reasons 
for this crash of the dot-com bubble have been well documented in vari­
ous literature sources. However, the main reason for the disappearance of 
these companies was their inability to be profitable and to provide value 
to their customers. “If it does not make cents, it does not make sense.” 
Many companies were created by bright computer professionals who 
knew how to design and start a technologically advanced ­e-commerce 
solution. However, these professionals had little to no ability to provide 
an efficient and effective business-related model for their solutions.
At the end of the crash in 2001–2002, a new trend appeared evi­
dent within ­e-commerce—a trend of developing and implementing 
­e-commerce solutions that were not only more business-oriented and 
­targeted the need to provide significant value to the customers but also 
by doing that, be more financially sound, i.e., profitable. This designated 

6	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
a new era of ­e-commerce that had some major differences with the previ­
ously used “dot-com” approach in ­e-commerce (see Table 1.2).
The table clearly depicts the main differences between the old and 
new approaches to ­e-commerce. Instead of old ­e-commerce decisions 
being based on technology innovations and revenue emphasis, the 
new ­e-commerce development is mostly based on the need to develop 
a solid business model that would emphasize value-added offerings for 
the customers and profits for the company. According to some literature 
sources  [5], more than 60% of all ­e-commerce companies were profit­
able in 2004 as opposed to only 10% of them being profitable in 2001. 
Instead of the entrepreneurial nature of most dot-com companies and 
pure online strategies (doing all business online), the new ­e-commerce 
development is mostly associated with traditional firms. These firms range 
from large companies like IBM and GE to a myriad of small and mid-size 
enterprises (SME) who embrace an ­e-commerce strategy as a part of the 
overall business strategy. In this case, it may be called a mixed or “click-
and-brick” strategy. Finally, during the ­e-commerce evolution, many 
special standards regulating its activities and communication through 
­e-commerce have been developed or improved. For example, XML 
(eXtensible Markup Language) and XBML (business XML) computer 
languages were developed to improve communication between different 
­e-commerce web sites. The Electronic Product Code (EPC) was created 
to recognize the product being sold or delivered using mobile commerce 
equipment.
A new changing trend in ­e-commerce is associated with utiliza­
tion of the Internet-related technology and software for improving 
Table 1.2  Dot-Com and new ­E-Commerce compared
“DOT-COM” ­E-Commerce
New ­E-Commerce
Technology-driven
Business-driven
Revenue growth emphasis
Earning and profits emphasis
Venture capital financing
Traditional financing
Pure online strategies
Mixed “click-and-brick” strategies
Entrepreneurial
Traditional firms
Lack of standards
Stronger regulation/standards

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
7
communication, information sharing, collaboration, and functionality of 
the Web, which is commonly defined as Web 2.0. Web 2.0 means pro­
liferation of connectivity and interactivity of web-delivered content that 
allows users to—besides obtaining information from a web site—own the 
data on the Internet, gain control over this data, and add value to the web 
site as they use it. The key Web 2.0 applications and services include[6]:
• Blog (web-log)–a webpage consisting of brief user opinions, 
views, and information, or links (also called posts), arranged 
chronologically within a menu-driven format.
• Wiki–a webpage or set of web pages that can be easily edited 
by anyone who is allowed access. A well-known example is 
Wikipedia, the free Internet encyclopedia.
• Podcast–audio recordings, usually in MP3 format, of 
talks, interviews and lectures, which can be played either 
on a desktop computer or on a wide range of handheld 
MP3 devices.
• Multimedia sharing–services that facilitate the storage and 
sharing of multimedia content such as video (YouTube), 
photos (Flickr), and podcasts (Odeo).
• Social networking–professional and social networking sites 
like facebook.com and myspace. com that facilitate meeting 
people, finding like minds, and sharing content.
• RSS–a family of formats which allow users to find out about 
updates to the content of RSS-enabled websites, blogs or 
podcasts without actually having to go and visit the site. 
Information from the website (typically, a new story’s title 
and synopsis, along with the originating website’s name) 
is collected within a feed (which uses the RSS format) and 
‘piped’ to the user in a process known as syndication.
1.4  E-Commerce Growth
Since its creation, ­e-commerce has experienced steady growth with an in­
creasing rate of growth in the first decade of the 21st century. Survey after 
survey conducted by a variety of companies has indicated an accelerating 

8	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
volume of transactions in business-to-consumer (B2C) and particularly in 
business-to-business (B2B) ­e-commerce. In 2003–2005, more than 70% 
of companies in the United States have experimented with purchasing on­
line; and around 15–20% of their total spending was being channeled via 
the Internet[7, 8]. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, B2B ­e-commerce 
covers more than 20% of all business transactions in the U.S.A[9].
Although B2B sales continue to dwarf B2C sales, many retailers now 
see online sales as their best opportunity for new growth. The estimates 
made by different consulting firms[10] show that by the end of 2012, the 
sales through ­e-commerce will be between 210 and 340 billion dollars 
(see Figure 1.3). The average growth of retail ­e-commerce is estimated to 
be from 12% to 14% annually[11]. In addition, the proportion of retail 
­e-commerce in the total U.S. retail sales is predicted to grow from ap­
proximately 4% in 2006 to 13% in 2010[11].
The implementation of ­e-commerce also varies across the globe. The 
highest level of ­e-commerce sales as a proportion of the total sales is in 
­Australia, South Korea, and France—with more than 16% of the total sales 
in 2004, United States—more than 13%, and Japan—around 9%[12].
Figure 1.3  Comparative estimates: U.S. retail ­E-commerce sales, 
(billions)[10]
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
eMarketer
Forrester
Jupiter

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
9
The projected ­e-commerce growth raises the interest of researchers 
to understand how effective and efficient this ­e-commerce implementa­
tion has been, and what influences ­e-commerce results in manufacturing 
and service organizations. Despite the evident increase in importance of 
­e-commerce and effectiveness of its implementation, until recently little 
research has been undertaken to investigate factors that influence the 
results of ­e-commerce solutions. This knowledge not only has potential 
benefits for organizations considering ­e-commerce implementation but 
also for those organizations that have already engaged in such implemen­
tations, because it can provide them with an understanding of how to 
facilitate and improve their implementation processes.
1.5  Main Characteristics, Dimensions, 
and Types of ­E-Commerce
The main characteristics of ­e-commerce are its pervasiveness and inexo­
rability. Pervasiveness of ­e- commerce means its persistent development 
and proliferation in business and non-profit organizations of various 
sizes. Inexorability of ­e-commerce represents its inevitable and unstop­
pable nature in terms of the high rates of growth that were described in 
the previous section. Inexorability also means that ­e-commerce tends to 
transcend geographical, cultural, and political differences of nations and 
countries and enables common business information and web sites for the 
entire world. Finally, inexorability represents the ability of ­e-commerce 
to change the business environment, and create completely new business 
relations. ­E-commerce development has completely revitalized different 
industries including jewelry, banking, telecommunications, hotels, real 
estate, software, and many others[13].
If you ask yourself why ­e-commerce development is so pervasive and 
inexorable, the answer should come from the simple fact that ­e-commerce 
can be a rich source of value for organizations that employ it. This value 
comes from ­e-commerce disintermediation, which means an act of tak­
ing out an intermediary organization used for channel delivery of prod­
ucts and services. For example, direct sales of computers through the 
Internet by Dell or Hewlett-Packard (HP) eliminates any intermediate 
organizations like distributors and retailers. This leads to reduced cost 

10	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
of product delivery to the customers and increased profits. At the same 
time, ­e-commerce re-intermediation facilitates creation of third party 
organizations that provide virtual environments for connecting buyers 
and sellers or, generally, business partners for transactions on the Internet. 
The creation of companies like eBay or Amazon is a typical example of 
­e-commerce re-intermediation.
Organizations may have various levels of ­e-commerce implementa­
tion. The differentiation between these organizations is based upon three 
dimensions[14]:
• Products and services produced and sold by an organization 
that can range from traditional physical to fully digitized 
products (services).
• Processes established in the organization that can also vary 
from physical to fully digitized (online) processes.
• Agent, which is an organization itself, ranging from a traditional 
“brick-and-mortar” firm to a virtual online organization.
Pure ­e-commerce organizations are characterized by their products/
services and processes being completely digitized, as well as the whole 
organization being a digital agent company. These organizations are also 
known as virtual or pure-play ­e-commerce companies. An example of 
such an organization is www.YouTube.com, a famous online site for up­
loading, storing, and sharing videos worldwide. It is a pure ­e-commerce 
company, because all its products/services, like video play lists or sub­
scriptions, are digitized; its processes like video search, creating video play 
lists, etc. are also digitized; and, finally, this organization is a virtual (com­
pletely online) digital agent.
Partial ­e-commerce organizations are those organizations that may 
have some physical ­e-commerce dimensions like physical products or 
processes. For example, Amazon purchases and stores books (physical 
products) that it then sells online. The company also organizes a logistics 
(physical) process of book delivery to the customers. However, Amazon 
also sells many digital products (like videos and music) and provides a 
variety of digitized processes. In this case, Amazon is a typical partial 
­e-commerce organization.

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
11
“Click-and-mortar” organizations are companies that conduct 
some ­e-commerce activities, for example, selling computers, printers, or 
software through ­e-commerce channels like HP or Gateway, but provide 
their primary business in the physical world. Contrary to that, “brick-
and- mortar” organizations perform all their business without the In­
ternet by selling their physical products in stores or conducting processes 
by means of physical agents only. The number of “brick- and-mortar” 
companies have significantly shrunk over the years as ­e-commerce prolif­
eration has grown in a variety of traditional companies.
E-commerce organizations are also differentiated by the transactions 
and interactions they make. One of the common types are the Business-
to-Business (B2B) ­e-commerce organizations that provide transactions, 
communication, and interactions between business partners. B2B 
transactions may include selling products and services to businesses, 
outsourcing from suppliers, logistics, and distribution of products to 
companies, financial transactions, and others. B2B transactions may be 
done on the downstream of the organization’s supply chain, i.e., from 
raw materials, to manufacturing organizations, and then to distribution 
and retail (see Figure 1.4). B2B can also be done on the upstream of the 
company supply chain, for example purchasing materials from suppli­
ers, or outsourcing a logistics provider for a manufacturing organization 
(see Figure 1.4).
Suppliers 
Logistics 
Transportation 
Logistics     
Transportation 
Logistics 
Transportation 
Production 
Retail 
Distribution 
     Customer 
Figure 1.4  B2B and B2C ­E-Commerce

12	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
Another very common type is Business-to-Consumer (B2C) 
­e-commerce organizations which provide transactions, communication, 
and interactions with consumers (end users). These organizations can 
be manufacturing, distribution, retail, or other companies that sell their 
products or services to consumers online. B2C transactions and interac­
tions are done on the downstream of the organization’s supply chain (see 
Figure 1.4).
Since the beginning of the ­e-commerce era, both B2B and B2C trans­
actions have experienced consistent growth in revenues. These revenues 
are derived from selling products and services online to business custom­
ers or end consumers. They also include revenues from financial transac­
tions via the Internet.
The volume of transaction revenues in B2B ­e-commerce is substan­
tially larger than that of B2C. For example, in 2004 the B2B transaction 
revenues in U.S.A were around $1,812 billion or 93% of all ­e-commerce 
revenues. At the same time, the revenues from B2C ­e-commerce transac­
tions were $130 billion, which was just 7% of the total business-related 
­e-commerce transactions[9].
Besides B2B and B2C transactions, ­e-commerce transactions and in­
teractions may have other types:
• Consumer-to-Consumer (C2C) ­e-commerce is used in 
organizations that provide private sales and auctions between 
individual consumers.
• Peer-to-Peer (P2P) ­e-commerce allows networked peer 
computers to share data and processing with each other 
directly; can be used in C2C, B2B, and B2C ­e-commerce.
• Government-to-Business (G2B) and Government-to-
Consumer (G2C) ­e-commerce enable government 
organizations to provide information, interaction, 
business, and services to companies and consumers 
respectively.
• Business-to-Business-to-Consumer (B2B2C) ­e-commerce 
organizations provide some products or services to client 
businesses that maintain their own customers. eBay, for 
example, provides a virtual marketplace to its customers 

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
13
(business and individuals) that sell products through eBay 
to their own customers.
• Mobile Commerce (M-commerce) makes possible ­e-
commerce transactions and activities to be conducted in a 
wireless environment, for example, buying products and 
services from a web site on a cell phone.
• Location-based Commerce (L-commerce) provides 
m-commerce transactions targeted at individuals in specific 
locations and at specific times, like navigation systems in cars.
• Intra-business ­e-commerce includes all internal 
organizational activities that involve the exchange of goods, 
services, or information.
• Collaborative Commerce (C-commerce) creates an 
environment where individuals or groups communicate or 
collaborate online.
Many of these transactions types, including mobile and location-based 
commerce, collaborative commerce, and business-to-business-to-consumer 
commerce will be discussed in this book.
1.6  Value Creation in ­E-Commerce
As previously mentioned, the main reason for the growth and prolifera­
tion of ­e-commerce (pervasiveness and inexorability) is its ability to create 
value for an organization that implemented the ­e-commerce solutions, 
for the customers of this organization, and for its partners and suppliers. 
Value creation represents the potential or expected and actual monetary 
and non-monetary results of utilizing an ­e-commerce business model. 
The main monetary results of value creation include revenue enhance­
ment through sales growth and price differentiation, and cost reduction 
related to cost of goods sold, operating costs, and asset intensity reduction 
(see Figure 1.5).
Revenue enhancement is the first aspect of value creation. ­E-commerce 
develops a new online channel for selling a company’s products and ser­
vices along with existing traditional channels. This potentially generates 
additional sales volume through this channel, and, at the same time, can 

14	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
facilitate product sales through the existing channels. For example, a con­
sumer may use Walmart’s web site to purchase a variety of products that can 
be then sent to a nearby store for customer pickup. At the same time, while 
coming to the store for the pickup, the consumer may potentially end up 
buying some more products from the company. In this case, the channels do 
not cannibalize, but rather complement each other and provide higher sales 
volumes and revenues. The revenue increase may be also associated with 
the ability to quickly adjust prices depending on customer segments (for 
example, repeat customers will pay a higher price than new customers will) 
or by increasing prices through building the company’s brand name recog­
nition on the Internet. In addition, ­e-commerce can enable quick matching 
of customer demand with existing supply of products, and, thus, provide 
better knowledge of what prices need to be established and promoted.
Besides the opportunity of increased revenue, ­e-commerce is also an 
important source of cost reduction. This is the second aspect of value 
creation through ­e-commerce (see Figure 1.5). The cost of goods sold 
through online web sites may be reduced by providing a direct selling 
channel to the customers and reducing the need for intermediaries like 
wholesalers and retailers. Taking out the intermediaries can reduce the 
cost of sales up to 25–30%. At the same time, by using ­e-commerce for 
outsourcing materials, components, and services, companies can reduce 
process and transaction costs associated with outsourcing. ­E-commerce 
enables companies to simplify outsourcing processes and reduce related 
Figure 1.5  Creating monetary value in ­E-Commerce

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
15
costs. Finally, ­e-commerce creates opportunities for asset intensity reduc­
tion, which means (a) reducing capital costs by effective, speedy disposi­
tion (selling) of unnecessary or old equipment as well as excess or obsolete 
inventory, and (b) more effectively using existing space by reducing in­
ventory clutters with ­e-commerce.
The results of the survey conducted among the companies that im­
plemented ­e-commerce solutions[15] revealed that more than 61% of 
respondents stated that implemented ­e-commerce solutions increased 
or significantly increased revenues. At the same time, 58% of those re­
sponding achieved a decrease or significant decrease in costs through the 
implementation of ­e-commerce solutions. According to the survey re­
sults, the most important cost categories that were reduced appeared to be 
transactional cost specifically in terms of paperless transactions, admin­
istrative cost associated with reduction of purchasing procurement per­
sonnel, inventory cost, and reduction of prices of materials and services. 
All this represents typical cost savings results associated with ­e-commerce 
implementation.
The non-monetary value creation may incorporate a variety of tan­
gible and intangible results relevant to ­e-commerce development:
Improved customer satisfaction through providing more choices of 
products, services, and information.
Customization and personalization of product and service offering.
Improved quality of products and services.
Faster delivery schedules.
Extended hours of work (24 hours, 7 days a week).
Global outreach of products, services, and information.
Permanent access to information.
According to the survey  [15], organizations that implemented 
­e-commerce presented relatively evenly distributed answers about the 
benefits of ­e-commerce implementation, which are shown in Table 1.3.
However, responses to the question of drawbacks and problems in 
implementing ­e-commerce solutions demonstrated that the three most 
critical problems in ­e-commerce implementation were high costs of im­
plementation, data security, and low liquidity (not enough buyers and 
sellers), which covered 66.7% of responses (see Table 1.4).

16	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
1.7  Chapter Summary: Managerial Aspects 
of ­E-Commerce
	 1.	 E-commerce has become a significant element in the modern global 
economic environment. It represents the use of a computer network, 
primarily the Internet, to buy and sell products, services, informa­
tion, and communication. ­E-commerce is also an application of 
technology using the Internet. In addition, it is a tool for increasing 
efficiency and lowering costs in organizations.
	 2.	 The main characteristics of ­e-commerce are its pervasiveness and 
inexorability. Pervasiveness of ­e-commerce means its persistent de­
velopment and proliferation in business and nonprofit organizations 
of various sizes. Inexorability of ­e-commerce represents its inevitable 
and unstoppable nature in terms of the high rates of growth that 
were described in the previous section.
	 3.	 e-commerce can be a rich source of value for organizations that em­
ploy it. ­E-commerce disintermediation means an act of taking out 
Table 1.3  Benefits of implementing ­E-Commerce solutions
Main benefits of implementing ­E-Commerce 
­solutions in organizations
Number of 
­responses (%)
Shorter procurement cycle
13.3%
Improve communication and relationships with suppliers
13.3%
Improve communication and relationships with customers
12.6%
Better reliability and control of purchase orders
11.9%
New channel of marketing and sale with global outreach
10.4%
Reduce inventory level and cost
8.9%
Eliminate or reduce the number of middlemen
8.9%
Reduce purchase prices
7.4%
Table 1.4  Drawbacks and problems in ­E-Commerce implementation
Main drawbacks and problems in implementing ­
E-Commerce solutions in organizations
Number of 
responses (%)
High costs of implementing ­e-commerce solutions
26.7%
Data security
26.7%
Not enough buyers and/or sellers online
13.3%
Poor integration with internal “back-office” systems
8.9%
Low return on investment and/or long payback period
6.7%
Not enough speed of connection/bandwidth problems
6.7%

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
17
intermediary organizations used for channel delivery of products 
and services though ­e-commerce supply chain. At the same time, 
­e-commerce re-intermediation facilitates creation of third party orga­
nizations that provide virtual environments for connecting buyers and 
sellers or generally, business partners for transactions on the Internet.
	 4.	 Organizations may have various levels of ­e-commerce implemen­
tation. Pure ­e-commerce organizations are characterized by their 
products/services and processes being completely digitized. Partial 
­e-commerce organizations are those organizations that, besides digi­
tal products and processes, may have some physical ­e-commerce di­
mensions like physical products or processes. “Click-and-mortar” 
organizations are companies that conduct some ­e-commerce activi­
ties, but provide their primary business in the physical world.
	 5.	 E-commerce organizations are also differentiated by the transactions 
and interactions they make. The most common types are Business-to-
Business (B2B) and Business-to-Consumer (B2C) e-commerce trans­
actions. Besides B2B and B2C transactions, e-commerce transactions 
and interactions may have other types: ­consumer-to-consumer 
(C2C), business-to-business to-consumer (B2B2C), government-to-
business (G2B), mobile commerce (­M-commerce), Location-based 
Commerce (L-commerce), and some others.
	 6.	 Value creation in ­e-commerce represents the potential or expected 
and actual monetary and non-monetary results of utilizing an 
­e-commerce business model. The main monetary results of value 
creation include revenue enhancement through sales growth and 
price differentiation, and cost reduction related to cost of goods sold, 
operating costs, and assets intensity reduction. The non-­monetary 
value creation may incorporate a variety of tangible and intangible 
results relevant to ­e-commerce development like improved customer 
satisfaction and quality, faster delivery schedules, extended hours of 
work, global outreach, and permanent access to information.
References
1.	 Cable Network News (CNN), “Top 25 Innovations: The Internet Ranked 
No 1, Changed the World,” March 1, 2005, retrieved from www.cnn
.coml2005lTECHl01l03lcnn25.top25.innovationslindex.html.

18	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
2.	 Drucker, P., Managing in the Next Society, Truman Talley Book, New 
York, 2002.
3.	  “The Difference between the Internet and the World Wide Web,” 
Webopedia, February 29, 2008, retrieved from www.webopedia.
com.
4.	 Internet Domain Survey, “Number of Hosts Advertised in the DNS,” 
Internet System Consortium (ISC), January 2008, retrieved from 
www.isc.org/index.pl?/ops/ds.
5.	 Mullaney, T.J., “E-biz Strikes Again,” Business Week, Special Report -- 
­E-Biz, May 10, 2004, retrieved from www.businessweek.com.
6.	 Anderson, P., “What is Web 2.0? Ideas, Technologies, and Implications 
for Education,” JISC Technology and Standard Watch, February 2007, 
1–63.
7.	 Bednarz, A., “Analyst Firm Predicts ­E-business Upswing”, Network 
World, September 1, 2004.
8.	 Juniper Media Metrix, “The Forecast for ­Business-to-Business 
e-­commerce”, DM Review, Jan. 17, 2006, retrieved from www
.­DMreview.com.
9.	 U.S. Census Bureau, “e-commerce 2004,” May 25, 2006, retrieved 
from www.census.govlestats.
10.	 E-Business News, “US Retail ­e-commerce Set for Growth,” February 2008, 
retrieved from www.ebusinessnews. infol?action=read&article=684.
11.	 “Forrester Research US eCommerce Forecast: Online Retail Sales to 
Reach $329 by 2010,” September 19, 2005, retrieved from www.
internetadssales.com.
12.	 eMarketer, “Report on Europe ­e-commerce: B2B and B2C,” July 2003, 
retrieved from www.emarketer.com/Report.aspx?b2b_b2c_euro_jul03.
13.	 Special Report-E-biz, “E-biz Strikes Again,” BusinessWeek, May 
10, 2004, retrieved from www.businessweek.com/magazine/con­
tent/04_19/b3882601.htm.
14.	 Whinston, A, Choi, S.Y., and Stahl, D. O., The Economics of 
­Electronic Commerce, 1st McMillan Technical Publishing, 1997.
15.	 Radovilsky, Z. and V. Hegde. Factors Influencing ­e-commerce 
­Implementation: Analysis of Survey Results, Journal of Academy of 
Business and Economics, Vol. IV, No.1, 2004, p. 29–37.

CHAPTER 2
How to Develop and 
Implement E-Commerce
2.1  Main Steps in Development 
and Implementation
In this chapter, we will be discussing the development and implementa­
tion of e-commerce models. The material presented in the chapter may be 
relevant to developing a new e-commerce model as well as ­improving 
existing e-commerce model(s) or solution(s).
In practice, there are a number of online guides and recommenda­
tions on the implementation of e-commerce. Some of these guides pres­
ent implementation steps for specific e-commerce models or solutions. In 
this chapter, we introduce a sequence of strategic steps for the e-­commerce 
d­evelopment and implementation processes that may be employed for 
any type of e-commerce solution (either a new development or existing 
one) for an organization of any size (see Figure 2-1). These steps are also 
related to the e-commerce business model methodology.
The first step of the e-commerce development process is identifying 
the e-commerce business model. This is a critical step in the overall e-com­
merce development process because it establishes a strategic vision and, to 
some extent, guides the long-term decisions of what the e-commerce sys­
tem should be, how it is going to perform, and what specific e-commerce 
models need to be implemented. At this step, a company needs to ­establish 
the five main components of the e-commerce business model 2. These are 
the value proposition, e-commerce offerings (value-added activities), sup­
porting resources, revenue and cost models, and value creation (expected 

20	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
Figure 2.1  Steps of E-commerce development and implementation
 
Step 1: Identifying
E-commerce
Business Model 
Step 3: Developing Technology
Infrastructure for E-commerce
Step 4: Implementing
E-commerce and
Following up
Step 2: Developing
E-commerce Business Plan
(E-business Plan)
Establishing Strategy and
Selecting E-commerce
Models 
Documenting Details of
E-commerce
Implementation Plan
Creating E-commerce Web
Site
Providing Actual
Implementation
and Follow-up
Steps
Outcomes 
benefits). Based on the established e-commerce model components, the 
company may develop and evaluate several alternative e-commerce mod­
els selected from demand-side or supply-side e-commerce, c-commerce, 
m-commerce, e-services, etc. Then, the company needs to compare these 
alternatives using qualitative and quantitative measurements, for example, 
ROI analysis. Finally, the company identifies the best ­e-commerce model or 
models to be developed.
The second step in the development of the e-commerce model is to 
design an e-commerce business plan or e-business plan. The goal is to 
create a detailed written document that will explain how the company 
intends to achieve its e-commerce goals and fulfill the strategy formulated 
in the previous step. An e-business plan should include a business descrip­
tion (mission statement, business goals, project objective) of the proposed 
e-commerce implementation, along with market and competitor analy­
ses. It should also contain operations decisions and financial statements 
associated with projected costs (cost of ownership) and benefits (revenue, 
profits, ROI). There may be some other items included in the plan (see 
section 2.3 of this chapter).

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
21
The third step involves developing the technology infrastructure 
for e-commerce, which in most cases ends up being the creation of the 
e-commerce web site. This web site contains all features and elements 
necessary to fulfill the main strategic vision and strategic goals of the 
developed e-commerce model(s). The development of the technological 
infrastructure includes selecting a company that will be hosting the web 
site (internally or externally), identifying the best development software 
for the e-commerce models under development, and registering a domain 
name. This step can also involve creating and managing web site content, 
constructing and testing the web site, and marketing and promoting the 
web site. In addition, the company needs to identify the performance 
measurements for utilizing the web site for e-commerce implementation 
(see sections 2.4 and 2.5 of this chapter for details on developing techno­
logical infrastructure and performance measurements).
The last (but certainly not the least) step in the e-commerce develop­
ment process includes actual implementation and follow-up. This step 
involves creating an e-commerce implementation strategy. The strategy 
describes the long-term decisions necessary to successfully introduce and 
sustain the new e-commerce model(s). This may include marketing of 
the web site, sales promotions, customer service and support, web site 
maintenance, and other decisions. All these aspects of the implemen­
tation strategy would be specified in the implementation plan. Upon 
implementing the new or improved e-commerce model(s), the company 
would have to follow up on the implementation results. The company 
will collect customer feedback and measure implementation results based 
on the performance measurements introduced in the previous step. This 
may potentially lead to changes in the current online procedures and 
workflows.
In the next several sections of this chapter, we will detail the first three 
steps of the e-commerce implementation process.
2.2  Identifying E-Commerce Model
The development of an e-commerce business model is based on the five 
major components. We briefly summarize these components and their 
elements in Table 2.1.

22	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
Table 2.1  Components of an E-commerce business model
Components of 
E-Commerce Model

Description of Components
Value Proposition
Construction of a value proposition requires specification 
of two things:
• Target market segments
• Core customer benefits
Value-added 
e-commerce Offerings
Represents value-added activities in the following 
components:
• Scope of offerings
• E-commerce products and services
• E-commerce processes
• Relationships between e-commerce products/ services 
and e- commerce processes
Supporting Resources
A company must select and then align its resources to 
deliver the value proposition. These resources may include
• E-commerce technology
• Brand name
• Quality of products and services
• Distribution network
• Supplier network
• Buyers’ and sellers’ base
• Personnel
• Integrated software ERP system
• Outsourcing
Revenue Model 
and Cost Model
Revenue generation options
• Product, service, or 
information sales
• Transaction fees
• Subscription fees
• Advertising
• Affiliate fees
• Licensing fees
Cost reduction options 
• Direct and/or indirect 
cost
• Paperless environment
• Administrative expenses
• Quality cost
e-commerce Value 
Creation
Represents potential/expected monetary and non-monetary 
results of utilizing an e-commerce business model
• Revenue enhancement
• Cost reduction
• Asset intensity reduction
An Example of Developing an E-commerce Business Model: 
Cathay ­Pacific Airways
Cathay Pacific Airways is an international airline registered and based in 
Hong Kong. It offers scheduled passenger and cargo services to 92 desti­
nations around the world. The multiple award-winning airline has won 

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
23
Cathay and its 
Major Competitors
Average Number 
of Seats Booked 
Online Per Week
Percentage of Total 
Number of Seats 
Booked online 
in 2005
Cathay Pacific Airways
    6,000
  2%
Singapore Airlines
  49,000
15%
Emirates Airlines
  56,000
20%
British Airways
  80,000
27%
United Airlines
660,000
47%
Table 2.2  Passenger bookings online (per week)
the prestigious “Airline of the Year 2006” designation by global travel and 
transport information company Official Airline Guides as well as by Air 
Transport World magazine[1].
Cathay entered the new millennium in full stride, with profits peak­
ing at US$650 million in 2000. However, in the following years, the 
airline faced some of its greatest commercial challenges: the attacks on the 
United States on September 11, 2001, a second Gulf War in 2003 and the 
outbreak of the SARS epidemic in China in November 2002, as well as 
increasing fuel prices. The profit attributable to shareholders was lower by 
25.33%, to US$422.8 million in 2005[2]. In addition, the profit margin 
decreased by (34.5% or 3.9 percentage points) (this seems contradictory) 
because escalating fuel costs reduced the profit in the second half of the 
year, which is traditionally the stronger period. For the full year of 2005, 
fuel expenditure increased by 67.2% to about US$2 billion, with fuel 
surcharges on tickets only partially offsetting this additional cost[2].
One of the big areas of concern in the company was online booking. 
Cathay’s online bookings had been consistently weak since they began in 
1999. Online booking had grown by about 100% per year, excluding 2003 
(the year of SARS) to only 2% of all seat bookings in 2005. Competitors 
were more successful in obtaining online bookings (see Table 2.2)[2, 3 4 5 6].
Obviously, short-haul domestic flights make up a large portion of 
United’s flights. However, the percentage of total number of seats booked 
online in 2005 for each airline revealed the issue of how poorly Cathay’s 
online booking has penetrated the market. Factors contributing to this 

24	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
low percentage are that Cathay offers only limited discounts during the 
low flying season, which are not marketed well, and does not always offer 
the lowest price. For some customers, Cathay has proven neither that 
online buying is price competitive nor that the experience is more ef­
ficient than using a travel agent. Cathay Pacific decided to undertake the 
development of a new e-commerce environment to increase the number 
of online bookings.
Value Proposition
The development started with identifying the elements of the value prop­
osition: The Target market segment includes individual travelers across 
various classes (first class, business class, economy unrestricted and re­
stricted classes) as well as the loyal Marco Polo Club members (exclusive 
traveler’s club). In addition, the target market segment may be corporate 
customers with consistent and frequent business travel requirements.
The Cathay’s core customer benefits may involve:
• Timely information: Cathay offers its target segments the 
core benefits of 24/7 access to up-to-date, accurate and 
detailed information by removing the intermediary, the 
travel agent
• Travel information aggregation: Benefits include the 
aggregation of all personal travel information in one location 
or site, especially for Marco Polo members. This includes, 
but is not limited to, checking flight schedules, fare rates, 
seat availability, arrival and departure times, and baggage 
information, etc.
• Abundant choice: Cathay’s customers have the ability 
to choose the best quality travel experience.
Value-added e-commerce Offerings
• Cross-category dominance: Cathay extends its product 
offerings online from strictly air flights to package holidays, 
duty free items, and Cathay merchandizing products

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
25
• Predominantly intangible products: Cathay offers intangible 
services and experiences, with a minor offering of tangible 
duty free items and its own products
• Low customization: There is some customization for Marco 
Polo Members through password-protected entry into 
personal information requests
• Average level of digitization: Although Cathay will courier 
tickets free-of-charge to certain areas of Hong Kong, it also 
offers e-tickets as an option to anyone, anywhere. Therefore, 
the travel product experience is a physical service, the 
purchase of the ticket is digitized, and, if not an e-ticket, the 
ticket is sent by courier or mail
• Cross-functional integration: Cross-functional information 
such as flight scheduling, reservations, e-ticket purchasing, 
airport check-in, and baggage lost and found is integrated on 
the web site
• Customer online booking processes: Processes include 
information search, product offerings, evaluation of alternatives, 
purchase decision, a checkout process, order tracking through 
a confirmation number, and post sales service and support 
through e-mail or telephone. The purchase decision is 
acknowledged with real time validation of personal travel details 
and booking information. Advanced information is available 
online on a real-time basis, for example, possible flight delays, 
weather forecasts, and duty-free products that can be ordered 
prior to the flight and then received when in flight, etc.
Supporting Resources
There are strong links among the online resources in the system. These 
resources include:
• Strong brand name: Cathay’s brand is vital for successful 
development and implementation of its online bookings
• Premium quality of products and services: Cathay 
differentiates itself from its competitors by providing a travel 

26	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
experience with outstanding service for First Class, Business 
class, Economy Unrestricted and Restricted classes, including 
Marco Polo Club members
• Wide network: Cathay provides a wide range of flight 
alternatives or schedules to satisfy customer needs. Cathay 
itself flies to 92 destinations
• Forward-thinking customer service: There is a 
comprehensive ‘Frequently Asked Questions’ (FAQ) section 
built into the searchable database which helps answer 
questions raised by the travelers in a timely manner
• Award-winning partnership: The One World Alliance, 
Cathay’s partner, has been rated as the world’s leading 
alliance for the third year in the World’s Travel Award, 
winning over the competing alliances of Star and Skyteam, 
etc. Available via a link on Cathay’s web site, the Alliance 
enables its member customers more service and benefits 
via, for example, a broader network of destinations, the 
redemption of frequent flyer miles and points across the 
combined worldwide network, and the access to shared 
airport lounges
• Technology outsourcing: Cathay has outsourced its online 
booking engine to Amadeus, which was founded by Air 
France, Lufthansa, Iberia, and SAS in 1987. It is a leading 
provider of IT solutions to the travel and tourism industry 
and is the first Global Distribution System (GDS) to offer 
neutral (unbiased) flight availability data.
Cathay has selected and aligned most of its online booking resources 
to deliver the benefits of the Value Proposition (Table 2.3).
In terms of fulfilling expectations, success demands success. Based 
on the course in-class discussion and a small sampling of other travel­
ers, most had a positive online booking experience while others expressed 
some level of inadequacy. Overall, all the benefits of the Value Proposition 
(e.g. quality in terms of customer satisfaction) are not being delivered to 
their fullest potential.

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
27
Core Benefits 
in Value Proposition
Resources
Degree of Delivery
Brand equity
Strong brand name
High; but creates 
expectations difficult 
to consistently fulfill
Travel information 
aggregation
Premium quality 
products & services
High degree providing 
a sustainable advantage
Up-to-date, accurate 
information
Forward-thinking 
customer service
Medium, because of 
poorly-marketed specials 
and frustrating-at-times 
online experience
Wide network of travel 
destinations
Award-winning 
partnership
High in terms of choice; 
supportive, complementary 
links among resources 
in the system; strong 
link between resources 
and value proposition; 
convenience
Easy, efficient access 
to information
Technology Outsourcing: 
Amadeus
Low degree of uniqueness 
in terms of resource system; 
ubiquitous in airline industry
Table 2-3  Resources that relate to each benefit
Revenue Model/Cost Model
As an e-tailer, Cathay earns revenue using online booking as a comple­
mentary means of increasing its sales volume. It represents a new channel 
for the existing product portfolio parallel with the existing channel of 
travel agents.
Cathay strives to reduce costs by employing online booking. This 
includes:
• Servicing cost savings: Fewer phone calls to, and less 
hands-on time with, Cathay staff means a reduction in human 
resources costs.
• Distribution cost savings: This involves a lower level of 
distribution of fare information to different travel agencies at 
locations throughout the world, originally done by fax and 
mail. It saves on labor as well as traffic costs.

28	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
• Commission savings: Reducing the commission payable to 
travel agents or any third-party channel that sells tickets provides 
a cost savings for Cathay in terms of the commission itself and 
the administrative costs associated with the commission payment.
• Paper savings: There is a potential reduction in the paper 
required in a transaction with online bookings that is realized 
when the customer chooses an e-ticket.
To summarize, the above four types of savings implemented by 
­Cathay through online bookings would generate a significant direct and 
indirect savings on a yearly basis.
Value Creation
Cathay uses the value creation levers of revenue enhancement and 
cost ­reduction to develop monetary value in online booking. Revenue 
­enhancement and market share growth include:
• Volume growth: There is revenue enhancement through the 
increased sales volume of convenient e-tickets.
• Price differentiation: Catering to certain customer segments, 
there are limited time-sensitive price discounts through online 
booking. This increases the sales volume and revenue accordingly.
• Other revenues/benefits: These include the e-store selling 
Cathay Pacific accessories and items, e-marketing such as 
ticket discount, Cathay’s holiday packages, promotions, and 
affiliations with different hotels.
Cost reduction may be based on lowering operating costs: This in­
volves resource savings such as the administration costs included with 
general office costs as well as human resource costs in relation to direct 
customer service and the distribution saving costs as defined in above.
Other elements of value creation may represent:
• Extensive monitoring capabilities: Effective and efficient 
tracking facilitation is available through Amadeus.
• Improved customer satisfaction: Improving service levels 
and customer satisfaction from average to high, for example, 

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
29
with the availability of real time online information, timely 
feedback and a convenient portal all foster the e-commerce 
culture. The frontline services facilitation, for example, 
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) of e-ticketing, 
the e-store and e-marketing via email are available globally on 
a 24/7 basis.
Selecting E-commerce Alternatives
After the five components of the new or improved e-commerce business 
model are defined and explained, the next step is to identify potential 
alternative business models. These potential e- commerce business models 
are presented in Table 2.4.
If we return to the Cathay Pacific example, the alternatives that may 
be considered will be a modified storefront or forward auction. However, 
it needs to be connected to the internal Cathay system of ticket reserva­
tions as well as to the travel agents and operators. One of the potential 
alternatives will be to design a customer web portal that would provide a 
variety of access methods to Cathay Pacific’s information, ticket booking, 
business partners, discounts, etc.
Groups
Models
Demand-side (Sell-side) E-commerce
Storefront
Forward Auction
Infomediary/ Affiliate
Supply-side (Buy-side) E-commerce
Reverse Auction
E-procurement with Catalog
E-sourcing
Exchange
Collaborative commerce
Collaborative Design
Collaborative Planning
E-services
Web Portal
Mobile Service/M-commerce
E-payment
E-logistics
ISP/Web Hosting
EDI
Table 2.4  E-commerce model alternatives

30	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
2.3  Developing an E-Commerce 
Business Plan
The development of an e-business plan is the second major step in the 
e-commerce implementation process. An e-commerce business plan or 
e-business plan is a formal statement (written document) of a set of busi­
ness goals that will be achieved by developing a new e-commerce model 
(or improving an existing model) and associated applications, the reasons 
why they are believed to be attainable, and the plan for reaching those 
goals for e-commerce development. It may also contain background in­
formation about the organization or team attempting to reach those goals.
In many cases, the e-business plan is prepared for external audiences 
such as investors, potential business partners, or prospective managers. It 
can also be done for an internal audience like high-level management that 
needs to consider and approve a new e-commerce project. An e-business 
case is a special case of a business plan that explains in a written form a 
new initiative or project inside an existing company. Its purpose is to jus­
tify a specific investment of funds. The e-business case will be presented 
to the company’s board of directors and senior management. As a special 
case of e-business plan, it has contents very similar to that of the business 
plan. However, an e-business case involves more operational detail and it 
fits the project within the organizational context.
One of the main differences between organizations with successful 
e-commerce results and those who failed in the Internet market is that 
the successful companies had a proper e-business plan. Failure to have a 
proper e-commerce business plan can have severe consequences for the 
business:
• The internet is a very competitive medium and failure to 
launch e-commerce without a proper e-commerce business 
plan could quickly crash the business.
• If an e-commerce business were launched without an 
e-commerce business plan, then maintaining the business 
would be an impossible task.
• The lack of a plan would indicate the unprofessional 
establishment of the online business.

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
31
• The online customers are very intelligent and could easily 
judge the instability of an unplanned e-commerce business. 
Therefore, it is necessary to have a proper e-commerce 
business plan.
These points lead to the question of what the differences are between 
a business plan and e-business plan. First, an e-business plan should rec­
ognize the different and unique capabilities of the Internet. While 
developing a new e-commerce model, decision makers should think dif­
ferently and creatively about the opportunities and problems the Internet 
presents. Second, the created e-commerce solutions are global in pro­
viding visibility to an international audience. This introduces complexity 
for payment options, distribution channels, web site design, and others. 
Third, the e-commerce solutions are usually 24/7 operations and, thus, 
the e-business plan must account for this difference in Web hosting and 
customer service requirements. Fourth, the e-commerce models provide 
greater opportunities for personalization of content and customer self-
service. Fifth, e-commerce is conducted at Internet speed. This means 
that e-commerce development and implementation must be planned in 
months, or even weeks, not years. The sixth and final point is that the 
e-commerce business models are different, and thus require special con­
siderations for choosing the best e-commerce business model for the new 
development and implementation.
The creation of an e-business plan may be done for a variety of reasons. 
We have already mentioned that it is usually done for external audiences 
like investors, banks, and financial markets (in the case of an initial public 
offering—IPO) for acquiring funding to proceed with the e-commerce 
project. In addition, the e-business plan may be done to obtain necessary 
or extra resources including equipment supplier, Internet service provider, 
applications service provider, business partner, or even for recruiting senior 
management to lead the e-commerce development and implementation.
The process of writing the plan forces a decision maker to think 
ahead, set goals, anticipate problems, and set some measures for success. 
This ultimately makes the e-commerce business model more specific and 
detailed. In addition, it enables the decision maker to identify revenue 
stream, expense statement, and potential problems. All this provides a 

32	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
more realistic approach to e-commerce business development, and makes 
a decision maker a more informed owner. It may also keep the company 
on track by setting targets for e-commerce development, and allows it to 
measure actual performance against these targets. One more reason for 
building an e-business plan is that after a detailed analysis, the company 
may decide not to develop the business. Many owners of failed businesses 
would have saved considerable time, money, and heartbreak if a proper 
business plan had been created.
The e-business plan may include the following sections:
• Executive Summary
• E-commerce Description
• Marketing Plan
• Research and Development
• Operations Management
• Financial Statements
• Implementation
The Executive Summary section should concisely communicate the 
basics of the entire e-business plan. It is usually written after the rest of 
the plan has been completed. It includes tangible benefits that occur be­
cause of e-commerce, e.g., increase of sales, reduction of cost, reduction 
of errors, improved cash management, easier access to procurement infor­
mation, possible business reengineering, just in time/direct site delivery 
purchasing, etc. The executive summary also details the major costs of 
implementation, e.g. software and hardware, upgrading, employee educa­
tion, and marketing.
The e-commerce Description section should include the main goals 
and objectives, business model components and how they are associated 
with the company’s products or services along with information about 
the industry and the internet. These goals and components should be 
kept simple and easily understood. It should also discuss which of the 
products/services make the most sense to bring online. Discussions in this 
section should also include access to the global marketplace, the possibil­
ity of global market growth, customers buying online from the comfort of 
their home, possible elimination of the intermediary, etc. While talking 

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
33
new technology every opportunity should be taken to keep the goals of 
the business simple and easily understood.
The Marketing Plan section should discuss the target market, the 
company plans to reach customers with this site, identify competitors, 
describe the different types of product advertising, and explain product 
pricing, delivery and payment mechanisms. The plan should describe the 
potential customer target markets and answer several questions, includ­
ing: Who are your customers? How many of them exist on the internet? 
How many of them are international? What are the implications of this? 
Does the company have the resources in place to process online orders 
and keep its customers satisfied? How will it encourage repeat a business? 
What techniques will it use to build and maintain customer interest?
In developing the Marketing Plan, the company should look for com­
petitors with similar products or services to its products and services, and 
explain their strengths and weaknesses within that context. It is very easy 
to identify competitors’ weaknesses, but hard to identify their strengths. 
It takes time to learn your competitors’ strengths and the planners have to 
make sure they incorporate those into their plan.
A part of the Marketing Plan should be dedicated to the Advertising 
Plan, which describes how the target markets are to be reached. It should 
also describe how the company is going to tell the internet community about 
its products or services. Designing the web pages is only a part of the puzzle. 
Another part of the Marketing Plan should involve discussion of pricing in 
terms of how the company is setting prices for its products or services. If the 
product is intangible information delivered over the internet, it should try 
creating a pricing model to justify its prices. Again, the company can start by 
researching what others are charging for similar products. Finally, the Mar­
keting Plan should provide description of delivery and payment, i.e., how 
the company will deliver its product or service and is paid for that.
In the Research and Development section of the e-business plan, the 
company needs to provide the technical and technological aspects of its 
proposed e-commerce project. It should address the R&D efforts that 
will be required to bring it to completion, and a forecast of how much 
the project will cost.
The Operations Management section of the e-business plan should 
discuss the major aspects of the business including daily operations and 

34	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
physical location. In addition, it should include what equipment the busi­
ness will require. Will it be using its own Web server, or will it be contract­
ing with another company? How will the company recruit its employees? 
Will it hire internet knowledgeable staff, or train them in-house? What 
will be the cost associated with either option? What features will be incor­
porated into this site initially and what are the plans for future expansion? 
Who will help design the web site? What will be the domain name and 
how many will be purchased? What will be the URL or web site address? 
Who will take care of search engine placement? Who will determine key­
words, key phrases, and meta tags? What will they be? The Operations 
Management section should also address who will be running the busi­
ness and their expertise. What is management’s level of internet expertise? 
Where did they gain it? If no expertise, whom will they use as a consultant? 
Resumes for the management team are usually included in this section.
The Financials section presents and explains the potential investors and/
or banks or other financial institutions that may be approached for financ­
ing for the project will pay close attention to this area, since it is a forecast 
of profitability. As in a regular business plan, include all pertinent financial 
statements. This should include three to four years of profit/loss statements, 
cash flow statements, and balance sheet as well as startup balance statements.
In the last section of the e-business plan, Implementation Timeline, 
the company should enumerate the steps it will take to make its proposal 
a reality and how long it will take to establish its Internet presence.
It is worthwhile to mention that a number of web sites may provide 
detailed information on how to develop an e-commerce business plan. 
Some of these web sites are listed in Table 2.5.
Web Site
Brief Description
myphliputil.pearsoncmg.com/student/
bp_turban_introec_1/TutIntro.html
Introduction to the e-business tutorial 
with details for each section of the plan
www.webpractices.com/ebizplans.htm
Contains a number of references to web 
sites with e-business plans
www.smallbusinesscomputing.com/
emarketing/article.php/3553126
Explains how to develop an e-business 
plan for a new e-commerce web site
www.bplans.com/eb
Provides general templates and software 
to develop an e-business plan
Table 2-5  Example of web sites with e-business plan information

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
35
2.4  Developing Technology Infrastructure 
for E-Commerce
The third step in the e-commerce development and implementation pro­
cess is concerned with selecting and installing technology infrastructure 
for the e-commerce project. The elements that are selected, installed, and 
maintained at this step are the following:
• Select a web host–make a decision of either outsourcing the 
web site development and location to a hosting company, 
or developing everything inside the company, or doing a 
combination of hosting and development
• Select development tools/software–identify the tools/software 
that will be used in developing the web site
• Register a domain name–select an appropriate domain name 
for the developed web site
• Design the web site-provide the logical and physical design 
of the web site including site layout, location of the site 
information, color schemes, graphics, etc.
• Construct the web site and test–use of a standalone or hosted 
software to construct the web site and test it.
We now discuss these elements in more detail.
Web Hosting
In general, web hosting is the business service of housing and maintain­
ing data files, audio, video, images, or any other content accessible via the 
Internet. A company can do self-hosting by acquiring all components of 
a web site including hardware, software, staff, and dedicated telecommu­
nications service. This is usually used by large and sometime by mid-size 
companies. However, the hosting is predominantly done by outsourcing 
some or all elements of the web site to a web-hosting organization.
The companies that do web hosting provide two types of hosting: 
pure hosting service or design-and-host service. The pure host service 
is usually done by Internet Service Providers (ISP) (see a list of those 
companies at www.thelist.com), which are organizations that offer 
customers access to the Internet and related services (see, for example, 

36	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
www.appsitehosting.com). Besides providing the Internet access, these 
organizations are also able to store customer data and web sites on shared 
or dedicated web servers. The customer uses the extranet access to these 
servers to login to a web site, and develop, modify or change data infor­
matiwon or web site design.
The pure host service can also provide mirror sites that duplicate the 
original web site, physically located on a web server, in different countries 
or even continents. In addition, the pure host service company can offer co-
location, in which case the customer purchases or leases a web server (with 
control over its operations), but the server is located in the hosting compa­
ny’s physical facility. The pure host service may be used by all kinds of com­
panies, but it is specifically useful for medium-size and large corporations, 
which generally have skilled staff available to design and create the web site.
By utilizing a pure host service strategy, a company that develops 
an e-commerce project can reduce the cost of acquiring Internet-based 
infrastructure and computer hardware for this project. In addition, the 
company can lower the cost of maintenance and service of the hardware, 
and better concentrate on its core competencies. However, the pure host 
service does not provide the software and development tools and environ­
ment to develop a web site. These should be purchased or outsourced in 
addition to the hosting service.
The second type of hosting service is design-and-host service. In 
this case, a hosting company, sometimes called storebuilder, provides 
full hosting service including not only disk space on a server for stor­
ing company’s data and web sites, but also software tools (templates) to 
design and develop web sites. The hosting company also provides cus­
tomer service and support, and timely upgrades to the hosted web sites. ­
Examples of the design-and-host service include the Microsoft’s Office 
Life (e-commerce Manager), eBay Stores, Yahoo! Merchant Solutions, 
and others. This particular service is most popular with small and me­
dium-size (SME) companies that would like to get a relatively simple and 
quick design and development of their web site.
E-commerce Software Selection
The selection of the e-commerce software environment is one of the 
­critical elements in e-commerce web site development. In practice, 

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
37
companies use several ways of acquiring this software. The software can 
be built from scratch by utilizing internal IT resources. In this case, the 
company designs software for e-commerce development using standard 
and universal programming languages like Java, JavaScript, C++, SQL, 
tools like Macromedia flash, and database programming tools, etc. While 
the tools are readily available with relatively low investments, the cost of 
designing and developing the e-commerce software internally could be 
quite significant. This option is ultimately used by large corporations for 
B2B and B2C e-commerce development.
A more common option in the software development is to use pack­
aged tools. In this case, a company purchases e-commerce software 
development tools from a vendor. These tools are used internally to de­
velop e-commerce web site. The examples of these solutions may include 
­Microsoft Commerce Server, IBM WebSphere, Oracle iStore , AbleCom­
merce, and many others. These vendor programming tools are effectively 
employed by a variety of large and mid-size companies that design and 
develop B2B and B2C e-commerce web sites.
Finally, a company may employ pre-built templates or, as we dis­
cussed in the previous section, design-and-host (storebuilder) services. 
The company may employ e-commerce templates for full design of the e-
commerce web site without additional programming. This is usually used 
by small companies for B2C e-commerce development.
To choose the best option of the e-commerce software, companies can 
employ Vendor Evaluation and Selection methodology. This methodol­
ogy is based on three phases. In the first one, Internal Needs Assessment, 
the company needs to establish the software requirements based on func­
tions and features that the company wants to have in a web site, which 
may be directly gathered from the e-business plan. Then the company 
needs to identify software vendor alternatives, i.e., software companies 
that should be considered for selection. To identify a set of prospective 
vendors, companies may use:
• Available industry public and private research on software 
vendors produced by e-commerce consulting firms like 
Gartner, AMR, Forrester, and others[7,8, and 9]
• Vendors’ web sites
• Vendor references (“word of mouth”).

38	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
Finally, at the Internal Needs Assessment phase, the company needs 
to establish and send to the prospective vendors Requests for Proposal 
(RFP). In the RFP, the company specifies the required functionality and 
capability of the software that it needs to acquire, and requests this infor­
mation, along with the associated cost, service and support guaranties, 
and other related information from each vendor.
At the second phase, Vendor Analysis, the company receives com­
pleted RFPs from prospective software vendors, and then performs a 
detailed analysis and comparison of vendors. The result of this analysis 
is the creation of a short-list of two to three finalists who will be con­
sidered further for the selection. At the third phase, Negotiation and 
Selection, the company prepares its negotiation strategy, develops critical 
terms and conditions for the contract, and then tries to negotiate with 
vendor finalists for the best contract terms. The negotiations process will 
allow the company to finalize the selection of the best software company 
for the e-commerce project. An effective selection methodology ensures 
that the project team outlines appropriate evaluation criteria, gathers the 
most objective industry data possible, and evaluates that information in 
a structured manner.
The analysis and comparison of different software alternatives is 
based on four primary criteria: Functionality, Cost, Service and Sup­
port, and Ability to Execute. The first criterion, Functionality, defines 
capabilities that the software contains to fulfill the customer’s needs in 
the development of the e-commerce web site. These capabilities depend 
on the type of developed web site (demand-side e-commerce, supply-
side e-commerce, c-commerce, etc.). For example, for the demand-side 
storefront, the functionality may include:
• Viewing and maintaining catalog information
• Pricing capabilities
• Customer outlining (interface with the customers’ e-commerce 
applications)
• Shopping cart (add, delete, and edit items in the shopping cart)
• Bidding capabilities for exchanges and auctions
• Order tracking capabilities

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
39
The second criterion is Cost, which should include not only the ini­
tial license costs, but also installation and maintenance costs, help and 
­support costs, ongoing education and training, and professional service 
such as customization and integration. The third criterion, Service and 
Support, defines quality of general support including the vendors’ prod­
uct installation capabilities, vendors’ service availability, quality, and 
timeliness of service and support. It also represents quality of professional 
services including business consulting skills, system integration, and proj­
ect management.
The fourth criterion, Ability to Execute, defines each vendor’s finan­
cial viability to provide long-term service for the company. The measure­
ments may include the vendor’s revenues, growth margins, earnings per 
share, and other fundamental financial ratios. It also defines technical 
execution—ability of the vendor to meet industry milestones like innova­
tive R&D capabilities in comparison to those of other vendors.
In addition to the four key criteria, the company may incorporate 
other criteria in software selection including development time, customer 
references, personal connections to the software vendor, existing partner­
ship with the vendor, and some others.
The importance of the four criteria and their ranking depend on the 
specific e-commerce project and the company’s need to emphasize spe­
cific development and implementation targets. Typically, however, the 
Functionality criterion represents up to 1/3 of the total criteria weight. 
Up to 33% of the total weight, is usually given to the Cost criterion, and 
the other two criteria (Service and Support, and Ability to Execute) together 
represent the remaining 1/3 of the total weight.
An example of criteria performance measurements for four software 
vendor alternatives is presented in Table 2.6.
From analyzing and comparing the table’s data, it becomes clear that 
different criteria may give preference to different alternatives. For example, 
the Functionality measurement identifies Vendor 4 to be the preferred, 
because it provides the highest number of applicable software options. At 
the same time, the Cost measurement points to Vendor 1 to be the best, 
because it offers the lowest cost of implementation. The Service and Sup­
port measurement clearly identifies Vendor 3 to be the best. Thus, it is hard 

40	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
Alternative
Functionality: 
Number of 
Applicable 
Options
Cost: Total 
Cost of 
Implementation
Service and 
Support: 
Service 
Availability
Service and 
Support: 
Quality 
of Support
Ability to 
Execute: 
Analystrating 
(1 Thru 5, 
1 Being 
the Best)
Vendor 1
  8
19,300
24/7
Mediocre
3.1
Vendor 2
12
22,500
10/5
Good
3.5
Vendor 3
14
29,950
12/6
Excellent
2.1
Vendor 4
15
27,500
24/7
Very good
2.7
Table 2.6  Example of alternatives and measurements
to make a selection decision based on separate criteria. In addition, each 
criterion has different units of measurement (number of options vs. dollars 
of cost vs. available times, etc.).
To overcome this problem, we need to identify an integrated mea­
sure for each alternative, which combines all criteria with their respective 
weights. We also need to normalize the otherwise different measurements 
by ranking vendors within each criterion. The method that can be used 
in this case is referred to as the Weighted Score method or Factor Rating 
method. It involves the following steps:
	 1.	 Choose vendor alternatives.
	 2.	 Identify criteria/factors and their measurement.
	 3.	 Develop factors’ weights–Wi for each i-th criteria measurements 
(i51...k). The sum of all weights should be equal to 1.0 or 100%.
	 4.	 Estimate criteria/factor ratings–Fij for each vendor alternative 
j (j51...n). The ratings should have the same range spread for all fac­
tors, for example from 1 to 10, or from 0 to 100.
	 5.	 Determine integrated weighted score (TWR) for each alternative:
TWRj = Σ (Wi*Fij)
	 6.	 Choose the alternative with the largest total weighted score (maxi­
mum TWR).
Let us show how this method works using the data in Table 2.6. 
­According to this table, we have identified four software vendor alternatives 

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
41
from Vendor 1 through Vendor 4, and five measurements. This completes 
Steps 1 and 2 of the Weighted Score method.
According to Step 3, we need to establish measurement weights. As 
we discussed, the first two measurements (Functionality and Cost), are 
each assigned 30% (0.3) of the total weight. The Availability weight is 
the next in importance measurement, and we assign 20% (0.2) of the 
total weight to this criterion. Finally, the remaining two measurements 
­(Quality of Service and Ability to Execute) will each be assigned a weight 
of 10% (0.1) (see Table 2.7). The total weight of all criteria is 100%. The 
weights, however, have been assigned subjectively, and may require more 
attention and possible reevaluation in the future.
Step 4 of the method requires providing factor ratings based on ranging 
each criterion on a normalized scale. Let us establish this scale of ratings 
from 0 to 100, where the rating of 0 represents the worst outcome, and 
the rating of 100 represents the best outcome. Thus, for the Functionality 
measurement, the rating of 100 will be assigned to Vendor 4, which has 
the best functionality of 15, and the rating of 0 will be assigned to Vendor 
1, which has the lowest functionality of 8. The spread then will be 7 units 
(15-8) and 100 points of rating (100-0). Vendors’ 2 and 3 ratings will be 
somewhere in between 0 and 100. For Vendor 2, the associated Function­
ality rating will be (see Table 2.7):
(100/7)*(12-8) = 57.14
For Vendor 3, the associated Functionality rating will be (see Table 2-7):
(100/7)*(14-8) = 85.71
Similar calculations can be done for the Cost measurement. However, 
in this case, the best outcome with a rating of 100 will belong to Vendor 
1 with the lowest cost, and the worst outcome with the rating of 0-to 
Vendor 4 with the highest cost.
For Vendor 3, we converted weekly availability to weekly hours for 
each Vendor. Thus, Vendors 1 and 4, each with availability of 168 hrs 
(24*7), Vendor 2, with availability of 50 hrs (10*5), and for Vendor 3, 
which has an availability of 72 hrs (12*6).
For the Quality of Service measurement, we need to convert quali­
tative attributes into measurable units. For this, we use a 5-unit scale, 

Weight
0.30
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.10
1.00
Functionality
Cost
Availability
Quality of Service
Ability to Execute
Weighted
Orig.
Rating
Orig.
Rating
Orig.
Rating
Orig.
Rating
Orig.
Rating
Score
Vendor 1
  8
    0.00
19,300
100.00
168
100.00
2
    0.00
3.1
  28.57
52.86
Vendor 2
12
  57.14
22,500
  69.95
  50
    0.00
3
  33.33
3.5
    0.00
41.46
Vendor 3
14
  85.71
29,950
    0.00
  72
  18.64
5
100.00
2.1
100.00
49.44
Vendor 4
15
100.00
27,500
  23.00
168
100.00
4
  66.67
2.7
  57.14
69.28
Table 2.7  Example of weighted score method
42	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E COMMERCE SYSTEM

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
43
where “Excellent” is defined as 5 points, “Very Good” = 4, “Good” = 3, 
“Mediocre” = 2, and “Poor” = 1. The scores are entered in Table 2.7, and 
then respective ratings are estimated. The table seems inconsistent with 
the explanation here.
Finally, we can estimate the integrated weighted score for each vendor 
alternative. For example, for Vendor 1:
TWR1 = Σ (Wi*Fi1) = 0.3*0 + 0.3*100 + 0.2*100 
+ 0.1*0 + 0.1*28.57 = 52.86.
The same calculations have been done for other three alternatives. As 
can be seen the best alternative is Vendor 4. The second best is Vendor 1. 
These two vendors may be considered for further considerations and con­
tract negotiations at Phase 3 of the software selection.
Domain Name
A Domain name is a unique name within the Internet space, and identi­
fies an Internet web site. Domain names have two or more parts, sepa­
rated by periods (dots). For example, www.microsoft.com is a domain 
name for Microsoft Corporation web site. On the web, the domain name 
is a part of the Uniform Resource Locator (URL) that tells a domain 
name server using the Domain Name System (DNS) whether and where 
to forward a request for a web site. The domain name is mapped to an 
IP (Internet Protocols) address, which represents a unique physical re­
source on the Internet.
More than one domain name can be mapped to the same Internet 
address. This allows multiple individuals, businesses, and organizations 
to have separate Internet identities while sharing the same Internet server. 
Every domain name has a suffix that indicates the top-level domain 
(TLD) to which it belongs. There are only a limited number of such do­
mains, which either represent the type of organization to which the web 
site belongs or the country where the web site is located. For example, 
.com means a commercial web site; .edu represents an educational insti­
tution; .gov points to a US government agency; .mil is a U.S. military 
TLD; .net usually stands for a network organization; and .org usually 

44	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
represents a nonprofit organization. Country TLDs are, for example, .us 
for the United States, .de for Germany, .jp for Japan and .tv for Tuvalu. 
Other newer TLDs are .info, .biz, etc.
To register and start using a domain name for a web site, a com­
pany needs to use the services of a Domain Name Registrar. The domain 
name industry is regulated and overseen by ICANN, the organization 
that is responsible for certifying companies as domain name registrars. 
To register a domain name, a variety of accredited registrars may be used. 
Some of the popular domain registrar web sites are: www.alldomains.
com, www.directnic.com, www.godaddy.com, www.nameboy.com, and 
www.aboutdomains.com.
The chosen registrar will determine the annual cost of registering a 
domain name. Some registrars will offer discounts if the registration lasts 
for more than one year or if the web site for which the domain name was 
acquired is hosted at a site affiliatd with the registrar. However, no reg­
istrar has the authority to sell more than a 10-year registration contract 
for any domain name. The registrar will ask to provide some contact and 
technical information to have on record. This information is stored in a 
registry, which other computers can access to find information on the 
registered web site. The most popular destination for such queries is the 
InterNIC (Internet Network Information Center) site, www.internic.net.
Web Site Design, Construction and Testing
The web site design should start with the site design specifications. A 
well-written site design specification is a powerful daily tool for judging 
the effectiveness of a development effort. It provides the team with direc­
tions of how to keep the development process focused on the ultimate 
purposes of the site. As such, it quickly becomes a daily reference point 
to settle disputes, to judge the potential utility of new ideas as they arise, 
to measure progress, and to keep the development team focused on the 
ultimate goals. At a minimum, a good site specification should define the 
content scope, budget, schedule, and technical aspects of the web site. 
The best site specifications are short and to the point, and are often just 
outlines or bullet lists of the major design or technical features planned. 
The finished site specification should contain the goals statement from the 

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
45
planning phase, as well as the structural details of the web site. A detailed 
description of the web site design can be found in www.webstyleguide
.com, www.websitetips.com or www.web-source.net.
System design specification can be broken down into two parts:
• Logical design represents a dataflow diagram (blueprint) that 
describes the flow of information at the site, processing functions 
that must be performed, and databases that will be used (see 
Figure 2.2) It may also contain descriptions of the security and 
emergency backup systems, and controls that will be used.
• Physical design also translates the logical design into 
physical components. Physical components may include: 
(a) a database with product catalog; (b) customer and order 
information; e-commerce software system with web design 
tools; (c) advertisement and e-mail servers; and (d) networking 
elements (web server, internet service provider, security, 
firewalls, etc.). The web site physical design can be also done in 
the form of a flowchart diagram.
The site design specifications are directly used for the site design 
step, at which the web site project acquires its look and feel, as the page 
grid, page design, and overall graphic design standards are created and ap­
proved. Now the illustrations, photography, and other graphic or audiovi­
sual content for the site need to be commissioned and created. Research, 
writing, organizing, assembling, and editing the site’s initial text content 
is also performed at this stage. Any programming, database design, data 
entry, and search engine design should be well under way by this point. 
The goal is to produce all the content components and functional pro­
gramming and have them ready for the final production stage: the con­
struction of the actual web site pages.
The construction of the web site is the final step in creating a web 
site. At this step, all elements of the site design are connected together 
in a functional web site. The results of web construction should include:
• Finished HTML for all web pages
• All page content is in place

46	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
Login
Register
Configure
Search
Browse
Home 
Get Help
Ordering
Direct
Logout
Select
Pay
Product
Search 
Add to
Cart
Figure 2.2  Examples of logical design blueprint
• Finished navigation link structure
• All programming in place and linked to pages, ready for testing
• All database components in place and linked to site pages
• All graphic design, illustration, and photography in place
• Final proofreading of all site content
• Detailed testing of database and programming functionality
• Testing and verification of database reporting features
• Testing of web site’s support procedures, answering e-mail, etc.
• Archives of all site content components, HTML code, 
programming code, and any other site development materials.
Once the site has been constructed with all pages completed, and all 
database and programming components linked, it is ready for testing. 
Testing should be done primarily by quality assurance (QA) specialists 
outside of the site development team. The QA specialists must be willing 
to supply informed criticism and report programming bugs, typographi­
cal errors, and review the overall design and effectiveness of the site. The 
QA specialists will inevitably notice things that the development team 
has overlooked.
Overall, the web site testing process may include several types of 
testing. Unit Testing involves testing program modules one-at-a-time, 
using a variety of factors[10] (see Table 2.8). System testing provides 
evaluation of the web site as a whole, in the same way a typical user 
would be using the site. Acceptance testing requires that the firm’s key 
personnel (marketing, finance, operations) use the site on a test Internet 
or ­Extranet sever.

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
47
Factor
Description
Functionality
Pages that work, load quickly, and point the customer 
toward product offerings
Informational
Links that customers can easily find to discover more 
about products
Ease of use
Simple foolproof navigation
Redundant navigation
Alternative navigation to the same content
Ease if purchase
One or two clicks to purchase
Multi-browser functionality
Site works with the most popular browsers
Simple graphics
Avoid distracting, obnoxious graphics and sounds that 
the user cannot control
Legible text
Avoid backgrounds that distort text or make it illegible
Table 2.8  Factors for successful web site design[10]
While doing testing, the specialists need to pay attention to specific 
features of the web site that may annoy the customers, for example:
• Links that cause error reports
• Pages that are too slow to load
• Forced to download plug-ins
• Site times out
• Poorly named links
• Poor navigation design leading to too many clicks
• Crowded layout
• No skip button at introduction if user is greeted by animation
• No search engine
• Confusing layout
• No site map for navigation reference
2.5  E-Commerce Implementation 
Measurements
The purpose of measuring e-commerce implementation is to get support 
for the continuation of the e-commerce project, measure the progress of 
work on the project, and determine whether the expected benefits were 
achieved from investments in the e-commerce project. The measurements 

48	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
should reflect the value proposition of the designed e-commerce project, 
and need to reflect monetary and non-monetary results of e-commerce. 
These results can be clustered into five main groups:
• Revenue and Profit
• Cost Reduction
• Customer and Supplier Satisfaction
• Web Site Development
• Web Site Performance
Performance indicators for each group are presented in Table 2.9.
Group of Measurement
Performance Indicators
Revenue and Profit
Gross revenue generated by the web
Profits from web sales
Comparative costs of web versus traditional business
Return on investments
Cost Reduction
Operational cost of production use
Cost to maintain, enhance, and support the system
Direct staff cost
Management cost
Overhead cost
Customer and Supplier 
Satisfaction
Average time of using the web site 
Number of customers/suppliers using the web
Number and percentage of repeat customers
Number of customer complaints per unit time
Web Site Development
Ease of navigation around the web
Amount of information available 
Number of products or services available
Flexibility in handling change
Web Site Performance
System response time
System throughput—volume of work per unit time
Downtime and time to repair or recover
Number of simultaneous users in the system
Availability of systems and technology for work
Table 2.9  Performance indicators of E-commerce[10]

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
49
2.6  Chapter 2 Summary: Managerial Aspects 
of E-Commerce Development 
and Implementation
	 1.	 The first step of e-commerce development and implementation is 
to identify the e-commerce business model. This is a critical step in 
the overall e-commerce development process because it establishes 
a strategic vision and, to some extent, guides the long-term deci­
sions of what the e-commerce system should be, how it is going to 
perform, and what specific e-commerce models need to be imple­
mented. At this step, a company needs to establish the five main 
components of the e-commerce business model. These are the value 
proposition, e-commerce offerings (value-added activities), support­
ing resources, revenue and cost models, and value creation (expected 
benefits).
	 2.	 Based on the established e-commerce model components, the com­
pany may develop and evaluate several alternative e-commerce 
models selected from demand-side or supply-side e-commerce, 
c-commerce, m-commerce, e-services, etc. Then, the company needs 
to compare these alternatives using qualitative and quantitative mea­
surements, for example, ROI analysis. Finally, the company identi­
fies the best e-commerce model or models to be developed.
	 3.	 The second step of e-commerce development and implementation 
is to design an e-commerce business plan or e-business plan. The 
goal is to create a detailed written document that will explain how 
the company intends to achieve its e-commerce goals and fulfill the 
strategy formulated in the previous step.
	 4.	 An e-business plan should include a business description (mis­
sion statement, business goals, project objective) of the proposed 
e-commerce implementation, along with market and competitor 
analyses. It should also contain operations decisions and financial 
statements associated with projected costs (cost of ownership) and 
benefits (revenue/profits and ROI).
	 5.	 The third step of e-commerce development and implementation in­
volves developing the technology infrastructure for e-commerce, 
which in most cases ends up being the creation of the e-commerce 

50	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
web site. This web site contains all features and elements necessary to 
fulfill the main strategic vision and strategic goals of the developed 
e-commerce model(s).
	 6.	 The development of the technological infrastructure includes 
selecting a company that will be hosting the web site (internally 
or externally), identifying the best development software for the 
e-commerce models under development, and registering a domain 
name. This step can also involve creating and managing web site 
content, constructing and testing the web site, and marketing and 
promoting the web site. In addition, the company needs to identify 
the performance measurements for utilizing the web site for e-com­
merce implementation.
	 7.	 The selection of the e-commerce software environment is one of the 
critical elements in e-commerce web site development. In practice, 
companies use several ways of acquiring this software. The software 
can be built from scratch by utilizing internal IT resources. It can 
be created using packaged tools form a vendor (IBM, Oracle, etc.), 
or a company may employ vendor’s pre-built templates that do not 
require additional programming.
	 8.	 To choose the best option of the e-commerce software, companies 
can employ Vendor Evaluation and Selection methodology that is 
based on three phases: Internal Needs Assessment for establishing 
the software requirements, Vendor Analysis for creating a short-list 
of two-three finalists that will be considered further for the selec­
tion, and, finally, Negotiation and Selection for negotiating with 
vendor finalists for the best contract terms. The negotiations process 
will allow the company to finalize the selection of the best software 
company for the e-commerce project.
	 9.	 The analysis and comparison of different software alternatives should 
be based on four primary criteria: Functionality, Cost, Service and 
Support, and Ability to Execute. The Weighted Score method may 
be used to identify an integrated measure for each alternative, which 
combines all criteria with their respective weights. This method also 
normalizes the otherwise different measurements by ranking vendors 
within each criterion.

	
How to Develop and Implement E-Commerce	
51
	10.	 The last (but certainly not the least) step in the e-commerce develop­
ment and implementation includes actual implementation and fol­
low-up. This step involves creating an e-commerce implementation 
strategy. The strategy describes the long-term decisions necessary to 
successfully introduce and sustain the new e-commerce model(s). 
This may include marketing of the web site, sales promotions, cus­
tomer service and support, web site maintenance, and other deci­
sions. All these aspects of the implementation strategy would be 
specified in the implementation plan.
	11.	 Upon implementing new or improved e-commerce models, com­
panies would have to follow up on the implementation results. The 
company will collect customer feedback and measure implementa­
tion results based on the performance measurements introduced in 
the previous step. This may potentially lead to changes in the current 
online procedures and workflows.
	12.	 The purpose measuring e-commerce implementation is to get sup­
port for the continuation of an e-commerce project, measure the 
progress of work on the project, and determine whether the expected 
benefits are achieved from investments in the e-commerce project. 
The measurements should reflect the value proposition of the de­
signed e-commerce project, and need to reflect monetary and non-
monetary results of e-commerce. These results can be clustered into 
five main groups: revenue/profit, Cost reduction, customer and sup­
plier satisfaction, web site development, and web site performance.
References
	 1.	 “ATW Toasts the Industry’s Top Performers at the Annual Awards 
Dinner Gala in Singapore,” Air Transport World, April 2006, p.63.
	 2.	 Cathay Pacific Airways, “About Us: Annual Report 2005,” May 30, 
2006, retrieved from www.cathaypacific.com.
	 3.	 United Airlines, “2005 Annual Report,” May 22, 2006, retrieved 
from www.unitedairlines.com.
	 4.	 Emirates Airline, “About Us: Annual Report 2005,” May 22, 2006, 
retrieved from www.emirates.com.

52	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
	 5.	 British Airways, “British Airways Fact Book 2006,” May 19, 2006, 
retrieved from www.britishairways.com.
	 6.	 Singapore Airlines, “About Us: Annual Report 2005,” May 20, 
2006, retrieved from www.singaporeair.com.
	 7.	 AMR Research, “IT Spending Overview, 2004-2005: Liberate Funds 
from IT Operations to Invest in Technology That Addresses Cus­
tomer Demands,” October 1, 2004, retrieved from www.amrresearch
.com.
 8. Alvarez, Gene, “Magic Quadrant for e-commerce, 4Q06,” February 
8, 2007, Gartner Research, retrieved from www.gartner.com.
	 9.	 Mirabito, Bill, “Outsourcing eCommerce With Fewer Options,” 
Forrester Research, September 17, 2007, retrieved from www.forrester
.com.
	10.	 Laudon, K. and C.G. Traver, e-commerce: Business, Technology, Soci­
ety, 2nd Edition, Pearson Addison-Wesley, 2003, p.232.

CHAPTER 3
Management and ERP 
Systems
3.1  What is Enterprise Resource Planning?
Defining ERP
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems and their implementation 
are one of the most important issues in information technology (IT) busi­
ness today. These computer-based systems provide integration of all func­
tions inside an organization and automation of business-related processes. 
ERP also serves as a backbone of the modern e-commerce systems. ERP 
systems experienced a significant growth in sales in the last decade of the 
20th century. They will continue to be one of the largest, fast-growing, 
and most influential players in the IT field well into the new millennium. 
According to AMR Research, the ERP market grew to $25.4 billion in 
2005 with a forecast of $29 billion in 2006. In 2006–2010, the market 
will grow at an average of 10% per year[1].
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) is defined as an integrated 
computer-based system that manages internal and external organization 
resources. These resources include tangible assets, financial resources, ma­
terials, and human resources. At the same time, ERP is an application and 
software architecture that facilitates information flows between various 
business functions inside and outside an organization and, as such, is an 
enterprise-wide information system. Using a centralized database and op­
erating on a common computing platform, ERP consolidates all business 
operations into a uniform system environment.
The word “enterprise” in the ERP name represents the fact that this 
system integrates and automates processes within an entire organization 

54	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
regardless of the organization’s nature. In fact, ERP systems have been 
implemented in manufacturing, distribution, transportation, education, 
healthcare, banking, and other industries. The word “resource” in the 
ERP name reflects the system’s intention to rationalize the usage of an 
organization’s resources. Finally, the word “planning” describes one of the 
main functions of resource management, i.e., planning resources through 
a variety of business processes.
Introduced in the early 1990s, the term “ERP” does not reflect the 
real capabilities of the system it represents. First, ERP systems provide 
not only planning but also other management functions such as organiz­
ing, controlling, scheduling, reporting, and analyzing business processes. 
Second, a traditional approach to ERP considers it a “back-end” com­
puterized system for managing the internal resources of an organization. 
However, the ERP has crossed the boundaries of being just a system for 
planning internal resources. It may often contain “front-end” applications 
of managing customers and improving customer satisfaction—customer 
relationship management (CRM); collaborating with suppliers through 
applications of supply chain management (SCM); and utilizing business-
to-business (B2B) e-commerce. As such, this integrated system combines 
external (front-end) and internal (back-end) business applications and 
should be defined as an extended enterprise management system or ex­
tended ERP system (see Figure 3.1).
Back End
Applications 
Finance and  
Accounting 
Human Resources
Manufacturing 
Distribution 
Marketing 
Front End
Applications
Customer  
Relationship 
Management 
E-Marketing 
E-Selling  
E-Service 
Front End
Applications
Supply Chain 
Management 
E-Procurement 
Supplier Selection 
Supplier  
Relationship  
Management 
Customer 
Supplier 
Supplier 
Supplier 
Supplier 
Customer 
Customer 
Customer 
Customer 
ERP APPLICATIONS 
EXTENDED ENTERPRISE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
Figure 3.1  General ERP structure

	
Management and ERP Systems	
55
As the original term “ERP” does not fully describe existing integrated 
solutions, many ERP software vendors avoid using this term to repre­
sent their extended enterprise management systems. For example, these 
systems are called “Total Integrated Solutions,” “E-Business Platform,” 
“E-Business Suite,” etc. Regardless, the term “ERP” or “ERP system” con­
tinues to be the most popular term to describe a suite of integrated ap­
plications of an extended enterprise management system.
History of Evolution
ERP systems have almost a 40-year history of evolution. Understanding 
this evolution is important for comprehending current ERP systems and 
seeing perspectives of their future development. The idea of integrating 
and automating business processes utilizing computer programs was first 
introduced in the late 1960s and early 1970s with the development of 
Material Requirements Planning (MRP). This coincided with the time 
when manufacturing companies started to employ extensively computers, 
specifically mainframes and minicomputers, in business and management 
decisions. MRP is an integrated computer-based system for calculating 
material and delivery schedules. It combines inventory management, ma­
terials planning, capacity planning, purchasing, and distribution. Later 
MRP systems also generated purchase orders to suppliers and work sched­
ules for internal production.
The next major step in the evolution of ERP was the development 
in the early to mid-1980s of a new breed of integrated systems called 
Manufacturing Resource Planning (MRP II). This system fully inte­
grated materials and capacity planning with distribution planning, sale 
ordering, marketing, finance/accounting, and human resources. Besides 
planning material and capacity resources, MRP II integrated inven­
tory with financial/accounting transactions, sales orders with materi­
als planning and accounting/finance transactions, marketing and sales 
analysis with demand forecasting, etc. All inputs and outputs, analysis, 
and reporting were based on one centralized database system. MRP II 
was very popular and widely utilized by a variety of large and midsize 
companies that employed predominately mainframe and minicomputer 
technology.

56	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
Modern ERP systems were established in the early 1990s. This coin­
cided with the proliferation of personal computers, which replaced the 
old mainframe capabilities with the new client-server technology. Con­
sidered as an advanced MRP II system, modern ERP has several major 
differences from MRP II systems. These differences include: utilization 
of the client-server technology and its ability to run on personal comput­
ers (clients) and powerful servers utilizing multiple operating platforms 
(Unix, NT, etc.); advent of ERP into non-manufacturing companies 
(“enterprise” rather than “manufacturing” resource planning); and inte­
gration of MRP II applications with new business processes like supply 
chain management and customer relationship management. In the mid- 
and late 1990s, a large number of companies converted their existing 
computer systems to ERP.
The latest evolution of ERP systems started at the end of the 1990s 
with the introduction of Internet-enabled ERP systems. This introduction 
correlated again with major changes in IT systems that were signified by 
the Internet and e-commerce revolution. The new systems were charac­
terized by internet-enabled ERP architecture; new front-end e-commerce 
Applications Server
ERP Application Modules 
Database Server
Relational Database with 
ERP Records 
Web Browsers 
Client PCs 
Internet
Figure 3.2  Typical architecture of web-enabled ERP systems

	
Management and ERP Systems	
57
solutions; easy access to the system by employees, customers, and sup­
pliers; collaborative planning and scheduling; and optimized operations, 
finance, and marketing decisions.
ERP and E-commerce
The majority of modern ERP systems are fully internet-enabled systems. 
This means that communication between a server where an ERP system 
is installed and many clients (end-user PCs) is done through the Internet.
An ERP system may comprise three main tiers: clients, applications 
server, and database server (see Figure 3.2). Clients are end-users that 
connect to the system via internet browsers. An applications server incor­
porates a Web server, forms, system tools, and a variety of ERP programs. 
A database server includes a relational database with ERP records. Some 
ERP systems have been developed with separate applications and Web 
servers, which would define them as four-tier systems (clients, Web server, 
applications server, and database server).
ERP systems are considered a backbone of e-commerce solutions. 
Successful utilization of the “front-end” e-commerce solutions is un­
imaginable without strong support by and cooperation with the inter­
nal “back-end” computer systems. In fact, many ERP vendors combine 
ERP applications and e-commerce solutions in one integrated computer 
system.
3.2  ERP Principles, Features, and Classification
Main ERP Principles
In many respects, ERP is a result of modern organizations’ efforts in de­
signing management information systems. Various processes of an or­
ganization have to be linked together so that whenever a change in an 
external or internal process takes place, the company is able to adjust all 
other related processes immediately and effectively. ERP systems enable 
this to happen, not only at the information systems level but also at the 
applications level, by utilizing certain principles and features. The two 
main ERP principles are integration and automation.

58	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
ERP integration is based upon:
• A single logical database system operating on a common 
computing platform. All ERP applications would input 
data and retrieve information from the same database and 
all employees would have the same point of access to get 
necessary information
• An integrated set of commonly designed business applications 
including manufacturing, distribution, marketing, accounting, 
finance, and human resources. This set consolidates all business 
processes into a uniform system environment
• Integration between internal company applications and 
external applications for accessing customers and suppliers.
ERP automation represents the ability of an ERP system to automati­
cally process business transactions and information between different 
processes and functions inside an organization, as well as between this 
organization and its customers and suppliers. The elements of ERP au­
tomation are:
• Automated business transactions. For example, these can 
include calculation of production and material schedules, 
demand forecasts, inventory levels, and production costs.
• Automatic information sharing between numerous 
organization functions. Data created in one application 
become available to other related applications. For example, 
a new employee input made in a human resources module 
may be available in other applications like purchasing and 
marketing, which utilize this employee information.
• Automated recording, monitoring, and reporting of the data 
generated in ERP.
ERP Features
One of the most important ERP features is that it is a process-driven 
system. In contrast to individual and function-driven computer applica­
tions in marketing, finance, or operations, an ERP system integrates these 

	
Management and ERP Systems	
59
functions into a variety of computer-based processes. They represent real 
business processes that companies apply to managing resources, working 
with customers and suppliers, etc. In general, an ERP system may include 
a variety of business processes like:
• Order fulfillment
• Production planning and scheduling
• Capacity planning
• Outsourcing materials from suppliers (purchasing)
• Shipping products to the customers
• Product costing, payments, and receipts
• Managing customers
• Selecting and managing suppliers.
Some of these processes are interrelated and dependent on one an­
other (see Figure 3.3). Integrating these business processes into a com­
pany’s ERP system provides the necessary environment for running the 
company in real time with all functions being interoperable in the system.
Other features of ERP systems include:
• A relational database that integrates all data inputs, 
transactions, and outputs of ERP systems. This can substantially 
reduce or even eliminate inaccuracy and inconsistency of 
records that might have existed in separate individual databases. 
Sales and
Internal
Orders
Forecast
Including
Orders
Master
Production
Schedule
Material
Requirements
Plan
Purchase
Requisitions
Shop-Floor
Production
Orders
Capacity
Requirements
Rough-cut
Capacity
Plan  
Capacity
Adjustments
Capacity
Requirements
Plan
Capacity
Adjustments
Purchase
Requisitions
Supplier
Selection
Purchase
Orders 
Supply Status
Checking
Supply
Received and
Verif ied 
Paying
Supplier
Customer
Information
& Contacts
Customer
Orders
Finished
Goods
Inventory
Shipment
Customer
Billing and
Payment 
Order Fulﬁllment 
Production Planning 
Capacity Planning 
Purchasing 
Figure 3.3: Example of interrelated ERP processes

60	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
The Oracle database is the most popular relational database 
used in ERP systems.
• On-Line Transaction Processing (OLTP), which is an ERP 
operational system for collecting and managing the basic data 
in an organization, such as sales, order processing, inventory, 
accounts payable, accounts receivable, and other important 
transactional data.
• Company-wide access to information from a relational 
database. Transactions that are taking place in each ERP-driven 
business process may be visible, in principle, to anyone in an 
organization. In practice, however, the level of an employee’s 
visibility of and access to ERP processes depends on the 
employee’s role (responsibilities) in the company.
• Multiple simultaneous accesses to the ERP system by many 
users and in various locations. This feature may be used by 
a company that has multiple domestic and international 
locations/divisions and wants to integrate all business 
functions into one computer system. This feature also enables 
fast and reliable information sharing among different parts 
of the company. The ERP On-Line Analytical Processing 
(OLAP) provides the ability to access, present and analyze 
database records across several dimensions like time, place, and 
product line. OLAP also serves as a foundation of the business 
intelligence module in ERP (Motiwalla and Thompson, 2008).
• Scalability, which means that an ERP system provides adequate 
capabilities in the situation where the total number of users of the 
system is growing. This may be due to the company’s expansion 
or to its merger with or acquisition of another company. A 
scalable ERP system should also accommodate a growing 
number of users and applications without jeopardizing the speed 
of transactions or the performance of the entire system.
• From a technical standpoint, ERP systems should be flexible 
enough to run on various implementation platforms and 
operating systems like Unix, Linux, and Windows.
• Internet-enabled architecture of ERP systems (see Figure 3.2).

	
Management and ERP Systems	
61
Table 3.1  Groups and categories of ERP applications
Core 
Applications
Applications’ 
Enhancements 
Business 
Intelligence
Application 
E-commerce
Supply Chain
Management
(SCM) Group
• Inventory
• Supply Chain 
Planning
• Materials 
Requirements 
Planning
• Capacity 
Requirements 
Planning
• Shop Floor 
Management
• Warehouse 
Management
• Purchasing
• Quality 
Management
• Manufacturing 
Intelligence 
(Analytics)
• Advanced 
Planning and 
Scheduling
• Supply Chain 
Intelligence 
(Analytics)
• Supplier 
Relationship 
Management
• Electronic 
Storefront
• E-Procurement
• E-Supplier Portals
• Private Exchange
• Online Auction
• Collaborative 
Supply Chain
• E-Design
• Mobile Supply 
Chain Commerce
Financial
Management
Group
• General Ledger
• Accounts 
Receivable
• Accounts 
Payable
• Asset 
Management
• Cash 
Management
• Activity-based 
Costing
• Property 
Management
• Treasury 
Management
• Financial 
Intelligence 
(Analytics)
• Balanced 
Scorecard
• E-Expenses
• E-Receivables
• E-Payment
Human 
Resources 
Management 
(HRM) Group
• Personnel 
Administration
• Payroll
• Employee 
Benefits and 
Compensations
• Time 
Management
• Training 
Administration
• Human 
Resources 
Intelligence 
(Analytics)
• Organizational 
Development
• Self-Service 
Human Resources
• E-Recruitment
• E-Learning
• HR-Centric 
Web Portal
• Information 
Collaboration
• Mobile Commerce
(Continued)

62	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
Table 3.1  (Continued)
Core 
Applications
Applications’ 
Enhancements 
Business 
Intelligence
Application 
E-commerce
Customer 
Relationship 
Management 
(CRM) Group
• Order 
Management
• Product 
Configuration
• Order Fulfillment
• Customer 
Management
• Service 
Management
• Marketing
• Sales
• Field Customer 
Service
• Marketing 
Intelligence 
(Analytics)
• Service 
Intelligence 
(Analytics)
• Advanced 
Demand 
Management
• Customer 
Interaction Center 
(Call Center)
• E-Marketing
• E-Selling
• E-Fulfillment
• E-Service
• Mobile Sales
Product 
Lifecycle 
Management 
(PLM) Group
• Product Data 
Management
• Direct Material 
Sourcing
• Customer Needs 
Management
• Project 
Management
• Quality 
Management
• New Product 
Design and 
Development 
Analytics
• Knowledge 
Management
• E-design
• Collaborative 
Product 
Commerce
• Collaborative 
Product Design
Classification of ERP Applications
The ERP applications can be classified according to four main dimensions:
• Groups of applications
• Categories of applications
• Industry applications (vertical integration)
• Customer size (large, medium-size, and small companies )
In addition, The ERP system can be clustered into five groups of 
applications (see Table 3.1):
• Supply Chain Management (SCM)
• Financial Management or Financials

	
Management and ERP Systems	
63
• Human Resource Management (HRM)
• Customer Relationships Management (CRM)
• Product Lifecycle Management (PLM).
The Supply Chain management (SCM) group is associated with the 
applications of planning, scheduling, executing, monitoring, and report­
ing material and information flows from suppliers to a manufacturing/
service organization, then managing and executing production in this 
organization, and finally distributing finished products to the custom­
ers. Financial Management (Financials) is another major group that 
includes accounting and financial applications, as well as applications to 
analyze and optimize market forecasts, credit risk of new contracts, cash 
flow and liquidity, financial portfolio, and market risk.
The Human Resource Management (HRM) group of applications 
is capable of performing a variety of human resources functionalities, i.e. 
maintaining employee records, recruitment, payroll, administration, com­
pensations and benefits, education and training, employee self-service, etc. 
The Customer Relationship Management (CRM) group of applications 
includes a set of applications related to customer interactions with the 
company, managing customers’ demands and orders, and improving cus­
tomer satisfaction. Finally, the Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) 
group is a relatively new group of ERP applications used to provide infor­
mation, planning, and analysis of product lifecycle processes including 
research and development, product introduction, product service and 
support, and end-of-life processes.
Within each group, the ERP system may be clustered into three cat­
egories of applications (see Table 3.1):
• Core applications are comprised of traditional applications 
of business and management existing in current as well old 
versions of ERP software. These applications mainly perform 
transaction processing, data entry, planning, scheduling, 
executing and monitoring processes, and reporting.
• Applications’ enhancements/business intelligence is a set 
of applications, which has analytical, and decision-support 
nature. They are added to the core applications mainly to 

64	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
perform measurement and analytical functions, forecasting, 
advanced planning and scheduling, and optimized decision-
making in order to enhance business decisions and processes 
in each ERP group.
• E-commerce applications are comprised of various 
applications of B2B and B2C e-commerce that have 
capabilities to perform collaborative commerce; buy/sell and 
outsource products and services; communicate, share and/or 
exchange information with employees, customers, suppliers, 
partners, manufacturers, or distributors.
These categories enable to see a variety of application offerings within 
each ERP group in a structured and systemized manner. In addition, the 
ERP categories systemize traditional and modern applications of ERP, 
like those of intelligence/analytical nature and B2B e-commerce solu­
tions. In general, the introduced classification enables standardization of 
the existing ERP systems. It can also serve as a basis for comparison of 
various ERP systems. The groups and categories of the ERP system form a 
matrix with various applications that may be used in ERP (see Table 3.1).
The third dimension of the established ERP classification is indus­
try applications (vertical integration). This implies customization of 
ERP systems for specific industries. Today, top-ranked ERP vendors have 
vertically customized their systems toward a variety of industries. Fore 
example, SAP established customized solutions for more than 25 differ­
ent industries that include Aerospace and Defense, Automotive, Bank­
ing, Chemical, Consumer Products, Engineering and Construction, 
Healthcare and some others. Each industry-related ERP system contains 
industry specific applications, for example, Profit Management and Risk 
Management applications for banks or Healthcare E-business Applica­
tions for the healthcare industry. Besides, an industry-related system may 
also include standardized ERP applications like Accounting/Finance, 
CRM, Human Resources, and others relevant to that industry.
The fourth classification dimension is customer size for which ERP 
applications are developed. According to this dimension, the ERP systems 
are grouped into groups of applications for large, middle-size and small 
companies. Oracle has introduced, along with its well-known E-Business 

	
Management and ERP Systems	
65
Suite, an integrated set of applications for middle size and small com­
panies. This system consists of less comprehensive but still versatile set 
of ERP applications including Accounting, Customer Support Manage­
ment, Employee Expenses, Time and Billing, Payroll, Online Bill Pay­
ment, Web Store and Customer Care. Due to a relatively small number 
of applications and their limited capabilities, the total cost of ownership 
of for this set of applications is lower that that of a general ERP system.
Major ERP Vendors
The number of software companies that develop ERP software runs in the 
hundreds. Many of these companies provide limited ERP functionality as 
market niche players; others focus on some vertical markets (industries). 
However, a relatively large segment of these companies provides com­
prehensive solutions to their customers. The largest and most popular 
ERP vendors are SAP and Oracle. These two companies have 68% of the 
global ERP market share (see Figure 3.4)[1].
SAP is the largest ERP vendor in the world. The most famous SAP 
system, SAP R/3, includes all common groups of the ERP applications. 
SAP is especially popular with large manufacturing companies that run 
their manufacturing, distribution, and supply-chain applications. Realiz­
ing that its R/3 architecture could not meet the challenges of e-commerce 
in the late 1990s, SAP started implementing an Internet-based solution. 
SAP
43%
Microsoft
4%
Sage Group
5%
Oracle
23%
Infor
3%
Others
22%
Figure 3.4  Main ERP vendors

66	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
For that, SAP launched its totally redesigned, Internet-based solution—
mySAP.com, also known as SAP Business Suite. It is a broad undertak­
ing by SAP to extend its back-office suite to the Web. This suite is a 
single entry point for a range of front-end, back-end, and e-commerce 
ERP applications. The SAP software has been implemented in a variety 
of companies (predominately, large companies) including IBM, Hewlett-
Packard, Philips, Siemens, Chevron, and many others.
SAP delivers a comprehensive e-business platform designed to help 
companies collaborate and succeed—regardless of their industry or net­
work environment. SAP Business Suite includes mySAP ERP (Financials, 
Human Resource Management, Operations, Corporate Service), mySAP 
Business Suite (Customer Relationship Management , Product Lifecycle 
Management , Supplier Relationship Management, Supply Chain Man­
agement), and SAP Manufacturing and SAP Service and Asset Manage­
ment. As mentioned before, SAP also provides a variety of Industry 
Solutions and Small and Medium Size Business Solutions. Finally, SAP 
is involved in variety of services like hosting, consulting, custom develop­
ment, global customer support, and education.
Oracle Corporation is the second largest ERP vendor after SAP (see 
Figure 4). Oracle was the first company to offer a fully integrated, Inter­
net-enabled suite of business applications—E-Business Suite. This sys­
tem runs entirely on the Internet, supporting e-business across the SCM, 
Financial, Human Resources, and CRM groups. However, Oracle’s Fi­
nancials and Customer Relationship Management groups of applications 
are the company’s most popular among its customers.
Oracle’s E-Business Suite, along with SAP, is also commonly used by 
large and mid-size manufacturing and service companies. These include 
Cisco, Sun Microsystems, Visa International, Alcoa, Xerox, and many oth­
ers. In recent years, Oracle pursued an aggressive expansion by acquiring a 
number of large ERP vendors like PeopleSoft (with JD Edwards), Siebel, 
Retek, and some others. The goal was to increase market share and become 
more competitive with Oracle’s major rival in enterprise applications—
SAP. Oracle main products and services are:
• Database systems (database, database design and development tools)
• Middleware applications (application server, developer tools, 
business integration, business intelligence, and collaboration suite)

	
Management and ERP Systems	
67
• Business applications: Oracle E-business Suite, PeopleSoft 
Enterprise, JD Edwards EnterpriseOne, JD Edwards World, 
Siebel CRM
• Consulting, education, and support services.
Besides SAP and Oracle, the ERP market contains other popular sys­
tems like Sage Software, Microsoft Dynamics, Infor ERP, Epicor ERP, IFS 
ERP Applications, and QAD. These ERP systems are typically developed 
for and implemented in mid-size and small companies. For example, the 
focus of Sage Software is to provide business and management ERP ap­
plications and services to small and mid-size enterprises (SMEs). These 
applications cover a full range of business requirements including account­
ing, customer relationship management, contact management, human 
resources, warehouse management, specialized industry needs, and oth­
ers. The Sage Software markets its applications in four customer-focused 
­divisions: Business Management, Healthcare, Payment Solutions, and 
­Industry & Specialized Solutions.
Microsoft Dynamics is a line of integrated software management sys­
tems for SMEs that provide ERP applications. For example, Microsoft 
Dynamics AX delivers a range of core ERP applications including:
• Business intelligence and reporting
• Collaborative workplace
• Configuration and development
• Customer relationship management for sales and marketing
• Customer relationship management for field service
• Financial management
• Human resource management
• Project management
• Supply chain management
Infor is another popular ERP software company for SMEs. It offers 
a full range of enterprise business software including customer relation­
ship management, enterprise asset management, enterprise resource plan­
ning, financial management, human capital management, performance 
management, product lifecycle management, supplier relationship man­
agement, and supply chain management, including business specific 

68	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
inventory management, transportation logistics and warehouse manage­
ment software. The company also provides ERP solutions and service for 
various vertical markets including manufacturing, distribution, and ser­
vice industries.
3.3  ERP Benefits and Issues
ERP Benefits
The rapid growth and proliferation of ERP systems indicates the great 
importance of these systems to businesses. According to a survey con­
ducted in 2007–2008[3], the majority of the respondents view ERP as a 
strategic weapon to streamline and automate business processes in order 
to improve efficiencies. In general, the implementation of an ERP sys­
tem should increase the reliability of a company’s information, provide 
full access to this information at any point of time, automate a variety 
of tasks and processes in different organizational functions, and improve 
forecasting, planning, scheduling, and reporting. These improvements 
may lead to a shorter order-to-market time, lower inventory levels, more 
efficient and effective management of resources, and, as a result, major 
cost savings.
Koch[2] suggests that the median annual savings from a newly imple­
mented ERP system are approximately $1.6 million. Results of a survey 
of over 1,400 manufacturing companies showed that the best-in-class 
ERP implementations led to 23.7% reduction of inventory costs, 18.3% 
decrease in manufacturing operations costs, and 17.8% decline in ad­
ministrative costs[3]. Through best-in-class ERP implementations, the 
manufacturing companies achieved 97% of complete and on-time ship­
ments, 92% of inventory accuracy, and 96% of manufacturing sched­
ule compliance[3]. These results coincide with some previously done 
surveys[4], which identified important improvements due to the ERP 
implementation:
Improved interaction with customers
Improved on-time delivery
Improved interaction with suppliers

	
Management and ERP Systems	
69
Lowered inventory levels
Improved cash management
Reduced direct operating costs.
The same survey also recognized that areas benefiting the most from 
ERP were availability and quality of information and integration of busi­
ness operations/processes, as well as the three functional areas of inven­
tory management, financial management, and supplier management and 
procurement.
ERP Issues
Despite the benefits, ERP systems remain the most complicated, time-
consuming, and costly computer-based systems. Implementation time 
and software cost depend on the company’s size, number of implemented 
applications (modules), and level of planning and preparation of the im­
plementation process.
A survey conducted by Mabert et al.[4] showed that the ERP imple­
mentation time for a large or mid-size company could vary from 23 to 
35 months, on the average. The average implementation cost for a large 
or mid-size company could be around $20 million, and smaller firms 
may spend up to $12 million[4, 5]. A substantial portion of companies, 
while implementing ERP, had major cost overruns exceeding the original 
estimated budget by an average of 60%[5].
Implementation is only one element of the total cost of ownership 
(TCO) of an ERP system. In general, TCO includes software license fees, 
hardware cost, installation and implementation fees (consulting, addi­
tional personnel, training, testing, etc.), cost of maintenance, and cus­
tomer support. The average TCO of an ERP system could run up to $85 
million, but for some large organizations could reach $400 million[2]. 
In several cases, documented in the literature sources, a long and inef­
ficient implementation led to substantial drawbacks in the companies’ 
performance, loss of sales and customers, and strained relationships with 
suppliers. Among numerous companies that experienced costly problems 
with their ERP implementations were W.L. Gore and Associates (with 
PeopleSoft) and Whirlpool, Hershey Foods, Allied Waste Industries, and 

70	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
Volkswagen (all with SAP). In recent years, however, more businesses 
have grown weary of big up-front investments in ERP applications, caus­
ing vendors increasingly to offer modular packages of software and ser­
vices. For their part, businesses seem to have learned from past mistakes 
and pay more attention now to issues such as process standardization and 
minimal customization to help keep costs more in line[6].
Analysis of ERP implementation practices revealed the following 
major issues that companies need to deal with while implementing an 
ERP system:
• ERP is a complex and rather rigid system that may require 
a company to redesign its business processes. The top ERP 
systems are based on best business practices, and a company 
must accept the assumptions inherent in those systems. This 
pushes the company toward generic processes established 
in ERP. Thus, the company needs to ensure that adopting 
generic processes does not sacrifice its production results, 
customer service, and competitive advantage.
• Successful ERP implementation is nearly impossible without 
thorough preparation and efficient management of the 
implementation process. These require strong executive 
commitment and involvement in the ERP implementation 
process from start to finish; an empowered implementation 
team that needs to define objectives, outcomes, and 
implementation strategy; clearly developed education and 
training strategies; and full communication of ERP plans to 
the company’s employees.
• ERP systems require virtually a life-changing experience for 
everyone involved. A company that implements ERP and 
its employees need to overcome traditional conservatism in 
utilizing a previously unknown computer system which has 
new input forms, output reports, functionality, etc. Thus, 
extensive and consistent training of all involved employees 
becomes a critically important element of a successful ERP 
implementation.

	
Management and ERP Systems	
71
A top-ranked ERP system, being a time- and money-consuming 
system, may not be suitable for implementation in small and mid-size 
companies. In addition, a standard ERP system, which is developed with 
generalized business processes and applications, may not be appropriate 
for certain industries. To address these issues, the leading ERP vendors 
provide a host of solutions that include:
• Customizing ERP systems for individual industries
• Developing ERP solutions for small and mid-size companies
• Lowering applications costs by selling individual modules
• Providing ERP hosting solutions.
ERP Hosting Solutions
Due to the ERP complexity and costs, ERP hosting/outsourcing became 
a popular option for small- and mid-size companies that lack capital and 
resources to do in-house implementation. An ERP hosting provider hosts, 
manages, maintains, and monitors computer applications on behalf of its 
customers. The hosting provider assumes responsibility for the underlying 
delivery mechanisms, which include networking infrastructure and hard­
ware requirements. The hosting organization may be also responsible for 
application maintenance and upgrades, training, technical support and 
overall systems management. Typically, the hosting provider charges an 
end-user organization a fixed monthly fee based on the application usage 
and services rendered. These services may include hardware installation, 
customer support, maintenance, and upgrade.
Many companies outsourcing ERP-related applications evidenced 
benefits of hosting solutions. A research, conducted by the author, identi­
fied the following important benefits of outsourcing enterprise applica­
tions through hosting solutions versus implementing them in-house (the 
benefits are presented in a descending order of their importance):
• Various cost savings/cost reductions, which improve 
companies’ return on investments (ROI). These reduced costs 
include: costs of additional IT staff to manage implementation, 

72	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
maintenance and support of the applications; expenses of 
creating, running and maintaining a complex infrastructure; 
cost of installing and running servers and other hardware; and 
cost of software upgrades/updates.
• Companies can concentrate on their core competencies. 
Outsourcing complex ERP systems allows companies to 
focus on their core strategic activities and achieve greater 
competitive differentiation in its principal business areas.
• Fast implementation schedule. According to various 
researches, the average time to implement outsourcing 
solutions is around 6 months, which is lower than the average 
time for implementing an ERP system in-house.
• Investment risk reduction. The hosting model reduces 
companies’ risk of making huge investments in the 
software implementation and purchasing soon-to-be 
obsolete software.
• Regular software upgrades/updates. In many cases, hosting 
providers are responsible for the timely upgrade of their 
software according to customer suggestions and requests.
While selecting a hosting company, customers should consider a com­
bination of factors representing major aspect of the hosting model. Based 
upon several research reports and information from the hosting-related 
web sites, the author identified important factors that customers need to 
look into while selecting a hosting provider. These factors are presented 
below in a descending order of their importance to the customers:
• Guaranteed delivery (reliability of vendor). Customers 
would need to get a reliable hosting company that provides 
service virtually all time, with the uptime of at least 99%, 
guaranteed access 24 hours a day and 7 days a week.
• Quick implementation time. The implementation cycle time 
should be no more than 6–9 months.
• Vendor’s reputation. Customers should select a well-referenced 
vendor that has a successful track of implementations, excellent 
customer service and maintenance.

	
Management and ERP Systems	
73
• Financial stability. A hosting provider’s financial position 
is very critical to support the ongoing business so that it can 
provide services over long term. Therefore, a customer, prior 
to making its final hosting decision, needs to fully investigate 
the hosting company’s financial performance and results.
• Scalability. Hosting providers should offer services that scale 
as quickly as company develops.
• Appropriate security. Customers would need to get a hosting 
provider that provides layered data security and backup 
service. Moreover, only authorized escorted personnel should 
have access to data center.
3.4  Implementation and Future Development
Implementation Steps
The selection and implementation of an ERP system consists of several 
major steps that prepare a framework for successful implementation, 
identify an ERP software vendor and applications to be implemented, 
and install and implement the software. The main steps and their ele­
ments are presented in Table 3.2.
One of the critical elements in the first step is to develop a company’s 
ERP vision. The vision should include objectives, needs, and expectations 
for implementing such a system, as well as an implementation model. 
Today, companies utilize several implementation models. One of them is 
associated with a combination of the “best-of-breed” applications, which 
are generally leading edge solutions developed independently by differ­
ent ERP vendors and then often arranged into suites of ERP vendors or 
integrated by other specialized providers. For example, a company might 
decide to select SCM applications from SAP, HR from PeopleSoft Enter­
prise, and Financials from Oracle E-Business Suite. In this case, separate 
subsystem solutions are interfaced and not integrated[7]. However, a best-
of-breed system requires addition efforts and software to integrate the 
system using enterprise application integration (EAI).
Another model is a “single-source” integrated ERP system from an 
ERP software vendor. This model provides an easy integration of all ERP 
applications, and component modularity give end-users greater purchasing 

74	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
Steps
Elements
Step 1
Vision and Implementation 
Model
• Form ERP selection and implementation team
• Develop ERP vision (needs, objectives, 
implementation scope, and outcomes)
• Identify the implementation model (one-vendor 
solution, best-of-breed solution, or outsourcing)
Step 2
Vendor Selection
• Develop selection criteria
• Establish ERP software candidate list 
(four to six candidates)
• Create Request for Proposal (RFP), and send 
it to the prospective candidates
• Review their responses and identify three-four 
finalists
• Request the finalists to demonstrate their 
packages
• Select the winner and negotiate the contract
Step 3
Analysis and Design
• Identify implementation approach 
(“Big Bang” versus “Step-by-Step” approach, 
vanilla implementation vs. customization)
• Process and data mapping
• Prototype development
Step 4
Development and Installation
• Organize the implementation project
• Justify the investment and budget the project
• Define the performance measures for the new 
system
• Create the initial detailed implementation 
project plan
• Educate the project team
• Assess integrity of the existing database
• Install new or upgrade existing hardware
• Install the ERP software
• System conversion using the phased, pilot 
or parallel approach
• Educate the ERP users
• Define and refine procedures for the new 
system
• Ensure integrity and accuracy of the data
Step 5
Go Live and Operations
• Bring the first module/product/plant live, refine 
and adjust. Repeat the same for other modules/
products/plants
• Improve continually
• Support and ongoing training
• Patching and upgrades of the software
Table 3.2  Selection and implementation of ERP

	
Management and ERP Systems	
75
flexibility and lower implementation costs. However, issues remain over 
scope of functionality and better ROI for type and size of users. It has been 
a periodically alternating pattern in terms of preferring best-of-breed or 
single-suite ERP systems. According to some sources, the integrated vs. 
best-of-breed ERP debate still goes on in some organizations, but the 
suite advocates are clearly winning[1]. To choose a specific implementation 
model, a company needs to take into consideration a variety of factors 
including size of the company, industry the company belongs to, ability to 
integrate various applications, and projected investments.
Selection of the best ERP vendor should be based on the following 
criteria:
• Features and functionality–the capabilities that ERP 
software has to fulfill the company’s needs; the multiplicity of 
features and applications that the vendor can provide
• Estimated total cost of ownership (TCO) as defined in 
ERP Issues
• Provided service and support-quality and timeliness of a 
vendor’s product installation, service availability, customer 
service, business consulting, and system integration
• Financial viability of the vendor to provide long-term 
service for the company (vendor’s revenues, growth margins, 
earnings per share, fundamentals ratios, etc.)
• Technical execution-ability of the vendor to meet industry 
milestones (R&D capabilities in comparison to those of other 
vendors).
In addition to the four key criteria, the company may incorporate in 
software selection other criteria including development time, customer 
references, personal connections to the software vendor (I don’t think this 
is a valid criterion, since it is subjective rather than objective, though 
I suppose it brings the human element into consideration), existing part­
nership with the vendor, and some others.
The importance of the four criteria and their ranking depend on the 
specific e-commerce project and the company’s need to emphasize spe­
cific development and implementation targets. Typically, however, the 

76	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
Functionality criterion represents up to 1/3 of the total criteria weight. 
The same, up to 33% of the total weight, is usually given to the Cost 
criterion, and the other two criteria (Service and Support, and Ability to 
Execute) represent together the remaining 1/3 of the total weight.
Measuring Implementation Results
To monitor and analyze implementation processes and results, a company 
needs to put in place a system of ERP key performance measurements. 
This system should describe financial results of implementing ERP, pro­
cess and operational improvements, customer and supplier satisfaction, 
and system/IT performance results. Possible measurements of ERP imple­
mentation are presented in Table 3.3.
Key Performance 
Measurements’ Group
Possible Indicators
Financial Results
• Inventory cost reduction
• Labor cost reduction
• Quality cost reduction
• IT cost reduction
• TCO cost reduction
• Return on investments
• Financial payback
• Higher revenue/profit
Process and Operational 
Improvements
• Increased sales
• Improved product and 
service quality
• Productivity growth
• Improved planning and 
scheduling
• Order-to-fulfillment 
time reduction
• Procure-to-pay time 
reduction
• Inventory level 
reduction
Customers, Employee, 
and Supplier Satisfaction
• Improved stakeholder 
service and support
• Improved customer 
satisfaction
• Improved employee 
satisfaction
• Improved supplier 
relationship
• Successful employee 
training
• Number of customer 
complaints
• Number of employee 
complaints
Systems/IT Performance 
Results
• Increased IT 
infrastructure capability
• Availability of 
information
• Reliability of 
information
• System response time
• Data accuracy and 
responsiveness
• System integration
Table 3.3  ERP Implementation measurements

	
Management and ERP Systems	
77
The Future of ERP
In more than 30 years of evolution, ERP systems have undertaken a sig­
nificant transformation from function-specific applications to fully inte­
grated process-driven systems. These systems operate over the Internet 
and contain both back-end and front-end capabilities. Being one of the 
main enterprise-based computer architecture and business applications, 
ERP systems have been experiencing a dramatic growth in sales for the 
past 10–12 years, and, according to various forecasts will continue to 
grow in the future. The further development of ERP systems will be 
­associated with[8, 9]:
• Merger and acquisition of ERP systems, as well as their 
consolidation. For example, in 20042008 Oracle Corporation 
acquired a variety of ERP-related companies including 
PeopleSoft with JD Edwards, Siebel, Retek, Hyperion, 
Agile Software, BEA Systems and others. In addition, 
implementing these applications separately, Oracle is working 
on combining all these software applications into one 
integrated system—Oracle Fusion. Microsoft Corporation 
also acquired a number of ERP-related applications that have 
been consolidated into the Microsoft Dynamics unit. This 
unit in the future will be integrated with Microsoft Office 
applications.
• Increased penetration into the small and mid-size enterprise 
(SME) market, which represents developing and marketing 
low cost ERP systems for SME
• Continuous development of specialized (vertical) ERP systems 
for different industries (retail, health care, education, etc.)
• Development of service-oriented architecture (SOA) and 
web services. This designates a possibility of using on-
demand (as needed) ERP applications for SME. In addition, 
it will facilitate the modular design of the ERP software. For 
example, SAP NetWeaver platform will allow customers to 
select different ERP applications as needed and connect them 
to existing systems.

78	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
3.5  Chapter 3 Summary: Managerial 
Aspects of ERP
	 1.	 Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) is an integrated computer-
based system that manages internal and external organization 
­resources. ERP is also an application and software architecture that 
facilitates information flows between various business functions inside 
and outside an organization and, as such, is an enterprise-wide infor­
mation system.
	 2.	 Introduced in the early 1990s, the term “ERP” does not reflect the 
real capabilities of the system it represents. First, ERP systems pro­
vide not only planning but also other management functions such 
as organizing, controlling, scheduling, reporting, and analyzing 
business processes. ERP has crossed the boundaries of being just a 
system for planning internal resources. It may often contain “front-
end” ­applications of managing customers and collaborating with 
suppliers As such, this integrated system should be described as an 
extended enterprise management system or extended ERP system.
	 3.	 The majority of modern ERP systems are fully Internet-enabled sys­
tems that usually contain three main tiers: clients, applications/Web 
server, and database server. Some ERP systems have been developed 
with separate applications and Web servers, which would define 
them as four-tier.
	 4.	 ERP systems are considered a backbone of e-commerce solutions. 
Successful utilization of the “front-end” e-commerce solutions is 
unimaginable without strong support by and cooperation with the 
internal “back-end” computer systems. In fact, many ERP vendors 
combine ERP applications and e-commerce solutions in one inte­
grated computer system.
	 5.	 The two main ERP principles are integration and automation. ERP 
integration is based upon a single logical database system operating 
on a common computing platform, an integrated set of commonly 
designed business applications, and integration between internal 
company applications and external applications for accessing cus­
tomers and suppliers. ERP automation represents the ability of 
an ERP system to automatically process business transactions and 

	
Management and ERP Systems	
79
information between different processes and functions inside an 
­organization, as well as between this organization and its customers 
and suppliers.
	 6.	 One of the important ERP features is that it is a process-driven 
system. In contrast to individual and function-driven computer 
­applications in marketing, finance, or operations, an ERP system 
integrates these functions into a variety of computer-based processes. 
They represent real business processes that companies apply to man­
aging resources, working with customers and suppliers, etc. Other 
features of ERP systems include: relational database, company-wide 
access to information with multiple simultaneous accesses, scal­
ability, internet-based architecture, and various implementation 
platforms.
	 7.	 The Supply Chain management (SCM) group of ERP is associated 
with the applications of planning, scheduling, executing, monitor­
ing, and reporting material and information flows from suppliers. 
­Financial Management (Financials) is another major group of 
ERP that includes accounting and financial applications, as well as 
applications to analyze and optimize market forecasts, credit risk 
of new contracts, cash flow and liquidity, financial portfolio, and 
market risk. The Human Resource Management (HRM) group of 
applications is capable of performing a variety of human resources 
functionalities, i.e. maintaining employee records, recruitment, pay­
roll, administration, compensations and benefits, education and 
training, employee self-service, etc. The Customer Relationship 
Management (CRM) group of applications includes a set of applica­
tions related to customer interactions with the company, managing 
customers’ demands and orders, and improving customer satisfac­
tion. Finally, the Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) group is a 
relatively new group of ERP applications used to provide informa­
tion, planning, and analysis of product lifecycle processes including 
research and development, product introduction, product service 
and support, and end-of- life processes.
	 8.	 Within each group, the ERP system may be clustered into three 
­categories of applications including core (traditional) applications, 

80	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
applications’ enhancements and business intelligence, and e-commerce 
applications.
	 9.	 In general, the implementation of an ERP system should increase 
the reliability of a company’s information; provide full access to this 
information at any point of time; automate a variety of tasks and 
processes in different organizational functions; improve forecast­
ing, planning, scheduling, and reporting; and facilitate external col­
laboration with customers and suppliers. These improvements may 
lead to a shorter order-to-market time; lower inventory levels; more 
­efficient and effective management of resources; and, as a result, 
major cost savings and increased return on investments (ROI).
	10.	 Despite the benefits, ERP systems remain the most complicated, 
time-consuming, and costly computer-based systems. Implementa­
tion time and software cost depend on the company’s size, number 
of implemented applications (modules), and level of planning and 
preparation of the implementation process. Successful ERP imple­
mentation is impossible without thorough preparation and efficient 
management of the implementation process. These require strong 
executive commitment and involvement in the ERP implementa­
tion process from start to finish; an empowered implementation 
team that needs to define objectives, outcomes, and implementation 
strategy; clearly developed education and training strategies; and full 
communication of ERP plans to the company’s employees.
	11.	 ERP systems require virtually a life-changing experience for every­
one involved. A company that implements ERP and its employees 
need to overcome traditional conservatism in utilizing a previously 
unknown computer system, which has new input forms, output re­
ports, functionality, etc. Thus, extensive and consistent training of 
all involved employees becomes a critically important element of a 
successful ERP implementation.
	12.	 The selection and implementation of an ERP system consists of 
several major steps that prepare a framework for successful imple­
mentation, identify an ERP software vendor and applications to 
be implemented, and install and implement the software. Today, 
companies utilize several implementation models. One of them is 
associated with a combination of the “best-of-breed” applications, 

	
Management and ERP Systems	
81
which are generally leading edge solutions developed indepen­
dently by different ERP vendors and then often arranged into 
suites of ERP vendors or integrated by other specialized providers. 
Another model is a “single-source” integrated ERP system from an 
ERP software vendor. This model provides an easy integration of 
all ERP applications, and component modularity give end-users 
greater purchasing flexibility and lower implementation costs.
	13.	 To monitor and analyze implementation processes and results, a 
company needs to put in place a system of ERP key performance 
measurements. This system should describe financial results of im­
plementing ERP, process and operational improvements, customer 
and supplier satisfaction, and system/IT performance results.
	14.	 The further development of ERP systems will be associated with 
merger and acquisition of ERP systems, as well as their consolidation; 
increased penetration into the small and mid-size enterprise (SME) 
market; continuous development of specialized vertical ERP systems 
for different industries (retail, health care, education, etc.), and devel­
opment of ERP service-oriented architecture (SOA) and web services.
References
	 1.	 Shepherd, J., D’Aquila, M., and Carter, K., “The Enterprise Resource 
Planning Report, 2005–2010,” AMR Research, 2006, retrieved from 
www.amrresearch.com.
	 2.	 Koch, C., “ABC: An Introduction to ERP,” CIO Magazine, 
March 2007, retrieved from www.cio.comlarticlel40323l/ABC_An_
Introduction_to_ERP.
	 3.	 Jutras, C., “The State of the ERP Market,” Aberdeen Group, 2008, 
February, 1–5.
	 4.	 Mabert, V.A., Soni, A., and Venkataramanan, M.A., “Enterprise 
resource planning: Measuring Value Survey of U.S. Manufacturing 
Firms,” Production and Inventory Management Journal, Third/Fourth 
Quarter, 2001, 46–51.
	 5.	 Willis, T.H, Willis-Brown, A.H., and McMillan, A., “Cost Contain­
ment Strategies for ERP System Implementations,” Production and 
Inventory Management Journal, Second Quarter, 2001, 36–41.

82	
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING AN E-COMMERCE SYSTEM
	 6.	 Sullivan, L., ERPZilla, InformationWeek, July 11, 2005, retrieved 
from www.informationweek.com.
	 7.	 Harrelson, B., “Decisions: Comparing Best-of-Breed Solutions to 
All-in-One ERP Suites,” APICS-The Performance Advantage, June 
2001, 25–27.
	 8.	 Whiting, R., “ERP Gets a Complete Makeover,” InformationWeek, 
July 24, 2006, retrieved from www.informationweek.com.
	 9.	 Aberdeen Group, “ERP in the Mid-Market,” Aberdeen Benchmark 
­Report, October 2006, 1–31.

A
Asset intensity reduction, 13, 15, 22
B
Blog, 7
Brick-and-mortar” organizations, 11
Browsers, 1
Business model, 13
Business-to-business (B2B), 7–8, 11
Business-to-Business-to-Consumer 
(B2B2C), 12–13
Business-to-consumer (B2C), 7–8, 
11, 12
C
C-commerce—see Collaborative 
Commerce
Click-and-mortar” organizations, 11
Collaborative Commerce 
(C-commerce), 13
Consumer-to-Consumer (C2C) 
e-commerce, 12
Core customer benefits, 22, 24
Cost reduction, 14, 22, 28, 51
D
Development and Implementation of 
e-commerce, 19–59
Acceptance testing, 46
Co-location, 36
Construction of the web site, 45
Design-and-host (storebuilder), 36
Domain Name, 43
E-business case, 30
E-business plan, 30–34
E-commerce business model, 19
E-commerce business plan, 30–34
E-commerce implementation 
measurements, 47–48
E-commerce Software Selection, 
37–43
Logical design, 45
Mirror sites, 36
Physical design, 45
Pre-built templates, 37
Self-hosting, 35
Site design specifications, 45
Steps, 19
System testing, 46
Unit Testing, 46
Vendor Evaluation and Selection, 
37
Web hosting, 31
Weighted Score method, 40
Dot-com bubble, 5–6
E
eBay Stores, 36
E-business, 4, 34, 74
E-business plan, 30–34
Advertising Plan, 33
E-business case, 30
E-commerce Description, 32
Executive Summary, 32
Financials, 34
Implementation Timeline, 34
Marketing Plan, 33
Operations Management, 33–34
Research and Development, 33
E-commerce (Electronic commerce)
Benefits, 15
Characteristics, 9–10
Cost reduction, 13
Defined, 2–4
Development and implementation, 
19–59
Dimensions, 10
Disintermediation, 9
Growth, 7–9
History and current development 
of, 4–7
Inexorability, 9
Internet, 1–2
Managerial aspects of, 16–17
Networking, 4
Pervasiveness, 9
Index

Re-intermediation, 10
Revenue enhancement, 13
Types of, 11
Value creation, 13–16
E-commerce software selection, 36
Ability to execute, 38
Built from scratch, 37
Cost, 39
Criteria, 38
Design-and-host, 37
Functionality, 39
Internal needs assessment, 37
Negotiation and Selection, 38
Packaged tools, 37
Pre-built templates, 37
Service and Support, 39
Vendor Analysis, 38
Vendor evaluation and selection, 50
Electronic service
Business and consumer blogs, 7
Enterprise Extranet, 4
Enterprise Intranet, 3
Enterprise Resource Planning 
(ERP), 61–89
Applications’ enhancement, 69–70
Automation, 66
Benefits, 76–77
Core applications, 69–70
Customer Relationship 
Management (CRM), 70, 71
Definition, 61–63
E-commerce applications, 71–72
Financial Management, 71
Future of ERP, 85
Groups of applications, 69–70
History of evolution, 63–65
Hosting solutions, 79–81
Human Resources Management 
(HRM), 69, 71
Implementation Steps, 81–84
Integration, 86
Issues, 77–79
Main dimensions, 70
Major ERP vendors, 73–76
Manufacturing Resource Planning 
(MRP II), 63–64
Material Requirements Planning, 63
Measuring Implementation 
Results, 84
Microsoft, 75
On-Line Analytical Processing 
(OLAP), 68
On-Line Transaction Processing 
(OLTP), 68
Oracle, 74, 75
Process-driven system, 85
Product Lifecycle Management, 70, 
71
SAP, 73–75
Scalability, 81
Supply chain management, 62, 71
E-service—see Electronic Service
G
Google, 56
Government-to-Business (G2B) 
e-commerce, 12
Government-to-Consumer (G2C) 
e-commerce, 12
H
Hyper-Text Transmission Protocol 
(HTTP), 1
I
Inexorability of e-commerce, 9
Internet, 1–2
Intra-business e-commerce, 13
iStore, 37
L
Location-based Commerce 
(L-commerce), 13
L-commerce—see Location-based 
Commerce
M
M-commerce—see Mobile 
Commerce
Microsoft Dynamics, 75, 85
Mixed/“click-and-brick” strategy, 6
Mobile Commerce 
(M-commerce), 6, 13
Monetary value in E-commerce, 14
Monetary Results 
(value creation)—see Value 
Creation
Multimedia sharing, 7
84	
INDEX

N
Non-monetary, 15
O
Oracle, 37, 50, 68, 74, 75, 81, 85
P
Partial e-commerce organizations, 10
Peer-to-Peer (P2P) e-commerce, 12
Pervasiveness of e-commerce, 9
Podcast, 7
Portal, 29, 69
Product Lifecycle Management 
(PLM), 70, 71, 75, 87
Pure e-commerce organizations, 10
Pure-play e-commerce companies, 10
R
Revenue enhancement, 13
Revenue Model, 22, 27
Reverse Auction, 29
RSS, 7
S
SAP, 73–75, 78, 81, 85
Social networking, 7
Storefront, 29, 69
T
Target market segment, 22, 24
V
Value creation, 13
Monetary, 13, 14
Non-monetary, 13
Virtual/pure-play e-commerce 
companies, 10
W
Web 2.0, 6–7
Web pages, 1
Wiki, 7
World Wide Web (WWW), 1
Y
Yahoo! Merchant, 36
YouTube.com, 10
	
INDEX	
85


Designing and Implementing 
an E-Commerce System
Zinovy Radovilsky
Dr. Zinovy Radovilsky is Professor of Management in 
the College of Business and Economics at California 
State University, East Bay. He has more than 20 years 
of experience in teaching operations and supply chain 
management courses. Dr. Radovilsky has been a busi-
ness consultant to leading U.S. companies and organi-
zations and has done extensive research in the areas of 
enterprise resource planning (ERP), e-commerce busi-
ness models and management, quality management, 
and quantitative business methods. He published a 
number of papers in international and domestic peer-
reviewed journals. Dr. Radovilsky is also a managing 
editor of two research journals
For further information, a 
free trial, or to order, contact: 
sales@businessexpertpress.com
www.businessexpertpress.com/librarians
THE BUSINESS 
EXPERT PRESS
DIGITAL LIBRARIES
EBOOKS FOR 
BUSINESS STUDENTS
Curriculum-oriented, born-
digital books for advanced 
business students, written 
by academic thought 
leaders who translate  real-
world business experience 
into course readings and 
reference materials for 
students expecting to tackle 
management and leadership 
challenges during their 
professional careers.
POLICIES BUILT 
BY LIBRARIANS
• Unlimited simultaneous 
usage
• Unrestricted downloading 
and printing
• Perpetual access for a 
one-time fee
• No platform or 
maintenance fees
• Free MARC records
• No license to execute
The Digital Libraries are a 
comprehensive, cost-eﬀ ective 
way to deliver practical 
treatments of important 
business issues to every 
student and faculty member. 

