Brief books for people who make websites
Foreword by Erik Spiekermann
 No.7
Design is a job
Mike Monteiro
www.allitebooks.com

Design Is a Job
Mike Monteiro
www.allitebooks.com

Copyright © 2012 Mike Monteiro 
All rights reserved
Publisher: Jeffrey Zeldman
Designer: Jason Santa Maria
Editor: Mandy Brown
Copyeditor: Krista Stevens
Compositor: Rob Weychert
Editorial Assistant: Sally Whiting
Production Assistant: Nellie McKesson
ISBN 978-1-937557-04-1
A Book Apart
New York, New York
http://abookapart.com
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
www.allitebooks.com

table of contents
chapter 1
What Is a Designer?
5
chapter 2
Getting Clients
11
chapter 3
Choosing the Right Clients
22
chapter 4
Charging for Your Work
31
chapter 5
Working with Contracts
45
chapter 6
Sticking to Your Process
57
chapter 7
Presenting Design
66
chapter 8
Managing Feedback
75
chapter 9
Getting Your Money
87
Conclusion
130
Resources
132
Acknowledgements
134
Introduction
1
chapter 10
Working with Others
100
Index
136
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

This book is dedicated to my son Henry. 
Sometimes when you can’t find what you need it’s just because  
you haven’t made it yet. Now it’s your turn.
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Foreword
Online and offline, Mike Monteiro is known as a straight 
talker. He is a living bullshit detector and will not suffer fools. 
I believe this is because he started his career by making logos 
in thirty minutes for a copy shop in Austin, without prior 
qualifications. Fear of discovery is terrible, but it keeps you on 
your toes. I should know: I started out making logos in thirty 
minutes for a small printshop in Berlin, without prior quali-
fications as a graphic designer. So Mike and I know bullshit 
when we see and hear it, having been quite good at it for a 
while ourselves. 
Being a designer is all about attitude. Sure, you have to 
know your craft, but as we both found out, you can pick most 
of that up over time if you’re prepared to listen, watch, and 
learn. Without the right attitude, however, you’ll always be a 
vendor to some people, a crazy artist to others. 
Clients need to understand that they’ve hired us to do 
something they are not good at. And that they need to pay us 
for our knowledge, skills, experience and, yes: attitude. To be 
referred to as one of those “creative types” is to be written off 
as intellectually inferior. 
Contrary to popular belief, designers are not artists. We 
employ artistic methods to visualize thinking and process, 
but, unlike artists, we work to solve a client’s problem, not 
present our own view of the world. We thrive on constraints, 
but we hate compromise. If a design project is to be consid-
ered successful—and success is the true measure of quality—it 
must not only add an aesthetic dimension, but solve the prob-
lem at hand.
This book will teach you how to be part of a service indus-
try without becoming a servant. My advice, now and always, 
is learn, learn, learn—starting right here.
—Erik Spiekermann
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

 	
Introduction	 1	
Introduction
I love design. 
I love it when something is well-designed. I love the  
process of getting there. I love the interesting failures along 
the way. I love that I have the opportunity to earn a living  
designing things at a place that my partner and I built from  
the ground up. I love the arguing and the critiques. I love  
that someone I hired three years ago can now make my  
designs better. And I absolutely love the clients who make  
this possible. 
Which leaves you. I love you most of all. And I am tired of 
seeing you get your ass kicked because no one taught you  
better. I am tired of you not getting paid. I am tired of you 
working nights and weekends. I am tired of you doing spec 
work because someone has convinced you it will look good 
in your portfolio. I am tired of you sitting by and hoping the 
work sells itself.
So I wrote you a book. It has a spine and by the time you’re 
done reading so will you.
This book is a guide to making a living as a designer. It con-
tains the fundamentals of being a working designer, including 
working with clients and others, valuing your work, and get-
ting paid. This book will look at ways to communicate and 
apply these fundamentals to every aspect of your job. The goal 
is to expand your view of your job as a designer to include not 
just your talent, but the business and communication aspects 
as well.
I made it a short book so you can get back to work.
This book does not contain a “system.” At the end of this 
book you will not run out to buy forty-three index cards. You 
will not get real. You will not add five items to your bucket 
list. You will not have to adjust your social media strategy, nor 
will you unlock a secret. You will have more confidence in 
yourself and a deeper understanding of your craft. 
www.allitebooks.com

	
2 	 Design Is a Job
Why listen to me? 
I’ve been running Mule Design, along with my partner Erika 
Hall, for almost ten years. Before that I worked at startups, in-
house marketing departments, and for other studios. I’ve been 
a freelancer, a contractor, and possibly the world’s worst em-
ployee. I totally lied about being qualified for the first “design 
job” I ever got, making logos in thirty minutes for the desktop 
publishing department of a local copy shop in Austin, Texas. I 
spent years freaking out that someone would finally figure out 
I had no idea what I was doing. 
I started my own design studio for a few reasons. First, I 
was a terrible employee. I was convinced I could run a design 
studio better than anyone I’d ever worked for, and I wasn’t 
sure why they had such a difficult time doing it. (Turns out the 
problem they all had in common was me.) 
Second, I wanted control over the kind of clients I worked 
with. It’s my belief that as a designer you are responsible for 
what you put into the world. When you work for someone 
else you can’t always pick and choose what you work on. We 
very consciously keep Mule small so we never feel we have to 
take on a job we can’t ethically stand behind just to keep the 
lights on. 
Third, I found a good partner. And I wanted to keep work-
ing with her. 
Along the way we made every possible mistake we could 
make. We worked for free. We kept working through shifting 
strategy. We sat back and waited for the phone to ring. We got 
shafted. We lost bids for stupid reasons. We worked without 
contracts. I have made every mistake I am telling you not to 
make in this book. And I guarantee that you’ll make mistakes 
as well. If not the same ones I did, you’ll find new and better 
ones. Because getting good at what you do doesn’t come from 
not making mistakes; it comes from getting up off the floor 
after you fall down, and then putting up a warning sign so 
others avoid the pothole you fell into. This book is my warn-
ing sign to you.
Because I want you to do better. And work your ass off. 
And benefit accordingly. Because design is a job.

 	
Introduction	 3	
Why this book for you
Obviously, try as I might to be balanced, I’m coming at all of 
this from a bias of client services. And web design. It’s what 
I do. But whether you’re in client services, or a freelancer, 
working at a startup, or a big company, you’ll learn something 
from this book. Heck, you don’t even have to be a designer to 
get something out of this. Whether you call yourself a visual 
designer, a graphic designer, a web designer, an interaction 
designer, a photographer, a casual blogger, or a modern dance 
enthusiast, there will be something in this book that will make 
you better at your craft.


 	
What Is a Designer?	 5	
What Is a  
Designer?1
“Bring in the creatives!”
Let me tell you a beautiful story. You may be living it right 
now, you lucky dog. This story takes place in a beautiful far-
away place with a deep blue sky, an ocean of green-screen 
possibilities, lollipop-trees dripping with inspiration, and the 
sensuous dance of exotic muses over the techno-thump of an 
ambient jungle soundtrack. Yum.
In this beautiful world there are no alarm clocks. After all, 
creativity demands sufficient sleep. You glide into work when 
you please, hopping and skipping past the insistent ogres that 
dare to schedule their beastly requirements meetings before 
11 a.m. (there’s no need to go to them after 11, either), and you 
slip into your Mirra chair, dismiss a few meeting requests on 
your 30″ monitor, fire up iChat, and wait for inspiration to 
show itself.
By then it’s time for lunch.
In this beautiful myth you are what is known as a “creative.” 
You are very lucky. Because while others are weighed down 
by requirements, metrics, testing, and other variations of math 

	
6 	 Design Is a Job
and science, you are a child of magic (or magick, if you’re a 
goth). Knowledge of these base matters would only defile your 
creative process. Your designs come from inside you. 
But, of course, a story isn’t really interesting until we in-
troduce a little conflict. Shall we try a dragon? And let’s say 
that dragon is now standing at your desk. And he’s holding a 
printout of your comp, imported into PowerPoint and marked 
up with very specific changes, most of which you don’t agree 
with—all of them decided in a meeting you did not attend.
Magic won’t save you from this dragon. It’s time to stop  
being a creative and start becoming a designer. Grab your 
lunch. We’re clocking in.
Why this myth is destructive
The myth of the magical creative is alive and well, and it’s 
powerful. It’s equally perpetuated by designers and those who 
work with them. And it’s destructive, reducing a designer’s job 
to pixel-pusher, prettifier, and someone who feels their way 
to success. A magical creative is expected to succeed based on 
instinct, rolling the dice every time, rather than on a methodi-
cal process that can be repeated time and time again. 
Also, it makes you insufferable. Nobody likes a co-worker 
who operates outside the rules. And this will make it harder 
for you to work with your team. 
It also makes life harder for other designers (like me) to do 
their jobs. I love my job. And I don’t like people who make 
it harder than necessary. But every time a client tells me to 
just “blue sky” something, or that they don’t want to “stifle 
my creativity,” I have to spend time undoing the myth of the 
magical creative. (Luckily, I look more like a Teamster than 
a magical being, but alas, you may have been cursed with 
attractiveness.)
A designer requires honest feedback and real criticism,  
and that’s not going to happen in a realm where colleagues  
or clients are worried about crushing the spirit of a magical 
being. The sparkly fog of affirmation gets in the way.
So what does a designer actually do? Let’s find out.

 	
What Is a Designer?	 7	
A designer solves problems within  
a set of constraints 
Those constraints often come in the form of available materi-
als (a lack of wood, a small printing press, or bandwidth),  
the audience for whom the solution is intended (kids, users 
who aren’t very web-savvy, those who speak a variety of  
languages), and business requirements (style guides, vendor 
relationships in place, our logo is Satan).
What kind of problems? Well, that’s what determines the 
kind of designer you are. If you’re solving the problem of cre-
ating a chair that doesn’t hurt your ass if you sit in it for eight 
hours, you’re a furniture designer. If you’re sixteen and hold-
ing an empty toilet paper roll in one hand and a piece of alu-
minum foil in the other, you’re an industrial designer. Since 
you’re holding one of these small brightly-colored books in 
your hand, let’s assume you’re some flavor of web designer, 
as I am. So for the remainder of this book when I pull out 
examples or go into specifics, they’ll be from a web designer’s 
perspective. If you’re a different type of designer I’m sure you 
can still get something out of this, just abstract it up a level 
and apply it to your particular field. 
A designer understands goals
Whether you are helping to launch a new business from 
scratch, or making incremental changes to an existing prod-
uct, or something in between, any design task you undertake 
must serve a goal. It’s your job to find out what those goals are.
That’s the first step to designing anything: ask “Why are 
we doing this?” If the answer isn’t clear, or isn’t clear to you, 
or just doesn’t exist, you can’t design anything. Stop working. 
Can you help set those goals? If so, do it. (Yes, it is part of your 
job. Anything that helps you do your job is part of your job.) 
How? Coming up.

	
8 	 Design Is a Job
A designer gathers information
Who are we designing for? How will they use what we are 
designing? Do they need it? What backend technologies does 
the client have at their disposal? What new ones are they 
open to trying? Who else has tried this and how have they 
succeeded or failed? 
Once you have design goals you need to gather as much 
information as possible to make sure you are designing a so-
lution that will fulfill those goals. You simply cannot design 
without researching the landscape. Just like you can’t build a 
house without surveying the land. 
A designer imposes order
Eventually all of this information needs to be used to create 
something. Ideas and requirements become artifacts and  
systems. This is the part of the job most other people will  
recognize as “design” because it is visible and involves pic-
tures. And you can do it while wearing your headphones.
A designer creates novel forms
Also fun. Successful design balances convention—familiar 
forms, terms, and interactions—and novelty—new forms 
to engage and delight the users, in the hope they will stick 
around a bit longer and maybe buy their pants here instead 
of somewhere else. As long as you remember that those new 
forms must serve the goals of the business. Otherwise, they’re 
just novelty. 
A designer talks to clients  
and stakeholders
No matter how good the work is, if you can’t sell it you 
haven’t finished the job. I can’t stress how important this is.  
(I go on at length about this in a later chapter.) I’ve run into 
quite a few designers who left this job to someone else, be 

 	
What Is a Designer?	 9	
it a client rep or an art director. I’ve also seen my share of 
studios where the designer wasn’t given the opportunity to 
sell their own work, which is amazingly shortsighted. Selling 
your work directly to clients is extremely important. Not only 
should you be able to explain why you made the decisions 
you did, but you’ll get first-hand feedback on where the work 
needs to go next. 
How often has your work come back to you with changes 
you didn’t understand or agree with? And all you had was a 
second-hand account of what was said, or worse yet, no ex-
planation for why those changes were requested.
Once you are ready to take the responsibility for selling 
your work (and I am very purposefully using the word “sell-
ing,” not “presenting”) then you can begin to call yourself a 
designer. And get the credit for the good work you do.
A designer is a gatekeeper
At some point in the next few days you will finish this book 
and I want you to immediately pick up Victor Papanek’s 
Design for the Real World, which I will bluntly summarize like 
so: you are responsible for the work you put into the world.
Carefully choose the projects you take on. Choose to 
leave the world better than you found it. Improve things 
for people. This doesn’t mean just working on non-profit or 
purely mission-driven projects. A lot of commercial products 
and services improve life for people in large and small ways. 
Just make sure there is some meaning to what you are doing 
besides exploiting a niche. Be the advocate for the person who 
will ultimately buy, use, or experience what you are designing. 
We have limited resources, whether natural, financial, or 
cognitive. Don’t contribute to people wasting them on crap. 
You have more power than you think. And you are part 
of a long lineage of designers who fought to be listened to 
and respected. Designers like Victor Papanek, Tibor Kalman, 
Ray and Charles Eames, William Caslon, Paula Scher, Zuzana 
Licko, and our own Jeffrey Zeldman. Not only can a designer 
change the world, a designer should. This is the best job in the 
world! Let’s do it right. 

	
10 	 Design Is a Job
In summary
Your toolbox should contain tools for input (goals and re-
search), activity (make things!), and output (sell those things!). 
A designer’s work starts way before a single pixel gets placed 
and ends way after the last one is locked in place. You may 
not take the lead in every, or even any part of the process; 
throughout your career you’ll work on small teams, big teams, 
and sometimes alone. But even when you don’t own a par-
ticular process, make sure to (respectfully) insert yourself. The 
more you know, the better your work will be. And don’t wait 
to be asked.

 	
Getting Clients	 11	
2Getting Clients
The biggest lie in this book would be if I told you I don’t 
worry about where the next client is coming from. I could tell 
you that once you build up enough of a portfolio, or garner 
enough experience, or achieve a certain level of notoriety in 
the industry, this won’t be a concern anymore. I could tell 
you I sleep soundly, not bolting out of bed at 4 a.m. to run 
laps around the local high school track. I could tell you that 
I never worry about enough presents under the tree. I could 
tell you these things, but I’d be lying. And I don’t want to lie 
to you. Getting clients is the most petrifying and scary thing I 
can think of in the world. I’d rather wrestle lady Bengal tigers 
in heat with meat strapped to my genitals than look for new 
clients. 
If putting in the work to get the kind of work you want to 
do sounds too daunting, then close this book right now. Walk 
away. Rethink your life choices and take up a less stressful 
craft, like cleaning out cobra pits. Do it. No one will think  
less of you. Cover yourself in sackcloth and pray to your god 
for penance.
www.allitebooks.com

	
12 	 Design Is a Job
Go!
(Are they gone? Great! More clients for the rest of us.)
All kidding aside, getting clients can be one of the most 
daunting challenges a designer faces. After all, until you’ve 
actually secured a client, you can’t do the job. That said, the 
biggest sure-fire way to not get clients is to be worried and 
freaked out. Clients are looking for confidence when they 
hire. You wanna make sure you don’t land a client? Then act 
freaked out and worried. I’m not saying play “hard to get.”  
I’m telling you to behave like someone who I’d entrust writing 
a large check to while putting my professional reputation in 
your hands.
This chapter will be of the most immediate use to free- 
lancers and principals of moderately-sized shops. However, 
the concepts will be useful to anyone. Even if you’re not in  
client services, or you’re deep within the bowels of a large 
client services shop where clients just “happen,” it’s useful to 
know where they come from.
Clients are the lifeblood of a healthy business. They are the 
oxygen in your bloodstream that keeps everything going. No 
matter how good you are at what you do, without someone 
willing to pay you for that service you will have to close your 
doors. Lack of clients is the number one reason design studios 
fail. The number two reason? Who cares.
So where do clients come from? The best ones come  
one way.
Referrals
At this point, all of our jobs come through referral. Often, 
there is no formal RFP (request for proposal) process. In the 
case of some of the largest, best projects we’ve worked on, we 
weren’t bidding against anybody else. 
When you need a new doctor, lawyer, or butcher, your first 
inclination will always be to ask someone you trust. You value 
the opinions of people you trust, and it’s faster than doing a 
lot of research on your own. 
Say you wake up tomorrow morning with a weird pain in 
your knee (probably from doing laps at 4 a.m.). You’ll make 

 	
Getting Clients	 13	
a mental run through your address book until you think of a 
friend who had knee problems last year. The next time you 
see her you’ll ask her about the doctor who treated her, and 
after confirming she’s not walking with a limp, you’ll get that 
doctor’s number. Now you not only have a doctor in mind, 
but you’ve gone from wondering if you can find a good doctor 
to hoping this particular doctor has an opening for you. All 
because of the wonderfully transitive properties of trust. 
So it goes with hiring for design. Most people don’t hire de-
signers very often. (The average person’s address book should 
contain more tailors than designers.) So during those odd 
times someone needs to buy design they’ll confer with friends 
or colleagues who’ve hired designers in the past. And they’ll 
certainly trust those referrals more than a Yelp listing or some 
unknown replying to a public RFP.
If you’re trying to decide between two design firms that 
seem equally talented, the one that came with a referral has 
a solid advantage. And that vetting goes both ways—a client 
who is well-socialized and has a good reputation in a large net-
work is more likely to be a great client. In most cases, you’re 
going to be as skeptical of a client who hires a designer from 
an ad as they are of the designer who answered that ad.
How to get referrals
Most referrals come from colleagues or friends of colleagues, 
friends, or past clients. The keys to getting those referrals are:
1.	 Be pleasant to work with.
2.	 Do good work.
Get to know the people on the client team and treat them 
well. Make them a valuable part of the project and make sure 
their voices get heard. People change jobs. If the current proj-
ect goes well, the person who hired you will have her stock 
rise within the company, and the rest of the staff will even-
tually spread out far and wide to other companies who will 
need design services at some point. Your DNA travels with 
them. (Not literally. I’m hoping I don’t need to add a chapter 

	
14 	 Design Is a Job
explaining that.) When the call goes out to find a design part-
ner, they’ll be throwing your name in the ring. 
Everything you deliver on a current project and every 
interaction you have with a current client is business develop-
ment. All successful jobs lead to more jobs. And you are never 
not trying to line up your next job. 
Be pleasant, don’t be nice
We once received a call from a gentlemen who said, “[redacted] 
referred me to you. He said that you wouldn’t be shy about 
telling me I was wrong, you’d probably piss me off, and that I 
should listen to everything you said because it would work.”
I was delighted.
That said, you should aim to be pleasant to work with, as 
everyone would rather work with someone pleasant than 
with an asshole. But no one wants to work with someone 
who’s faking it. Doing good work often requires a few hard 
conversations. 
There’s a difference between being enjoyable to work with 
and being “nice.” Being nice means worrying about keep-
ing up the appearance of harmony at the expense of being 
straightforward and fully engaged. Sometimes you need to tell 
a client they’re making the wrong call. Part of client services 
is being able to do that without coming off as a dick. But being 
afraid to do it because you’re too invested in being “nice” is 
worse than being a dick.
No one is hiring you to be their friend. They’re hiring you 
to design solutions to problems. But if they can get the same 
solution from someone who’s pleasant and someone who’s a 
jerk, they’ll go with the former. 
Do good work
Of course, being the most pleasant person in the world won’t 
help your cause if the work isn’t good. But don’t make the 
mistake of thinking the quality of your work by itself will be a 
shining beacon that pulls clients near. Good work is the core 
of your business, and for the purposes of this particular book 

 	
Getting Clients	 15	
let’s assume you do good work. But clients aren’t hiring your 
portfolio, they’re hiring you. So while your portfolio is impor-
tant as proof that you can do what you say you can (especially 
if you can match the work up with success metrics!), it can’t 
be your biz dev department. You need to convince your po-
tential clients that you’ll be able to solve their problem as well 
as you solved your past clients’ problems. 
To do this design thing right we’re going to have to rede-
fine what we think of as “our work.” That stuff in your port-
folio? That’s just evidence of work. The real work is that plus 
all the conversations, decisions, and convincing you did along 
the way.
Be clear (and enthusiastic) about what you do
Some people call this the elevator pitch. It’s actually the 
standing-around-at-drinks pitch. (No one wants to make small 
talk in an elevator. Creepy and invasive.) You need to be able 
to explain what you do very succinctly and in an interesting 
manner. Everyone hates being cornered at a party by the guy 
who drones on about his work.
But if you sound really excited and confident about what 
you do when someone inquires in a perfunctory manner at a 
baby shower—and then you shut up—the person you are talk-
ing to might actually remember and recommend you when 
the occasion arises. This actually happens all the time.
Network
Research is a fundamental part of design. Networking is just 
research plus manners. In all of human history from the time 
your choice of careers was either hunting or gathering, it  
has never been easier to figure out who is in a position to  
hire you, and then figure out who you know who knows  
that person.
For an easier time doing this, it helps to know a lot of 
people. 
If you are not a networking natural, try a user-centered 
approach, just like in design. Whenever you meet someone, 

	
16 	 Design Is a Job
start by learning something about them. Try to find out just a 
bit about what interests and motivates them. Try to think of 
something you could do to help them, whether it’s validating 
their needs and interests or providing some useful informa-
tion. Then when you talk about what you do, and what you 
need, just put it in that context. 
This all has to come from a place of genuine interest and 
confidence. Or you risk sounding like a creepy stalker. As 
with all things, practice. 
Don’t be afraid to ask people you know for recommenda-
tions and referrals. Knowing someone to recommend is very 
exciting for people. Whether it’s being thought of as karma or 
scoring business points, people love giving out referrals when 
they truly believe the person they’re recommending is solid 
and trustworthy.
Be visible
A very wise (and handsome) man once told me, “No one’s  
going to know what you think about unless you write and 
publish your opinions.” I was incredibly shy and insecure 
about my writing when he said that. (Here’s a secret: you 
don’t get over it. You push through it.) Yet I knew that for the 
sake of my business I had to take that advice to heart. And 
you should too. People need to know who you are so they 
can write you checks. Write! Design! Put yourself out there. 
Let history decide whether it’s crap or not. But unless you’re 
putting yourself where people can see you and making your 
opinions known, clients or potential employers won’t be able 
to find you. And the more you write the better you’ll get at it. 
(Case in point, I’m almost certain the end of this book will be 
good.)
By the way, that very wise man started a publishing empire 
a few years later. Thanks, Zeldman.
Maintain relationships
The end of a project is not the end of the client relationship. 
First, you have a responsibility to check in on the success of 

 	
Getting Clients	 17	
the work. Were the longer-term goals met? Did the metrics 
meet everyone’s expectations? Second, maintaining relation-
ships is the single most important thing you can do to ensure 
good referrals. Not only did you nail the work, but you were 
pleasant while doing so and have remained pleasant after-
ward. You’re a good person to know! And everyone wants to 
introduce good people to other good people. 
Maintaining a relationship is not hard. (If my therapist is 
reading this I just screwed myself.) You’re both busy people 
with sites to build and lives to live, so don’t reach out with 
chores for them to do. Send the occasional email, or make 
the occasional phone call, to just say hello. Check in briefly. 
If their company just did something awesome send them an 
email, mention it on Twitter, and congratulate them publicly. 
Maybe once in a blue moon make plans for a drink or a meal. 
And yes, make sure to tell them you’re always on the lookout 
for any referrals they can send your way, but don’t make that 
the central point of conversation. 
Reflect well on people who recommend you
When a friend or colleague recommends you to a potential 
client, you carry a responsibility to that referrer. You need to 
do right by them. They’ve put their reputation on the line to 
vouch for you. Treating that referral well not only shows that 
you’re a reliable person, it also grows your referral network 
by one more happy client. 
Sloppy work on your part reflects badly on the person who 
recommended you as well. Not only are you less likely to get 
another lead from that person, you might not be able to use 
them as a reference, and you’ve potentially added strife to the 
relationship between two of your clients.
Do you have to take a job that came from a referral? No. 
You still need to go through your process of deciding whether 
the client is right for you or not (coming up). But how you 
handle the inquiry is key. I’ll give you an example. 
We’re a small shop. There are twelve of us as of this typ-
ing. And we get a fair amount of business inquiries. (Knock 
on wood. I love you all.) But we’re not always the right studio 

	
18 	 Design Is a Job
for those jobs, and the faster we determine that, the better for 
everyone. 
I need to manage the percentage of time I spend talking to 
leads versus the percentage of time I spend working with the 
clients to whom I’ve already made commitments. So meeting 
with every person who contacts us, as much as I might want 
to, would leave me little time to take care of current clients.
To help with this, we’ve developed a set of questions, a 
screener, to help both parties decide whether we’re right for 
the job. If the potential project passes the initial screening, 
then we know it makes sense to devote some precious, oth-
erwise billable time to pursue it. Some of the questions are 
common to all design studios: goals and necessary capabilities, 
timeline, and budget. There are several others we have added 
over the years as we’ve learned what qualities make a better or 
worse project for us. 
(I love you guys so much I’ll even give you link to the 
screener: http://muledesign.com/designbook/screener.html.)
The most important thing to keep in mind is that you are 
evaluating the potential client as much as they are evaluating 
you. Prospective clients sometimes find this surprising. Those 
folks aren’t likely to make good clients. 
As soon as we know that we’re not the right studio for 
someone, we tell them. But a potential client who comes 
in from a referral is generally sent to us by someone who’s 
worked with us before and thinks we’re a good fit to solve 
this problem, so we’re more inclined to sit down with them 
right away. After an initial conversation, we may in fact decide 
we’re not a good fit after all, but we’re going to do our best to 
refer them to someone who might be a better fit. We like them 
to leave feeling satisfied and helped. And someday they may 
have a project we’ll be right for. So even when you choose not 
to work with someone you want to leave them with a good 
impression. If you give them a clear, positive idea of what you 
do, they will then refer you to others. 
Referrals are the one true path. But surely there are others, 
right? Well, sure. There are also other tablets besides iPads,  
I suppose.

 	
Getting Clients	 19	
Other, less good, ways to get work
First of all, before we go too far with the joke, these are all 
good things to be doing regardless. Although ninety percent 
or more of your work will come in through referrals, there’s 
no reason to sit on your hands waiting for the phone to ring. 
Let’s review some of these.
Request for proposals (RFPs)
There are many good organizations that have to go through 
an RFP process to hire anyone. And those are good jobs to go 
after. People who tell you they don’t go after RFPs and people 
who tell you they don’t have meetings are both lying to you.  
The problem with most RFPs is that they’re written by people 
who are as irritated that they have to write it as you are that 
you have to reply to it. 
That’s also the key to handling an RFP. Find out who wrote 
it. Most come with a contact number in case you have ques-
tions. Call it. Make friends with the people who wrote it. 
They may have even heard of you. If so, you’re golden. Strike 
up a conversation with them and get as much detail as you can 
about the organization involved. 
The other problem with RFPs is that they can be overly 
prescriptive in nature. They can include specific solutions 
that may or may not be appropriate. This is usually an indica-
tion that the organization is freaked out about having to hire 
designers and is trying to maintain as much control as pos-
sible—to the point where they’re going into as much detail as 
possible and short-circuiting the entire design process. You 
may be able to help them through that.
If an RFP starts dictating button colors, pick up the phone. 
It’s a cry for help and your opportunity to create mutual un-
derstanding. Speaking directly to a designer may be what they 
need, much more than getting 325 replies to a badly-formed 
RFP. Remember, not all organizations who send out formal 
documents have to.
By the way, how do these organizations decide where to 
send these RFPs? By referral. BAM!

	
20 	 Design Is a Job
Outbound contact
I totally encourage you to go after clients you want to work 
for. Let’s just be realistic about the return on this type of  
business development. It is very, very low. You’re basically 
throwing seeds across a cement lot in the hope that one or 
two of them will find a crevice with enough dirt to take root 
in, not get eaten by birds, and that it’ll rain at some point. It’s 
hard enough to get a job that exists, but contacting people 
when a job may not exist is rough. 
That said, if there’s a client you’re really interested in work-
ing with, go after them. Your best bet, as always, is going in 
through your network. Someone you know will know some-
one at that organization. Get ready to buy some meals and 
drinks. This is a little like that game where you start off with 
a paperclip and have to trade your way up to a dream client 
in ten moves or less. But with a little luck you may be able to 
get in front of the right people. More likely than not you’ll 
be making a pitch to be considered should they have design 
needs in the future, so make a lasting impression. Pee in their 
fireplace or something.
Oh, and potential clients love getting cold calls as much as 
you do.
Advertising
We were once asked to co-sponsor a party at SXSW. I believe 
it was about three or four grand to get our name on the ban-
ner outside the bar and a listing in the program. We didn’t 
have a spare three or four grand sitting around at the time. 
Instead we got stickers with our logo on them. Cost: $50. (It 
helps that our logo is an animal. People like animals.) We went 
to the party and gave everyone a sticker. People got drunk, 
put stickers on each other, took pictures, and uploaded them 
to the internet. You know how people referred to that party? 
The Mule party. 
So yeah, I believe in advertising. I also believe in not 
throwing money away. Did we get any clients out of that  

 	
Getting Clients	 21	
party? Probably not, but we raised our profile a little bit.  
And we were only out $50. Oh, and we drank the free beer 
paid for by the people who anted up the $4K. 
So host the occasional party, buy the occasional ad in a 
conference brochure. Be visible in places where clients look. 
Very targeted advertising might be helpful to raise your profile 
and let people know you exist, but I wouldn’t put more than 
one or two eggs in this basket if you’re trying to get clients. At 
the most, advertising might help you seem familiar to a poten-
tial client who’s just been referred to you.
Conferences
Conferences are a fine place to meet both potential clients 
and peers. Sometimes these are the same person. They’re full 
of other designers who work at organizations big enough to 
have a conference-going budget. (They’re also more likely to 
expense dinner for a whole table, so tag along.) Those are the 
same large organizations who hire outside designers, and send 
out RFPs, at which point having someone on the inside will 
be invaluable. 
Blog about things you want to work on
If you’re interested in working with Disney, then blog about 
Disneyland. Write the best blog about Disney design on the 
internet. Will this in and of itself guarantee that you’ll be the  
designer they call when they need work? No, but it certainly  
won’t hurt. And you’ll be writing about what you love anyway. 
As always, the key to everything, especially getting clients, 
is confidence. No one wants to deposit a check into an ATM 
machine that looks like it just got wheeled in place yester-
day and may not be there tomorrow. Ultimately you need to 
evaluate whether a client is the right client for you, because 
the perfect client is one that understands and values what you 
do, whose design problem plays to your strengths, and whose 
timeline matches your availability. 
And this will keep the tigers away from your genitals.
www.allitebooks.com

	
22 	 Design Is a Job
3
Choosing the 
Right Clients
Getting clients is great. But they tend to come in enough 
different shapes and sizes that some of them will not be right 
for you. Or you may not be right for them. For the sake of 
both your businesses you need to make sure you’re selecting 
the right clients.
You have a responsibility to your potential client to make 
sure you’re actually the right designer for the job, and you 
have a responsibility to yourself to make sure the work you’re 
bringing in is within your capabilities. If you’re responsible 
for bringing in work for a shop full of people, you certainly 
have a responsibility not to put them in a bad position by 
bringing in work that doesn’t play to their strengths. 
The clients you choose to take on define you. Your portfo-
lio needs to tell a story and each client you add to it is another 
chapter in that story. Make sure you’re consciously building 
the story you want to be telling. And make sure your story is 
compelling enough that your next client is excited to become 
a character in it.

 	
Choosing the Right Clients	 23	
In ten years of business at Mule, we’ve taken on projects 
we’ve been personally excited about, projects we thought 
had a fantastic benefit to the world, projects we thought were 
great fun, projects with subject matter we were curious about, 
and yes, even projects that were taken primarily to keep the 
lights on (if any clients are reading this please rest assured that 
yours did not fit into that last category). But we’ve never taken 
on a project that we either were ashamed of or knew would 
be doomed from the start.
Can you do good work for this client?
The business development process should go both ways. A 
potential client is trying to decide whether they want to work 
with you, and you’re trying to decide whether you want to 
work with them. Are they tackling a problem that’s interest-
ing to you? Do you have the core competencies to solve it? Is 
there room for you in the problem-solving process? Can they 
pay you?
Over the years the one constant that we’ve been able to 
rely on is that how a potential client behaves in the business 
development process is exactly how they will behave during 
the project. Trust your gut. If they’re slow to return your calls 
now, while they’re trying to engage you, they’ll be just as 
slow later. If gathering requirements or technical constraints 
is hard, then gathering feedback will be just as hard, if not 
harder. If your conversations reveal a May Day parade of red 
flags, then disengage. You will not be able to do good work, 
and neither you nor the client will be well-served.
Optimally, a client shows up and says, “We have a good 
sense for our problem, we’re not tied to any particular solu-
tion, and we’re looking forward to working together to come 
up with one using our collective expertise.” And then we all 
take off on our unicorns. More likely than not, clients tend to 
show up with a solution in mind, even if they can’t fully ar-
ticulate the problem. 
It’s whether you’re able to walk them backward from the 
solution they envision to the problem, and how open they are 
to that process, that lets you know they’re going to be a good 

	
24 	 Design Is a Job
client. Your ability to do that is a sign of how good a designer 
you are as well.
That conversation generally goes something like this:
“The home page just needs two big buttons: ‘buy pants’ and 
‘subscribe to our newsletter about pants.’”
“What’s your goal with those big buttons?”
“We want people to buy our pants.”
“Are they good pants?”
“They’re the best pants.”
“Why don’t we start by getting people as excited about 
your pants as you are?”
“Go on...”
That’s gonna be a good client.
A bad client conversation goes like this:
“The home page just needs two big buttons: ‘buy pants’ and 
‘subscribe to our newsletter about pants.’”
“What’s your goal with those big buttons?”
“What do you care? Just make my buttons!”
Bad client. Walk away and let them see how great you look 
in your pants as you do so.
Do they understand what you bring  
to the table?
“Don’t worry. We know exactly what we need.”
Beware of clients who have waited to call you until they 
have a perfect diagram of what they need and want you to col-
or it in. If they’re not coming to you for strategy and problem-
solving, they’re not coming to you for design, they’re coming 
to you for production. And if you take on production work, 
you don’t get to call yourself a designer. (Yes, there’s a union. 
And we’re vicious.)
Look for clients who have clear goals, not detailed punch 
lists. This is especially true of RFPs that require you to reply 
directly to each line item at the risk of being disqualified from 
the process. You don’t want to sign up for a process that you 
know is broken from the start. Once you set sail on a boat you 
can’t convince a captain to take to the sky.

 	
Choosing the Right Clients	 25	
From a client’s point of view, hire a designer to help you 
get to a solution. Not to execute on one. You wouldn’t show 
up at a database analyst’s door with a fully realized database 
schematic. Don’t show up at a designer’s door with a drawing 
of a tuna can.
Beware of negging
You know that douchebag at the bar who walks up to your 
friends and says, “You know, I usually date models….” Yeah, 
that guy. The client services version of that is, “You know, 
we’ve got some really big name agencies who’d love to get this 
job.” Great, go call them. Don’t work for someone who tries  
to make you feel they’re lowering themselves to work with 
you, even as a negotiation tactic. Good work comes from  
mutual respect.
Reluctant buyers
Never work with someone who shows up begrudgingly and 
doesn’t understand the value of design. It’s not going to work 
out. If someone doesn’t understand the value of what you do 
they’re going to be reluctant to both pay the price and do the 
work to get it done right.
We see this with early stage startups who were sent by 
their VCs. They don’t want to be working with a design 
agency. Either they don’t see the value, or they feel like bring-
ing in an outside resource is slowing them down. We also 
see it with internal designers who were sent by a higher-up. 
Sometimes they feel like they should have been allowed to do 
the job themselves, sometimes they’re freaked out about their 
own job security. Either way, a reluctant buyer will be focused 
on proving that you weren’t needed and trying to disengage 
themselves from the process like a little kid tanking the violin 
lessons his dad forced him to take.
The design process gets messy, and people need to be able 
to tell each other difficult things like “Your business model 
won’t work.” You won’t be able to have those discussions with 
people who don’t value what you have to say.

	
26 	 Design Is a Job
Is this project core to their business?
Someone who is in the business of selling pants will still be 
selling pants in three to four months, provided they’re still 
selling anything. But when someone selling pants comes to 
you with an idea to sell toasters, beware. Why are they getting 
into a new business? Is it a natural growth of their existing 
business? Does their expertise in their current business trans-
late to their new business? Or is it an opportunistic attempt 
to “fill a hole in the market”? That hole may close before the 
project is over, and they’ll want to move to the next opportu-
nity. Want to redo all that work? No, because they’ll want you 
to do it for free.
Which brings us to the most important thing of all.
Work for money
You are in business. You need to be as confident about money 
as you are about design.
How clients talk about money is also a good indication 
of what sort of client they will be. Do they already have the 
money? Do they have to make the business case for design to 
get the money? What do they value and what are they willing 
to pay for? What don’t they want to pay for? Do they have ac-
cess to as much money as it will take? Do they already have a 
budget limit? Have they already worked with a designer who 
took their money and didn’t give them value in return? Are 
they cagey about telling you how much they want to spend? If 
so, why?
Beware of clients who want you to work for equity or  
other things that can’t be easily converted into rent. There’s 
too much there beyond your control. And especially beware 
of clients who tell you the work you do together will look 
great in your portfolio. For one, it probably won’t. A client 
who asks you to work for less than market rates already  
disrespects you. How do you think that’ll play out during the 
project? Think you’re getting portfolio-level work out of that? 
Secondly, you’re in business to make money. I’m lucky 
enough that I get to do what I love, but only because I can 

 	
Choosing the Right Clients	 27	
make a living off of it. Working for portfolio fodder is the 
same as dying young and leaving a good-looking corpse.
Never work for free. Any work you take on for free will 
get pushed aside for paying work. That does neither you nor 
the client any favors. Neither of you will respect each other’s 
time. If the situation merits it, work at a discounted rate. But 
submit a budget showing the actual rate, with the discount ap-
plied. Let the client know the value of what they’re getting.
Money is a standard part of any business transaction. 
Watch out for clients who don’t understand the financial value 
of what they’re hiring you for. In ninety-five percent of the 
jobs we’ve taken on, our clients have met or exceeded their 
success metrics after our work was done. Can we take full 
credit for that? Sure! Well, no, probably not, but it’s safe to 
say we were definitely a part of it. Design, done right, is not a 
loss on the balance sheet and should not be bought or sold as 
one. Design is an investment in infrastructure and keeps the 
wheels of business running smoothly. Good design equals a 
more effective product or service. Design equals profit!
Your role in making clients better
Now, it’s easy to laugh at clients and say they’re bad clients. 
But the truth is that no one is born knowing how to be a good 
client, just as no one is born knowing how to be a good de-
signer. And look how hard you have to work at being a good 
designer!
By and large, most clients want to be good clients, and 
they’re trying to do the right thing by their business. 
Clients will always ask you to make their logo bigger, pre-
scribe solutions, and ask you to do things that will make you 
smack your forehead. You can roll your eyes at how much 
they don’t understand about design or you can roll up your 
sleeves and begin practicing your craft by helping them clarify 
what they need. 
Not knowing the design language doesn’t make someone 
a bad client. I doubt very much that most of you could have a 
medical conversation with your doctor on par with a conver-
sation your doctor could have with another doctor, and that 

	
28 	 Design Is a Job
doesn’t make you a bad patient. And just like a good doctor 
can put you at ease with a sensitive bedside manner and care 
with professional terminology, so must a good designer culti-
vate a productive means of getting the necessary information 
from their clients. 
It’s your job as a designer, and a communication profes-
sional, to find the right language to communicate with your 
client. When you say a client doesn’t “get it” you might as well 
be saying, “I couldn’t figure out how to get my point across. I 
am a lazy designer. Please take all my clients from me.” 
Your ethical responsibility 
You have a responsibility to the community at large to make 
sure that what you’re signing up to design is worth being de-
signed. That’s right, kids: I’m interjecting ethics into the mix. 
You are responsible for the work you put into the world.
A few years ago I was interviewing a designer for a job. 
We ended up passing on him. Not because the work was bad; 
it wasn’t. And not because he interviewed badly; he didn’t. 
We passed on him because, while reviewing his portfolio, we 
came across work for a client I won’t name. Let’s just say their 
product kills people.
“Why did you work on that?” I asked.
There are two answers I would have accepted from him. 
“I don’t have a problem with their business model—in fact, I 
think there are too many people in the world.” Weird? Sure. 
But hey, he would have been taking a stand. The second an-
swer I’d have accepted would’ve been, “They’re terrible, but 
I really needed the money and had no other options.” I can’t 
begrudge anyone making a living, and we’ve all done a few 
things we’re not proud of.
Instead he looked surprised that I was asking the question 
and said something to the effect that it was just the next proj-
ect on his plate.
I asked him if he agreed with how the client made their 
money. He replied in the negative—he’d just done the design. 
I told him we didn’t take on any projects that we couldn’t ethi-
cally stand behind.

 	
Choosing the Right Clients	 29	
And here I’ll quote him: “Must be nice.”
And that’s when I decided not to hire him.
Now, I’m not trying to embarrass this individual, who I’m 
sure will have a solid design career, and I might have even 
done the same thing at his age. But as a designer, hell, as any 
type of craftsperson, you are responsible for what you put 
into the world. You are defined by the clients you take on,  
and you can only stand as proud of the work as its benefit to 
society entitles you to.
So before you take on a client, ask yourself whether the 
problem the client is asking you to solve is one you feel good 
about attaching your name to. Are they serving a real need? 
There is absolutely nothing wrong with making money—in 
fact, one of the goals of this book is to encourage you to make 
your fair share—but making it to someone else’s detriment 
makes you complicit in that person’s downfall. If a product 
you design does harm, then you have done harm. 
I urge each and every one of you to seek out projects that 
leave the world a better place than you found it. We used to 
design ways to get to the moon; now we design ways to never 
have to get out of bed. You have the power to change that. 
Making it work
Client services is a story based on a series of good relation-
ships. Before you enter into one make sure that all the neces-
sary elements for success are there. You’ll be spending some 
time with these people, and both your reputations are on  
the line.
Make sure you can spot the differences between a client 
who needs your help, an otherwise good client who’s just not 
a good fit for you, and an actual bad egg.
Will following these rules help you get better clients? 
Probably. Are they fail-safe? Oh, hell no. But they’re based 
on many, many years of trial and error, messing up, dusting 
myself off, and trying again. As always, I’m not advocating for 
a single way of getting real or getting things done; I’m telling 
you how it worked out for me. Your mileage will certainly 
vary. Above all, the best advice I can give you in selecting your 

	
30 	 Design Is a Job
clients is to be confident, treat everyone with the same respect 
you want them to treat you with, trust your gut, and iron your 
shirt.
Now that we’ve decided who to work with let’s figure out 
what to charge them.

 	
Charging for Your Work	 31	
4
Charging for 
Your Work
This should be the shortest chapter of the book. Anything 
I have to tell you can be summed up thusly: charge as much 
as you can, deliver an honest value, and never work for free. 
Unfortunately, most designers feel such pangs of guilt about 
charging an adequate amount for their work, if anything at 
all, that it’s probably worth the time and effort to go a little 
deeper.
Let’s get comfortable talking about money
Before we go any further we need to get over this money 
thing. It has come to my attention that some of you are un-
comfortable with the idea of money. Let’s start by going over 
a short list of people who are not uncomfortable with money: 
your landlord, your utility companies, your insurance agent, 
your grocer, your tailor (yes, you should have one), and your 
doctor. If you have kids, let’s add their orthodontist and the 
bursar at their eventual college of choice to the list. Money is 
www.allitebooks.com

	
32 	 Design Is a Job
so necessary to the fabric of society that even my friends in 
Berkeley have a secret guilty stash of it. 
The minute you got into the design game, you took up a 
trade that involves money changing hands. And hopefully you 
can get on the receiving end of that transaction. You are not 
doing design, you are selling design, which is a valuable service. 
If you don’t want to charge for your services, you can pick up 
Design Is a Hobby on aisle three of Michael’s between the balsa 
wood and yarn. 
But if you are trying to make a living as a designer, then 
comfort with money needs to be part of your skill set. There 
will be no “ums,” no hesitation when a client asks for a price, 
no asking them to tell you what your work is worth. As with 
all parts of the job, confidence begets confidence, and it’s even 
more so with money. No one wants to hand money to some-
one who behaves like they don’t deserve it, or has no idea 
what to do with it. 
And above all, you will never, ever tell a client, “I’m not 
comfortable talking about money.”
My friend Anil Dash once said that if you hand a client 
an estimate and slap them across the face and they complain 
about the slap, then the estimate wasn’t high enough. The best 
part is that he was actually a client when he said that.
So how much should you charge? You charge as much as 
you can. If you can stand in front of a client completely confi-
dent and explain why you are worth the amount you quoted, 
you should charge it. The problem with designers isn’t that 
they don’t know how much to charge; it’s that they’re afraid 
to charge it!
You can always negotiate down from a price that was too 
high, but you can’t recover from a price that was too low. 
You’re stuck with that. There is nothing wrong with trying to 
get the highest price for your work. It’s supply and demand. 
The more demand there is for a particular service, the more 
suppliers of that service can charge. You’ll find that your rates 
will fluctuate as the market for design ebbs and flows. But if 
you are not confident in the value of your work, there’s no 
way you’ll be comfortable charging a fair price.

 	
Charging for Your Work	 33	
Approaching pricing 
A few years ago I was fortunate enough to work with a com-
pany called Kickstart (not to be confused with Kickstarter, the 
excellent crowd-sourcing project funding service). Kickstart 
is an NGO (non-governmental organization) that designs and 
manufactures low-cost water pumps for use in impoverished 
agricultural areas of the world, mainly in Eastern Africa. They 
have an amazing track record of helping people lift themselves 
out of poverty by using these simple, easy-to-fix water pumps 
to irrigate crops. They create jobs. Here’s why I’m mentioning 
it: they don’t give away the pumps, like most NGOs would. 
They sell them. 
The Kickstart founders spent years working with NGOs 
who donated equipment and tools to those in need, only to 
return to the scene and find that the equipment had been 
scavenged for parts or was sitting unused and rusting away. 
People didn’t value (or need) what they had been given. So 
Kickstart decided to sell their pumps, marketing them as the 
“Super MoneyMaker.” The results were impressive. Instead of 
free hand-outs, the Super MoneyMaker became an item the 
poorest people in the world would save up for. Only people 
who actually planned to use one would buy one. When you 
pay for something with your own money, you value it more 
than when you get it for free. You take care of it. Most telling, 
people would scavenge from other things to repair their Super 
MoneyMakers. 
Undercharging for your work has the same effect. You’re 
telling your client the work has little value. Clients value you 
in direct proportion to how much it costs them. If you have 
ever done volunteer work, you may have noticed that the 
people you were volunteering for had no trouble making in-
creasing demands on your time. No one is going to value your 
work, or your time, if you don’t.
Oh, and guess how much people value free work? You  
got it.
Your design work is your client’s Super MoneyMaker. 
 

	
34 	 Design Is a Job
What to charge
About once a week we get an email or call that starts, “How 
much do you charge for a website?” And while it’s easy to roll 
your eyes at a question like that, you’d do better to remember 
two things: you’re in a service profession, and it’s actually a 
fair question. From a client’s perspective, the basis for pricing 
is opaque at best. 
Design can mean a lot of things. Ask five designers what 
they would charge to design the exact same thing and you will 
get five different answers. To a prospective client, the idea of 
hiring a design firm can be daunting enough without having 
to figure out how much it’s all going to cost. Calling a bunch 
of design firms and getting a range of prices that don’t re-
semble each other has got to make you feel like people are just 
making this shit up. Which they are.
A client can get work of any description for a cost between 
zero and infinity. And people who don’t buy design every day 
might not have a good idea of all the options that go into  
setting a price. It’s your job to help them figure it out. And 
sometimes the best way to do that is to help them map it to 
something they are familiar with purchasing. After all there’s 
not much difference between asking, “How much do you 
charge for a website?” and “How much do you charge for a 
car?” Except that people have probably bought a car before. 
They know that the type of car a college student needs to get 
back and forth to class is vastly different than what parents 
with a new set of twins need. And that they’ll have to pay 
more for the latter. And that, even among one type of car, the 
price can vary wildly based on their quality and feature set, 
which really isn’t that different from decisions you’d have to 
make in choosing what kind of website you want and who 
you want to build it. Except they may not know that yet  
(metaphors are handy).
When you first go off on your own to freelance, or start a 
studio, you might have the idea that everyone else has it all 
figured out. (We totally do! I’m totally lying!) There’s no secret 
formula for knowing how much to charge for your work. 
There’s only the experience you gain from having to do it 

 	
Charging for Your Work	 35	
over and over again. You’ll undercharge a few; you might even 
overcharge a few. But eventually you do it enough times that 
patterns start to emerge. You gain enough experience to real-
ize that this new job is similar to a job you did last year, which 
you undercharged for. So you make the correction. Eventually 
what you gain is the confidence to trust your math and the 
experience to trust your instincts. 
If you’re ever in a situation where you can overhear a  
couple of design studio heads having a casual conversation, 
try to listen in. The way each maneuvers to get the other to 
reveal their pricing structure is as fascinating as watching two 
overweight old bulldogs in the dog park circling each other 
for a genital sniff, but with much less probability of success. 
And a lot more slobber.
The going rate for design work isn’t posted anywhere like 
the price of apples. And unlike competing grocers, you can’t 
casually walk by their apple stand and see what your competi-
tion is charging to adjust your prices accordingly. But with a 
little savvy and a bit of friendliness you should be able to get a 
general idea, at least a ballpark hourly rate, of what others are 
charging. Decide who you are competing against, and you will 
at least have a good ballpark to start playing in. 
There is always someone cheaper. Negotiate price, but 
don’t compete on price. Compete on quality, value, and fit. 
Charge for value, not time
There are formulas that claim to help you figure out what to 
charge by looking at how much you need to make. They’ll 
have you add up your expenses, rent, supplies, utilities, etc., 
and then add a markup to that based on how much profit you 
want. But there’s a problem with most of those formulas: they 
do not calculate a billing rate—they calculate a cover-your-ass 
rate. You should, of course, know the minimum rate you need 
to make to keep the lights on. But you should be charging  
clients based on what that work is worth to them, not the 
time it takes you to complete it. 
Let’s say you’re working on bids for two logos for the same 
company. One is a logo for an internal project team. The other 

	
36 	 Design Is a Job
is for a new service they’re expecting to become a major new 
profit center. And let’s also say you expect both of them to 
take you the same amount of time. (Bear with me as I over-
simplify the hell out of this.) Are you going to charge the same 
for both? No, you are not. Because the first logo is designed to 
build camaraderie around an internal project, while the sec-
ond is part of a major project release that could stand to make 
the company a lot of money. It’s got a much higher value to 
the company.   
Only you know the value of your time. (Hint: it is greater 
than $0.) But the value of your work to a particular client de-
pends on what the client has to gain from that work. And the 
client is not buying time from you. They are buying work. 
The value of that work is what you need to charge them for.
Do your research
This is different than the research you’ll be doing once you 
sign the project. You get paid for that. This is research in sup-
port of putting together a smart bid. 
Find out as much about the company you’ll be working 
for as possible. Do they have a history of launching products 
on time? Is there a possibility that they’ll be acquired or shut 
down during the project? Are you dealing with the actual 
decision-makers? Can you have access to the actual decision-
makers? And the super obvious, but oft-forgotten: do they 
have money to pay you?
Find out about their internal teams and their involvement 
in the project. If they’re responsible for major pieces (content 
strategy and the backend buildout are two excellent examples), 
have conversations with the people responsible for that. Make 
sure you’ll all be speaking the same project language. (This 
also goes a long way toward building allies in the upcoming 
project, by the way.)
Do some research into the market landscape as well. 
Maybe there’s a good reason why no one else has been able to 
sell mismatched socks online. 
Not only will this research help you prepare a solid price, 
the knowledge you gain from it will make you a better 

 	
Charging for Your Work	 37	
salesperson. And help you to close the deal with confidence. 
(Or tell you enough to stay away from the project!)
Figure out what the client really wants early 
Most clients will approach you with a wish list of desires. If 
they don’t you should actually work with them on coming up 
with one. Assign a cost and a benefit to each one. Then figure 
out which ones are crucial to the project and which ones 
would be nice to have. Figure out which ones actually fit into 
their overall goals. Not only will this help you come up with  
a proper scope, but it’ll give you a handy list of priorities 
should you need to adjust the budget. It also keeps additional 
things from popping up later in the project, you know, after 
it’s been scoped.
Clearly define your services
Make sure the client knows exactly which services they are 
being charged for, and just as importantly, which ones they 
aren’t being charged for. Explain how the services are inter-
connected. For example, research isn’t there to be cut; the rest 
of the work is actually contingent upon it. Show the client 
that you’ve thought through the different parts of a project 
and that each of those parts has a cost. You’d expect this kind 
of itemization from any other business, and design is no dif-
ferent. When your mechanic presents you with a bill, you 
may cringe; but when he goes over the itemized list you be-
gin to see how that figure got there, and you see the care and 
concern that went into preparing that number. It also doesn’t 
occur to you to talk your mechanic down because you can see 
that each part has a cost. Your job is to treat your time and ex-
pertise as if it has that same set cost.
We’ve also found that delivering a chart of all the steps  
necessary to the site launch with a column for what we’re  
responsible for and what they’re responsible for is a good way 
to find out what services the client may not even be aware 
they need. And, of course, we’re talking about content migra-
tion. Of course we are.

	
38 	 Design Is a Job
“But it’ll only take me an hour!”
Good for you! That should be a highly profitable job. 
Don’t punish yourself for being good or efficient. I’ve seen 
designers pull their hair out trying to solve something and 
I’ve seen designers nail something on the first try. Quite often 
these were the same designers on consecutive days. In either 
situation, what the client pays for is that solution, not the time 
it took you to get there. If it should take you less time than 
what was estimated and agreed to, and that estimate was cre-
ated honestly based on previous similar work: great. 
(I’ll be honest with you. Because I love you and you’re not 
going to share this with clients. I have actually sat on work  
for a few extra days and waited to deliver it closer to the esti-
mated date just to avoid this conversation. But I’m a bad  
person. I’m certainly not recommending you do this.)
The flip side of that, of course, is that you can’t charge the 
client for the time it takes you to learn a particular tool. If a 
client hired you to build something in a platform you don’t 
know yet but feel confident you can learn, the time it takes 
you to pick up that expertise is on you. Once you consider 
yourself capable, turn the meter on.
Large jobs vs. small jobs
Beware of small jobs. The greatest trick the devil ever pulled 
was convincing the world that a small job wouldn’t be too 
much of a problem. 
When I was in college I took a holiday job loading UPS 
trucks at night. I trained with a guy named Frank. First  
piece of advice Frank gave me was, “Watch out for the small 
boxes, kid.”
“Why?”
“You’ll find out.”
Sure enough, I absentmindedly grabbed the first small box 
that shot out of the chute and it slammed my hand into the 
floor. Frank laughed and laughed. He laughed even harder 

 	
Charging for Your Work	 39	
when he realized I needed stitches. I really liked Frank. (The 
box was filled with ball bearings, by the way.)
The moral of this story is that small jobs contain the same 
kinds of problems as big jobs, minus the budget and the time 
to deal with them adequately. You’ll try to squeeze them into 
as little time as possible and they don’t want to be squeezed. 
Remember, a small job for you is not necessarily a small job 
for the client. And while you may be thinking that this is a 
little something you can squeeze in between big projects, the 
client is still expecting the same amount of detailed attention 
you’re giving your bigger projects. And they’d be right to ex-
pect that. 
Getting your price
Mention ballparks early to avoid sticker shock
As a kid I was lucky enough to be raised in the fine city of 
Philadelphia (holla!) and unlucky enough to witness base-
ball at Veterans Stadium (pronounced VEH-tchrn). Veterans 
Stadium was one of those terrible multi-use complexes built 
in the 70s that tarnished the landscape in several cities across 
America. Anyhow, as a kid I didn’t have much money, so my 
friends and I would get seats in the 700 level, the highest level 
of the stadium. (Between pitches we’d throw batteries at the 
airplanes flying below us.) 
This is an incredibly long-winded way to tell you that as 
soon as a client calls we try to give them what we call a “700 
level ballpark figure.” Meaning, we can’t see too much of the 
detail on the field yet, but it sounds like it’s an $80–$120K  
project. As we gain insight into the project we’ll start getting 
more precise with that figure and communicate that with 
them so that by the time they get a proposal in front of them 
it’s a figure they’ll be prepared for.
If a potential client is going to have sticker shock, get it 
over with as soon as possible. Before you’ve taken the time  
to put together a proposal. 

	
40 	 Design Is a Job
Nothing in your proposal should be a surprise
Some people treat proposals like they are passing a number in 
a folded piece of paper across a table to be peeked at and then 
accepted or rejected. Just as a design project requires client in-
put and feedback along the way, so does a proposal. Start with 
a high-level draft and iterate quickly, with the client offering 
insight into anything that may trip up their team and pointing 
out potential roadblocks.
The frank and open communication you begin here will 
serve you well throughout the project. You need to expose all 
implicit assumptions because the road to feeling ripped off 
is paved with assumptions about what you were getting. You 
and the client may agree on a number and have radically dif-
ferent ideas of what that number includes.
It’s perfectly fine to summarize what is included and  
what isn’t for reference. Another way to handle this is to list 
everything that needs to be done on the project and who is 
responsible for it, whether it is you, the client, or a third (even 
as-yet-unnamed) party. You compile this list by means of a 
phone call or in-person conversation in which you go through 
the list of everything that you anticipate will need to be done 
and ask the client who they would like to be responsible for 
that work. Everything you are responsible for goes into your 
estimate. Everything you aren’t responsible for goes on a list 
of scope exclusions. 
Here is a short list of terrible surprises to avoid, just to give 
you an idea:
• Copywriting  
• Backend development
• Localization 
• Video production and motion graphics 
• Custom illustration
• Content migration
• Print collateral
• CMS customization 
• SEO 
• Maintenance

 	
Charging for Your Work	 41	
Your personal charm and enthusiasm for your work should 
convert your main client contact into a strong ally by the time 
the proposal is finalized, so that you already have the bless-
ing of a person on the inside when it’s time to present the 
proposal.
Present it, don’t send it!
Putting together a proposal can be such an onerous and time-
consuming job that getting it all wrapped up can feel like a 
victory. And it is—of sorts. But you haven’t won anything yet. 
Getting the proposal ready just means that you’re now ready 
to sell it. It’s really enticing to write a nice little email, attach 
the proposal, and ride off to the couch or bar. It’s also a great 
way to lose a job.
Don’t ever leave a proposal on its own. A proposal is a 
prop for a sales presentation. If at all possible, get yourself 
in front of the client’s decision-makers and sell. Everything 
you learned while preparing the proposal should be at your 
disposal. Read the room. Go over as much or as little detail as 
the room requires. Make sure you go over key benefits of the 
proposal. You don’t sell features, you build features. You sell 
benefits. You are convincing them to hire you, not accept your 
proposal. The proposal is merely one data point toward that 
decision. Your presentation skills will decide how big a data 
point it is. 
Three things can happen now: you can not get the job, you 
can get the job right away, or you can be asked to negotiate. 
It’s a little bit like the three bears. And guess whose porridge is 
just right? Getting the job right away? No.
“Why is your bid higher than the others?”
I love it when a client asks this question. You will learn to love 
it as well. First off, congratulations on having the confidence 
to bid high but not too high! Second, your high bid did not 
scare off the client. Furthermore, you’re being presented with 
an excellent opportunity to further sell yourself. The client is 
asking you to close the deal.
www.allitebooks.com

	
42 	 Design Is a Job
You need to sound confident as hell that not only did you 
bid correctly, but that you are the best possible fit for this 
job. And by going into detail about how you got to that price, 
you can show them that you have a detailed understanding of 
what it will take to get that job done. Which, by the way, you 
better have.
Also, this is an opportunity to build yourself up, not tear 
others down. Don’t badmouth other bidders; you’re not help-
ing yourself by doing that. Quite the opposite. You don’t want 
to get a job because you convinced someone the other bidders 
sucked. You want to get the job because you were the right 
person for it.
Negotiation
Having to negotiate your price isn’t a sign that something 
went wrong—it’s a sign that something went right.
You will know you charged too little if the client agrees 
right away. There’s nothing quite as disconcerting as seeing a 
client’s eyes light up and their mouth turn into a Cheshire cat-
like grin when they see your estimate and their pen races to 
sign the dotted line before you realize your mistake. 
Ideally, your price should require a bit of negotiation. You 
don’t want to charge so much that they don’t feel like they 
can negotiate, but you also don’t want to leave money on the 
table. You want a client to feel like your time and expertise 
are valuable, that you’re right for the job, and that it may take 
a little work on everybody’s part to make this happen. Once 
a client has decided to put effort into working together, they 
have skin in the game and it’s in their best interest to get it  
to work. 
If the client wants the price lowered, go over all the items 
in the proposal and find out what can be cut. Never lower 
the price without taking something away. And never take 
something away without explaining the lost benefit. If the 
lost benefit wasn’t that great then maybe it’s a fine thing to cut 
anyway. The amount isn’t arbitrary; every item has a set cost. 
So if you want to pay less you have to be willing to get less. 

 	
Charging for Your Work	 43	
And when I talk about things to cut I am talking about the 
amount of stuff the client will have delivered to them, i.e., site 
features. You can’t cut parts of your process that you need to 
do the job. The answer to “Can we take out this research?” is 
always no.
Remember, the client wouldn’t be negotiating with you if 
they didn’t already want to work with you. So negotiate from 
a place of confidence. That means being okay with not get-
ting the job. Confidence doesn’t come from knowing you’re 
right—it comes from being okay with failing.
Why clients think they can lowball
First off, let’s define lowballing as the actions of a client who 
is not necessarily constrained by budget but wants to con-
vince you that you should undercharge for your work. This is 
different from a client who values your work but is stuck with 
a fixed budget. 
It’s a client’s job to get the most work from you for the least 
amount of money. And they’re comfortable doing it because 
you probably presented the price in an apologetic tone with 
a lot of up-talking. We all know what up-talking is, right? It’s 
when you end every sentence as if it were a question. Like 
you’re asking for approval for what you just said. The next 
time you have dinner with a bunch of people pay attention to 
how they give the waiter their order. 
“And for you, sir?”
“I’ll have the pasta?”
Just once I’d like the waiter to come back with, “No. 
Actually, that was wrong. I’ve got you down for the fish.”
Those are people who haven’t clearly made up their mind 
about what they’re having and defaulted to something they 
weren’t totally sure about. It’s easy to change their minds. So 
when you negotiate price with a client and say, “That’ll be 
$50,000?” What they hear, if they’re good at their job—which 
is to get the best value for the best price—is “I can totally be 
talked down to $40,000.”
Clients may also lowball you because design doesn’t hold 
any value for them. You should have weeded those clients 

	
44 	 Design Is a Job
out earlier, but they get through once in a while. If you’re not 
delivering your estimate with confidence, you’re reinforcing 
their opinion. 
How can you prevent them from doing it? Well, pres-
ent with confidence and conviction and back your numbers 
up with good solid research, of course. But more important 
than trying to prevent them from doing it is how to address 
it when it happens. Stand your ground. You gave your price. 
And like I said, it’s their job to try to talk you down. They’ve 
got to try, right? 
Get comfortable saying, “No.” Go stand in front of a mirror 
right now. C’mon. Let’s do it together. “No. This is my price. 
This is what it costs to work with me.”
You will lose work. But you will also feel better about the 
work you get. You may even get a reputation as a hard-ass.  
I can tell you from personal experience, it’s not the end of  
the world. 
In summary
Look, money is hard. It took me years to get comfortable with 
the idea of being a financial grownup. And I doubt many of 
you got into this business for the money. I’m guessing you’re 
here because you love design. But to practice your craft you 
need to keep the lights on, and you need your financial house 
in order. The more attention you pay to this stuff at the right 
time, the less of your overall day you’ll spend worrying and 
fretting about it. Don’t worry about money, deal with money. 
The secrets to getting the price you want for your work 
are having done the homework to know you’re asking for the 
right thing, the confidence to ask for it, and the willingness to 
walk away when you can’t get it. Now that I think of it, I just 
accidentally gave you the secret to life, which I was saving for 
another book.

 	
Working With Contracts	 45	
5
Working with 
Contracts
I’ll assume that everyone reading this book was given “the 
talk” at some point during their passage through the sticky 
doors to adolescence. You know; the talk. Where one—or 
good grief, both—of your parents pulls you aside and attempts 
to talk to you about sex. And being safe. And respecting one 
another. And protection. And you’re pretty sure they’re more 
freaked out by giving the talk than you are of getting it. 
Some of us, including me, have now had to give the talk to 
our own teenagers. (Any doubt I had about him being my kid 
vanished when he said, “Yeah, I already know all of this from 
4chan.”) 
Talking to teens about sex is a lot like talking to designers 
about contracts. “We’re being careful. We’re in love. We trust 
each other. They have an agile process. He promised there 
wouldn’t be any backend development.”
A contract is like a prophylactic. It won’t keep you from 
getting fucked, but it may keep you free from additional  
liabilities down the road.

	
46 	 Design Is a Job
See how I lured you into a chapter about contracts with 
tawdry sex talk? At the end of the chapter I’ll tell you a great 
dirty joke, too.
In the last chapter we learned how to convince clients to 
work with us. Everything was great. We sold them on what a 
great partner we’d be; we were ready to start working; every-
one was happy, etc., etc. Shouldn’t we be designing by now? 
What went wrong? 
Nothing. And we’re going to do our best to keep it that 
way, by specifying the responsibilities of each party to the 
greatest extent possible in a written document signed by  
both parties.
Why a contract?
A contract establishes the nature of the relationship between 
all parties and makes the important stuff clear to everyone 
involved:
• What are the ground rules for working together?
• How much money is exchanged and at what point?
• What are the deliverables, and when are they due?
• What happens if there is a delay?
• Who has what rights? What rights does the client get and 
when? Which do you retain?
And very importantly, a contract states what should happen if 
everything goes to hell. No one goes into a relationship with 
the intention to screw the other party, but things happen. 
Markets collapse. Funding falls through. Leadership changes. 
Often, the problem is that one party assumed the other was 
responsible for something when this wasn’t the case—some-
thing like a trademark search or content migration. 
Then there are deadlines. They get missed on both sides. 
Do you want to be liable when your client is telling you 
they’re going to miss the holiday shopping season because the 
site is late to launch? 

 	
Working With Contracts	 47	
You can prevent a lot of weirdness—expensive, painful 
weirdness—down the road if you clarify all this up front. 
Getting entangled in ambiguity or dealing with a legal 
dispute keeps you from getting paid for your work, creates a 
huge amount of frustration, threatens your reputation (your 
most important asset), and keeps you from spending your day 
designing stuff. 
In short, a contract is what you need to start building trust 
between all parties. No contract, no basis for trust. 
Get a lawyer (a love story)
Many, many years ago when our company was still in its in-
fancy we were working with a particular client on a website. 
And, yes, we had a contract in place, one we’d cobbled togeth-
er from a combination of online resources and other design 
companies who’d been kind enough to share their contracts 
with us. The project was going well enough. Until it wasn’t.
The client, for whatever reason, had decided he was dissat-
isfied with our design solutions. It happens. We work through 
it. Except this particular client decided to bring in another  
designer, someone he’d previously worked with on print col-
lateral to design the site. Since the project was for a full build-
out he expected us to take this other designer’s work and build 
the site. (Small aside here: if anyone approaches you to work 
on a project they’ve already hired another designer for, walk 
away. Professional courtesy. More on that in Chapter 10.)
Our contract specifically stated that the client couldn’t 
bring in another designer to do the work he’d hired us for. 
So we pulled him aside and talked to him about it. (Contract 
conversations should happen in person, if at all possible, and 
never in front of the whole team. Gives everyone a chance to 
save face.) 
Unfortunately the client did not see it the way we did and 
threatened to sue us for refusing to finish the project. Not 
having been in business for very long, and not having huge 
reserves of cash, we freaked out. We’d never had a client 

	
48 	 Design Is a Job
threaten to sue us before! Several conversations with the  
client only seemed to make things worse. 
We knew we needed a lawyer, and fortunately we remem-
bered the name of the friendly corporate counsel from a pre-
vious employer. She recommended we call her partner’s son, a 
smart young lawyer at a local firm. His name is Gabe. 
Gabe listened to our story, looked over our contract, smirk-
ing while he read it, and said the most magical phrase I’d ever 
heard: “I can make this go away.” And after a calm but forceful 
phone call, he did. 
Sadly, we had to fire the client. (Yes, sadly. I take no pride 
in ever having to do that, and to this day we’ve only ever had 
to do it twice.) But we were able to walk away relatively un-
scathed, with a lesson learned. 
Most importantly, we added a valuable member to our 
team: Gabe Levine is still with us to this day. He solidified all 
our standard contracts, reviews incoming contracts, gives us 
client relationship advice, and has even come on stage with 
me when I talk about contracts. 
Why am I waxing so rhapsodic about my lawyer? He 
makes sure my contracts are strong and helps me negotiate 
with confidence. Having him as an advisor makes me confi-
dent enough in what I’m doing that I ask for what I’m worth 
and don’t negotiate my rights away. But most of all, I love my 
lawyer because he makes me money.
By and large the first thing I hear when someone tells me 
they’re having a problem getting paid and I tell them to hire a 
lawyer is, “They’re too expensive.” Yes, they do cost money. 
But so do you! The better our contracts, the more secure our 
client relationships. His job isn’t to sue clients—it’s to make 
sure we never land in a place where we have to. And ulti- 
mately he is trained and knowledgeable in things that I am 
not. Not having to do those things, and letting someone do 
them well, means I can spend my time doing what I’m good 
at—designing things. I happily write two checks every month. 
His is the first; my therapist’s is the second.
The second comment I hear most about lawyers is, “Are 
things at the point where I need a lawyer already?” Things 

 	
Working With Contracts	 49	
were at that point when you decided to stop being an amateur 
and turned pro. Look: you don’t need to carry your lawyer 
around with you or talk to her every day. Work with her on a 
solid master contract to cover your most frequent needs, espe-
cially if you’re a contractor or freelancer, and then get her on 
the phone if the client has questions about it.
How to introduce your client and your lawyer
For the most part your lawyer is an invisible advisor. She 
should review all of your contracts, but she rarely exposes 
herself to the client. This isn’t to say that your lawyer needs 
to be a secret. In fact, you should make no bones about telling 
your client that you’re having your lawyer review something. 
They are likely doing the same. Sometimes, as in the example 
above, just letting a client know that you have a lawyer as well 
helps to put them, well, let’s say at ease. 
There’s nothing wrong with letting your lawyer and the 
client’s lawyer settle small contract disputes directly. It usually 
saves a lot of time. Heck, they probably went to school to-
gether. But never, ever, and I mean never talk to a client’s law-
yer directly without yours present. Only lawyers talk to other 
lawyers. Sometimes negotiating a very large project requires a 
friendly conference call with everyone and their lawyers. You 
can accomplish in one hour what might take days exchanging 
tracked changes.
We’ve been on conference calls with clients and found out 
their lawyers were, unexpectedly to us, on the call as well. So 
we calmly stated, “Unfortunately, we’re going to have to re-
schedule this call when our lawyer is available as well.” 
This can go one of two ways.
1.	The client is upset you have a lawyer. This is a huge red 
flag. This is a business relationship and good business 
people keep a lawyer handy to make sure they don’t do 
anything stupid. 
2.	Or, everyone is fine with it and you reschedule when your 
lawyer can join in.

	
50 	 Design Is a Job
Your lawyer is there to help you make sure you’re in the 
best possible position to help your clients without putting 
yourself in a bad spot. Your lawyer is a defensive asset and not 
to be weaponized unless absolutely necessary. If you have a 
lawyer who is turning everything into a fight, then it’s time 
for a conversation, or a new lawyer. 
Talking to clients about contracts
If you’re working with a large organization you may spend 
some time haggling about the contents of a contract, and 
they may even attempt to substitute their contract for yours. 
In either situation, you’ll want to confer with your excellent 
lawyer. However, if you’re working with a smaller organiza-
tion, or even with an individual, they may balk at the idea of 
a contract at all. And just as it’s your job to sell design, it may 
also become your job to sell them on the need to define the 
business relationship properly.
If a client flat-out refuses to sign a contract, that’s a red 
flag. But don’t give up right away: it may be that they’re just 
uncomfortable with the idea and need to talk about it. You’ll 
need to learn to make your case for why the contract is im-
portant to both of you, and be ready to walk away from the 
job should you be unable to convince them. A larger com-
pany may also refuse to sign your contract, and ask you to 
sign theirs instead. (They may refer to theirs as a “Master 
Services Agreement,” the same way Swanson calls hamburger 
“Salisbury steak.”) In which case you should run it by your 
lawyer before signing. 
Contracts protect both parties
Every relationship you have has an implicit contract. For 
example, if your buddy calls you and tells you that he just 
got dumped it’s implied that you will meet him at a bar right 
away. If your kid is sick it’s implied that you’ll make chicken 
soup. You hold the door open for the person behind you. You 
take turns merging into traffic. These are the implicit con-
tracts that keep society moving along at a nice pleasant clip. 

 	
Working With Contracts	 51	
But what happens when these implicit contracts go wrong? 
Tension builds and, eventually, arguments arise because one 
party believed the other party was responsible for behaving a 
certain way. (This is why I had my lawyer draw up a contract 
between me and my kid.)
Having an explicit understanding of what is expected from 
both parties in a relationship—an explicit agreement of what 
happens should something go wrong—relieves that tension. 
People go into a business arrangement with the best of inten-
tions and a lot of assumptions. A contract makes those as-
sumptions explicit by documenting the terms of engagement 
clearly.
If any red flags or concerns come up during the business 
development process, make sure those are addressed in the 
contract. Unless they are so big and unresolvable that you 
need to walk away. 
For example, let’s say you’ve decided, for whatever rea-
son, to work with a company that’s just laid off a thousand 
employees. Make sure the contract addresses what happens 
should the team you’re working with get laid off. And from 
the client’s side: let’s say they’re worried about working with 
an agency that’s out of state. Make sure a certain amount of 
visits to their office are baked into the contract.
That said, both parties don’t necessarily need equal protec-
tion. It’s doubtful that a 10-person studio, or one freelance 
designer, can bring down a startup of 100, much less an estab-
lished multi-national corporation. Make sure your contract 
protects you adequately. 
The larger and more established the organization, the more 
heinously skewed in their favor their terms are going to be. 
Always start from a strong position with your desired terms 
in mind and a good sense of what you are and aren’t willing to 
accept. There will always be other clients.
If you’ve done your work in the business development pro-
cess, you have allies in the organization. You have convinced 
someone with some amount of authority that your work is 
indispensable to their success. That is influence and leverage. 
You might hear, “That’s just our policy with outside vendors,” 
but, as with the Geneva Convention, you’ll find that there is 
www.allitebooks.com

	
52 	 Design Is a Job
frequently more wiggle room in policy than you’ve been led 
to expect.
Contract negotiations expose misunderstandings
Some of the essential terms—like the estimated price and key 
deliverables—get fleshed out as you negotiate the statement of 
work with your client. However, a lot of gray areas may ap-
pear during this process. 
For example, what does “payment due upon completion” 
really mean? What is “completion”? Things get ugly at the 
end when everyone involved doesn’t have a clear shared idea 
of what constitutes “done.” Does it mean that the website is 
live? Or when you deliver Photoshop files of the final design? 
When the client is subjectively satisfied with your work? Does 
the client need to send you written approval?
Settle the terms of the relationship first and save the argu-
ments for the design.
What makes a good contract?
First off, it’s good to have a contract separate from a statement 
of work. A contract defines the relationship between two or 
more parties. A statement of work defines a specific project, 
while a contract can cover a multitude of statements of work. 
For example, if you’ve done multiple projects with the same 
company you can choose to have the same contract cover all 
of those projects, but each project needs to have its own state-
ment of work.
Approach contract negotiation in the spirit of fairness 
while being aware of the balance of power. Who is fundamen-
tally in the pole position? It’s generally going to be the client. 
So if you have a good handle on what their anxieties are, you 
can address them without gutting essential protections.
If you are dealing with a large organization that has enough 
lawyers sitting around to sue you out of existence in their free 
time, you need to stick to your guns.
Make sure your contract includes all of the following:

 	
Working With Contracts	 53	
Intellectual property (IP) transfers on full payment
This simple little idea protects you from doing the work and 
getting shafted. Basically, it means that even though the work 
may be sitting on your clients’ server, until they’ve paid you 
for it, it belongs to you. Most clients are eager to get the IP to 
their work, because until they do, you can make a claim on 
money they make through that work. Also, you can request  
it back.   
Termination fee (or kill fee)
A termination fee protects you from walking away empty-
handed should a client kill the job for reasons that are out of 
your control. The kill fee should cover the resources you’ve 
allotted to this particular client and the fact that you’re not out 
looking for work because you’ve committed your time to this 
project. Lots of clients will balk at a kill fee because they think 
it means that you can walk out on a contract, and still make 
them pay. Not true. A fair contract is binding on both sides. 
Neither party can walk away without just cause.
If the client is uncomfortable with the kill fee, then don’t 
allow them to terminate for any reason other than your mate-
rial breach of the contract terms. 
As a basic rule of thumb: any contract that either party can 
just walk away from is not a contract. 
Deliverables acceptance language
This goes a long way toward making clients more comfort-
able with the provisions in your favor, such as the kill fee. The 
contract should state that if the client is not happy with your 
work they need to let you know and give you a chance to ad-
dress the problem, but ultimately they can, for all intents and 
purposes, fire you. That means you keep the work though. 
Do not get fired and deliver the work. It sucked, remember? 
Should a client tell you the work is no good and demand the 
rights to it, they’re probably trying to use it without paying 
you. This work is terrible! And the portions are so small!

	
54 	 Design Is a Job
Make sure your contract does not include:
Unreasonable indemnity language
This protects the client from using you as a human shield. 
For example: say you make some recommendations that ac-
cidentally violate a law. Stupid of you, yes, and it’s something 
you should fix. Ultimately the client could decide to sue you 
instead. But indemnity means that if the client got sued they 
could hold you responsible for their losses. An individual or 
a small studio simply can’t afford the insurance necessary to 
cover that kind of indemnity language, so avoid it.
Warranties
While you certainly design for success, and test accordingly, 
you simply cannot guarantee that a design will meet goals.  
It’s like asking a college to guarantee that getting a degree 
from them will get you a good job. A client once asked me for 
a guarantee and I told him I’d give him one if we could add a 
bonus clause to the contract should the goals be met. That was 
the end of that conversation.
What a contract doesn’t do
A contract doesn’t keep things from going wrong. It merely 
addresses what should happen when they do. Most impor-
tantly, a contract can’t make the project go right. There is no 
substitute for a solid client relationship coupled with good 
quality work—those are what make projects go well. And 
while a contract is essential to every project you take on, be-
ware of the false security that might come from statements 
like “Don’t worry. We have a contract!” 
A contract will not turn the wrong client into the right 
client. A contract is not a parking lot for red flags. If your 
gut is telling you that a relationship isn’t going to work out, 
trust your gut. It’s better to be wrong by passing up a job 
you should have taken than to be wrong by taking a job you 
shouldn’t have. There will always be other jobs.

 	
Working With Contracts	 55	
Enforcing the contract
Once both parties have agreed to terms, signed the contract, 
and exchanged copies, put it away. It’s there should you need 
it, but don’t use it as a shield during the project. There will be 
a million small disputes while you’re working together. The 
vast majority of these should be handled with civil conversa-
tions, always in person when possible. Handling disputes 
with conversation will eventually build the client relationship. 
Pulling out the contract at every possible opportunity will 
only undermine the relationship. Save it for those moments 
when things have actually gotten bad. Most projects don’t get 
that bad. And if they do, it’s a sign that you’re doing something 
else wrong. 
However, do make sure you understand everything you’ve 
agreed to and act like it. For example, if you have agreed to get 
approval in writing at every milestone, do that consistently. 
Don’t get lazy just because the project seems to be going well.
If a project gets to the point where you feel like the other 
party isn’t meeting their end of the contract, address it as soon 
as possible. But approach it with a positive attitude. Assume 
both parties want to fix it. This will be an account-level con-
versation. You and the client, one on one. Never whip out the 
contract in front of either team. You’ll have an easier time ne-
gotiating your way back to good project health in private. The 
goal is always to finish the project well.
Should it become clear that you’ve reached an impasse, 
then it’s time to call your lawyer for advice. Never threaten 
your client with your lawyer or with legal action until your 
lawyer tells you to do so.
The more careful you are when you enter into a client re-
lationship, the more attention you pay to details and dotted 
i’s and crossed t’s, the more likely you are to get through that 
project doing good, successful work, and build a lasting rela-
tionship that will lead to new work and referrals for years to 
come.
If a jerk like me can do this, you certainly can. I guarantee 
you’re nicer.

	
56 	 Design Is a Job
In ten years of business, I have never taken a client to 
court. I’ve only ever fired clients twice, and those are none of 
your business. I’ve been fired once. In the few times it hasn’t 
worked out, the parting has usually been civil. 
Except for the time it wasn’t. There’s no way I could write 
a chapter on contracts and ignore the biggest land mine of all.
Working with friends
The design and tech communities are small. You’re going to 
work with your friends at some point. In fact, there’s noth-
ing wrong with getting a chance to pitch on a project because 
you’re friends with somebody on the client team. You still 
need to sell yourself as with any other client. Nobody should 
hire you just because you’re buddies with Jim in marketing, 
but being friends with Jim might get you in the room.
And, in general, having a friend on the client team isn’t 
a problem as long as both of you behave professionally and 
don’t abuse the relationship. 
The particular land mine I’m talking about is informal proj-
ects with friends. The sort of stuff you feel funny about asking 
a contract for. I’d tell you to avoid these projects, but you’ll 
just ignore me, because, let’s face it, you’d feel like a giant jerk 
asking your buddy to sign a contract to design a few pages 
or make a logo for his pet project. Until your buddy sells his 
pet project. Now we have tension. And as bad as it is to have 
tension in a client relationship, it’s ten times worse when a 
friendship is also on the line.
If you insist on doing these projects, at the very least have 
a conversation about possible outcomes and detail your deci-
sions in an email to each other. That may be a bit uncomfort-
able (although it certainly doesn’t have to be) but it may ulti-
mately save a friendship. And it’s a lot less uncomfortable than 
having a screaming argument with each other at a later point.

 	
Sticking to Your Process	 57	
6
Sticking to 
Your Process
A while back we were contacted about a project. A nice one; 
high-profile client, good budget, realistic timeline. We wanted 
it. We had an initial phone call with the principals and got 
even more excited about it. They were smart. Asked us really 
good questions, we gave really good answers. They told us 
us they were talking to a few different agencies, which never 
scares us. All-around good first impression.
A few days later the client told us they were asking the can-
didates to sketch some concepts for the proposed site to help 
them make their decision. And get this! They even offered to 
pay for it. Not bad, right?
We said no.
We told them that in order to design the right site we’d 
have to do our research. We’d have to talk to them about  
their goals, their content, their brand, how they made their 
money—all that stuff. And we’d have to talk to their intended 
audience. We’d have to take a look at the competition. Tech-
nical constraints, editorial process, content strategy, etc., etc. 
We needed to understand and define the problem we were 

	
58 	 Design Is a Job
being asked to solve. Then, and only then, would we propose 
a solution.
We told them that our process was why our work suc-
ceeded enough times that they’d heard of us. Sure, our sites 
are pretty, but more importantly, they work pretty well. They 
meet goals. And hopefully people enjoy using them as they 
work toward their goals, be it a customer’s goal of completing 
a task, or the site owner’s goal of getting you to register.
We told them that if we were just to do some quick sketches, 
without the benefit of discussion and research, the ideas 
would inevitably be wrong. We’d never be able to guess what 
was in the clients’ heads. And we wouldn’t put ourselves in a 
position where we’d be judged on our mind-reading prowess.
And as I’m telling them all this, I’m kissing the job goodbye. 
Which sucks, because it was a really good job, and I really 
wanted to do it. But the only way I could do it was if they un-
derstood and respected our process. And if you think it took 
guts to tell someone this, then I wish I’d had them that day, 
because I was totally freaked out and scared. But you have to 
do the right thing because it’s the right thing, scared or not.
“That all makes a lot of sense. You’re hired.”
Thunk.
And the next time I had that same conversation with a  
client it was just a little less scary.
Your process is what enables you to do good work. 
You’ll develop and tweak it throughout your entire career. 
Sometimes because you’ve learned something new, some-
times because the industry evolves and you need to reflect as 
much. But it will be the framework you will use to do your 
work.
As we tell potential clients when they ask us what their site 
will look like: “Oh, we have no damn idea. But we know what 
the process is for finding out.”
Why you need to stick to your process
People get to where they are in life by following a process, 
whether they’re conscious of it or not. Successful people, like 
you, will be conscious of it. You’ll also look for opportunities 

 	
Sticking to Your Process	 59	
to improve it. Mind you, waking up every morning, going to 
a job you hate, and crying in a bathroom stall before lunch is 
also a process. But much like the best umbrella is the umbrella 
you have on you, the best process is always the one you’re 
having success with. Don’t fall for trendy processes. If the one 
you’re using works for you, go with it.
Your successful process has also led you to enough good 
work that people want to keep hiring you to do more work.  
So, why is it that the first thing a client does upon hiring you 
is attempt to break the process that got them to hire you in the 
first place? We’ll get to that in a second, but first let’s discuss 
why you’re not going to let them anymore.
I started this chapter with a story about a client who at-
tempted to break our process. Which would have resulted in 
the exact opposite of what they were trying to achieve. Their 
goal was to ensure that they got good work. And they came up 
with a plan they felt did that. It’s important to separate their 
goal from their plan because clients’ goals are generally worth-
while. At least clients you’ve allowed to get this far into the 
conversation. Their plans, however, are a whole other matter. 
Planning how to achieve a goal needs to be something you 
take charge of. That’s your job. And unless you show the client 
that you are taking charge of that you’re going to have a very 
hard time getting anything done during the project.
In this particular case, I addressed the client’s goal by en-
suring that they’d get good work because we had a process for 
getting good work done. I addressed their actual concern. And 
presented my own plan. And they were open-minded enough 
to listen to it, and I managed to convince them their goals 
would be better met with my plan than theirs. Just as impor-
tantly, I followed up by achieving that goal. 
Now should a client immediately step off the minute you 
announce you have a process? I’d be surprised if they did. You 
need to sell. When a client hires you they are hiring your pro-
cess as well, but you need to sell them on that process as the 
reason you do good work. And that needs to be done as part 
of the hiring process, not after.
“If we’re going to work together, here’s how it’s going  
to work.”

	
60 	 Design Is a Job
You’re not going to ask for permission to do things your 
way. You’re going to convince clients that your way works by 
showing them how you will use your process to meet their 
goals. And you’ll back this up by showing them how many 
times it’s worked in the past. And every time you manage to 
do this you’ll have yet one more example to make your case. 
Making the next time you have to do this that much less scary.
Our process works. So will yours. If you stick to it. And 
fight for it.
Why companies attempt to break  
your process
Companies love talking a studio out of the process that got 
them to hire them. Which is akin to signing Roy Halladay 
and then asking him to play the outfield. (Yes, it’s a baseball 
metaphor—I’ll walk you through it.) Roy Halladay is possibly 
the greatest pitcher of his generation. He’d be a terrible out-
fielder. But imagine some VP in the organization decided that 
since they’d just sunk a lot of money into signing him, they’d 
better get the most use out of him. So they should put him at 
a position that plays every day, instead of having him pitch. 
(Starting pitchers go once every five days.) In this metaphor 
baseball is standing in for design and the stupid VP is still the 
stupid VP. 
So why would someone do this? Anxiety. Anxiety about 
having spent the money. Anxiety about needing to see what 
they perceive as “results” as soon as possible. Anxiety at hav-
ing made the wrong decision. And ultimately, anxiety about 
their own job security should they have made the wrong  
decision in hiring you.
When people get anxious they fall back into the terrible 
habits that make up their comfort places. And, by definition, 
problem solving and innovation don’t happen in our comfort 
places. 
Throughout a project you may have to remind a client 
multiple times that they agreed to follow your process. And 
throughout a project you will have to convince a client that 

 	
Sticking to Your Process	 61	
your process is actually on target to get them the results  
they need. 
There will be hand-holding. There will be tough love. 
But above all, you will have to stand your ground and stick 
to what you know works. You will also need to be flexible 
enough to alleviate a client’s anxiety without putting the proj-
ect in jeopardy. A good process, like a building built on a fault 
line (like the one I’m writing in right now!) is built to give 
enough so that it doesn’t break.
How companies attempt to break  
your process
A short selection of popular favorites.
Start drawing (solving) before you fully understand  
the problem
This is a no. The anxiety here comes from a basic misunder-
standing that they hired you to design and design is pictures. 
They’re not sure why you’re doing this other stuff. And if 
you’ve ever walked into a visual presentation and said, “Today 
we’re finally going to look at design!” you’re part of the reason 
this problem exists, so stop blaming your clients. You need 
to start every project with an explanation of what designing 
something looks like. And how all the pieces fit together.  
And the minute you start putting “pictures” in front of people, 
you’re going to have to address their reactions to those  
pictures. Don’t put yourself in a position where you have to 
defend either your own work or their reaction to it before you 
have the research to know whether it’s right or wrong. 
Work out of order
You know what the least important page of a website is? The 
home page. More likely than not it’s a one-off template, it 
doesn’t expose enough of the navigational system, and quite 
often it’s more controlled by the needs of marketing than the 
www.allitebooks.com

	
62 	 Design Is a Job
site’s users. Yet this is the page clients want to see the most. 
I often describe it as building the roof of the house first and 
then letting it sit until we go back and build the walls. 
I hate starting with the home page. However, I’ve found 
that until clients see it we can’t get their attention on anything 
else. So, we give them a home page. And while they debate its 
merits we get cranking on the rest of the site. We bend, but 
we don’t break.
Try to do your work for you
The most common instance of this, by far, is “We’ve already 
done a lot of research. So we can just hand it to you and skip 
that whole phase.” And yes, seeing that research will be help-
ful, but it doesn’t take the place of us having to do our own. 
The point isn’t to do research—it’s to understand. It’s not a 
checklist item that we’re happy to allow someone else to  
cross off. 
The second most common instance is clients developing 
competing visuals. That’s a deal breaker. Never put yourself  
in a situation where you’re competing to solve a problem 
you’ve been entrusted to solve. Plus, you need the room to  
try things that may or may not be right without the cavalry 
being called in.
I love competing to get work, but once I get it, it’s mine. 
The competition is over.
Control or block your access to people
Welcome to the world of internal dysfunction. Bob is your 
client and Bob is in a power struggle with Mary, but you need 
to get information from Mary to do the job, but Bob doesn’t 
want you to talk to Mary because he’s afraid he’ll look weak, 
or he doesn’t want Mary to know what’s going on. There’s no 
way this ends well. Have a talk with Bob before the project 
starts. Make sure he knows that you will need direct access to 
people to do the project. If he hesitates, figure out what the 
problem is; perhaps Bob just wants to make sure he’s in the 
room when you talk to certain people. 

 	
Sticking to Your Process	 63	
But if Bob isn’t willing to give you access to other people 
in the company, that’s usually a sign of a bigger problem. Like 
perhaps the project isn’t really that important to the company, 
or he doesn’t have the support he needs to carry the project to 
fruition.
Rush
I love having a sense of urgency around a project. But certain 
things will take the time they will take. The popular saying 
is that you can’t throw nine women at a baby and get it in a 
month. (I have tried this, and it is true!) Rushing leads to stu-
pid mistakes, like launching a site filled with lorem ipsum (not 
that anyone’s ever done that of course). What’s worth doing is 
worth doing well, and even while working in an urgent man-
ner, details must be looked after and quality needs to stay at a 
high level. 
And I guarantee you that the client who wants to rush the 
most is the same one that spent a month or more waffling to 
sign the job.
Waffle over decisions
Nothing derails a project faster than waffling over decisions, 
whether it’s taking too long to make a decision, or revisiting 
decisions that have already been acted on. You either have a 
team sitting on their hands waiting, or a team working back-
ward to unravel what they’ve made. 
You can protect yourself against this by making sure your 
client understands the repercussions of waffling. Everything 
on a project has a cost associated with it. Be it time or money 
or both. Clients hate wasting time and money, and in many 
cases don’t have the resources or authority to get more of  
either. So when asking them to make a decision, make sure  
to also tell them the cost associated with it.
“If we get an answer to this by Wednesday, then we can 
move forward and meet the Friday deadline. But anything be-
yond a decision by 6 p.m. will push us to Monday, and move 

	
64 	 Design Is a Job
all the subsequent deadlines out as well. Which means we’ll 
need budget for an extra four days of work.”
Obviously, you want to tailor that statement to the situa-
tion. Don’t pull out a battle ax when a reassuring tap on the 
shoulder is enough. Just make sure your client understands 
that there’s no magic trick that allows for 120 hours of work 
on the last week of the project.
You can do a lot to show a client how valuable time is in 
how you comport yourself throughout the project. Run your 
meetings and work sessions efficiently. Come in prepared. 
Don’t run over. Don’t hang out. Don’t train clients to think 
you’ve got extra time on your hands. As far as they’re con-
cerned, you scoped twelve weeks for this project, there was 
one right before it, and there’s another one right after it. 
Waffling endangers that valuable precious resource.
Ignore project goals in favor of organizational politics
“Because the CEO said so.” Every project is subject to one or 
two peccadilloes from a higher up that make absolutely no 
sense to anyone. This is a matter of picking your battles. Some 
of their requests will have absolutely no effect on the overall 
experience or success of the site. Some of them can be dev-
astating. One CEO demanded that the site contain a photo of 
a particular local landmark so users knew where they were 
located. This was of utmost importance to him, and relatively 
easy to accommodate. (It’s on his bio page, by the way.)
A lot of organizational politics are a consequence of people 
not feeling heard. This is why you should aim to include as 
may people as possible in kickoff meetings. Even if they’re 
ultimately not part of the project team, give them an opportu-
nity to be heard. You’ll find out useful information that your 
main contact might have assumed you didn’t need to know. 
You can also learn a lot from who your contact attempts to 
omit from such meetings. 
Ultimately your client may ask you to do something on the 
project that’s detrimental to the project’s goal because they’ve 
been told to do it, and they’re understandably unwilling to 
defy a higher up’s request. You need to be willing to take that 

 	
Sticking to Your Process	 65	
bullet. After all, you don’t have to work with these people be-
yond the project. You can push them a little harder. And you 
need to be willing to have difficult conversations within the 
organization that your main client may be unwilling or unable 
to have.
Try a new trendy way of doing things
As a designer it’s your job to differentiate between innovation 
and a trend. And to get your client to strive for the former 
while ignoring the latter. You can usually do this by pointing 
them to the last big trend that’s just started backfiring and en-
joying a moment of awkward laughter together. 
And please, let’s all stop with those ridiculous wrap-around 
banners. Enough already.
How you can assure your client things 
are going well
At the risk of sounding like a broken record (ask your par-
ents), stay in good communication with your clients at all 
times. They will accept your process as long as you are show-
ing them results. Make sure to set their expectations correctly 
as to what is happening when. And once they happen let them 
know you’re on track.
Should they get off track make sure to communicate that as 
well. How you handle the communication of something going 
badly and how quickly you can implement a plan for getting 
back on track is ultimately more important than going off 
track to begin with. 
A good client will trust your process as long as they have 
transparency into it, can see results, and you’re willing to 
bend a little here and there. Without breaking.

	
66 	 Design Is a Job
7
Presenting  
Design
A designer who does not present his or her own work is 
not a designer. Presenting the work, explaining the rationale, 
answering questions, and eliciting feedback are part of the 
design toolkit. If you sit at your desk while someone else pres-
ents work to the client, you don’t get to complain about the 
feedback. The failure was yours.
I’ve been presenting design to clients and internal teams 
for a long time (Bush, Sr., was in the White House when I 
started), and I still get anxious about it. It may have been a 
while since I’ve thrown up in a client’s bathroom and washed 
off next to the person I’d eventually be presenting to, sure, but 
I still get nerves. 
The fact that I’m sitting here telling you how to present 
design isn’t a testament that I was born with some great skill—
it’s a testament that anyone can present design if they’re will-
ing to pick themselves up off the floor and just keep at it.
There is no substitute for learning how to present design 
other than presenting design. Be nervous. No one ever died 

 	
Presenting Design	 67	
from a poor presentation. At some point you’ll realize that 
your nerves are lying to you. The evidence that you can pres-
ent design will grow too large to ignore. You’ll do it again and 
again, and one day you’ll realize that you’re not as terrified as 
you used to be. Stay there. You’re actually designing from that 
point forward.
It’s not going to sell itself
The biggest myth ever perpetuated in the design field is that 
good design sells itself. (The second is that Copperplate is a 
legitimate typeface.) Design can’t speak for itself any more 
than a tamale can take off its own husk. You’re presenting a 
solution to a business problem, and you’re presenting it as 
an advocate for the end users. The client needs to know that 
you’ve studied the problem, understood its complexities, and 
that you’re working from that understanding.
Stop trying to get your clients to “understand design” and 
instead show them that you understand what they hired you 
to do. Explain how the choices you’ve made lead to a success-
ful project. This isn’t magic, it’s math. Show your work. Don’t 
hope someone “gets it,” and don’t blame them if they don’t—
convince them.
If you’re confident enough that you’re putting the right 
solution in front of a client, which you better be, you need to 
pass that confidence along to the client. Ultimately, your job 
is to make the client feel confident in the design. Confidence 
is as much of a deliverable as anything you’re handing over in 
the project.
Why you need to present your own work
It bears repeating.
Being able to present your own work is a core design skill. 
It helps build rapport with the client. It puts the person direct-
ly responsible for the work in front of them. It shows them 
that you’re presenting that work with confidence. And it gives 

	
68 	 Design Is a Job
them an opportunity to ask questions directly of the person 
who did the work.
When I was a kid we played a game called telephone. All 
the kids form a circle, and the lead kid whispers a word in the 
ear of the kid next to them. That kid whispers the word to 
the kid next to him, and so on, until the word gets whispered 
in your ear. (Shut up. The Xbox hadn’t been invented yet.) 
Without fail, the word that got whispered in your ear was 
different than the word you started with. “Chocolate” would 
become “chick lit,” “baseball” would become “base board,”  
and “let’s go to church” would become “let’s go smoke in the 
alley.” You get the idea.
When clients are speaking to you through an intermedi-
ary you’re not hearing directly from them. You can’t see their 
face. That’s important. Quite often the look on their face will 
tell you much more than the words out of their mouth. 
Things that were posed as questions, such as, “Why is the 
logo that size?” get reported back to you as statements like, 
“Make the logo bigger.” You weren’t there to answer the ques-
tion. In fact, you didn’t even know it was posed as a question. 
As a designer, you need to become adept at interpreting 
what a client actually means. You need to be there to ask clari-
fying questions. You need to manage the presentation process 
as carefully as you make the work.
This also applies to work that’s not being presented in 
person. If you’re working with a long-distance client, set up a 
phone call so that you can present the work and the rationale. 
And don’t send the work in advance. Reveal it during the call, 
after you’ve had the opportunity to set the stage properly. The 
last thing you want is clients getting ahead of you and starting 
a call with their list of proposed changes before you’ve had a 
chance to present.
If you’re working at an agency that won’t let you present 
your own work, make the case for how it benefits everyone. It 
helps you, it helps the client, it helps the project get done cor-
rectly. If they still won’t let you present your own work, get 
the hell out. They’re not letting you do your job. Don’t work 
at a place that doesn’t let you do your job correctly.

 	
Presenting Design	 69	
Have an agenda
Before you ever get in a room with a client, let them know 
why you’re getting in that room. (If you’re not sure why you’re 
meeting, then maybe there’s no reason to meet.) Make sure 
everyone is walking in with the same expectations and knows 
what’s expected of them. Also, let them know how long the 
presentation is scheduled for, and give them the desired 
outcome.
A meeting without an agenda is an invitation for everyone 
to bring their pet issues. After all, you can’t really stray off 
course if no course has been set.
Be confident in what you’re showing
There should be absolutely no doubt that this is your meet-
ing. Stand up. Walk to the head of the room. Announce who 
you are, what you do, reiterate the goals of the project and tell 
people how what you’re about to show them will meet those 
goals.
Put your audience at ease by letting them know that they’re 
exactly the right people to have in the room, and what you 
need from them is their expertise with the product or service, 
not design knowledge. 
Steer the discussion away from personal subjectivity by 
outlining good topics of feedback: how well the proposed so-
lutions meet specific metrics, whether their voice and brand 
are coming through, etc. Encourage them to stay in their own 
zone of expertise and they won’t attempt to hop on yours.
Never apologize for what you’re not showing. By the time 
you’re presenting, you should be focused on presenting what 
you have, not making excuses for what you don’t. And you 
need to believe what you’re saying to convince the client of 
the same. If you think the work is on the way to meeting their 
goals then say that. Design is an iterative process, done with a 
client’s proper involvement at key points. The goal isn’t  
always to present finished work; it’s to present work at the 
right time.

	
70 	 Design Is a Job
I’ve met a few designers over the years who feel like selling 
design is manipulation. Manipulation is convincing someone 
that the truth is different than what it seems. You’re familiar 
with the marketing phrase “Sell the sizzle, not the steak”? 
Well, if the steak sucks, that’s manipulation. If the steak backs 
up the sizzle’s promise then it’s good salesmanship. If you 
believe the work is good, and you can stand before a client 
and make an honest attempt at convincing them of the same 
by using the research you’ve done, then what you are doing is 
selling good design. 
Don’t be arrogant. Confidence means you believe you’ll 
succeed because you’ve done the research, you understand 
the problem, and the work you’re presenting backs that up. 
Arrogance is believing you’ll succeed despite not having done 
those things. Don’t be that jerk.
Speak to goals, not features
Your review of the work should be goal-driven. And priori-
tized. The client had major goals with this project. They’ll be 
anxious to see how those goals are addressed. Go there first, 
and do it in a way that maps to their goal and not to your 
manifestation of the goal. For example:
“Here’s a Twitter button!” is bad.
“As you can see, we’ve addressed your social media con-
cerns!” is better.
“We’ve placed social media sharing tools in places along-
side the article where testing shows the reader is most likely 
to interact with them, and designed that space so that it’s flex-
ible enough to add and subtract services as they rise and fall 
from prominence,” is the best of all.
Remember that every feature is there for a reason. Lead 
with the reason. And if you don’t have a good reason why it’s 
there, that’s probably a sign it’s not needed.
Don’t give a real estate tour
The most obvious sign that a designer is nervous is the real 
estate tour. You’ve seen this. The presenter will start at the 

 	
Presenting Design	 71	
top left of the page, telling you where the logo is, describing 
how it “pops,” then move right and down, describing every 
element along the way, taking you on a guided tour of every 
element on the page, winding up at the copyright notice in 
the footer. They’ll make no mention of goals or benefits. In 
the process they’ll leave themselves totally open to clients 
pulling up with construction teams and cranes to do some 
remodeling.
Don’t waste a client’s time walking them through what 
they can already see. Your job is to explain how what they’re 
looking at is the best way to achieve their goals.
If you start with the declaration that you’re accommodating 
the social media strategy, there’s a lot less resistance because 
you’ll be showing that every visual element is in a particular 
place for a reason. Otherwise it just sounds like you’re drop-
ping buttons in random spots.
Give the client permission to go negative
It can be incredibly difficult for clients to say anything nega-
tive about your work. Something about “upsetting the sensi-
tive, talented creatives.” Or just basic, if misguided, decency. 
This doesn’t help the project. Unspoken expectations lead to 
seething unspoken frustration, which ultimately bursts forth 
in a gruesome mess when you’ve run out of budget.
Let them know that negative feedback is an essential part 
of the process and a part of the client’s job. We prefer con-
structive and well-reasoned negative feedback, but even an 
outburst of “Never show me that crap again!” saves everyone 
a lot of time.
At the beginning of every visual design presentation, par-
ticularly in the early stages, we give a little speech, some varia-
tion of, “Today, we are going to show you some things that 
may not be right. If you see something that isn’t working, you 
need to point it out. If you don’t tell us what you think isn’t 
working, we will show you the same thing again and again 
until we are out of time and money and you are stuck with it.”
We’ve found this exercise makes everyone a lot more com-
fortable with the process and saves a lot of time wasted by 

	
72 	 Design Is a Job
clients saying, “Yeah, that seems fine” when they’re thinking, 
“That is a pile of noxious crap for our customers to poop on. I 
hope they can read my mind so I don’t have to say it.”
Help your client give you the 
information you need
More often than not the designers who complain that clients 
give them subjective feedback are the ones most prone to ask-
ing for subjective feedback. Everyone gets the feedback they 
deserve.
Stay away from questions like “Do you like it?” You weren’t 
hired to make something they liked. Ask your clients to com-
ment specifically about the things you want them to address. 
Avoid talking about things you don’t want them to go into. 
“What do you guys think of the size of the logo?” for example.
They will, of course, still give you feedback about things 
you may not want feedback about. Most of it you just need 
to hear and acknowledge. But if they’re persistent, ask them 
to map what they are asking for to a goal, and follow up with 
clarifying questions. Oftentimes a client’s prescriptive feed-
back needs to be unpacked to get to the real issue. 
When presenting with a team
If you’re presenting with a team, you and everyone else has 
a role to play. Your job is to take the responsibility for selling 
the design work. But you may not be the only designer on the 
project. If you’ve been working collaboratively, present col-
laboratively. Just make sure that you’ve clearly outlined who’s 
taking charge where. 
You may also have a project manager on your side who 
does the initial project recap. They should also keep track of 
time management and the agenda.
And while everyone should have a set role, be flexible 
enough to let everyone play to their strengths. If your interac-
tion designer has been championing the faceted navigation 

 	
Presenting Design	 73	
model you’re proposing, let her pitch it. Weave other people 
into the presentation as seamlessly as possible. 
Cover your teammates’ backs during the presentation. If 
they’re looking lost or confused, jump in, finish their sen-
tence, and let them jump back in when they recover. Don’t 
throw to another member of the team when they aren’t ex-
pecting it (“...and now Jason will explain our take on the ad-
vertising model to you...”). 
Always present with a united front. No matter how much 
arguing there might have been back at the office, by the time 
you’re in front of a client, every solution you’re presenting is 
a team solution. Should a client propose something similar 
to what had been shot down internally earlier in the week, 
anyone who screams, “That’s what I wanted!” gets punched in 
the neck then and there.
Of course I’m kidding. No punching until you’re back in 
the office.
Be open to being wrong
Confidence also means you can handle being wrong. And you 
will be. Many times. The goal of a presentation isn’t to shove 
your decisions down a client’s throat—it’s to present what you 
believe to be right in a manner that also persuades others that 
it’s right. And it also means allowing them to convince you 
that you’re wrong. I can’t tell you how many times I’ve walked 
into a presentation totally confident that what I was present-
ing was rock solid, only to have a client come up with an obvi-
ous use case that I’d overlooked and which brought the whole 
thing to a crashing halt. And that’s good. Because part of the 
design process is finding those holes. Be glad you’re working 
with a smart client. Don’t keep trying to sell something that’s 
broken. Acknowledge you were wrong, and be thankful for 
the new insight.
Never embarrass your client
Chances are your main client contact reports to someone. 
Someone who may be meeting you for the first time during 

	
74 	 Design Is a Job
this presentation. (Make sure you know this in advance!) 
Whether this is the CEO, or one of thirty-two “Executive” 
VPs, not only is your work under scrutiny, but so is your  
client’s judgment in hiring you. Do them a favor and make 
them look good. Be prepared. Be honest. Engage them in the 
conversation and listen to their feedback. This person is your 
ally, and helping his stock rise within the organization can 
only help you in this project and future ones.
End strong
End on time. Respect your client’s time and show them that 
yours is valuable as well.
Make sure everyone’s questions have been answered. And 
make sure they have an avenue for feedback, which we’ll 
discuss in the next chapter, as well as a deadline. Thank them 
for their time. Shake hands and offer to take your glass to the 
sink. They’ll tell you to leave it, but offer anyway. Your  
mother raised you well.
Which reminds me of a fabulous story from the pre-Mule 
days. I was working with another studio and we’d just gone 
through a particularly difficult presentation. Couldn’t wait to 
get out of the client’s office. We said our goodbyes, packed up 
our stuff, and headed to the elevator. While we’re waiting for 
the elevator our creative director turns to me and says, “God, 
she was a bitch!” just as said bitch came walking around the 
corner.
The rest of the project was awkward.
My advice to you when you finish the presentation is to 
thank everyone for their time. Shut your mouth. Pack up your 
laptop. Head out of the building. Walk out the front door. 
Around the corner. In the car. Across the bridge. Okay, now 
you can talk.
Or, just make it a habit never to speak ill of your clients. 
They’re paying your bills. And putting their livelihood in your 
hands. They’re good people.

 	
Managing Feedback	 75	
8
Managing  
Feedback
Gathering and managing feedback is an essential part 
of the design process. And next to Adobe updater updates, 
it’s the thing designers complain about the most. Complaints 
range from “They’re not telling me what to do!” to “They’re 
telling me what to do!” to “Oh, God! They sent a PowerPoint 
comp!” 
We’re far enough along in this book now that I bet you 
can guess what’s coming. That’s right: I love you, but it’s your 
fault. You can’t assume clients will know how to give you the 
right feedback at the right time and in the right manner. What 
you can assume, however, is that both you and the client are 
trying to get to the same goal: a successful project. So take a 
deep breath. And let’s figure out how to get what you need.
Setting the stage for good feedback
No matter how smart or articulate a person is, no one intui-
tively knows how to give useful design feedback. This skill 

	
76 	 Design Is a Job
is not part of anyone’s day job (except for art directors). How 
to give feedback must be taught. And the teaching starts at 
the very beginning of the project. When you decide to take 
on a client, and explain your process to them, make sure you 
explain how their feedback is crucial to making the process 
work. Both of you have a role to play and the feedback is the 
rich sinewy connective tissue between both parties. 
Has your client bought design services before? How often, 
how long ago? And what role did he or she play? Get a proper 
gauge of your clients’ experience with design feedback. And 
realize that “A lot!” may not be a good answer. Experience 
working with freelancers may not translate well to working 
with a large design consultancy, and vice versa. And neither 
translates to working with a small shop. In the end, you will 
have to both show your client how to work with you and, 
more importantly, you’ll have to learn how to work with your 
client.
Work with your client to establish a feedback cycle that 
works for both of you. At Mule, we generally like getting feed-
back no more than forty-eight hours after a presentation so 
we don’t lose momentum.  Some companies have too many 
stakeholders to make this possible, so neither should you 
require it, nor should they agree to it in that case. You’d both 
be setting yourselves up to fail. Come to a good compromise. 
But make sure they understand that more time for feedback 
means the project completion date moves back as well. 
Some companies move faster, and want to promise you 
feedback in twenty-four hours. That’s great! Give them forty-
eight. Companies that move faster also have to put out a lot 
more fires, and generally with a smaller staff. Probably the 
people who are supposed to be giving you their feedback are 
manning the hose.
Either way, document the agreed-upon feedback cycle in 
writing and put it in the Statement of Work. It’s a deadline, 
subject to the typical accolades that come from meeting a 
deadline and remonstrations that come with missing one.

 	
Managing Feedback	 77	
The invisible stakeholder
This is also when those invisible stakeholders you didn’t do 
a good enough job of ferreting out make their presence felt. 
We’ve all met these lovely people. They show up during the 
third week of development with thoughts about the design 
concept. Or the team you’ve been working with for three 
months will announce that once the site is ready to “launch” 
they’ll unveil it to the board to get their thoughts. You will feel 
tricked when this happens. You know how you should really 
be feeling? That’s right—dumb. Because you didn’t flush them 
out early in the process.
Going into a project, you need to know who on the client 
side provides input, who gives feedback, and who approves. 
You may have a better idea of who these people should be 
than your client. As you meet people within the organization 
during the discovery phase (because you have one, right?) ask 
yourself whether they’re someone who can insert themselves 
into the feedback cycle later. Be proactive and have a discus-
sion with your main contact about involving them sooner 
rather than later. If they decide they won’t be participating in 
reviews, then you’ll have to hold them to that later. As impor-
tant as it is to have a small feedback group reviewing design 
decisions, it’s even more important that it’s the right group.
The general rule is to involve as many people as possible in 
early discussions, and make that number as small as possible 
once you go into review cycles. Often, people on the client 
side say they want to remain involved, but really just want 
to tell you the one thing they care about and then get back to 
their day job. If they don’t get to tell you that one thing, then 
they will pop up at the end of the project all bent out of shape.
Your client is not an expert in  
giving feedback
There’s nothing less helpful to the client than telling them you 
want open-ended “feedback.” Your clients need your help in 

	
78 	 Design Is a Job
figuring out what kind of feedback you’re looking for. They 
need structure and guidance. And if you provide that structure 
and guidance ahead of time there’s a far greater chance that 
you’ll be getting the kind of structured feedback you’ll need to 
move forward, and save everyone a lot of time.
Most clients tend to feel self-conscious about voicing their 
opinion about design. How often have you heard, “I don’t 
know anything about design!” That’s fine; they don’t have 
to. What they do know something about, however, is their 
business, and what you’re actually looking for here is busi-
ness feedback. You need to know whether the design work 
is meeting the business goals of the project. You say “design,” 
and clients hear “art,” and now everyone’s uncomfortable. Act 
like the design expert the client hired; remind them—if need 
be—that they hired a design expert, and their job is to be the 
business experts. Keep them in their comfort zone and they’re 
less likely to come back with feedback from a family member 
who’s got “a good sense of design.”
Of course our dirty little secret is that while we’re telling 
our clients to be objective, and to keep personal preferences 
out of it, there’s nothing we want more than them to like it. 
The first step in getting objective feedback is to make sure 
we’re giving objective presentations and keeping our own feel-
ings out of the mix.
Feedback guidelines
We prepare feedback guidelines for the client before presenta-
tions. We tell them what’s helpful to talk about and what’s not. 
They’re thankful for the guidance and it saves them a lot of 
time. Clients love it when you save them time. We tell them 
what decisions are relevant at this point, what to ignore, and 
what may require further clarification. We also reiterate key 
points made during the presentation so they don’t forget. 
For example, let’s say we just did our first visual concept 
presentation for a website. If we did it right, then the comps 
we showed were loose and sketchy and focused on tone, not 
specific functionality. And they were probably done before 
site architecture was finalized. The last thing we want is a 

 	
Managing Feedback	 79	
lot of feedback about missing functionality. So the feedback 
guidelines might say:
Focus on:
• Overall tone (Does this site feel like your company?)
• Voice (Is it using language the right way? Is it friendly? 
Authoritative? Trustworthy?)
• Structure (Too dense? Not dense enough?)
Ignore:
• Specific labels and body copy (Why is everything in Latin?)
• Missing elements (Where’s my newsletter signup?)
• Things we did not show you (I have comments about the 
company history page.)
It’s also a good idea to address personal preferences be-
fore any feedback is given, rather than after, at which point 
you risk making people feel dumb for liking green, which 
although not the right color for this project, is a very lovely 
color in and of itself. Unlike mauve.
Feedback guidelines should be short enough to be helpful, 
and not long enough to be considered additional work. Go 
over them with the client during the presentation and make 
yourself available should they require more clarification. 
Make sure every member of the team gets them so they’re all 
playing under the same rules.
And know that they’ll give you feedback on everything you 
asked them to ignore anyway. Clients will gravitate toward 
what they’re worried about the most, or what they’re most 
comfortable with. Feel free to ignore it until the time is right.
The most important feedback  
guideline of all
Many clients believe that proper feedback means telling a de-
signer how to fix something, or what is known as prescriptive 

	
80 	 Design Is a Job
feedback. Many designers complain about prescriptive feed-
back, unless they don’t get it. At which point they complain 
they don’t know what the client wants. Yes, our reputation as 
being difficult is well-deserved.
Let’s remember that clients aren’t experts in giving design 
feedback and—I’m gonna go out on a limb here—venture that 
most of the time they’re the problem solver on their teams. 
Let them know that not only are these your problems to solve, 
but that they’re paying you to solve them. 
You need to start holding this line during presentations, as 
clients jump in with suggestions on things they’re not happy 
about. Impromptu prescriptive work sessions during presen-
tations can eat up a lot of time, and put you in the awkward 
spot of having to tell clients that their suggestions may not 
be very good. So let them know ahead of time, “If something 
isn’t working, tell us why and we’ll fix it. We want to earn our 
money.” Remind them again in the written guidelines.
You don’t want to put yourself in a position of carrying 
out your client’s design decisions. If you allow them to start 
designing for you, you have no one to blame but yourself. If 
they insist on prescriptive feedback it’s time for an account-
level conversation. Anyone who hires you because they 
thought you could do the job and then doesn’t let you do it 
has lost respect for either you or the design process. 
Can you put “no prescriptive feedback” in the contract? I 
suppose you could, if you really wanted to. But ultimately I 
think this is one of those times you just need to be able  
to work without a net. Keep the contract to legal issues,  
and use your design skills and backbone to support your  
design process.
Getting feedback on time
As I mention above, set up a deadline for turning feedback 
around. Any time you’re requesting feedback, remind the 
client how much time they have and get them to commit to 
meeting the deadline. (The success of every project is the hun-
dreds of little commitments made along the way.) Let them 

 	
Managing Feedback	 81	
know that if something comes up that might put the deadline 
in jeopardy, they should let you know right away. That goes 
for both parties. The minute a deadline is in jeopardy notify 
the other party. There are many reasons for missing a dead-
line, but there is only one for not notifying the other party. 
(That’s a free life tip, kids.) 
The longer clients are taking to get you feedback, the more 
likely that they’re not just pointing out issues, but working 
out solutions. You, or your project manager, need to get them 
on the phone. Ask them if they need your team’s help with 
anything. Remind them to come back with questions, and not 
solutions. That usually goes a little something like this:
“What’s up with our feedback, Bob?”
“We’re not happy with global nav, but we’re not sure how 
to fix it.”
“Well, just tell us why you’re not happy with it. We’ll come 
up with something. That’s why you’re paying us, Bob.”
“That’d be swell. Cause we’re stumped.”
Most clients try to fix things because they believe it’s the 
right thing to do. And unless you tell them it’s not you have 
no one to blame but yourself.
How to read client feedback
Eventually the blessed day will come when the client sends 
you his feedback. Oh, did I tell you to get it in writing? You 
need to get it in writing. An email is just fine. Immediately ac-
knowledge getting it, thank them for sending it. And sit back. 
Relax. It’s important that you’re relaxed when reading client 
feedback. Open your mind to the possibilities that you might 
be going on a journey. Client feedback has a way of taking you 
to places you never dreamed you’d go. But, honestly, remem-
ber two very important things:
• You’re both working toward the same goal with the best of 
intentions.
• Most clients haven’t been trained in how to give feedback. 
(Well, except by you.)

	
82 	 Design Is a Job
First off, do yourself a favor and just read the whole thing 
straight through at least once. Resist the urge to read it aloud 
to the rest of your team, if you have one, because mocking a 
client’s feedback reflects poorly on you. They’re gonna say 
some weird stuff. They’re honestly trying. Give them a break. 
Don’t share the feedback with anyone else until you’re sure 
you can do it in a calm, reassuring manner. (Pro tip: some-
times my partner Erika withholds feedback from me for days. 
We’re totally in a “do as I say, not as I do” zone here.) 
Your job is now to take the client’s feedback and put it into 
an actionable form.
Organizing feedback
Your first job is to separate the actionable feedback from the 
non-actionable feedback. Sometimes clients just like to docu-
ment their thought process. Your job is to sift through and 
find the actionable from the non-actionable. 
“At first I thought this work reminded me of something I 
didn’t like, but then it didn’t and then it did again and then the 
reason I thought it did was because the typeface was similar, 
but then I changed my mind again and realized it was because 
it was blue.”
There is absolutely nothing you can do. Let it go. 
On the other hand, “We’ve changed our strategy!” is not 
feedback. Nor is anything that even hints at it. It’s a shift in 
goals to be addressed immediately at the account level. 
Having separated the feedback from the non-feedback, it’s 
time to make three lists.
To-do
No brainers. Stuff you can change immediately. 
Disagreements
Things that run counter to the goals of the project, disrupt 
the design, break conventions, or don’t jive with the client’s 

 	
Managing Feedback	 83	
brand. Or, they’re just bad ideas. Don’t do bad design! Prepare 
to make your case to the client about every issue on this list. 
You’re going to have to convince them. It’s usually not as hard 
as you think. Clients listen to reason more than you give them 
credit for. You’re just going to have to persuade them. Part of 
the job.
Clarification needed
If you don’t understand something on the client’s feedback 
list, pick up the phone and ask them about it. Don’t try to read 
their minds. Once you’ve gotten clarification on this list, move 
to one of the other two lists.
If you have a team now is a good time to go over the list 
with them. You’ll be organized and relaxed, and seeing that 
you’ve called out issues to discuss further with the client will 
probably keep your team relaxed as well. 
Let’s get on the phone.
Going over feedback with your client
Have we talked about how awesome talking to your client in 
person is? Every time you deal with your client in person is 
an opportunity to build trust. And to remind each other of 
why you chose to work together. So whenever possible, meet 
with your client in person, especially if you have a long list 
of feedback you disagree with. When that’s not possible, get 
them on the phone. Hear each others’ voices. The last thing 
you want to be is another in a long list of emails. Everyone 
hates email. 
Start by thanking your client for the feedback. Go over the 
no-brainer list. That’s a quick win. Mention any particularly 
good suggestions they made. You need to build up some good-
will for what’s coming.
With one exception: tackle the elephant in the room imme-
diately. If one of the items on the discussion list is big enough 
to derail the schedule—or undoes some previously-agreed to 
decisions—dive right into it. Make sure your client knows the 
impact this issue has in terms of time and cost. 

	
84 	 Design Is a Job
Your strategy with all the discussion items is to present 
your case rationally. Tell them why you disagree, use the re-
search you did, use data, use relevant writing on the topic. Let 
them know how their decision might run counter to the goals 
of the project. And, yes, use aesthetics. That’s one of the rea-
sons they hired you, right? Make the business case, but also 
make the design case. After all, you can’t always talk someone 
out of using Copperplate for business reasons. 
You won’t win all the fights. But you might find yourself 
winning more of them each time you try. More importantly, 
you’ll learn which ones are worth fighting for and which ones 
you can win. You’ll also learn the fine art of horse trading. I 
once argued with a client for an hour over an issue I didn’t 
care about (eventually letting him win!), because I really cared 
about the next issue coming up. At that point, he was so tired 
out and savoring his victory that he gave in almost immedi-
ately. Arguments are also things to be designed.
After going over feedback with your client, make sure you 
detail all of your decisions in writing, and have them reply 
with an acknowledgement so you’re both on the same page as 
to where to go next.
When clients comp
You thought maybe I wasn’t gonna address this? I just saved it 
for dessert.
There is nothing less helpful than getting feedback in 
the form of a comp (whether committed in Photoshop, 
PowerPoint, or Word). Nothing. I mean it. We’ve been in 
business at Mule for almost ten years now, and this is the only 
thing we’ve ever fired a client over. (It happened once. The  
client refused to stop after being told on numerous occasions it 
was counter-productive, not to mention a contract violation.)
Your best bet is to nip this in the bud before it happens. 
Yes, put it in the contract. Now put it in your back pocket for 
safe keeping. As we’ve discussed before, your contract is your 
safety net and your life support. You should be able to avoid 
this problem by using something from your design toolbox. 
Namely, your amazing skills of persuasion.

 	
Managing Feedback	 85	
Remind your client when requesting feedback that if some-
thing isn’t working for them to point it out and go into as 
much detail as possible as to why they feel it’s not working. 
Ask them to tie it to the goals agreed to earlier in the project. 
More than anything, their reasoning is critical to solving the 
problem. Being told to just do something a certain way—or 
worse, getting a comp of it—only means you have to reverse-
engineer the whole thing and find out what you were trying 
to solve. Lost time, lost budget.
They might do it anyway. Now can we whip out the con-
tract and beat them with it? Not so fast; your goal is always to 
come to an amicable solution first. There’s nuance at play here.
There’s a difference between comping to communicate and 
comping to substitute. 
If your client took your comp and haphazardly started 
chopping it up and moving things around and even adding 
things from other sites, they’re probably just trying to com-
municate with you. Yes, there’s a better way to do it, for sure. 
But these are the acts of someone trying to get a message 
across. You yourself are probably more comfortable showing 
solutions than describing them, right? That’s what’s going on 
here. It’s not malice. It’s still a pain in the ass, though; and it 
deserves a reminder that, while it may be the most comfort-
able way for them to get their point across, it’s the least help-
ful way for you to receive it. 
It’s worth a sit down. Have them walk through the comp 
and explain to you why they made the changes they did. 
This can be used as an exercise on both sides. Either they felt 
like they couldn’t get their point across verbally, or that you 
wouldn’t understand it. A walk-through can solve both of 
those problems.
On the other hand, suppose the client delivers their feed-
back in the form of a totally different comp than the one you 
presented. “We were hoping for something more like this.” 
More often than not, this happens when there’s an internal 
designer on the client team who’s not happy about outside 
help being brought in. Put yourself in their shoes. You might 
even do the same thing. Don’t. (We’ll cover working with in-
ternal designers in more detail later in the book.) 

	
86 	 Design Is a Job
My first question to you is whether you knew this designer 
existed already or not. If so, you needed to make an ally out of 
him earlier in the process. If not, you didn’t do your due dili-
gence. Either way you’re in a spot.
You are now in a position where you’re competing for a job 
you’ve already earned. That is unacceptable. Do not, under 
any circumstances, discuss the new comp with your client. 
Once you do you’ve validated its existence. Pull them aside. If 
you’re working with a team, this is a job for your team leader 
to handle; it’s account level. Remind the client that they’ve 
hired you for this job, and if they feel that you’re no longer 
capable of fulfilling it, then a larger discussion is needed. See 
if the client is willing to play by the rules, as they signed up 
to do; if they are, great. You’ll still need a strategy for dealing 
with that designer. I’d suggest keeping him close. If you can’t 
come to an agreement then be ready to walk away. Never, 
ever, threaten to walk away from a job. You either walk away 
or you don’t. But if you were hired to do a job and are now 
being asked to compete for it, then the job has changed. Your 
next call is to your lawyer.
Let’s end on a happy note
Ninety-nine percent of your clients are good people with 
honest intentions. They may not give you perfect feedback 
every time, but their intent is good, and you share the same 
goal of doing kick-ass work together. As long as there’s mutual 
respect you can get past a couple of hiccups in the process. 
There are always hiccups in the process.
In ten years of business at Mule, we’ve dealt with a lot of 
client comping. Only once did we terminate a project because 
of it. And we gave the client multiple opportunities to stop. It 
was a great lesson to get out of the way early. You may never 
have to deal with it yourself, but if you do, you’ll have the 
tools to handle it.

 	
Getting Your Money	 87	
9
Getting  
Your Money
Ever since starting our podcast, Let’s Make Mistakes, Katie 
Gillum and I have received a substantial amount of email from 
designers looking for advice of one sort or another. Most of it  
is from young designers just starting out on their career path. 
The topics vary from client-related questions like, “Where do 
I get some?” to craft-based questions like, “How long should I 
work on a concept?” 
The vast, and I mean vast, majority of the questions, how-
ever, are sad stories about late payments, or sadder stories 
about payments that are never coming. The saddest example 
I saw was from a designer whose client offered to settle up if 
the designer would do “just a little more work.” I hate to see 
a designer not being paid for their work, almost as much as I 
hate seeing a designer not doing their job to ensure they get 
paid. 
The best way to deal with late payments is to keep them 
from ever being late. And it takes a combination of good 

	
88 	 Design Is a Job
terms, clearly defined agreements, and, most importantly, rela-
tionship building to ensure that checks keep flowing at a good 
healthy pace. It’s bad enough to worry about where the rent 
is coming from, but it’s worse to have to worry about it even 
after earning the dough for it.
Sometimes no matter how much due diligence you do 
you’ll still get sideswiped. Companies reorganize, companies 
get bought, projects get de-prioritized, and so on. None of 
these are things you have any control over, but with the right 
systems in place you can not only survive this stuff, but walk 
away with your check in hand.
Let me tell you a story. A few years ago our team was 
working on a project with a new division of a pretty large 
company. We’d done our due diligence. They were solid. The 
budget was approved in a timely fashion without much hag-
gling, as was the contract. The team we were working with 
was opinionated, smart, and to this day, one of my favorite 
teams to have had the pleasure to work with. A few months 
into the project, the work was going really well. Honestly, this 
was one of those projects where both sides really egged each 
other on to do better work. So much so that they decided to 
expand the scope of the work, which we were thrilled about. 
We submitted a change order, which they had verbally agreed 
to, but not yet signed.
One day we go in for a work session and the place is eerily 
quiet. We’re ushered into an empty office and told to wait for 
someone to come talk to us. At first I think we’re getting shit-
canned, but then I realize that wouldn’t explain the office be-
ing so deserted. We wait for close to thirty minutes. To make 
a long story short, the company decided to lay off the entire 
team we’d been working with. Now, I’m not about to go criti-
cizing a company’s business decisions. They have the right to 
run their own company however they want. But as this senior 
VP is telling me all of this, my first response is empathy for 
the people I’d been working with, while my second response 
is to contemplate the huge amount of resources I’d allocated 
to the project. They owed a substantial amount of money. 

 	
Getting Your Money	 89	
Mister senior VP finishes his story and asks, “Do you have 
any questions?”
“Not at this time. Thank you.”
What followed was a nerve-wracking series of phone calls. 
The first call was to our lawyer, who flat out told us he’d be 
lucky to negotiate half our due payment, minus the change 
order, which was now floating around in a corporate no-man’s 
land unprocessed. Their lawyer called us and tried to strike a 
deal. At which point we told him he needed to talk to our  
lawyer. (Remember, kids: lawyers talk to lawyers.) And in an 
amazing stroke of luck one of the people the company had laid 
off had agreed to stay on for a few weeks to wrap things up. 
She reached out to us. Not only did she advocate for us, she 
tracked down the change order and made sure it was processed. 
Amazingly, we got paid what was owed us. And it hap-
pened because we’d set up safeguards (our contract), matched 
their lawyer with our lawyer, and most importantly, had a 
strong advocate on the inside. Someone who was willing to 
go to bat for us because we’d been doing good work together. 
Without any of those three pieces I would not have made  
payroll and quite possibly would have had to lay people  
off myself. 
We’ve already gone over how important a contract is in  
the design process, but a contract is a legal document that  
protects you when things go badly. Ultimately, you want 
things to go well, and you want to get paid for your work  
in a nice, timely fashion. 
And before we go any further and everyone starts getting 
depressed, let’s go over a few safety rules and reality checks. 
The vast majority of clients pay their bills. Most pay them 
on time. A small percentage pay late. And very few actually 
blow town without paying their bills. Everyone gets burned 
at least once. I’ve been burned a few times. If I hadn’t been, I 
wouldn’t know what to tell you. 
The payment process is not so different from the design 
process itself in that you start by doing your research. 

	
90 	 Design Is a Job
Do your homework
You have more power over how quickly you get paid than you 
might think. The first step is understanding everything that 
affects how soon you will get paid. Do your research and pay 
attention to details. And don’t overlook the obvious.
Do they have money to pay you?
In the excitement to take on a project, and under the spell of 
the client’s infectious charm and obvious passion for their 
project, you may forget to confirm whether they actually 
have the money to pay you. Watch out for this especially with 
startups and serial entrepreneurs—people who specialize in 
separating others from their money. Which is a fine skill. Just 
make sure they’re doing it to multi-millionaire VCs and not  
to you. 
“Our seed, first, second, etc., round is about to close,” 
translates to “We don’t have the money.” As excited as you 
may be about working with someone, don’t get yourself into 
a situation where getting paid depends on someone’s funding 
coming through. That’s not your fight. You already have one 
business to keep afloat.
Where is the money to pay you coming from?
Having money’s not enough, though. It needs to be there 
when it’s time to ante up, and it needs to be earmarked for 
you. Has the company set aside the budget for this proj-
ect? Large organizations generally allocate budget before 
resources, so when GlobalMegaCo comes calling there’s a 
good chance the budget’s already been allocated. But when 
Joe’sNewNapkinIdeaStartup rings your bell, the money may 
or may not be there. It’s up to you to find out for sure. How? 
Ask. There are two budget questions you need to ask during 
the biz dev process:
1.	“What’s your budget?”
2.	“Has it been approved?”

 	
Getting Your Money	 91	
If you feel weird about asking either of those questions, 
turn the book back to page one and start again. Keep doing 
that until you’re comfortable talking about money. 
If the client balks at answering either of those questions, 
you have a problem. Usually it’ll be the first question that 
sticks in their craw. Some clients think that if you “trick” them 
into telling you their budget you’ll tailor your estimate to it. 
You know what? They’re right. If you tell me that you have 
$200K, and I feel it’s appropriate, I’ll show you what a $200K 
design solution looks like. If you have $40K, I’ll see if I can 
come up with a $40K solution. But they’ll be different solu-
tions. I’m not going to charge you $200K for a $40K solution 
just because I know you have it. But the least helpful thing 
possible is for me to come up with a $200K solution when 
your budget is $40K. It wastes both our time. So tell me what 
your budget is and I won’t show you the Audi on the lot when 
you have Civic money. 
The more awkwardly you approach financial conversations 
with your client, the more awkward inexperienced clients will 
feel about answering them, and the less inclined more experi-
enced clients will be to trust you.
Is there anything going on at the company that could result 
in the budget being yanked? Or even the company going away 
completely? How does their business work? Is it VC-backed, 
ad revenue, or subscription-supported? Is it a foundation sit-
ting on a pile of cash socked away by robber barons a century 
or two ago? If the client is a VC-backed startup, when was 
their last round? Are you coming in at the beginning of a 
round, or toward the end? Does the board need to release  
the funds?
Some of this stuff is incredibly easy to find out. Heck, 
they’ll just tell you most of it if you know to ask. In fact, ask-
ing these sorts of questions often inspires confidence in the 
client that they’re hiring someone who knows how to ask the 
right questions. Some answers you can get from the news, 
blogs, or your vast network of connections. You might not  
get the answers to everything you need, but you can get most. 
And you’ll certainly get more answers than you would by  
not asking.

	
92 	 Design Is a Job
The invoice approval process
Once you determine that a company has the money to work 
with you, you need to find out who cuts the check. This is 
easier in small organizations, not impossible in others. But 
don’t wait until a payment is actually late to do this. Do it as 
part of the project research. 
What is the client’s standard accounts payable process? 
(If there isn’t one, it might be a good thing.) Do you need to 
watch a webinar to understand it?
Remember those movies you watched as a kid where they 
showed you where the milk came from? They’d start with 
a rooster crowing as the sun rose, and Farmer Bill walking 
to the barn carrying two buckets on his way to meet Bessie. 
Except that it turned out that Bessie was actually just what he 
called the incredibly complex equipment developed by the 
military that pumped a thousand cows simultaneously. And 
Farmer Bill sat in a windowed office overlooking the facility, 
his ass in an Aeron, reading Moneyball, manning a control  
panel that told him how much much milk was flowing and 
which cows were under-performing. 
They would take you through each step of the process, fol-
lowing the milk from the cow to a pasteurization boiler, then 
poured into a bottle, capped, packed in a crate, loaded on a 
truck, unloaded at the supermarket, picked up by mom, and 
finally drunk by some little ginger kid. 
Well, the invoice approval process is like that. (Shut up. I 
could have used the glue factory metaphor.) Only very rarely, 
in very small companies, does Client Bill take your invoice to 
his desk, pull out a checkbook, write you a check, and walk  
it back out to you. More often than not, your invoice is fil-
tered through an onerous multi-step byzantine process, where 
at any juncture it can get misdirected, mangled, or simply dis-
appear, never making its way back to your grubby little  
ginger hands.
It’s in your best interest to find out exactly what kind of 
process your invoice needs to go through when it’s submitted, 
who controls it at which juncture, how many steps are in be-
tween you and your bottle of milk, your options for receiving 

 	
Getting Your Money	 93	
payment, and how they might go wrong. The more steps, the 
more potential bottlenecks.
Just as you design sites with actual people in mind and not 
for “users,” you shouldn’t try to get paid by Accounts Payable. 
You should try to get paid by Bob, or Dorothy, or Stella. As 
long as you treat Accounts Payable as another faceless pro-
cess, they will treat you as another faceless invoice. Even the 
biggest, evilest corporation is staffed by moms and dads. Go 
make a friend! Share a milkshake together!
The structure of the organization is  
the biggest determinant
Small companies tend to understand that other small compa-
nies need to get paid promptly. And you’re much more likely 
to be working with, or at least have met, the person directly 
responsible for paying you. They may not even have a pay-
ment process at all, which goes one of two ways: you can 
convince them to pay you right away, which I wholeheartedly 
endorse, or your invoice sits forgotten on someone’s desk. Or 
if they do have a payment process, it’s just a matter of con-
vincing the person a couple of cubicles over to move you to 
the front of the line.
Large organizations tend to have less flexible processes 
with more moving parts and less visibility into the people 
directly responsible for payment. It’s not impossible to find 
them, mind you. But even if you make friends with Betty in 
Accounts Payable, which you should, she’s not going to be 
able to change a large organization’s accounting procedures by 
herself. She can, however, help you see into the process. She 
may also be an awesome resource for little hints and tricks 
that might speed things along.
Never, ever, go over Betty’s head to get paid. You have 
messed with her world and she will hold up your invoices 
in perpetuity. Plus, it’s a jerk move. And if you ever hope to 
work with this client again you’ll forever have an enemy gate-
keeper between you and your money.

	
94 	 Design Is a Job
Setting terms
For the uninitiated, “terms” refer to the agreement between 
you and your client about how long it’ll take you to get paid. It 
is short for “terminal.” As in the bus terminal you will end up 
sleeping in because you agreed to terms that weren’t in your 
best interests and couldn’t cover your rent.
Terms are referred to in wonderfully human terms such 
as net 15, net 30, net 45, and, for fans of comedy, net 60. (We 
once had a client try to talk us into net 90. It went as well as 
you’d expect it would go.) The number refers to the amount of 
time that can elapse between the date on your invoice and the 
date on the subsequent check. And the more institutional the 
client, the higher the number. 
You’ve probably figured out that you want a lower num-
ber, like 15, to pay your bills, while your client wants a higher 
number, like 60, to to keep their money in the bank generat-
ing interest longer. 
Don’t settle for terms you’re uncomfortable with. Negotiate. 
As always both parties will try to get the best terms for them-
selves. You propose 15, they counter with 60. So what do you 
counter with? 30? Who taught you to negotiate? You stick 
with your 15. Don’t blink first. If you counter with 30 right 
away you’ll get stuck at 45. 
Remember, they’re fighting for an extra 30 days of interest. 
You’re fighting to stay in business. Which they’ll need you to 
do to finish the project. It’s in everyone’s best interests to get 
you paid so you’re focused on the work and not the finances. 
Never take on terms that put your business at risk. 
There are other places to negotiate, apart from the net date. 
You can negotiate the number of payments. Sometimes lots of 
small payments are better than a few big ones. And a company 
may be able to give you better terms if your invoices fall be-
low a certain amount. The larger the project, the more often I 
like to invoice, at smaller amounts. Otherwise you run the risk 
of going months without getting paid, and each possible late 
payment carries substantially more risk. You want to avoid a 
feast or famine scenario.

 	
Getting Your Money	 95	
Beware of companies that treat paying you as a favor. You 
are delivering a valuable service for fair and agreed to com-
pensation. If a potential client starts making cracks about 
money, get the hell out of there before it goes further. They’re 
letting you know they don’t value what you do. They will re-
sent making payments. 
Above all, never take on bad terms just to get a job. There 
are worse things than being poor. Namely, being poor and  
owing someone your time.
Structuring payments
We are in a special category of industry that gets paid a com-
mencement fee, also called a deposit. It’s an industry standard, 
and don’t let anyone talk you out of it. Most clients have abso-
lutely no problem with it. Others get a little weirded out. You 
know what? They’re playing you against your inexperience. 
Any industry that has to allocate a substantial amount of 
resources to create custom work, be they group resources or 
an individual’s time, is taking a risk that needs to be mitigated 
by a deposit. Design is custom manufacturing. Anybody that’s 
making something specifically for you, and tailored to your 
needs, is going to charge you a fee up front. What you’re creat-
ing is not a commodity that can be turned around and sold to 
someone else. Your tailor, caterer, architect, the dude making 
uniforms for your little league team, the dopehead putting to-
gether your custom bike: all of these people are making things 
specifically for you. And if you should disappear on them the 
pool of people they can turn around and sell those items to is 
small to nonexistent.
If you go to your tailor and get fitted for a suit, he’s gonna 
make a suit that fits you out of material you choose. (Notice 
how often I use tailor analogies? It’s like a subliminal mes-
sage.) If you decide to be a jerk and not show up to pick up 
that suit, he’s stuck not only trying to find someone shaped 
just like you, but someone shaped just like you who has the 
same taste. That’s gonna be next to impossible. He’s not going 
to sink time into that. He’s going to have to eat the suit. (Not 
literally, mind you. Unless your tastes are really peculiar.) To 

	
96 	 Design Is a Job
minimize his loss and to solidify your commitment he’s going 
to ask you for a deposit. Now you both have skin in the game. 
He’s sinking time and material; you’ve sunk some money. If 
your tailor is smart he’ll negotiate for another payment from 
you during a fitting. That way he’s covering his time spent on 
the suit at different stages, and minimizing potential losses. 
When the suit is finally finished, you make the last payment 
and take the suit. You also get a receipt, which in our little 
analogy is the equivalent of the intellectual property passing 
from the tailor to you.
Had I gone with a navigational analogy here, instead of a 
tailor analogy, I’d say that your tailor had tied knots in a rope 
as he uncoiled it. That way the rope can never unravel past 
the last knot. Seriously, you need a suit. 
Make sure that your payments are tied to clear milestones. 
“When they’re happy with the home page” is not a clear mile-
stone. Tie it to an event that can be put on a calendar. Clients 
can argue whether something is approved or not far longer 
than they can argue whether a meeting ever happened. So if 
your milestone is the final design presentation you can invoice 
right after the meeting. Make sure the milestones are under 
your control. Unless you’re responsible for a site going live, 
site launch is a horrible milestone. 
Never tie a payment milestone to a metric. The world is an 
unsure place. And even when you do the research, the design, 
the development, and the testing correctly, things that are 
totally beyond your control can turn the world on its ear. You 
simply can’t carry the brunt of that. As of this writing there 
has never been a federal bailout of small independent design 
studios and I’m not holding my breath.
At Mule we divide most projects into three or four pay-
ments. The commencement fee is due upon signing the con-
tract. Don’t kick off without it. If you do, you’ve lost all your 
leverage and it might as well be net 30. We don’t walk into a 
kickoff meeting without a commencement check. The only 
exception is when we’re working with a large company or 
organization (read: schools and state) where trying to meet 
that requirement puts an undue burden on the client. In those 

 	
Getting Your Money	 97	
situations we wait until the payment has been processed. And 
we don’t do that very often.
Feel free to tack on a late fee for late payment. Make sure 
it’s high enough that you won’t be upset if a company takes 
you up on it, and have it grow incrementally over a period  
of time. 
Dealing with late payments
Ninety percent of dealing with late payments is figuring out 
how to avoid late payments. So if you picked up the book 
and skipped right to this section because you’ve got an urgent 
problem, just hold on a sec. Yeah, I realize it’s urgent. Yeah, I 
told you to chill a bit. Because I don’t want you dealing with a 
late payment while your guns are hot.
The first rule of late payments is to remain calm. Under no 
circumstance should you go screaming angry into a client’s 
office to get paid. Or start complaining publicly about it on 
Twitter. Those things may feel like the right thing at the time 
but neither of them get you any closer to your money.
Now that you’re calm you can try to understand why the 
payment might be late. Just how late is it anyway? And where 
is it? Let’s calmly track it down. Call your client. Remind them 
you were expecting payment and haven’t received it. Ask 
them to acknowledge whether they’ve sent it. If they tell you 
they haven’t, remind them it’s due and ask them to put it in 
the mail that day. If they’re local, offer to come get it or send a 
courier. It’s worth $30 to get your money. 
If they tell you they’ve sent it ask them for details: date 
sent, check number, tracking number if applicable. 
Most late payments are a matter of disorganization. Very 
few are a matter of shame. (Ran out of money.) And even few-
er are a matter of malice. (They just don’t want to pay you.) 
Until you have evidence to the contrary, assume your missed 
payment is a matter of disorganization. That’s the most likely 
possibility, and easiest to fix.
In large organizations, they might have a strict process, but 
release so many payments that some fall through the cracks. 

	
98 	 Design Is a Job
Rapidly growing companies might have plenty of money but 
be totally disorganized about who and what needs paying. 
True story: I once called a client about a late payment. 
They told me it had been mailed about a week before; gave 
me a check number and everything. I wasn’t totally buying 
it, but played along and asked them to cancel that check and 
issue a new one. They helpfully agreed, and I ended the call 
feeling like the master negotiator that I obviously am. Well, as 
the master negotiator is coming back from lunch he decides 
to check the mail, and you got it, there was a now-cancelled 
check sitting there. 
As for the late payments due to malice, or people just being 
jerks: these are the moments you save your lawyer for. Make 
every attempt to collect the amount owed you in good faith. 
And if that fails, unleash your lawyer. Just realize that he or 
she will charge you for getting that money, but 80% of a buck 
is still more than 100% of nothin’.
What you can do when the money 
doesn’t match up
In a crappy economy everyone pays late. Prepare for this. 
Negotiate smaller payments more often, so that each one isn’t 
as big a hit and there’s less time between them. Go into saving 
mode. Stash away as much money as possible. Client services 
is a land of feast and famine. 
There will be times that your incoming cash flow won’t 
be there in time to pay bills. Again, you should avoid this as 
much as possible by staggering your invoices and having a 
good mix of large and small invoices. Small jobs that pay faster 
and big jobs that pay more will diversify your payment sched-
ule so that you have a steady stream of small payments com-
ing in between the large ones.
But lean times will happen. Be ready for it by establishing 
a line of credit with your bank. I’ll be honest with you, banks 
have been slashing lines of credits across the board. (Glad we 
bailed their asses out.) But if you’re a business owner and you 

 	
Getting Your Money	 99	
have a good relationship with your bank, walk in and ask; it’s 
a common service. For good measure, try to make it at least 
two payrolls big. 
Chin up, sport
Sadly, you will have to deal with people paying you late. 
There are things you can do to minimize that: enough re-
search to know you’re not getting into a bad situation to begin 
with, solid work, a good relationship with the client, a good 
contact in accounts payable, and a mutual understanding of 
what money is due when. Even then, things fall through the 
cracks and you’ll need to use your knowledge of the situation 
to track down your payment. Help yourself get paid. I can’t 
guarantee you’ll never get screwed over again, but I’m pretty 
sure I can help you cut down on the times it happens.
And if you remember nothing else, don’t walk away from 
money that’s owed you. Go get it. You worked for it, you put 
in honest labor, and it deserves fair compensation. Get over 
your awkwardness with money. It’s neither charming, nor 
“authentic.” You’re a professional designer, and professionals 
get paid.
I can’t guarantee you that these conversations aren’t hard. 
In fact I can vouch that they are. Being scared is generally a 
good sign that you’re doing the right thing. I can, however, 
vouch that the second conversation you have about money 
will be easier than the first, and the third will be easier than 
the second, and so forth. Until one day you realize you’re no 
longer scared to do it and you’re writing a book about it.

	
100 	 Design Is a Job
10
Working  
with Others
A lot of this book has been about protecting yourself 
from other people. (The rest of it has been about protecting 
you from yourself.)  So far we’ve dealt mostly with clients. 
But throughout your career, you’re going to have to learn to 
deal with a multitude of other people to get your job done. 
Whether you work by yourself or as part of a team, know-
ing how to communicate with and listen to the other people 
around you will be a key factor to doing your job well.
Throughout your career you will deal with many different 
people, and they’ll be driven by different things. I can give 
you a baseline for how to treat a client, or a co-worker, but 
ultimately you’re going to have to figure out the best way to 
communicate with individual clients, and individual co- 
workers. And that takes listening, empathy, and understand-
ing what drives people. 
It takes confidence, self-awareness, and discipline to have 
good working relationships. You need to know what you 
want out of those relationships, know what the other person’s 

 	
Working With Others	 101	
concerns and anxieties are. And you need to have a clear un-
derstanding of how each of you fits into the process. 
If you’re working toward the same goals, respect each  
others’ talent, time, and opinions, and you can figure out how 
to communicate what you need from each other to attain 
those goals, you’ll do well. It also helps to know when to shut 
up. Be very clear and direct about what you need and you 
have a better chance of getting it.
Working with other designers
I took the bus to work this morning. It was rush hour, so I 
was packed in between other passengers in the very front, 
right by the driver. Another bus approached us from the  
opposite direction. The drivers made eye contact. They each 
lifted their hands to acknowledge each other, as if to say 
“Hello, I’m driving a bus, and so are you.” The buses motored 
along. Within ten minutes each of them would pass by another 
bus and the scene would repeat itself. 
Cabbies do the same thing. They’ll also allow other cab-
bies to merge into traffic before them, which they’d never let 
another driver do, ever. And I imagine that bankers probably 
have a secret handshake when they run into each other in 
steam rooms. Just like Masons.
Most of the world’s professions share a professional 
bond. At least enough of one to wave hello as they pass each 
other by and acknowledge that they’re members of the same 
profession.
Designers, however, are another matter. If I am meeting 
with a client’s team for the first time I can usually tell if they 
have a designer at the table. They’re the one staring me down 
with a smirk on their face. Sizing me up. Probably wonder-
ing why I’ve been brought in to do a job they thought them-
selves perfectly capable of. This doesn’t happen every time, of 
course. But it happens often.
So often that it needs to stop. Throughout my career I’ve 
heard the same complaint from almost every designer I’ve 
ever met: “No one values me.” And throughout this book I’ve 
pointed out a myriad of reasons why this may be true, and 

	
102 	 Design Is a Job
how you’ve brought a lot of that on yourselves. And how it’s 
within your power to fix it. And I’m telling you this with my 
heart full of love for you, for our craft, and for our profession. 
But until you start treating yourselves with respect, you can’t 
expect others to do so. Until designers stop treating each other 
with the catty competitiveness of contestants in a trashy real-
ity TV show, and start supporting each others’ efforts, and 
figuring out how to complement each others’ skill sets, you 
cannot expect others to take you seriously. 
Until you stop throwing each other under the bus, no one 
will ever confuse you with the person driving it.
Better together
Working with other (talented) designers makes you a better 
designer, and is essential to your professional development, 
especially early in your career. There’s simply no better way 
to learn your craft than to watch someone else practice it. But 
even as your career progresses, being in constant contact with 
someone else who speaks the same language will make you 
both better at what you do. Hell, just knowing that there’s an-
other designer in the room is sometimes enough to keep you 
from making lazy choices.
Working with designers that disagree with you is better 
than those who agree. They will make you fight over every 
decision you make! Which means you’ll learn to come up 
with really tight rationales and really good work. If you can’t 
get your work past another designer sitting right next to you, 
someone you trade jokes with every day, you’re not going to 
get it past a demanding client.
Peer-to-peer criticism
Having other designers look at your work is different than 
getting client feedback. These are your people. You speak 
the same language. It’s simultaneously more casual and more 
intense. After all, these are people who know you more in-
timately than your clients do. Maybe you work in the same 
space all day, maybe you meet up after work and show each 

 	
Working With Others	 103	
other stuff. You’re more willing to show them your mistakes, 
your lost causes, your uncertainties. At the same time, they’re 
the people who know you’re mailing it in, off the mark. They 
can not only tell you when something isn’t working, but they 
can tell you why it’s not working, and even tell you how to fix it.
You need to take advantage of these people.
Perhaps this is a byproduct of the advancement of my own 
years, but lately I’ve noticed a trend away from criticism. The 
word itself makes designers do that unattractive pouting thing 
they do. How dare we criticize something that has been lov-
ingly crafted by someone who had such pure intentions? Why 
be so harsh? We have begun defining our own work in such 
precious terms that even the hint of a dirty look might crush 
the little hollow bones that hold our designs together. We 
build each other up and pat each other on the back (gently!) for 
having the courage to have put our lovingly-crafted pixels on 
screen for those who know how to appreciate their delicacy. 
Not only have we have forgotten how to use power 
tools, we’ve begun confusing building IKEA shelves with 
furniture-making.
“But I worked so hard on this!”
Before this whole “design thing,” I had the pleasure of dis-
appointing my parents, hard-working immigrants that they 
were, by going to art school. We were taught to express our-
selves, bear our souls, develop our own personal vocabularies 
and read terrible, terrible French literature. And once a week 
we would get together and critique each other’s work. We’d 
line up all these highly personal artifacts we’d supposedly 
poured our souls into, and spend the day seeing who could 
come up with the most brutal takedowns. We’d eviscerate 
each other. It didn’t matter whether the work was done by a 
friend or someone you didn’t know. The task was two-fold: 
build critical thinking skills and thick skin. 
But this house of horrors had rules. You could say anything 
you wanted about the work itself, the effort that went into the 
work, and the craft of execution, but if you made a personal 
comment about the author the room would stop dead in its 
tracks. You’d be asked to leave. You simply did not criticize 
an individual. If you were going to make someone cry, which 

	
104 	 Design Is a Job
happened multiple times a day, you had to do it because they 
were a bad artist, not a bad person.
Now mind you, I am not trying to make a connection be-
tween art and design. The two couldn’t be more different: one 
is a corporate business tool for manipulating the poor, and the 
other is design. But there is a connection to be made between 
those critiques and peer-to-peer criticism. A few months in 
and something started to happen in those critiques. First off, 
people left. Having your work regularly criticized by your 
peers is hard. But those who stayed watched their work get 
better. And their critical skills improved as well. By the end 
of the year, we were not only doing better work, our critical 
thinking skills were sharp as knives.
Sorry for the art analogy. Let’s get back to the office.
I’ll concede the point that going into work every day to be 
criticized by your peers is not very pleasant. And it’s certainly 
not going to work out unless you lay some ground rules. It 
works if everyone involved respects one another. It works 
when there’s a sense of decorum. You have to talk about the 
work, not the person doing the work. And you have to rec-
ognize that everyone involved in critiquing the work has the 
best interests of both the project and the designer in mind. (If 
they don’t, you have a bigger problem.)
Start be clearly defining the goals at hand. Discuss whether 
the goals were met and how well. Even good work can be bet-
ter. The goal is never to make something good enough. The 
goal is also never to work hard on something. The goal is al-
ways to get it right. (Do not confuse someone having worked 
hard on something with it being right!)
As the person being critiqued, you need to realize that the 
feedback is not about you, it’s about the work. And you need 
to be open to good ideas that come from places other than 
your own head. There’s a balance between defending your 
work and remaining open to better ideas that takes a long time 
to develop. It takes confidence, intelligence, and an open mind 
to allow others to help you make your work better. It takes a 
thick head not to.

 	
Working With Others	 105	
No more catty competition
The perception (or reality) of competition poisons the work-
ing relationship between designers.
As a designer working in client services we’re often 
brought into situations where there’s a designer on the client 
team. You’d be amazed at how often their existence is hid-
den from us. I’m not quite sure who the client is attempting 
to protect in these situations: us, the designer, or more likely 
themselves. 
We’re often brought in after a job has been attempted in-
ternally. This is a tough situation for everyone. The internal 
designer might feel threatened that someone else is now in 
charge of a job they couldn’t do. (More likely they didn’t have 
the internal support to get it done.) At times the internal de-
signer has lobbied not to have an external team brought in and 
lost. Also awkward. 
Funny story. We’re about a month into a project with a  
client. Redesigning an online service. I’m sitting in the client’s 
office and we’re batting around a few ideas that have come up. 
I mention a particular flow I’m considering. “That sounds like 
something Sam came up with a while back?”
“Who’s Sam?”
“He’s a designer that was on this project for a few months. 
Came up with a few ideas. Other stuff came up though.”
“Can I talk to him?”
“Knock yourself out.”
The next day I go looking for this Sam, chat him up, he 
digs around his desk and pulls out a full set of flows and page 
schematics for the product we’re working on. And there were 
some very good ideas in there. To make a long story short, we 
got Sam involved in the project and a huge percentage of what 
we ended up designing had its genesis in those wireframes of 
his. Rather than reinventing a solution from scratch, we used 
his vast knowledge of the product and ideas that he had al-
ready explored and took them further than either of us could 
have done separately. 

	
106 	 Design Is a Job
And finding out about him was total happenstance. 
If you’re on the services side, make sure to find the client’s 
internal designers. Their internal knowledge will be a fantas-
tic resource to someone coming in cold. If you’re an internal 
designer and a design team is brought in, reach out to meet 
them. Their status as outsiders will make it possible for them 
to navigate above the company’s internal politics. Swallow 
your pride. You can both do things the other can’t. Together 
you’re a stronger team than you are apart. 
Sam could have been totally pissed off that someone else 
had been brought in to work on a project he’d done some re-
ally excellent thinking on. We could have been threatened 
that Sam had not only already done all of this work, but that 
our thinking was taking us down the same path. Instead, we 
realized we both understood the problem the same way and 
decided to tackle the problem together. Not to mention the 
company was open-minded enough to let us do so.
Whether you are thrown together on the same project or 
accidentally discover yourselves on the same project, you’re 
all better off uniting behind a common goal than you are com-
peting for attention and resources. 
My first art director
More often than not, though, the situation above plays it-
self differently. Designers are a maddening combination of 
competitiveness and insecurity. For every story I have about 
someone like Sam, I have ten stories about walking into a  
client’s office to find them looking at a competing comp from 
an internal designer. And I’ll freely admit to you that before 
I knew better, I was the one making the competing comps 
when my own boss hired from the outside. Why did I do this? 
Easy. I felt like I was better than the designers that had been 
brought in. And more importantly, I was afraid I wasn’t. 
Like all animals we crave validation. I didn’t care what my 
boss thought of those other designers as long as he thought 
better of me. I was very lucky to meet a designer named Matt 

 	
Working With Others	 107	
early in my career. Matt was brought in to do an annual re-
port that my boss didn’t think I was ready to do. (For what 
it’s worth I would have nailed it, dick!) From the moment he 
came in I was irritated. He could sense it; I’m not very good at 
hiding when I’m irritated. So one day Matt invites me to lunch 
and we start talking design. He starts asking me about the 
company. And starts running ideas for the annual report by 
me. Next thing you know we’re working on it together. He’s 
giving me tasks. We’re giving each other feedback. He was, for 
all intents and purposes, my first art director. And he taught 
me what you could accomplish working toward the same pur-
pose, rather than trying to undermine each other.
So now when I walk into a situation and find another de-
signer in the position that I was in, I reach out to them. Like 
Matt did. We are all links in a continuous timeline of a shared 
craft. It is our responsibility to keep that timeline strong. To 
add to it. To pull the next link aboard. 
Act like it’s within your power to improve your relation-
ship with other designers and you usually can.
The “rules” of working with other designers
Respect
You can’t work with people you can’t respect. Yet I fear that 
too often we choose not to respect people simply because 
their ideas, their viewpoints, and the way they approach a 
problem is different than ours. And that means we’re cheat-
ing ourselves out of a new (or old!) way to solve a problem. 
There’s always something to be learned from working with 
another designer, whether they’re a grizzled veteran or a  
fresh face. 
Remember those print designers we used to laugh at? Well, 
the web finally caught up to where everything they knew 
about layout, color theory, and typography was essential. We 
weren’t doing anything new with design. Our technology just 
hadn’t caught up to what design was capable of yet.

	
108 	 Design Is a Job
Getting good at doing what you love means having the 
confidence to recognize what you know, the humility to rec-
ognize what you don’t, and the courage to extend our respect 
to those who make our faults more visible.
Clear roles
To work together without tripping over each other and du-
plicating each others’ efforts you need to establish clear roles. 
Decide who owns what. Decide how feedback is going to 
work. Depending on the circumstances, a communication 
chain with the client may be in order. And yes, one of you 
may have to be in charge. (More on that later.)
Remember the bus drivers at the beginning of the chapter? 
How well do you think they’d all get along if they decided to 
start driving each other’s routes because they felt they could 
do a better job?
Hard is it may be, once you decide another designer owns 
a particular piece of the problem, you need to trust them with 
it. Communicate often. Give each other honest feedback. If 
their work is sucking, let them know, and work out other 
possible solutions together. But under no means should you 
“surprise” another designer with your take on something 
they own. And trust me, as someone who works with other 
designers, it is so very, very hard to not grab that mouse away 
sometimes. I’ll know exactly how to fix something, and we’ll 
be talking it through, and my hand starts slowly working its 
way to their mouse. That’s a terrible urge though. It’s disre-
spectful of the other designer. It’s a wasted teachable moment. 
And above all, it’s a sign you don’t trust your feedback skills as 
much as your execution skills. 
The goals of the project come first
Whose idea was it? Who cares, if it’s a good idea. If everyone 
on the team can rally around a common goal the chances of 
achieving that goal increase exponentially. If we’re spending 
time debating whether the map transition was Jim’s idea or 

 	
Working With Others	 109	
Betty’s idea, we’re not implementing the map transition.  
What matters is that we have a good idea to implement.
Whether you are working with other designers on your 
team or designers on a client team, you will ultimately be 
judged on the success of the overall project rather than  
individual achievements. So why let ego and pettiness spoil 
the party?
You can learn to feed your ego family-style when you  
celebrate the completion of a successful project along with 
everyone else. 
When I look back at projects I’ve worked on, the ones that 
stand out are the ones where people worked well together, 
not the ones where individual ideas and achievements stand 
out. And the halo over a successful project tends to encompass 
the entire team.
Remember that Jordan won no rings until he learned to 
distribute the ball and involve his teammates. Once he did he 
won six. 
Don’t drive someone else’s route
Every once in a while we get a potential new client who tells 
us they’d like to hire us because they’re not happy with their 
current firm. Or they’re “disentangling themselves” from their 
current firm. Or they’re not happy with what their current 
firm is doing and they want us to review their work. We turn 
those clients down. You should as well. Never step on another 
designer’s work. Anything you say about that firm’s work will 
be used against them. It’s one thing to compete honestly for 
projects, it’s another thing altogether to have a hand in getting 
another designer fired.
If a client’s not happy with the firm they hired, let them 
clean it up. You stay clear of that mess.
The same goes for that horrid practice of posting your ver-
sion of a redesign that has just gone live. By all means, critique 
it. Write about what works and doesn’t work, but keep in 
mind that another designer was working under constraints 
and internal politics that you may not be aware of. So write up 
your thoughts as a user, even as a user who’s also a designer. 

	
110 	 Design Is a Job
But taking the time to redo their work and posting it publicly 
is smug and petty. (Yes, it’s happened to me. Yes, I’m still an-
noyed about it.)
Stand united. Or I will yell at you.
But hey, it takes more than designers to make stuff happen, 
right? Let’s meet some of those other people.
Those other people in the office
Working with other people is simple: figure out what they 
want, and make sure they understand what you want. The rest 
is a rounding error.
A few years ago, during my company’s infancy, I was total-
ly addicted to a TV show on the Discovery Channel (the mon-
keys and hammers channel) called Monster House. The premise 
in a nutshell: Steve, the foreman, would assemble a group of 
contractors, each with a different specialty, and they’d have 
a week to completely redo part of someone’s house. During 
the week the contractors would bicker. Yet somehow at the 
end they always pulled through and the owners of the house 
would either be delighted or pissed that there was a fire-
shooting fountain in the living room and a moat where their 
lawn used to be.
But the part of the show I enjoyed most (or at least that 
serves our purposes today) was the very beginning. Steve the 
foreman would gather his whole crew together in a room 
and go over ideas for what they could do. Everyone worked 
together on this. The carpenter would suggest a drawbridge in 
the backyard, the general contractor would weigh in on how 
to do that while taking out 75% of the house’s load-bearing 
walls, and the electrician would estimate how much power to 
steal from the neighborhood grid to make it work.
And I turned to my partner Erika and said, “That’s how we 
need to work! We need to involve everyone in the project 
from the very beginning.” 
And that is how we work. At the beginning of every proj-
ect, all the members of the team get together and throw out 
ideas. There’s a fantastic amount of energy in the room as 

 	
Working With Others	 111	
we simultaneously debate how to organize, design, and build 
things. As we go, we check on whether someone’s idea might 
take us over budget, or blow our deadline, while our lead 
researcher points out that no one wants a website with a fire-
breathing fountain.
That way, when we all head off to our own specialties, 
we’re doing it with a group agreement on what it is we’re go-
ing to build.
I’ve worked at too many places where page schematics 
were thrown on my desk, fully formed, and comps delivered 
to developers as a fait accompli, often being seen for the very 
first time, to tell you that it does not work!
If you have the luxury of working in a room full of design-
ers of all specialties, you need to make full use of them. Work 
together. Early and often. Share in the failures and successes. 
But I guarantee, if you find people you work well with, the 
successes will outweigh the failures.
Depending on where you work, you might have a multi-
tude of other people in the office. Even if you work alone out 
of your studio apartment you’ll undoubtedly have to interact 
with other people (other craftspeople!) at some point during 
the day.
We’ve already gone over clients at length, as well as lawyers 
and obviously other designers. But web design is a complex 
thing. Lots of moving parts. And all of those parts require a 
person who’s really good at that particular skill.
If you’re in a small company many of these roles may be 
filled by the same person. If you’re in a large company, each of 
these roles may be further broken down into mind-numbing 
sub-specialties. 
They’re as responsible for the success of projects as you 
are. And as deserving of your respect as you are of theirs.
Project managers
You know what’s great about project managers? They manage 
projects. They keep things on time and on budget. They al-
locate resources and make sure you’re working on what you 

	
112 	 Design Is a Job
need to be working on. They do this by carefully lining up all 
the pieces that make a project go. They spend a great deal of 
time creating intricate timelines to ensure a project gets done 
on time, and when everything shifts, they do it again.
Just as you’re responsible for the quality of a project, your 
project manager is responsible for getting it done on time. 
And with the maximum amount of profit. This doesn’t mean 
you’re not both thinking about those things. It means you 
each own your part of the project. This often leads to ten-
sion, as your ultimate goal is to do good work, and the project 
manager’s ultimate goal is to do the work on time. And that’s 
pretty much how it should work. With each party pushing for 
the piece they own, and playing against each other, you can 
deliver excellent work on time.
The project manager also serves as the voice of the client  
in the room. They make sure the client’s requirements are  
being met, and do most of the day-to-day checking in with  
the client.
Project managers are not your mother. They may be the 
project’s mother, but not yours. They’re not there to man-
age you, outside of how you fit into whatever project they’re 
managing.
The best way to work with a project manager is to be clear 
about what each of you are responsible for and to keep them 
informed of project process as much as possible. Don’t wait 
until you’ve missed a deadline to alert your project manager to 
a problem. As soon as you get an inkling that you’re going to 
blow a deadline, let them know. Help them help you by giving 
them enough time to triage the problem with the client. 
There may be times when you feel like you and the proj-
ect manager are working in total opposition, but you’re not. 
You’re working toward the same goal—you just have different 
ways to get there.
You can also make their lives easier (and by extension, 
yours) by cutting the “creative” routine. Be realistic about your 
time estimates, mind your deadlines, understand the scope. Be 
someone who can be counted on.

 	
Working With Others	 113	
Researchers
A good researcher will make sure you’re not building houses 
with basements in a flood zone. They run interviews with 
the client’s team and with potential customers. They review 
the client’s analytics. Their job isn’t to tell you what to design; 
after all, no researcher could have told Henry Ford that people 
wanted cars. But a good researcher could have told him that 
people enjoyed going faster. 
Much as the project manager serves as the voice of the  
client in the room, the researcher functions as the voice of 
the user. A good researcher will talk directly to the people the 
work you’re doing is intended for and find out about their 
habits and proclivities. Good research is invaluable in know-
ing whether you’re headed down the right design path. 
You should make it a habit to sit in on as many of these in-
terviews as possible. It’ll give you a much better sense of who 
you’re designing for. 
Research doesn’t tell you how to design, it tells you where 
to design. And a good researcher isn’t prescriptive, they just 
gather and analyze the data. It’s your job to figure out what to 
do with it. Frequent check-ins with your researcher through-
out the design process can be incredibly helpful to validate 
your decisions against their research.
The success of every project depends on how well it reso-
nates with its intended audience. And your researcher is your 
eye into that audience. Treat them well.
Information designers
An information designer, or information “architect,” is a type 
of designer. You may even be one! (Short aside: I hate the 
term “information architect”; it’s a shame phrase, like “graphic 
novels.” Designers are designers.) They figure out the struc-
ture of things: how everything fits together, how to get from 
point A to point B, taxonomies, organizing principles, catego-
ries, etc. Basically, they figure out where things live and how 
you get to them. 

	
114 	 Design Is a Job
Information designers flesh out the structure and underly-
ing principles of the site, i.e., the blueprints (thus the architect 
thing). This is generally borne out in wireframes, also known 
as page schematics.
A client should sign off on the underlying structure of the 
site in a bare-bones wireframe before being shown a presenta-
tion layer; that way, we collect agreements at various stages 
along the way, and things can only unravel as far as the last 
point of agreement. Like tying knots in a rope.
This doesn’t mean the visual designer is sitting on his 
hands until the information designer gets that sign-off. 
Optimally, the two parties work as closely as possible to come 
up with possibilities and then go off to execute their individu-
al pieces. Solve together, execute apart. 
For years I worked in various places where information 
designers would work away, headphones on, uninterrupt-
ible, and then drop a hundred or so wireframes on my desk. 
Depending on the information designers, these wireframes 
would be in several states of fidelity, from pencil sketches, to 
fully fleshed-out page mockups. They would then disappear 
into their next project. This is known as “waterfall” develop-
ment. Because you’d want to put them in a barrel and throw 
them over a waterfall. 
My preferred method of working with information design-
ers is to set up in front of a large whiteboard and diagram 
what we’re working on together. The earlier you start devel-
oping solutions in common the better the project goes. And 
whiteboards make for easy and quick revisions. We take lots 
of pictures. And at some point you’ll need to go back and 
document all of that stuff for the sake of the client. But the 
more you check in with each other and review each others’ 
work while it’s in progress, the more likely you’ll head toward 
a strong solution you both agree on.
Who owns layout? Solving this problem once and for all 
Every day, all across the world, probably as you read this, 
there’s a designer presenting page schematics, or wireframes, 
to a client. A page schematic is a terribly confusing thing to be 

 	
Working With Others	 115	
showing to someone who’s not trained to read them. Even for 
someone who runs a website. (Ever look at the electrical wir-
ing diagram for a refrigerator? Yet you stick your arm in one 
multiple times a day.) 
And as if showing them that very confusing document isn’t 
enough pain to begin with we also throw in the biggest lie we 
tell our clients every day:
“These don’t imply layout.”
Oh, for fuck’s sake. How could they not?
This is generally done as a way to leave enough leeway 
for the visual designer to then come in and have the freedom 
to move things around as they organize the space and begin 
creating a visual experience. Which, by the way, we love. I 
once worked with an information designer who yelled at me 
for “moving things around!” (She’s no longer with us. The 
industry, I mean. Nothing was ever proven.) But we’re passing 
the problem on to our clients. We simply can’t tell a client to 
ignore the most obvious thing in front of them: an organized 
box! And think of all the meeting time we’d save by not hav-
ing to constantly repeat that stupid phrase.
For years we’d go back and forth on ideas to make the river 
run uphill, and, well, the metaphor just gave it away. Let lay-
out be layout. Get the visual designer and the information de-
signer working together from the start. Get them to agree on 
a basic grid, a potential layout, core functionality placement, 
etc. And have everyone evolve that idea as the project moves 
forward so that every party is aware of what’s going on. 
That way when you’re putting something in front of a cli-
ent you can say something more to the tune of “This is where 
we’re headed with the layout, which we’re evolving together.”
So who owns layout? You all do. Now can we please stop 
arguing about it? It’s exhausting.
Developers
If you’re a web designer, you should know how to code. 
However, if like me you have the luxury of working with 
fantastic developers, you may find your own hands-on skills 

	
116 	 Design Is a Job
getting rusty, even as you stay on top of all the ridiculously 
amazing advances in our field over the last few years. 
Of all the other people in the office, I work closest with the 
developers, because until we start making actual code, we’re 
looking at paintings of websites. We work back and forth 
at a pretty fast pace, riffing on each others’ work as we go. I 
don’t hand them things to build, we work on things to build 
together. The sooner we get into code, the sooner we can start 
iterating.
For example, we’re loving responsive design, right? And 
just this week I started mocking up the full-width desktop ver-
sion of a site, and as soon as we’d agreed on the basic frame-
work, my developer, Jim Ray, took that and started working 
through the responsive stuff. But every fifteen minutes or so, 
one of us would have to adjust what we were doing because 
the other one had either found a problem, or a better way to 
do something. We were making quicker and better decisions 
because design and development were informing each other. 
Had I attempted to mock up all of those responsive states and 
then hand them to Jim to code, those mistakes would have 
been baked in, and we would have spent days trying to chase 
them down. Not to mention that we would have probably 
asked the client to approve the final design, and it would have 
been broken.
We often comp just enough to figure out what it is we’re 
building, which is why we don’t include Photoshop comps 
with our final deliverables. They’re a mess, and often an un-
finished mess which may have little resemblance to what we 
ended up building. Don’t spend time updating paintings when 
what the client paid for was a website.
Engineers
Engineers build the things you design. They come in many 
flavors, such as application engineers, web developers, and 
software engineers. They’re often bundled together as “back-
end” engineers.
Some people also refer to developers as frontend engi-
neers. I pulled developers out separately because they work so 

 	
Working With Others	 117	
closely with designers, and in many cases the designer is the 
developer, that I think the relationship is different. Although 
the more a developer starts moving into programming lan-
guages such as JavaScript, Ruby, PHP, and Python, the more 
likely they’ll start referring to themselves as an engineer (and 
requesting a higher salary).
You’ve probably heard the phrase “designed by engi-
neers”? They probably like to say things like “engineered by 
designers.”
During my days in the startup salt mines a long, long time 
ago, I was working on a product redesign for a company I’d 
just joined. The design team was working through a new sign-
up flow. I was arguing that step three needed to come before 
step two. (I can’t remember if I was right anymore, but let’s 
assume I was.) The rest of the team, who’d all been there lon-
ger, were arguing that the steps couldn’t be swapped because 
it wasn’t engineered that way. I hate hearing a designer argue 
against something not because it’s right or wrong, but because 
it means a possible hard conversation. Hate it. So I said, “Let’s 
go talk to engineering.”
“You can’t!”
“Why not?”
And I realized no one on that team had ever had a discus-
sion with anyone in engineering about a product while they 
were still working on it. Things were delivered in a final state, 
engineering put it all together, often revising design decisions 
on the fly because of constraints we didn’t know (or hadn’t 
asked!) about, and both fiefdoms co-existed peacefully.
The next day I invited the lead engineer to lunch and after-
ward asked if we could swing by my desk so I could show him 
something. I walked him through the new signup flow. With 
step three before step two. 
“That’s not how we do it now,” he said.
I explained that I thought the new flow would lead to a 
higher conversion rate because it moved the credit card fetch-
ing to the end, front-loading the rest of the user data, and 
meaning people had more skin in the game and were slightly 
less inclined to bail. 

	
118 	 Design Is a Job
He agreed it was a good idea. At which point we presented 
the idea to the head of product together. 
And from that point forward we had regular check-ins with 
engineering. And it was much less likely that design would be 
changed in engineering, because we were catching the prob-
lems together and avoiding them.
Seasoned engineers tend not to go for trendy ideas, and 
have a lot of experience making pragmatic decisions. They are 
very good at what they do, as are you. And you’ll find that if 
you explain your rationale for your design decisions—as you 
need to be able to do with anyone you work with—they are 
an incredible resource. But as long as you’re both on separate 
sides of the gym thinking each other is weird, no one gets to 
dance.
There’s a tendency for designers to think of what they 
do as “hard” because it’s so subjective, and of engineering as 
“easy” because there’s a “right” answer. But I can assure you 
that there’s as much, if not more, creativity in how an engi-
neer solves a problem as in how a designer does.
Marketers
I’ve always been one to believe that all design is marketing. A 
well-designed chair summons your ass to it, a well-designed 
bike makes even the most honest among us want to steal it, 
and a well-designed website makes you want to use it. So why 
does “marketing” leave such a bad taste in designers’ mouths? 
Well, because most of it is bad.
There are good marketers and bad marketers, just like there 
are good designers and bad designers. A good marketer works 
for your audience. A bad marketer works for your advertisers. 
A good marketer will work with you to put together the best 
possible experience for your customers. Their main concern 
is making sure that the site stays in business so those custom-
ers can get their needs met. The easiest way to tell if you’re 
working with a bad marketer is to ask them, “Can you please 
explain what that means?” after they’ve said something. If 
they can’t, put a stake through their heart.

 	
Working With Others	 119	
Put a bad designer and a bad marketer together and you 
will get exponential crap. You’ll also get a ton of complaining 
on both sides. And it will all boil down to, “this other person 
isn’t making me good at my job.” Put a good marketer and a 
good designer together and they’ll achieve things neither of 
them could by themselves.
So as designers I’d like to implore you to do a few things. 
First off, stop having a knee-jerk response to marketing. 
Search out the good ones and work with them. Second, accept 
the fact that you also work in marketing. You are creatures of 
persuasion by nature. Just persuade people to do better things. 
Start with yourselves.
If you’re tired of marketing $200 basketball shoes to poor 
kids, then figure out what it is you want to persuade people to 
do, and go do that. Get a good marketing person to help you.
Content strategists
I saved my favorite for last. There’s been a resurgence in con-
tent strategy lately that’s been a joy to behold, in part. On the 
one hand, I’m thrilled people are talking about it and advanc-
ing its cause. On the other hand, there’s a tendency to treat 
it as a new craft, which reminds me of when web designers 
first launched Photoshop and thought they’d invented design. 
Content strategy has certainly been an underserved craft, but 
it’s hardly new to the world, much less the world of the web. 
Since we’re now far along in the book I believe I can give 
you some bad news. Almost no one is coming to the sites you 
work on because of your excellent design work, and those few 
that do are there to steal. People show up for the stuff. Design 
makes the stuff easy to find, and a pleasure to use; but it’s not 
the stuff. The web is made of content. Design is what holds all 
that content in place.
Don’t feel bad; the Golden Gate Bridge is only there to help 
cars get across, but it’s the bridge that people photograph. 
Content strategists help clients organize and plan for all 
of that stuff. If you have a content strategist at your disposal, 
start working together early and often. (That seems like a 

	
120 	 Design Is a Job
repeating theme. Weird.) You can’t build a container for some-
thing if you don’t know what size it is. 
There are two holy questions of any type of design: who is 
it for? And what are you putting in it? Content strategists are 
a godsend in figuring out the latter question. And that answer 
needs to inform what you’re designing. You can’t shove a sil-
verback into a cat carrier.
On finding yourself in charge
I once had the pleasure of working with a very talented in-
house designer at a large internet company. Let’s call him 
Bob, because everyone in this book is named Bob. Bob was a 
talented, good-natured guy. He knew his way around the com-
pany. He was always eager to help. And he had good ideas. I 
liked working with Bob. 
One day, toward the end of the project, I’m having lunch 
with Bob in the company’s luxurious subsidized cafeteria. I 
was having the swordfish. Bob says there’s an opening for a 
design director and he’s thinking about applying. 
I encourage him to do so; after all, he’s talented, good with 
people, and well-respected within the company. He appreci-
ates my encouragement and decides to apply.
A few weeks later we’re back at our studio, having finished 
the project, and I get an email from Bob telling me he got the 
job. I reply my congratulations back to him, excited that his 
confidence and hard work paid off.
About a year later we got another contract with the same 
company. Unfortunately, we weren’t working with Bob this 
time, but I searched him out. Bob looked like a different per-
son. He had circles under his eyes, his skin was a whitish 
green, and his studio was packed with piles of paperwork.
“How are you Bob? Wanna grab lunch?”
Over lunch Bob described how his work life had turned 
into an endless task of scheduling designers on projects, at-
tending management meetings, scheduling vacations, and  
office politics. 
“And I don’t get to design anything anymore,” he said.

 	
Working With Others	 121	
Corporate status vs. professional development
Bob’s story is sad, and not uncommon. I have way too many 
friends who’ve chased jobs because they were the next logical 
step in building a résumé. And obviously climbing the cor-
porate ladder comes with a higher salary. We can’t begrudge 
anyone the opportunity to make a better living. 
But does the cost of making a better living have to mean 
giving up doing the thing you love doing? And how smart is 
a company that elevates people out of the thing they do best? 
There’s got to be a better way to reward people while leverag-
ing their talent.
As your career advances it makes sense to take on more 
and more responsibility. And to make more money for doing 
so. But do you want to be in charge of the work or the people? 
Of all the people I know who’ve taken a job because it came 
with a “title,” even while they knew they wouldn’t be doing 
the kind of work they wanted to do, I can’t think of one that 
looks back on that as a good decision. Not a one. 
So as your career develops you will be faced with the 
choice of how to take it to the next level. Do you start your 
own company? Do you aim for design director at a large firm? 
Do you become a well-sought consultant where you only 
work six months of the year out of your swank modernist 
home in the hills?
The choice is yours. But I’d caution you to stay away from 
jobs that take you away from the thing you love to do, which 
is to design things. Although your definition of “designing 
things” may change. My friend John Gruber once said that 
Steve Jobs’ greatest accomplishment wasn’t designing any par-
ticular Apple product—it was designing Apple itself. At some 
point you may get to the point where you’re no longer design-
ing specific products, or specific websites, but instead helping 
to design the teams that design those things. And eventually 
designing the companies that those teams design within. But 
you don’t stop designing. 
If you’re at a company where the next step up the ladder 
means managing people more than managing the quality of 
the design the company is producing, get the hell out of there. 

	
122 	 Design Is a Job
There’s way too much design to be done to be losing good 
people to idiotic corporate structures that take our best de-
signers out of commission. There are people who love manag-
ing people and scheduling their vacations. Leave that to them.
Directing others
Even the Greatest Designer Of all Time™ can only work so 
fast and do so much work. Eventually, either you’ll be so suc-
cessful that you’ll have to figure out a way to increase your 
output without going nuts, or your company will decide that 
you’re too much of a valued commodity to do the job of one 
person. Which means hiring other designers. Which means 
you’re now directing them. The best way to get more value 
out of a designer who’s reached a certain level is to have them 
teach what they know to other designers. (Just make sure 
you’re in charge of their work quality, not their administrative 
overhead.)
I’ve been directing other designers at Mule for years. I 
absolutely sucked at it at first. (At least ten people just whis-
pered, “You still suck at it.”) It takes a while to get past your 
own competitive nature and inclination to just grab someone’s 
mouse and say “Step aside!” Because, honestly, you probably 
can do what you’re asking them to do a lot faster and most 
likely a lot better. But you’ll be condemning yourself to a situ-
ation where you’ll always have to jump in and be Batman, 
saving the city at the last minute from an inept police force, 
most likely made more inept because they know you’ll swoop 
in when you’re needed. (Ever wonder why Batman didn’t just 
open up a secret facility and have Jim Gordon send him his 
best cops for some intensive training time? Because Batman 
has a huge ego is why.) 
The first rule of directing others is that you have to let go 
of that ego. Or at least redirect it. The game is no longer about 
how well you can design something, it’s about how well you 
can work with others so that you can design well together. 
Otherwise you’ll be stuck in a situation where your capacity is 
limited to what you yourself can produce. 

 	
Working With Others	 123	
Not to mention being limited to ideas which only you can 
think of. The biggest joy for me in directing other designers 
is seeing them come up with ideas which I would have never 
come up with, and then working together to help them bring 
those ideas to fruition.
Give your people enough leeway to fail. And not so you 
can swoop in and save them, but specifically so they can trust 
that you won’t. They need to learn to fall before they learn 
how to recover.
The designers you’re directing need to be willing to show 
you work in progress. This isn’t a presentation situation; this 
is intimate. This is sometimes looking over the shoulder stuff. 
You know how much people like having someone hover over 
their shoulder? Not at all. Which means you need to establish 
trust. On both sides. Which means when you’re looking over 
your designer’s shoulder you’re the only one looking over 
her shoulder. Not you and the project manager, not you and 
the whole team. Just you. Your designers need to feel secure 
enough to tell you when they’re stuck. And trust you enough 
to help them get unstuck.
People at different levels need to be directed differently. A 
younger, less experienced designer will need more frequent 
check-ins and more prescriptive feedback, while a more  
experienced designer may just need the occasional course- 
correction. But even more than that, a good design director 
will find out the best approach for each of the people he or 
she is responsible for.
But none of this works if people aren’t willing to be di-
rected. And if you aren’t strong enough to do it. We’ve had 
designers come to work for us who’d either never been di-
rected by anyone before, or had been damaged by bad design 
directors in the past. In both cases, you have to be up front 
and direct with them about how your relationship is going 
to work and who’s in charge. They need to understand when 
it’s ok to push back and when to acquiesce and just start do-
ing what you tell them to, because that moment does come. 
Ultimately, you have a responsibility to deliver good work to 
your client. So training less experienced designers needs to be 

	
124 	 Design Is a Job
done within a setting where the client work doesn’t suffer as a 
result. You can’t deliver work with training wheels. 
The most dangerous instance in directing someone comes 
when you and they don’t agree about their skill level. A young 
designer who believes they’re better than they actually are 
won’t be as open to your direction. They’ll fight you and get 
defensive. Rather than being open-minded about the problem 
you’re currently pointing out, they’ll be wondering why you 
see a problem at all. They’ve closed themselves off to being 
directed and that relationship isn’t going to work.
Before we hire designers at Mule, I’m very clear with them 
about where I think they are talent and experience wise. I also 
tell them where I expect those skill levels to be in six months, 
and how we’ll get them there. If they agree with the assess-
ment and can commit to the work required to meet those 
future expectations, then we hire them. And with every de-
signer I hire I’m always looking for the one who’s eventually 
going to take over my job.
Being the boss
There are people for whom leadership comes naturally. I’m 
not one of them. I started my own company because I wanted 
to be able to choose the types of jobs I worked on, because 
I was arrogant enough to think I could do it, and honestly, 
because I didn’t realize how hard it would be. And maybe that 
was a good thing. 
You know those cautionary signs you see all over the place, 
the ones with great graphics of a mangled hand going between 
two cogs or someone’s hair getting caught on a fence? And 
you wonder what event caused those signs to be posted? This 
book is a collection of those signs. Every lesson contained in 
here was hard-won. And none was harder than the lesson of 
learning how to be in charge.
Whether you’re the lead designer on a project, or the direc-
tor of a group of designers, or the head of the company, or 
the captain of a ship, your team’s success is dependent upon 
strong leadership. 

 	
Working With Others	 125	
I love bad TV. And for a while I was addicted to this ridicu-
lous show called Whale Wars where a ship full of well-meaning 
hippies and trust fund babies getting back at their parents 
chased the Japanese whaling fleet around the South Seas. If 
ever a show had clearly defined “good guys” and “bad guys,” 
this was it. Whales are awesome. No one wants to see a dead 
whale being pulled onto a ship and gutted. It’s awful. And here 
were these well-meaning, if patchouli-stinking, kids primed to 
be the good guys.
But the captain of the hippie ship was a terribly inept 
leader. He was unable to make decisions. He made passive-
aggressive comments to his crew. And ultimately he locked 
himself away in his quarters during the climactic episode of 
the season while telling his crew to handle the situation them-
selves. They were lost. They were looking for leadership that 
just wasn’t going to come. And that’s a horrible feeling. By the 
end of the series I was actively rooting for the Japanese whal-
ers to take their boat down. I am a terrible person, but the 
whales deserved a better champion.
Luckily, we don’t work on ships and we’re not bound to 
maritime law, so I can tell you that sometimes you need to just 
become the leader you’re looking for without leaving yourself 
open to a mutiny charge.
Flat hierarchies are a lie
We’re not complex creatures. We’re chimps who know 
HTML5. And like chimps, we need to know someone is in 
charge. We get uneasy when the hierarchy is in flux. And we 
feel secure when our leadership is confidently taking us in the 
right direction. We like knowing what we’re responsible for, 
and whether we’re doing it well, or whether we’re doing it 
badly—especially if it also comes with instructions on how we 
can do it well instead. We like being rewarded in front of the 
other chimps, and being reprimanded behind the dignity of 
closed doors. We like to know whether we’re doing our jobs 
well from the person, or chimp, who entrusted us with them. 
When we first started hiring people, I was happy to let 
them find their way. Or, better said, I was too insecure in my 

	
126 	 Design Is a Job
own leadership abilities to point them in a particular direc-
tion. I was trying to be their buddy. Their fellow designer. 
They were looking for clear expectations on how to succeed. 
From their boss. And I failed them.
People want to do well. They need goals to meet. And you 
need to set those goals.
Hire people smarter than you
Everyone says this, but it’s hard to do. It’s much easier to 
hire people who are almost as smart as you, smarter than you 
at something you don’t like doing, or (my all-time favorite) 
remind you of yourself at a younger age. But to actually hire 
people smarter than you requires a heck of a lot of confidence 
and self-awareness. 
Think of it this way, though: there are going to be people 
smarter than you out there. Where do you want them? 
Working for you, or for someone else? And surrounding your-
self with smart, talented people is only going to make you  
better. It’s certainly the right call for the sake of the team.
And if you’re honestly trying to build a team of incredibly 
smart people, be content that your place in the group doesn’t 
have to be as the smartest one. You only need to be smart 
enough to convince them to work for you and keep them 
engaged. 
Learn how to apologize
We’ve screwed up a lot over the years, but one particular 
screw-up stands out. Not because of the screw-up itself, but 
because of the way it was handled. Which I’d love to tell you 
was totally thought out, but it wasn’t. That’s how all of these 
lessons go: you screw up, you stumble into solutions, and you 
remember them.
Anyway, we’d messed something up and the client was 
on the phone. He was pretty unhappy and verging on irate. 
Our project manager was attempting to placate him. She was 
explaining it wasn’t actually that bad, that we’d fix it, these 

 	
Working With Others	 127	
things happen, etc. She was doing her job well. And offering 
him everything she was able to. Finally he asks to speak to me.
I pick up the phone. He’s mad. He explains the problem. 
And I reply: “This is my responsibility. I apologize. It won’t 
happen again. Now what can we do to fix it?”
Did we actually screw up? Who knows. But I realized that 
the only way we could get past his anger was to apologize. 
And that’s not something I could ask someone else to do, nor 
would he have accepted it from someone else. And, quite hon-
estly, as the boss that was my sword to fall on. 
You’re going to screw up. Big. And when you do you need 
to own it, clean it up, and move on. I’ve never held a mistake 
against an employee, but I can’t tolerate someone who’s un-
able to admit to their mistake. And when it’s a client-facing 
mistake you, as the boss, need to raise your hand and claim it. 
Know when to part ways 
If you think this section is about firing people you’re only par-
tially right. That’s coming up. But I recently said goodbye to 
one of my favorite designers I’ve ever worked with. She was 
talented, good-natured, smart, and a pure joy to work with. 
But she realized it was time to go do her own thing. And as 
sad as I was when she told me she was leaving, I was just  
as thrilled to hear she was confident enough to go at it on  
her own. 
If you hire the right kind of people, they will eventually 
either leave you, or try to displace you. (My curse is not hav-
ing been able to find the latter.) 
Unfortunately, there are times when parting ways isn’t 
such a happy event. Sometimes you hire the wrong people. 
Sometimes you hire good people and it turns out you just 
can’t work together. There are lots of ways for relationships to 
go beyond fixing. And only one way to fix the problem. Being 
in charge means that every once in a while you’re going to 
have to fire someone.
There’s more pleasant names for it, of course: letting them 
go, telling them to start looking for other opportunities, laying 

	
128 	 Design Is a Job
them off, etc. These are all bullshit. You’re firing someone. 
Luckily I’m not in HR, and this isn’t HR advice.
I worked at a big company once. I was the designer in their 
pre-web marketing department. And to make a long story 
short, I was done. I’d been there for awhile, I wasn’t crazy 
about recent changes in the company, I’d become kind of a 
prick to work with, and I was still young enough that I felt 
they owed me something. I should’ve left.
One day the president of the company comes into my of-
fice and tells me what a bad employee I’d become. (True.) He 
tells me I had two weeks to shape up or they’d fire me. I’d 
never been fired before! I hated the job, but I didn’t want to be 
fired. I also needed the money. So I turned into a model em-
ployee for two weeks. (You can do anything for two weeks.) I 
mean, I did everything asked of me with a smile on my face. I 
honestly thought I’d averted being fired. 
Two weeks later he comes into my office and tells me my 
attitude hasn’t improved and fires me. I was devastated.
Hindsight is a wonderful thing. When I look back on that 
moment two things come to mind. First, I should have left 
that job a lot sooner. I was done. Second, I never had two 
weeks to shape up. The firing was done from the moment he 
gave me the warning. And I spent two weeks thinking I had 
two weeks to save my job. Which I didn’t. (Actually, three 
things come to mind: I’d like to thank him for freeing up my 
time to learn web design.)
Because of this particular experience I decided that I would 
never let an employee think they had a chance they actually 
didn’t. When one of my employees is on thin ice I let him 
know, and when I decide he’s done, I let him know that.
I’ve had to fire a few people. I take no pleasure in it. But 
when someone’s not doing the job, they’re putting an undue 
burden on the other employees, especially at a small company. 
And it’s not fair to them. It’s also not fair to let someone con-
tinue in a job that you’ve decided they can’t do. 
Be clear in your communication with your employees. 
Give them regular updates on how they’re doing. If they’re 

 	
Working With Others	 129	
not doing well, give them steps to correct the problem as well 
as a timeline for achieving those steps. Getting fired should 
never come as a surprise. 
Being fired sucks. It sucks much more than firing some-
one. So be clear and be quick. And be humane, but make no 
mistake that it is their right to see you as the prick in that situ-
ation. And it is your responsibility to take the steps to make 
your company better.
Everyone I’ve ever fired has gone on to do well some-
where else.

	
130 	 Design Is a Job
Conclusion
I told you a lie at the beginning of this book. To be fair, I be-
lieved it when I said it. But I told you I was writing this book 
for you. I wasn’t. I was writing it for me. Because this shit  
is hard. 
Let’s be honest. It’s a pain in the ass to get up every morn-
ing and design stuff for people. Most of the time you’re hitting 
your head against the wall, or going down the wrong path. 
Most of the work we do gets thrown out. Even the best of us 
have worse batting averages than ball players.
But those times when you get stuff right? Oh man, those 
are good times.
So I wrote this book to remind myself of those good times. 
To remind myself that the time I’ve spent beating my head 
against the wall, filling up a digital trash can with metaphori-
cal crumpled up work, and being asked to make logos bigger, 
buttons brighter, and “jazzing things up” actually amounted to 
something. It amounted to something I could pass on to you. 
And it paid back all the designers who were kind enough to 
help me learn the craft.
There are no bad clients. Okay, maybe there are some bad 
clients. But they’re not the problem. For too long now design-
ers have complained that clients haven’t behaved how they 
needed them to. You, my dears (and I love you all) have been 
the problem. You’ve ignored the parts of the job you either 
didn’t like, felt uncomfortable doing, or didn’t even know 
were your responsibility.
Maybe no one told you this was part of your job. Well,  
now I have.
We come from a strong line of kings and queens. People 
who have spent their lives making the world a better place 
than when they entered it. Some in small ways. Some in  
large ways. 
Tibor Kalman. Victor Papanek. Paul Rand. Ray and Charles 
Eames. Dieter Rams. Erik Spiekermann. Zuzana Licko. Jeffrey 
Zeldman. Paula Scher. Thousands of people whose names are 

 	
Conclusion	 131	
lost to history who signed the highways, the subways, our 
baseball cards, and our cities. And you. You are all designers. 
You are all as good or as weak as you choose to be. And you 
all have an opportunity to leave your mark of good work on 
the world. And I pray you use it well.
Now go do the thing.

	
132 	 Design Is a Job
Resources
This is a list of items neither basic nor necessary. You don’t 
need me to point those sorts of things out to you. Following 
are a few books and websites I hope will make you realize 
that you have a lot to learn, and get excited about that fact. 
Perpetual intellectual curiosity is the greatest resource a pro-
fessional designer can have. Barring that, an island hideaway 
is nice.
Respect your elders
Design has been around longer than the internet has. Good 
designers have strong voices; listen to them.
• Paul Rand: Conversations with Students, Michael Kroeger
• Design for the Real World, Victor Papanek
• Tibor Kalman, Perverse Optimist, Peter Hall and Michael 
Bierut (Sadly out of print, you should get your hands on a 
copy. Maybe the library has it.)
• Make it Bigger, Paula Scher
• Less and More: The Design Ethos of Dieter Rams, Klaus Klemp 
and Keiko Ueki-Polet
Sell yourself
A career in design is one long pitch. Be prepared. 
• Life’s a Pitch, Roger Mavity and Stephen Bayley
• P. T. Barnum: America’s Greatest Showman, Philip B. 
Kunhardt, Jr., et al.
Be grounded and well-rounded
Whatever type of design you do, your work exists in a space 
between physical artifacts and human attitudes and percep-
tions. Always keep this in mind. 

 	
Resources	 133	
• Being Wrong, Kathryn Schulz (Not only are you designing 
for fallible humans, you are one of them. Empathy and in-
tellectual understanding will make you stronger and less of 
a jerk.)
• The Language of Things, Deyan Sudjic (It doesn’t matter if 
you are an interactive designer, your work exists in con-
text of the world. A marginally less angry companion to 
Papanek’s book.)
• The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood, James Gleick (If 
it’s not stuff, it’s information. We have too much of both.)
• Managing Humans, Michael Lopp (You’ll probably have to 
work with some sort of humans in some sort of hierarchy; 
not only good for managers, but also the managed.)
Love what you do, and be very good at it
Read some autobiographies of people you admire and relate 
to for perspective. They don’t have to be these. Life anecdotes 
are excellent fodder for design presentations, even if they 
aren’t yours.
• Life Itself: A Memoir, Roger Ebert
• Bossypants, Tina Fey
• Autobiography of Mark Twain, Mark Twain
• The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin, Benjamin Franklin
Internet weblogs
Smart people writing stuff. 
• Subtraction by Khoi Vinh: http://subtraction.com
• Ftrain by Paul Ford: http://ftrain.com
• You Are Not So Smart: http://youarenotsosmart.com (More 
about how our brains fail us. Excellent anecdote to hubris.)

	
134 	 Design Is a Job
Acknowledgements
As difficult as it might be to write a book, I assure you that 
everyone within ten feet of me while I was writing suffered 
more than I did. My apologies across the board. You are all 
good people who deserved better than I was able to give you 
for the last few months.
This book wouldn’t exist at all without Jeffrey Zeldman, 
who convinced me I needed to write it all down when I was 
afraid to; to Mandy Brown, who makes me sound so much 
smarter than I actually am; and to Jason Santa Maria, who 
makes it all look so good. I’m honored to be the brown stripe 
in A Book Apart’s rainbow of awesomesauce.
My lawyer, Gabe Levine, who got the profanity clause re-
moved from the book contract. 
Katie Gillum, who workshopped a ton of this book with 
me on our podcast Let’s Make Mistakes and helped me with 
outlines. Tina Lee, who read through too many rough drafts 
and was never afraid to tell me when something sucked. 
David McCreath who has been putting up with my rants for 
longer than anyone. And everyone at Mule who treats design 
as a job every day. To every past Mule employee who’s had to 
deal with me learning how to do the job.
To everyone who gave me advice, feedback or stern talk-
ing to throughout the writing process. Michael Sippey, 
Andre Torrez, Amber Costley, Anil Dash, Alaina Browne, 
Mat Honan, Beth Callahan, Jeff Veen, Bryan Mason, Colleen 
Wainwright, Michele Catalano, Mike Essl, Mia Eaton, Josh 
and Kayla Cagan, Kristina Halvorson, Jen Bekman, Ryan 
Freitas, Ryan Carver, Rae Brune, Mike Kuniavsky, Elizabeth 
Goodman, Tina Roth Eisenberg, Amy Jane Gruber, and her 
husband, whose name escapes me.
To Erik Spiekermann, who disproves the axiom that meet-
ing your idols will be a disappointment, and was kind enough 
to write the foreword to this book.
To every client—past, present, and future—who has en-
trusted me with their projects and made it possible for me to 
practice my craft and earn a living. Thank you.

 	
Acknowledgements	 135	
A huge hug to my parents, Americo and Judite Monteiro, 
who were courageous enough to immigrate to a country 
where being a loud-mouthed jerk could be turned into  
an asset.
To my son Henry, who makes me want to be a better per-
son, and whose respect means more to me than anything in 
the world. I owe you some Mario Kart games, kid. And to my 
baby momma, Tracey Long, who is helping me raise a won-
derful boy. 
A very special thank you to Annette Rankin, who has the 
hardest job in the world.
And, of, course, neither this book, nor our design studio, 
nor much of anything would be conceivable without Erika 
Hall, my partner in all things good and bad. Her inspiration, 
her prodding, her support, and her understanding make all 
things possible.
And thanks to everybody who skipped right to this  
page looking for your name. I hope you learned something 
either way.

	
136 	 Design Is a Job
A
advertising 20–21
B
being nice 14 
being wrong 73 
blogging 21
C
cash flow 98–99 
Caslon, William 9 
client anxiety 60–61 
client budgets 90–91 
commencement fees 95–97 
competing designers 85–86, 101–102, 
105–106 
comps from clients 84–86 
conferences 21 
content strategists 119–120 
contract negotiations 50–52
D
Dash, Anil 32 
deadlines 80–81 
deposits. See commencement fees 
developers 115–116
directing other designers 122–124
E
Eames, Ray and Charles 9, 130 
elevator pitches 15 
enforcing contracts 55 
engineers 116–118
establishing a feedback cycle 76, 80–81
ethical responsibilities 28
F
feedback guidelines 78–79 
firing people 127–129
G
Gillum, Katie 87 
Gruber, John 121
H
Hall, Erika 2, 82, 110 
I
indemnity 54 
information designers 113–114 
intellectual property transfers 53 
internal dysfunctions 62–63 
invoice approval 92–93
K
Kalman, Tibor 9, 130 
Kickstart 33 
kill fees. See termination fees
L
late payments 97–98 
lawyers 47–50, 89, 98 
leadership 124–129 
Let’s Make Mistakes 87 
Levine, Gabe 48 
Licko, Zuzana 9, 130 
lines of credits 98 
lowballing 43–44
M
maintaining relationships 16–17 
marketers 118–119 
market research 36 
myth of the magical creative 6
N
negative feedback 71 
networking 15–16
index
V413HAV

 	
Index	 137	
O
organizing client feedback 82–83
outbound client contacts 20
P
Papanek, Victor 9, 130 
payment milestones. See structuring 
payments 
payment terms 94–95 
peer criticism 102–104 
prescriptive feedback 79–80 
presenting with a team 72–73 
price negotiation 42–43 
pricing 34–39 
processes of design 58–61 
professional development 121 
project managers 111–112 
proposals 40–41
R
Rams, Dieter 130 
Rand, Paul 130 
referrals 12–18 
reluctant buyers 25 
request for proposals 19 
researchers 113
S
Scher, Paula 9, 130 
screeners 18 
secret to life 44 
small jobs 38–39 
Spiekermann, Erik 130 
stakeholders 77 
statements of work 52, 76 
sticker shock 39–40 
structuring payments 95–97 
Super MoneyMaker 33
T
tailors 13, 31, 95 
termination fees 53
U
understanding goals 7, 37, 57–58 
user advocacy 9
W
waffling over decisions 63–64 
warranties 54 
wireframes 114–115 
working for free 27
working with friends 56 
working with other designers 107–110 
Z
Zeldman, Jeffrey 9, 16, 130

About A Book Apart
Web design is about multi-disciplinary mastery and laser  
focus, and that’s the thinking behind our brief books for  
people who make websites. We cover the emerging and  
essential topics in web design and development with style, 
clarity, and, above all, brevity—because working designer-
developers can’t afford to waste time.
The goal of every title in our catalog is to shed clear light 
on a tricky subject, and do it fast, so you can get back to work. 
Thank you for supporting our mission to provide profession-
als with the tools they need to move the web forward. 
colophon
The text is set in FF Yoga and its companion, FF Yoga Sans, 
both by Xavier Dupré. Headlines and cover are set in Titling 
Gothic by David Berlow.

About the author
Mike Monteiro is the co-founder and design director of Mule 
Design, an interactive design studio founded in 2001 whose 
work has been called “delightfully hostile” by The New Yorker. 
He prefers elegant, simple sites with clear language that serve 
a real need. He prefers that designers have strong spines. All 
of his clients still talk to him.
Mike blogs frequently about the craft and business of 
design on muledesign.com, and can be heard weekly as the 
co-host of Let’s Make Mistakes on muleradio.net. None of the 
terms Mike has coined are printable on a family website.
Originally, and emphatically, from Philadelphia, Mike now 
resides in San Francisco. When he’s not at work he’s out buy-
ing music on vinyl, reading comics, playing Mario Kart with 
his son Henry, and getting into arguments on Twitter. You 
can follow him as @Mike_FTW, but we’re not liable for what 
you’ll see.
He secretly really likes his dog.
Photo by Ryan Carver


