

Gretchen Anderson
Designing for Social Impact

978-1-491-92831-8
[LSI]
Designing for Social Impact
by Gretchen Anderson
Copyright © 2015 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Nicolas Lombardi
Production Editor: Kristen Brown
Copyeditor: Octal Publishing Services
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Ellie Volckhausen
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
June 2015:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2015-06-03: First Release
 
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Designing for
Social Impact, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Cover
photo by r.f. miller, Hundred Dollar Laptop, via flickr.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
1. Designing for Social Impact. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
What Is Social Impact?                                                                        2
What’s Different About Designing for Social Impact?                   5
The Social Impact Lifecycle                                                              12
Lessons from the Field                                                                      14
Looking Forward                                                                               24
vii


CHAPTER 1
Designing for Social Impact
During the 2000 United States presidential election, product design‐
ers and developers discovered an uncomfortable truth about our
nation. American democracy, long held up as a beacon for others to
follow, was susceptible to “user error.” As the stories of hanging
chads, bad ballot layouts, and unclear instructions unfolded, it
became clear that the election process contained quite a few bugs
from an end-user perspective. Dana Chisnell, the creator of Field
Guides for voting, was inspired to fix such problems the best she
knew how—by applying user-entered design practices. Until the
2000 presidential election, she pointed out that a “usable” ballot was
one that was readable by the machines that count them. But, the
“hanging chad” phenomenon brought to everyone’s attention the
role that user error (or rather, terrible design) can play in affecting
outcomes and a nation at large. This is but one example of how the
design of simple things has an impact far beyond its immediate sur‐
roundings. It’s part of a clear case that more comprehensive,
thoughtful design can have more predictable, measureable effects on
our world at large.
More and more, designers of all stripes seek projects and organiza‐
tions that have a mission to serve the greater good at their core.
Partly it stems from an innate desire to use our skills to their highest
potential. It also reflects broader trends in design and tools that
make it possible for us to tackle problems that we observe in society,
measure their root causes, and more quickly and efficiently test what
works to create positive change. The inherent “usability” issues
within the systems that surround social impact objectives are
1

becoming more evident. Design increasingly has the ability to run
programs at scale that address more systemic issues that arise from a
lack of infrastructure or overly complicated regulation.
This golden opportunity for design in the social space is already
gaining momentum. The ability to scale offered by digital technol‐
ogy is a part of what makes many social-impact projects finally
make sense. They can reach many people, more effectively, more
measurably. The pressures of globalization in a connected world also
fuel the drive toward social-impact–focused work, along with the
visibility of how old ways of handling social problems have failed.
The technology space has embraced approaches that make social-
impact projects manageable and measurable. Designers who are
deeply curious to learn about what is effective at scale can find very
fertile ground in governmental, philanthropic, and healthcare
domains.
Let’s look at how designing for social impact differs from more com‐
mercial work, and share some lessons from the field about what
works and that for which we should be alert.
What Is Social Impact?
Let’s begin by describing the territory of social-impact projects more
clearly.
Social-impact projects are those with outcomes measured not
through a lens of profits and market adoption, but through changes
in behavior that ultimately benefit an individual or a community as
a whole. What sets most social-impact projects apart from more tra‐
ditional consumer work is the rigor with which they must be meas‐
ured for effectiveness, not just “delight.”
We are in a territory where the idea of “usability” (if it is a consider‐
ation at all) has often meant creating things that are “functional”
within a very narrow set of criteria that focus on compliance with a
set of regulations or requirements. That compliance is most often
taken to mean legal compliance; that is, in ballots that present candi‐
dates names in the proper order, or compliance with regulations
such as those created by the FDA about how medical devices are
measured and deemed effective and safe. Regulation and compli‐
ance are certainly critical to ensuring that systems work, but they
2 
| 
Chapter 1: Designing for Social Impact

seem to represent the lowest rung on a hierarchy of needs that must
also include desired use, trusted advice, and more.
As we seek to move beyond usability as our goal, it’s important to
clarify the relationship between systems and those they serve. We
can view social-impact work as the answer to a series of questions
about the nature of the systems involved in the problem space.
Designers should consider the following questions when conceiving
projects:
• Is the system fair? Does it have a clear, accessible process for
governing and adjudicating inequities?
• Can it be transformed? Is there sufficient tolerance for change
in the organization? Or, can you act as a translator or interface
between the system and the target audience?
• If not, can it be side-stepped or supplanted with a new service?
The answers to these questions will help you understand where to
focus and how to align with those involved. Whether you work
within the system or outside of it is a key decision to make early on.
By being intentional about the relationship between your product or
service, the social impact you seek, and the systems that surround it,
you will have a higher chance of succeeding, in spite of—or because
of—forces you don’t control.
Measurability, and the ability to live with data as an inconsistent
map also come with the territory. Measurement of outcomes of
design work is critical. Small changes in behavior drive big changes
in behavior in unpredictable ways, as the work of behavioral econo‐
mists such as Cass Sunstein and Richard Thaler has shown. In their
book Nudge (Penguin, 2009), Sunstein and Thaler show how some‐
thing as simple as the default setting for how retirement planning is
handled can have a radical effect on the rate of savings. They imag‐
ine a scenario in which employers enroll employees in a 401(k) plan
by default, and they must take action to opt out of the system. If our
society values caring for everyone, and we have no way to guarantee
social security at a governmental level, changing this default is a
simple way to better achieve that outcome.
Without profits and other indicators of success, the bottom line
rules all. Social-impact projects have a “double bottom line” that
must also consider the effects on people as part of a successful out‐
come.
What Is Social Impact? 
| 
3

This report looks at social-impact initiatives across three categories:
civic engagement projects, nonprofit advocacy, and healthcare.
Although most social-impact projects attract and serve a global
audience, the experience and research that I bring to bear on this
report has been focused in the United States. When working glob‐
ally, there will undoubtedly be different challenges and pressures,
but the lessons shared here will hopefully resonate with practition‐
ers from many backgrounds.
Civic engagement encompasses those efforts to motivate a commu‐
nity to take part in actions that affect public institutions. It repre‐
sents an emergent field for design with the creation of new
initiatives such as the Presidential Innovation Fellowship or Code‐
forAmerica.org for which design and development talent is being
specifically cultivated to serve civic purposes. In terms of outcomes,
civic engagement spans a large range of issues, but will tend to be
measured by its ability to reach many people. For example, we can
measure voter turnout efforts by the number of people who show up
to vote, regardless of who wins. Helping people take advantage of
welfare benefits might additionally be measured by the impact on
the quality of life for those who take advantage of them. This type of
civic action focuses on changing the system from within by remov‐
ing friction for citizens who use and benefit from the system.
Another type of civic action focuses on large-scale mobilization of
people toward changing the system, and participation itself is con‐
sidered a goal. The idea of participation as a benefit in and of itself is
echoed by Jose Arenas, a community organizer in the San Francisco
Bay Area, who shared a perspective on why social work matters:
“Engaging in action in the public sphere helps us live more fully.
Even if you lose. Participating is a path to self-realization and pro‐
gress in itself.”
The second type of social-impact projects are those supported by
nonprofits to advocate from both within and outside the system.
Not-for-profit groups can span many types of design challenges, but
typically they operate in realms where public or private funding
does not exist or lacks sufficient returns for investors. Education in
the United States is one area where there are private interests
endeavoring to support or change a system that is not seen as an
appropriate or viable market for profits. Such ventures are typically
driven by the personal desires of the individuals or organizations
that finance them. They will be measured by their ability to deliver
4 
| 
Chapter 1: Designing for Social Impact

specific outcomes such as an increase in parents demanding high-
quality schools in their communities or a reduction in school sus‐
pensions for high school students.
Third, healthcare and medical product development—although
often done in a for-profit model—still share many characteristics
with civic and philanthropic endeavors. The outcomes cannot be
measured solely in commercial terms of profit or units sold. No per‐
son or insurer will pay for medical interventions that don’t cure
what ails us, no matter how attractively they are packaged. Because
healthcare payment is not a strictly consumer market, most of the
drive for designers is toward reducing costs over adding value to
increase prices. Measuring success here will include both cost man‐
agement and the efficacy of the intervention.
This is not to say that funding models are the prime driver of how
design for social impact is framed or conducted, but it is important
as a designer to understand different funding models and how they
might affect the constraints and ambitions of a project. Just as
design needs to grapple with business models in the commercial
sector, designers should take the time to understand how the sus‐
tainability of their work is foreseen and how it does or does not
align with the desired outcomes for the chosen audience.
What’s Different About Designing for Social
Impact?
Designers looking to move into the social-impact realm will find
that their education, training, and tools will be very relevant, and the
work will appear similar to commercial product and services
projects. However, there are four key differences in work that aims
to achieve objectives for social good:
Design for everyone
Targeting or prioritizing specific user groups can be challenging
or counterproductive.
The importance of being empathetic
Empathizing with users and user research must be especially
culturally sensitive and might require different approaches.
What’s Different About Designing for Social Impact? 
| 
5

Behavior change is a focus
Getting to more positive social outcomes involves more deeply
psychological motivations and barriers than changing purchas‐
ing patterns or task efficiency.
Risk tolerance is low
The ability to “make mistakes” or chase losing hypotheses is low
because there is more than money at stake.
Designing for “Everyone”
In a commercial context, targeting your product can often be the
secret to success. The roll-aboard suitcase is the classic example of a
product designed for the needs of a niche audience: flight attend‐
ants. Roll-aboards are easy to move through the airport, fit neatly in
overhead compartments, and hold just enough for a short trip.
Those needs also overlapped with many other travelers, which guar‐
anteed its market triumph.
When we design for certain social outcomes, we often don’t have the
luxury of targeting our designs. Our civic institutions are meant for
all citizens, so to target only those easiest to reach will interfere with
your ultimate goal and create advantages for those who least need
them. Imagine an information system for a city that only targeted
those residents who are homeowners and (improperly) seen as most
likely to research what new construction projects are occurring in
their communities. This group is likely to become strong defenders
of their immediate surroundings, ensuring that dangerous or pollut‐
ing projects are built only in poorer areas of the city. Civic engage‐
ment can’t be considered a success if it only serves to create more
NIMBYism within well-off communities.
This problem, known as information asymmetry, is a very real one
for product and service designers working to create positive social
change. “Early adopters” in a commercial market are highly-valued
for their ability to evangelize and popularize a product so that many
more can enjoy them. Indeed, many early adopters will even pay a
premium for a product whose price can be reduced when it is scaled
to the market as a whole. But what happens when tools that are
designed to remind people to vote are only available to a segment of
the market?
6 
| 
Chapter 1: Designing for Social Impact

Rather than targeting a part of the market that is most easily
reached, it can be more useful and powerful to develop a variety of
“on-ramps” for different types of people who have more or less
agency. This helps to ensure that those who need help the most can
obtain it. Understanding the unique challenges of a wide array of
people will help you design solutions that overcome inequality and
asymmetry rather than ignoring them to ensure adoption.
Fully embracing the uniqueness of our relationships means abandoning
the most durable (and offensive) marketing metaphor of the last fifty
years: the funnel. While all kinds of optimization are possible in funnel-
oriented thinking, it is by definition impersonal treating everyone in a
predefined process as of undifferentiated equal value. Organizing mean‐
ingful opportunities to engage over time allows each person more agency
to create his or her own experience and deepen his or her engagement
over time leading to more opportunities to engage over the lifetime of the
relationship.
—Michael Slaby, 
Obama for America
There is still value in picking certain groups to target solutions,
especially in the early days of a project. However, the choice of target
might actually be a group that is harder to reach but who will benefit
most from your work.
The Importance of Being Empathetic
Historically, social-impact projects have often been efforts that were
executed with little visibility or attention placed on what the target
audience actually desired, what motivated them, and what barriers
they faced. What better environment to interject design! The prac‐
tice of human-centered design places great value on understanding
and empathizing with that audience in order to generate effective
solutions.
First, a note of caution about embracing social change work: as
many designers contemplate taking on work that drives social out‐
comes, it can be tempting to imagine yourselves as a type of Robin
Hood—courageous crusaders who will take on the system on behalf
of the people. The most critical assets for designers to develop are an
open mind and curiosity about learning “what works” and building
upon that. This is in contrast to imposing top-down ideas on others.
Or, if you’re looking for a “disruptive” approach, be sure to include
What’s Different About Designing for Social Impact? 
| 
7

those who will live with those disruptions on a daily basis to avoid,
well, disruption.
As Matt Hammer, executive director for Innovate Public Schools
and a life-long community organizer shared, “It’s not about speaking
truth to power. Power knows the truth. You need provoke people to
know what they should have access to and how to obtain it from the
system.” He and other social workers emphasize the need to make
systems that create self-agency and autonomy within communities,
not simply band-aids. Beware of an attitude that assumes that by
simply applying design to a problem, the people who are affected
will benefit. Although this might always be a concern for designers,
when the effect of your work is about more than delighting people,
you owe it to your audience to respect their autonomy and to ensure
that they feel entitled to that which, by all rights, is theirs.
User research in this domain is especially critical and serves two
functions. One is to help the designers understand how people think
and behave. More important, though, it is to include those who will
use a solution in its creation. A fourteenth-century political model is
often quoted by those working in social justice or community
organizing: “Nothing about us, without us.” You might recognize a
version of this thinking in the phrase, “no taxation without repre‐
sentation.” By including those you serve in creating solutions, you
are helping to create self-agency and buy-in within populations that
previously will have been shut out of their own solutions, either
because of political processes, inequality, or a lack of expertise. For
example, diabetics looking to take control of their health might be
given very simple tools, because as one client put it, “a smart meter
makes a dumb patient.” We can find this type of paternal attitude
about the capabilities of those being served in many domains, and
designers should be on the look out for such views and work to sub‐
vert them.
Good designers will bring the tools they use every day to these
projects and will succeed if they can remember to keep their efforts
focused on helping people help themselves rather than creating
things “for” people. Social-impact work is a fantastic opportunity to
use co-design techniques to design with, not for.
It’s also critical for designers to distinguish between understanding
and empathizing with those we seek to serve and feeling sorry for
them. Even though this distinction might seem obvious, the tempta‐
8 
| 
Chapter 1: Designing for Social Impact

tion to position yourself as the answer to a problem is strong; after
all, wanting to do some good is probably what attracted you to the
social-impact space to begin with. During the research stage of a
project on insulin pumps for children, I once observed colleagues
openly expressing sorrow at how children’s lives had been negatively
affected during user interviews. What was striking was that none of
the children, and indeed few of the parents, saw themselves as “vic‐
tims” of a disease. Rather, theirs was a specific life with specific con‐
ditions that needed to be managed. Respecting the agency and abili‐
ties of those who will benefit from your product or service can be
the difference between understanding the real psychology at play
and failure.
Design for Behavior Change
Design, especially interaction design, has been described as using
human behaviors to affect choices. This is especially true in social-
impact projects. Enticing someone to buy a commercial product
might mean appealing to someone’s vanity or deep-seated desire to
be entertained rather than challenged. Enticing new, lasting patterns
that lead past short-term benefits to longer-term outcomes requires
different tools.
Consider the challenge of tackling voter turnout. Voter turnout in
the last election hit a 70-year low, at 36 percent. This is in a time
when vitriolic debate on both sides seems to be at an all-time high.
Why, then, are those angry voters not turning up in droves? It turns
out that voters are often apathetic in a very specific way. Jodi Gold‐
berg, a parent organizer in Milwaukee calls these types of people
“blithely trusting” of the system and others in it. Voters assume that
other people will take the time and energy to turn up at the polls
and things will generally work out. Or, they might be demotivated,
assuming that all hope is lost, and their time and energy is best spent
on their families and personal survival.
Apathy isn’t the only challenge that designers in the area of social
impact face; fear is a very real factor as well. Take the case of a gay
man at risk of contracting HIV. Although he might know that there
are steps to take to protect himself and others, the fear of facing the
knowledge that he might be infected is a powerful psychological
force that cannot be ignored. Designers and researchers must be dil‐
igent about identifying the psychological forces at work, and tying
the tools and information in products to them specifically.
What’s Different About Designing for Social Impact? 
| 
9

In the end, a dedication to finding evidence-based theories of
change that can be measured objectively is critical.
Design for Behavior Change is a large topic unto itself. As noted
earlier, behavioral economics has provided a strong research base on
how people actually act and react to forces in their lives. Rather than
being rational actors that many early economic models assumed,
people are people, and thereby irrational. Yet, irrational does not
mean completely unpredictable. There are many researchers and
designers who have begun to bridge what we know about our psy‐
chology with design best practices. Stephen Wendel’s book Designing
for Behavior Change: Applying Psychology and Behavioral Economics
is a great place to begin learning what behavioral economics and
psychology have to teach us about how people make decisions.
Another good resource is the “lenses” Dr. Don Lockton has devel‐
oped for designers to use. Likewise, Stephen Anderson has several
useful things to say about the topic on his website. BJ Fogg at Stan‐
ford has several tactics and practices that designers can use that have
been proven to work in many contexts; you can find them at http://
behaviormodel.org. Designers can also benefit from this primer on
psychology and motivation, created by me and Janna Kimmel.
The single most illuminating concept I have found in the work of
behavioral economists and those in the field of psychology is the
importance of intrinsic motivation in changing behavior. Extrinsic
motivation relies on external things, (i.e., compensation), to achieve
the desired behavior. Intrinsic motivation occurs when a person has
internalized the benefits of a behavior change and has the agency
and desire to achieve them. External motivators are great for helping
people perform routine tasks faster. But changing behavior and
making it stick requires internal motivation that unlocks the creativ‐
ity and desire to change.
Systems Change, Service Design
When we design commercial products or services, one of the first
things we do is assess the systems and infrastructure that will aid
and abet our efforts. In fact, much of the design efforts of the 1990s
and 2000s had to do with getting those systems aligned with the
mental models and needs of consumers. Enterprise software design
focuses on creating digital ecosystems for businesses that need some
10 
| 
Chapter 1: Designing for Social Impact

stability of operations and value infrastructure’s role in providing
that stability.
In domains focused on social good, those ecosystems aren’t always
available to designers. “Government-owned infrastructure isn’t often
stewarded well. One of the problems in Detroit, for example, is
aging infrastructure,” says Tiffani Bell of The Detroit Water Project,
an effort to crowd-fund payment of water bills for those who other‐
wise face having their water cut off. Her project steps in where the
city’s systems stop working to avoid catastrophe for those citizens
expected to live without the basic necessity of water. Bell isn’t crying
foul at a system that penalizes poor residents; she’s acknowledging
that the Detroit city system is so badly damaged that its citizens
must help themselves.
Often the aim of social-impact projects is to replace, decode, or
enhance existing systems that were never designed for consumers to
use. Such systems were, as was noted at the beginning of this report,
generally designed to comply with regulation. And so, as designers
we find ourselves not just functioning as human-computer interface
designers, but as designers of an interface to systems that never saw
“users” coming.
Risk Tolerance Is Low
Compounding this situation, especially in the civic arena, is a very
low tolerance for risk. Apple can afford to ship a product that might
not work entirely as expected at first; it knows that the delight it
does generate and the strength of its brand will placate consumers
for a while. The United States government had no such brand to
lean on when it launched HealthCare.gov in 2012. The initial phases
of that launch were not a surprise to anyone who has been involved
in large-scale software development. One of the key flaws of the sys‐
tem resulted from an architectural decision to require users to create
an account to shop for insurance plans, resulting in serious perfor‐
mance issues during a high-visibility launch. Governmental projects
have an especially low tolerance for such issues when the stakehold‐
ers are elected officials who live in the public eye. Politicians are also
vulnerable to partisan opposition who will magnify failures for their
own gain. A more agile approach to development might have identi‐
fied such performance issues earlier on, giving the team time to
adjust without scrutiny. It appears that the program has succeeded
despite the bumpy start, but not every mistake is recoverable.
What’s Different About Designing for Social Impact? 
| 
11

In public projects, the issue of procurement and financing is espe‐
cially challenging. Typically, there is a blind, open-bidding period
tied to a very specific Request for Proposal (RFP), outlining specific
features, phases, deadlines, and dependencies. This leads to the
worst of all worlds: fixed scope, costs, and timeline. Managing risk
takes the form of an increasing set of change orders against a master
plan that is no longer relevant. Enter Agile development methods.
Dana Chisnell says, “Agile was made for government.” As public
projects become more of a focus for digital designers and develop‐
ers, they will need to evolve how work is specified, bid, and man‐
aged.
18F is an organization within the General Services Administration
that is attempting to bring the craft of digital design and develop‐
ment into the government itself. Hillary Hartley, deputy executive
director and cofounder of 18F, says the goal is to “help government
do for itself again” rather than rely solely on contractors and pro‐
curement processes that work at odds with the ultimate goal of serv‐
ing people well with stuff that works. The transition to new ways of
framing goals and planning work will not be easy, but it is a key part
of designing for social impact.
The Social Impact Lifecycle
Even though different types of projects have specific audience, con‐
text, and content issues to wrestle with, a simple model of the lifecy‐
cle for social impact is useful to discuss here. The following diagram
demonstrates a typical path for a user who engages with a system or
product that has positive social outcomes as a goal:
12 
| 
Chapter 1: Designing for Social Impact

First, the journey begins with attracting people to the issue, cause, or
new benefit. Commercial projects understand this well; marketing is
valued as a key part of brand and user experience (UX). When
working in social-impact areas, this step might not be obvious to
everyone involved, or they might have very limited ideas about
awareness campaigns or other marketing basics. Designers can help
organizations deeply understand their audience and bring a large
number of levers to bear on attracting them, from social to search
optimization.
Second, this model lays out the need to both inform and provoke
people with information that is new, surprising, or agitating, with
the goal being to get them to take action. As compared to an ecom‐
merce model, the actions we are trying to provoke might meet with
resistance or apathy, so designers must create tension in the minds
of their audience that cannot be ignored. We will look at this more
deeply a bit later when we look at emerging practices around data
visualization. For those projects that are focused on delivering serv‐
ices, it might be less about provoking a response and more about
communicating clearly about what the service is and how to take
advantage of it.
The Social Impact Lifecycle 
| 
13

Finally, this model acknowledges that social impact is often an ongo‐
ing cycle, in which people are provoked over time to take actions
that add up to social impact. This is not to say that some types of
impact can’t be had in a single moment or interaction, but those
instances will be rare and hard to measure. Obama for America’s
Michael Slaby describes this as a “ladder of engagement” on which
people take incremental steps from signing up for information to
donating money to becoming an organizer of others. The specifics
of what your audience engages with over time will vary, but it is
important to acknowledge that a cycle exists.
The ongoing climb of the ladder of engagement is not the only way
people are involved. As Jess McMullin of Citizen Experience has
found in his work, engagement can also be provoked by extreme cri‐
sis as with a parent who loses a child to an unfair system,
which spawns awareness and engagement with something like
#BlackLivesMatter. The role of personal crisis in creating deep
engagement is another mode into which designers can tap.
Lessons from the Field
Having looked at some of the forces that make designing for social
impact different from designing in a commercial context, we can
now look at several emerging practices and lessons learned in the
field by several practitioners. These are offered as a series of guiding
principles about how the aforementioned unique challenges can be
met by teams creating products and services that deliver positive
outcomes.
1. Garner an Invitation
As discussed in the first section of this report, work in the realm of
social good often means needing to address a wide, even public,
audience whose orientation to the topic or task will vary, and can’t
easily be de-scoped from the target market.
In this situation, it is wise to remember the advice about first
impressions. No one person, brand, or message appeals to everyone,
and to come close is to become a bland purveyor to all. In some
communities, efforts to “help” are met with a great deal of well-
earned skepticism. Many social-impact projects contain a mental
model of the well-heeled savior come to “fix” things for others, a
model that can be detrimental to connecting with every population.
14 
| 
Chapter 1: Designing for Social Impact

So, how then do we as designers become respected and valued by
groups whose cultural context is very different from our own? How
do we gain trust with a group of people who are not predisposed to
trust outsiders?
Begin by acknowledging the networks of people who are already
working in or around the topic and create a partnership strategy
that is mutually beneficial. I interviewed a domestic violence pre‐
vention counselor, who for this discussion we will call Marta, who
works specifically with the Latino community. She described her
first years of service as an attempt to address the effects of violence
on the women she met, helping them to put their lives back together
as best they could. Over time, her organization has moved toward a
strategy of prevention services that target the whole family. As a
result, she serves as a counselor and guide to women around issues
as diverse as family planning, obtaining food stamps, choosing
schools, and finding employment. Marta is a key hub in her local
influence network.
Anyone focused on these issues can gain entry by working with
social workers like Marta, to help her community to develop infor‐
mation and tools that she can share and endorse. Community cen‐
ters, counselors, religious leaders, and other people embedded in a
community are often seeking out reputable, useable tools and infor‐
mation to share with those whom they serve. For designers, these
leaders represent a way to garner an introduction to an audience
whose trust will not be given to outsiders easily, if at all.
Partnerships in this type of ecosystem are also critical to success.
Understanding how to create and support key “evangelists” for your
cause is crucial to the distribution and acquisition of end users. It’s
also important to shift your focus from seeing groups involved in
similar or even identical work as competition and view them instead
as a special kind of audience that can be cultivated for mutual bene‐
fit. This might mean equipping them through a “train the trainer”
model where they become expert guides to introduce tools, and give
those tools a halo of trust within a community. It can also mean that
a specific version of tools is needed to enable a “street team” to use
data and information more naturally. As you lay out your approach
to cultivating audiences, don’t leave out community leaders as an
audience to serve, as well.
Lessons from the Field 
| 
15

The Field Guides for voting are an excellent example of how a
project can become more scalable and impactful when the “users”
considered are part of the system itself, not simply the end users.
The project began as research into how specific language used in
ballots affects voters. The final product is more of a series of play‐
books for those who run elections. They contain practical guidance
about everything from creating effective ballots to guiding people
through the polling place to ensure that voting is “functional” for
people, not just machines. By tackling the right audience—those
who run elections, not voters themselves—the effects of the work
will be felt by end users, the voters, more deeply.
2. Meet Them Where They Are...On-the-Go, Offline
Designing for a broad audience often means reaching people who
do not live their lives attached to small electronic devices. Although
the statistics for mobile devices and smartphones shows continuing
growth, I am consistently reminded in doing social impact work that
a large part of the audience (and often the neediest) is not digitally
connected.
GreatSchools tackled this problem by focusing on printed informa‐
tion about schools as a key part of a distribution strategy. Print
materials are a way for people to take your info “to go” easily and
refer to at times when they might have more capacity to think differ‐
ently or more deeply about a topic. Print also lends itself well to pre‐
senting data for comparison or longer-term usage.
In Milwaukee, thousands of school guides covering the area can be
spotted all over the city, from hair salons to the back seats of cars, as
families consider which schools to choose for their children. It also
serves as a way to signal how important that issue is for the city at
large and provides a visual cue to who is part of the conversation.
Print also lends itself to being discovered in some of the trusted
partner channels that should be part of your strategy. GreatSchools
has partnerships with many organizations such as health clinics or
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD). Counselors in partner organizations gladly hand out
printed information (as well as links to the website) to those who are
seeking affordable housing or health assistance. Because housing
and school attendance are two tightly linked topics, a partnership
that turns the HUD workers into school information evangelists is
16 
| 
Chapter 1: Designing for Social Impact

natural and a win-win for everyone. Designers should research and
consider how their work can and should exist offline for the part of
the audience who are not connected, yet deeply in need of assis‐
tance.
Finally, SMS messaging has begun to show returns as a channel for
many low-income families. In a partnership between the San Fran‐
cisco Unified School District and Stanford University, a series of
short texts aimed at helping parents grow early literacy skills in kids
showed major gains through a simple medium that has deep pene‐
tration in low-income and non-English-speaking households.
As you consider getting your tools out to a wide variety of people, be
sure to ask how you can best engage those with limited digital
access.
3. Imagine Feeding the Trolls
Whereas the best advice on the Internet is probably “don’t feed the
trolls,” as a designer, this might be advice you need to ignore. You
need to understand troll behavior to defend against it. In a commer‐
cial context, if your product doesn’t work for a part of the market,
they simply won’t buy it. However, in the context of serving social
good, alienating someone can fuel a counterargument to yours that
can be devastating, not just detracting.
Brandon Harris, formerly of Wikimedia, has thought a lot about
designing systems that can’t easily be hijacked for a specific agenda.
He counsels designers to make a “Troll Persona” whose motives and
tactics are likely to fall into the extreme. This type of white-hat
interaction design is akin to operational security efforts to proac‐
tively hack systems to find weaknesses that can and will be exploi‐
ted.
Key points of failure for trolls will tend to be commenting systems,
rating systems, or other places where communal voices can be
heard. In the case of Wikipedia, there is an entire network of quite
involved rules, social norms, and committees that police the space
and attempt to keep the playing field level.
A recent news story revealed a disturbing, though not entirely sur‐
prising, security vulnerability: drug delivery pumps in hospitals.
Although it’s understandable that manufacturers assumed that hos‐
pitals and medical equipment were not likely targets for hackers 10
Lessons from the Field 
| 
17

years ago, in today’s technology environment we can’t afford that
level of implicit trust. Design teams need to think about where to
defend their users and secure products whose existence might be
contentious or tempting to some elements of society.
4. Appeal to Identity, and Make a Plan
Todd Rogers, a psychology researcher from Harvard, has completed
some fascinating work on understanding motivation and behavior
change, especially in the realm of “get out the vote” efforts. His work
during the 2012 election cycle netted several important findings for
those of us engaged in social-impact work.
First, he discovered that appealing to a person’s identity to be a cer‐
tain kind of person is more motivating than being credited for doing
a task. For many years, voters have been given stickers with the “I
Voted!” message on them. According to Roger’s findings, those who
are encouraged to see voting as part of their identity rather than just
something they do are more likely to turn up to vote. Stickers now
proclaim “I’m a Voter!” in a small nod to this finding. Thinking
about ways to turn your desired behaviors into an identity is a tech‐
nique that designers can’t ignore.
Additionally, voter turnout increased substantially when voters were
prompted to make a specific plan for how and when they would
vote. By prompting people to name a specific time, identify where
their polling place was, and how they would get there, get-out-the-
vote efforts increased participation. Rogers’ TED talk on what he
learned is another good primer for designers wanting to more
deeply understand how psychology and behavior change are related.
This type of subtle shift in framing is part of a growing trend for
designers, especially around behavior change projects. As we will
discuss later, designers need to become adept creators and experi‐
menters around specific language, framing, and context that ulti‐
mately make the difference in measurable impact.
5. Use Data to Inform and Provoke Actions
Every good story needs a crisis; every design needs to create the
right tension in the minds of their users to succeed. One lesson from
the front lines of community organizing is the idea of showing “the
fear, followed by the hope.” Innovate Public Schools is an organiza‐
tion working in the San Francisco Bay Area to get Latino and
18 
| 
Chapter 1: Designing for Social Impact

African-American families to demand better quality schools for
their kids, who suffer at the hands of a sizable achievement gap.
What their organizers have learned is to mine data about schools to
find stark examples of disparity and inequity and display them
clearly as simple comparisons or rankings of different options. Inno‐
vate aims to help families to choose schools that serve all kids
equally, so a side-by-side comparison is the most effective way to
begin a conversation. Parents’ attention is most easily grabbed by
showing them a disparity that they’ve maybe sensed or wondered
about but never been able to pinpoint.
After you have found the provocative data point, or “the fear,” it is
important to follow that up with “the hope” or the options that will
lead to better outcomes for the person. This might mean showing
those schools where Latino kids are well served, or showing ways
parents at their school can advocate for their kids more effectively.
Simply laying out the fear without the hope will not lead to the
intrinsic motivation among your audience to take charge of their
destinies and become active participants in your social-good
domain.
It can be challenging to roll up data with all of its nuances, caveats,
and glitches, but this can be the area where design can play the big‐
gest role in driving impact. Just as an editor must help provide a
headline that pulls people into a complicated story, so must design‐
ers work on visualizing key takeaways from a set of data that can be
analyzed more deeply. Designers must partner with data scientists
and analysts who are close to the data to develop meaning from data
that is both accurate and accessible.
6. Not Just What You Say, But How You Say It
Just as you become a more thoughtful wielder of data for social
good, you must also become attuned to how people will use that
data to ensure that your efforts really are in service of the social
good, not the opposite.
In a study of rating systems around school quality, researchers pre‐
sented a variety of visualizations to parents to understand which one
they “liked” the best. A 1–10 scale, although overly precise, was seen
as “better” to parents than a 3- or 5-point scale which might have
been truer to the conclusions offered by the underlying data. How‐
Lessons from the Field 
| 
19

ever, an A–F scale was also valued, perhaps because it is familiar to
parents and relates to the domain of education.
The study went beyond measuring preference and also probed
parents how they might use each scale differently and a startling
insight emerged. Even though parents liked both the 1–10 scale and
the A–F scale, they overwhelmingly said they would choose to send
their kids to a school that was an 8 out of 10, but not a school that
was rated a B. This is important because those two ratings are identi‐
cal in the underlying data but have radically different outcomes. If
the aim of a ratings system is to help parents choose higher-quality
schools, we need to understand how presenting data affects choice.
In this case, schools rated an 8 or above are considered “quality”
schools, so using an A–F system will be counterproductive. It’s
worth noting that many states use an A–F rating system, because the
outcome of such systems is to provide a picture of accountability to
the public, not to drive consumer choice. In that case, letter grades
may in fact be more useful as a signifier of performance.
Becoming attuned to learning how people use your information is a
critical skill for working on social-impact projects. You need to learn
how to measure the impact of your designs on the understanding
and effect on specific tasks, not just preference.
7. Algorithms versus Legislation
As we noted at the beginning of this report, the design challenge you
face might be to make the system itself more useful and usable. How
can designers identify key components in a system—which is often
people—that contain critical information but aren’t accessible?
Consider the rise of commercial tools designed and developed to
make paying taxes more efficient and accurate. Even though the IRS
publishes many forms and handbooks, those of us who are not
CPAs find them impenetrable. By capturing the underlying logic
and algorithms of the tax code and expressing them in sequential
steps and diagnostics, software has made paying taxes for many peo‐
ple a simpler proposition. Taxes lend themselves very well to digiti‐
zation because of the nature of calculations and finances. In this
case, the challenge is daunting because of its scope, but it is relatively
simple because the tax code is a sort of algorithm in and of itself.
However, what happens when there is no algorithm underlying the
system? In Boston, a Code for America fellow, Joel Mahoney, under‐
20 
| 
Chapter 1: Designing for Social Impact

took a project to digitize the enrollment criteria for public schools.
He wanted to know if he could help families understand which
schools they were eligible for based on new legislation. He began by
creating a Google Maps visualization of schools within two miles of
an address. The first design decision he faced was whether that dis‐
tance was as the crow flies or as walking distance. As he dug deeper
into the data, he discovered edge-cases such as the corner of a school
being two miles from an address but not the school’s front door. As
he worked with local government to create a digital system, it
became clear that the legislation had not been created with digital
tools in mind. Rather, the system was an old-fashioned list of
addresses tied to schools, maintained by hand. As government
becomes more digitally supported, the ability to translate laws into
algorithms will become part of the design challenge.
8. Time-Shift and Demystify the System
One of the most challenging aspects of our infrastructure around
social impact is its retail model of locations staffed with people
without the retail level of service. Wendy Fong, working as a Code
for America fellow in Mesa, Arizona, discovered that a big challenge
for city residents was getting a hold of information about what was
happening in government outside of the city hall, where people were
expected to navigate between gathering information and expressing
their opinions between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m., in person. The app she
created effectively collected data and made it available 24/7 via a
computer. This simple time shifting and move toward self-service is
a benefit that other industries realized long ago, but it represents a
big opportunity for designers.
As noted earlier, simply moving toward a digital self-service model
is a seductive silver bullet for governmental and nonprofit groups
looking to save money. But, as we design for everyone, it’s critical to
think about how you will also support those who can’t or don’t
access digital services regularly. Tapping into community partners
and other channels should be part of the approach.
In Atlanta, Tiffani Bell’s Code for America project focused on assist‐
ing city suppliers to cope with a complex set of rules meant to
ensure fairness and avoid patronage in city government. These laby‐
rinths of rules often lead to a system that is so difficult to under‐
stand, it unfairly aids a small set of operators who have command of
what bids are available and how to game the system to win. Such
Lessons from the Field 
| 
21

information asymmetry—in which one party has more access to and
understanding of data—can be a big counterforce to equity and
social good. By making the latest bids on offer from the city an
upfront part of the website, Bell’s work begins to break down the
inequity to level the playing field.
9. Agile + Social Impact: Fast-Cycle Research
In several of the previous examples, we’ve seen how the need to
actually measure social impact is critical to the work. Without the
measuring stick of profit or units sold or active users, how are we to
assess progress? Many designers are uncomfortable with or uncer‐
tain about the relationship of data to design and struggle with the
idea of how to make use of feedback that seems incongruous or
counterintuitive. At the same time, it’s clear that the effect of very
specific wording or visualizations can be both surprising and signifi‐
cant. Becoming attuned to the ongoing feedback from your users is
a critical skill for designers and new approaches to development and
evaluation will be critical tools.
One such tool that is regularly employed by nonprofits is the Logic
Model, which is a framework that shows a theory of change from
end to end. It begins by looking at what assets and resources an
organization can bring to bear on a problem through to the outputs
(actions) and outcomes (social impact) delivered. It’s critical that the
outputs and outcomes are articulated in a way that is measurable,
even if they are indirect. For example, the Poses Family Foundation
recently launched Understood.org, a site that aims to help parents of
children with learning or attention issues. In its model, one of the
outputs it seeks from parents is their ability to advocate for their
children effectively. However, the ultimate end-goal of the organiza‐
tion is to affect student-level outcomes, such as college persistence
through the choices parents make for and with their kids. Be sure to
spend time working through the framework for how your capabili‐
ties and efforts align with the outcomes you intend. This can be a
useful exercise both in creating a shared understanding among
teams, and as a way to highlight gaps that might need to be closed
through additional efforts or partners.
It’s important to note that the type of top-down modeling of change
should itself be part of the iteration process. Although most organi‐
zations start with an idea of the causality surrounding the change
22 
| 
Chapter 1: Designing for Social Impact

they want to drive, it’s important to reflect on your theory of change
as you learn more through research and experience.
The ability for iteration and Agile approaches is especially important
in social-impact work. As we become better at conceiving, develop‐
ing, and testing ideas quickly, we drive better outcomes more
quickly. The key difference for designers working in the social-
impact realm is that the nature of the tests that you conduct and the
artifacts you use might be different than in a commercial context.
Your tests need to focus on what’s most effective, not just most
engaging. Typically designers consider layouts, colors, and flow of
tasks as an area to study and iterate around. As you begin to take on
social-impact work, you will need to pivot the way you think to
include the aspects of your particular intervention. Interventions are
the specific pieces of data, tools, or information that you think will
drive behavior change. Just as with drug development in healthcare,
dialing up or down the dosage and frequency of each intervention
can have an effect. The practice of evaluating such tweaks to the
product is called Fast-Cycle Research (FCR), whereby research is
conducted quickly and consistently to link design decisions to actual
outcomes. As teams engage in Agile sprints to create testable proto‐
types, the nature of the research will need to address both the ques‐
tion of “Do they like it?” as well as “What do they do with it?” and
“Do they do the right thing with it, consistently?”
An example of how FCR can reinforce good design practices is to
think of an app intended to help young pregnant women eat prop‐
erly to ensure healthy offspring. Early research would naturally
focus on what the barriers and motivations for young mothers are. It
would also include identifying ways of measuring success; for exam‐
ple, healthy weight levels. Early prototypes would certainly want to
test which features are needed and how users navigate the app. But
they might also want to look at how specific language affects usage,
such as framing the benefit to the mother (“Healthy moms look
great!”) versus the child (“Healthy kids start from day 1!”). Identify
those psychological triggers related to eating in young moms-to-be
that are important and test variations of advice to see what works.
This type of research can and should be done quickly. Setting up the
ability to test ideas within a sprint cycle is critical to creating tests of
the right size that will generate returns.
Lessons from the Field 
| 
23

Looking Forward
By now you should have a sense of how the landscape is different
when you’re not working in a commercial domain and some of the
key things to consider toward the goal of successfully delivering
positive social change. Turning now to the future, there are several
emerging developments about which designers and developers
should be aware.
Mobilization as a Service and Self-Service Tools
We’ve seen how designing for public, healthcare, and philanthropic
endeavors requires a special attention to your audience and what
they require from a system intended to serve them. Working at the
intersection of convoluted systems and people is fertile territory for
design.
Increasingly, however, the needs of these sectors will stabilize, just as
they have in the commercial sector. As solutions emerge to meet the
very specific demands of different systems and audiences, they will
normalize and we’ll see more standard services targeted at social-
impact efforts. Early progress can already be seen here. Nation‐
builder.com and Civiceagle.com are two new Software as a Service
(SaaS) platforms for political community organizing with turnkey
solutions for keeping politicians and leaders connected with the
public. POPVOX.com is a startup looking to make it easier for peo‐
ple to be aware of pending legislation and express their support or
resistance publicly. These are private organizations with digital roots
that are positioned as self-service tools for those who are deeply pas‐
sionate about issues, not technology experts.
Patientslikeme.com is a platform for people to compare symptoms
and obtain support for health challenges. Although many players in
the healthcare market acknowledge that patients can and should
have more efficacy and access to information about their illnesses,
there’s little incentive for HMOs and insurers to invest in such tools.
Patients Like Me began as a personal effort to support a family
member with Lou Gehrig’s disease, and, like the roll-aboard suitcase,
has turned out to be useful to many more people, all while existing
entirely outside the “system.” So, as savvy designers enter the social-
impact space, they will do what they’ve done elsewhere and share
what works, creating a normalization of features and making it less
expensive to create and maintain systems.
24 
| 
Chapter 1: Designing for Social Impact

Evolving Roles, Growing Capability
As design becomes a bigger part of the intentional part of social-
impact work, the roles within organizations will expand and evolve.
Following are some examples of roles that can help alleviate pain
points that organizations face today:
• Design thinking for procurement and financial models that help
manage risk, create more manageable RFPs, and create sustain‐
ability for products and services
• Interaction and visual designers to bring the craft of design to
bear on social projects, get beyond “functional” products, and
help government do for itself again
• Design technologists that can prototype ideas quickly and help
make abstract ideas tangible and testable
• Behavioral psychologists and design researchers to conduct
upfront research, understand key barriers and motivations, and
run fast-cycle research experiments
• Design thinking to help inform, explore, and prototype policy
options
Whether these roles are filled by working in-house or in social-
impact-focused consultancies, it will be critical for designers to
evolve their thinking about what success means and be deeply curi‐
ous about the overall effect that the work has on those it seeks to
benefit.
Designers are naturally predisposed to interdisciplinary teams and
collaboration, and social-impact work demands this aptitude at even
higher levels than commercial work. This work cannot be done in a
standalone fashion. You must acknowledge others working in your
space and engage multiple facets of large systems and many organi‐
zations to tackle the wicked problems underlying social change.
The Future of Impact
As we’ve looked at the current state of design for social impact, it’s
clear that the context of design is very different. The financial mod‐
els, target users, and risk tolerance all affect the way in which
designers operate and how they evaluate success. The tools and skills
of design are all highly relevant, however, and all designers will find
that their abilities are immediately valuable in this new context.
Looking Forward 
| 
25

By looking at the lessons learned by current practitioners in the
space, we’ve seen that adapting some processes or approaches is nec‐
essary. This field holds a great deal of promise for designers, and we
will need to continue to share our experiences and best practices to
continue to drive the quality of our social outcomes and bring them
to market more quickly.
26 
| 
Chapter 1: Designing for Social Impact

About the Author
Gretchen Anderson spent the first part of her career in design con‐
sulting for firms like frog design, Cooper, and Punchcut. For the
past three years she has served as the VP of Product for Great‐
Schools, a national nonprofit that helps parents get their kids a great
education. Gretchen oversees design, product management, and
engineering, and loves the challenge of helping design permeate an
organization, not just products.
Her past clients include Virgin Records, Samsung, and Johnson &
Johnson. Most recently at GreatSchools, she works with local com‐
munities like Detroit and Indianapolis that are looking to improve
education for their families. Gretchen is a Bay Area native who left
only long enough to get a bachelor’s degree from Harvard in history
and literature. She is on Twitter as @gretared.

