

David Hindman
Designing for Respect

978-1-491-94451-6
[LSI]
Designing for Respect
by David Hindman
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Angela Rufino
Production Editor: Nicole Shelby
Copyeditor: Jasmine Kwityn
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
January 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2015-12-18: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Designing for
Respect and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ix
Preface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  xiii
1. Examining the Challenge: Evidence of the Problem. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Impact on Users                                                                                   1
Trust                                                                                                       2
Time                                                                                                       7
Mood                                                                                                   12
Impact on Businesses                                                                        15
Impact on Society                                                                              17
2. What We Can Do: Design Principles for a Respectful Future. . . . . . .  19
3. Looking Forward. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
4. For Inspiration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
5. For Designers: Choosing the Right Work. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
6. Final Thoughts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
A. Further Reading. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
vii


Introduction
“It is forbidden to kill; therefore all murderers are punished unless they
kill in large numbers and to the sound of trumpets.”
—Voltaire
Today, designers have a lot of power. We are responsible for orches‐
trating innumerable interactions that transpire daily on a wide vari‐
ety of digital devices. And sometimes we forget the influence we
have on fellow citizens as we fall into the routine of executing our
work and packaging the next deliverable. Often, our sense of accom‐
plishment is rooted in satisfying business requirements for clients or
internal strategy teams. When we do stick around to gauge the suc‐
cess of a design, it’s often measured in business terms: engagement,
conversion, click-through rates, and so on. But what if we also meas‐
ured success in more human terms, such as hours saved or smiles
invoked? It is uncommon to attribute a portion of a product’s suc‐
cess to how it makes users feel. Apart from providing basic utility,
did it speak to users’ human needs? Did it bring them joy? Was it
patronizing or condescending? What if the end experience, while
deemed successful from a business perspective, causes additional
stress or confusion, or wastes a user’s time? If one moment is deceit‐
ful or wasteful, when multiplied by potentially millions of users, we
realize designers have a responsibility that borders on the domain of
public health. Two years ago, 67% of Americans were estimated to
spend an average of 34 hours a month on smartphones alone. That’s
a lot of interactions—we don’t need to do the math to realize that
one design decision goes a long way.
I propose that at the core of our interactions with technology, as
with one another, is the desire for a simple but crucial attribute:
ix

respect. When users are respected, it’s because we have acknowl‐
edged their efforts, their time, and their feelings. We’ve told the
truth, listened, and given them space. And the scaled effect of many
happy, respected users has a global impact because of the sheer scale
to which digital interactions pervade our lives today. The reverse is
also true for stressed or frustrated users.
In the world of UX design, many of our solutions may seem innocu‐
ous, but a great many are deceitful or cause user stress. Some of
these misleading designs have become infamous and are categorized
as Dark Patterns. In this report, we will examine digital design
through an ethical lens with the hope of raising awareness that hon‐
est and respectful design is better for business, users, and society
than trickery or carelessness. First, we will investigate some exam‐
ples of disrespectful design and how they impact users’ trust, time,
and emotions. We will also look at examples of respectful design for
inspiration, as well as some original concepts for services that both
aid businesses while respecting their users. Finally, to round out the
exploration, we will give designers a framework for choosing clients
or potential employers with an ethical lens. The hope is that this
exploration will start a dialogue among designers, technologists, and
business owners, with the hope that they can start to embrace the
importance of ethics and recognize the value of respectful design.
Defining Respect
Many have written and spoken about design ethics. Jackson Fox has
written about designing for politeness and Tristan Harris has spoken
about design that makes a good relationship. For our purposes, we
will focus mostly on the degree to which a user’s experience with
digital technology is respectful. The most applicable definition of
respect is “to have due regard for the feelings, wishes, rights, or tra‐
ditions of (someone).” To evaluate respect in user experience, I’d like
to examine three elements embedded in this definition: trust, time,
and emotional effect. Trust arises as a result of transparency and
straightforwardness. Time refers to time wasted or spent produc‐
tively. Emotional effect is the emotional response that an interaction
elicits in the user.
If we satisfy these parameters, then we can argue that our digital
conversations meet the demands of businesses as well as their users.
As designers, we should reflect on the interactions that we create
x 
| 
Introduction

and ask ourselves Did I waste someone’s time? Did I tell the truth in a
straightforward way? Did I avoid criticizing or confusing the user?
Was I polite? These are the questions we will focus on with regard to
respectful design.
Who This Report Is For
The target audience for this report is primarily digital designers of
all 
varieties 
(UX, 
interaction, 
graphic, 
visual, 
product),
business/product owners, developers, IT and marketing professio‐
nals, or anyone else who works with a designer to create digital serv‐
ices that affect many users. Beyond the realm of design, this is also
for anyone who is curious about ethics and well-being as it relates to
digital experiences. Nonindustry readers may also gain better aware‐
ness and a desire to feel more respected in their digital interactions.
Introduction 
| 
xi


Preface
Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Italic
Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file
extensions.
This element signifies a general note.
Safari® Books Online
Safari Books Online is an on-demand digital library
that delivers expert content in both book and video
form from the world’s leading authors in technology
and business.
Technology professionals, software developers, web designers, and
business and creative professionals use Safari Books Online as their
primary resource for research, problem solving, learning, and certif‐
ication training.
Safari Books Online offers a range of plans and pricing for enter‐
prise, government, education, and individuals.
Members have access to thousands of books, training videos, and
prepublication manuscripts in one fully searchable database from
publishers like O’Reilly Media, Prentice Hall Professional, Addison-
xiii

Wesley Professional, Microsoft Press, Sams, Que, Peachpit Press,
Focal Press, Cisco Press, John Wiley & Sons, Syngress, Morgan
Kaufmann, IBM Redbooks, Packt, Adobe Press, FT Press, Apress,
Manning, New Riders, McGraw-Hill, Jones & Bartlett, Course Tech‐
nology, and hundreds more. For more information about Safari
Books Online, please visit us online.
How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the
publisher:
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
707-829-0515 (international or local)
707-829-0104 (fax)
To comment or ask technical questions about this book, send email
to bookquestions@oreilly.com.
For more information about our books, courses, conferences, and
news, see our website at http://www.oreilly.com.
Find us on Facebook: http://facebook.com/oreilly
Follow us on Twitter: http://twitter.com/oreillymedia
Watch us on YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/oreillymedia
xiv 
| 
Preface

1 Some examples in this chapter were chosen because I encountered them in my own life.
Many of the pain points cited here represent edge cases and I noticed them simply
because I use these products and services so frequently. Many other aspects of these
same products are great, which is why I use them in the first place.
CHAPTER 1
Examining the Challenge:
Evidence of the Problem
What happens when an interaction with a digital service falls short
from an ethical standpoint? In this chapter, we explore some real-
world examples that could benefit from a more respectful design
approach.1 By studying these phenomena, we can be wiser about our
next design choices, and have a better idea of how ethical interfaces
can impact three key stakeholders: users, businesses, and society.
Impact on Users
The Introduction described elements of respect as they relate to user
experience. To best understand the impact of design on users, we
will look at some real-world examples and their impact on core
building blocks of respect: trust, time, and mood.
1

Trust
“I’m not upset that you lied to me, I’m upset that from now on I can’t
believe you.”
—Friedrich Nietzsche
Perhaps the most important element of a respectful conversation,
digital or otherwise, is trust. When users are deceived, intentionally
or accidentally, their experience suffers. The following sections
review some examples of deceitful patterns. Some of these are offi‐
cially referred to as Dark Patterns—intentional UI paradigms meant
to deceive. Others are simply deceptive regardless of intention.
What is the cost of deception? We can argue that users’ money, time,
trust, and customer morale all suffer at the hand of deceptive UI.
Fake Navigation
Many of us have fallen victim to this before. It’s especially prevalent
in slide shows, articles, and top ten lists—experiences that hinge
upon a prominent Next or Previous button. We know that designers
often use placeholder areas for advertising in their wireframes and
often don’t know what the ads that will take their place will look like.
As UX designers, we should strive to understand the potential ad
content ahead of time because it does end up being a major part of
the user’s experience. In the example shown in Figure 1-1, there is
an ad for fibromyalgia treatment inserted in a wellness article. Not
only is the content distracting and unrelated, but we see three calls
to action (tappable navigation arrows) that could potentially take us
to the next page, but only the relatively diminutive Next Page link is
legitimate. This kind of false navigation creates many stumbling
blocks and frustrating experiences for users, and is clearly meant to
be misleading.
2 
| 
Chapter 1: Examining the Challenge: Evidence of the Problem

Figure 1-1. This example from Livestrong.com contains an ad that dis‐
plays two arrows that are easily confused as actual site navigation
Hide and Seek
Burying key functionality is an effective way to betray a user’s trust.
This example comes to us from the Comcast user account portal.
We notice that customers who may want to cancel or downgrade
their service have an uphill battle. At the top level of Comcast’s site,
there are no tabs for changing your service, only for upgrading
(Figure 1-2). Of course, this is understandable from a marketing
standpoint—it’s certainly OK to try and sell customers more and
better service. However, the counterintuitive element of this experi‐
Trust 
| 
3

ence is that it actually is possible to downgrade digitally, but down‐
grades are accessible under the Upgrade tab. The two options shown
in Figure 1-3 represent downgrades from my current service, but are
accessible only in the Upgrade section.
Figure 1-2. Comcast’s website provides only a clear method to upgrade
but not necessarily change or downgrade service
Figure 1-3. Downgrades that are only available in the Upgrade section
This is an example of how business intent impairs a user experience
and ultimately ends up being deceptive and counterproductive.
Another example of hiding key navigation or functionality is shown
in Figure 1-4. In this popup ad triggered by the Technewsworld site,
we have to hunt for a way to close it because the dismiss button is in
an unconventional location. The ad also does not adhere to modern
conventions which allow users to close the ad by clicking anywhere
in the shadowed area, making it even more difficult to dismiss.
Devious? Maybe. Respectful? Not likely.
4 
| 
Chapter 1: Examining the Challenge: Evidence of the Problem

Figure 1-4. Quick quiz: can you quickly find the close button in this
screenshot? Hint: it’s not where your muscle memory for dismissing
popup ads thinks it is. See for yourself at Technewsworld.
Flagrant Trickery
The winner for deceptive UI in Harry Brignull’s Dark Patterns talk is
brought to us by RyanAir. The image from the Dark Patterns blog
shows the option to decline travel insurance hidden in a list of coun‐
tries that you have to choose in order to get travel insurance
(Figure 1-5).
Sandwiched between Latvia and Lithuania is the No Travel Insur‐
ance Required option. By clearly hiding a valuable option for cus‐
tomers, they lose our trust.
The RyanAir site has since been redesigned, but this
still stands as a classic example of tricky UI.
Trust 
| 
5

Figure 1-5. RyanAir’s previous website hides the opt-out for travel
insurance in a list of countries for which to select travel insurance
(source: Dark Patterns via Alan Colville)
Sneaky Defaults
Another example from the Dark Patterns blog is a design paradigm
in which merchandise is sneakily added to a user’s shopping cart.
The example in Figure 1-6, taken from the Livenation website,
shows a magazine that has been added to a cart that you must
decline to avoid being charged. Having to explicitly opt out of an
upsell definitely violates trust with the customer, and at what cost?
Figure 1-6. In this example from LiveNation.com, can you spot the
upsell? Did you even notice it?
6 
| 
Chapter 1: Examining the Challenge: Evidence of the Problem

Changing the Rules
One day on a long flight, I tried to listen to music that I had previ‐
ously bought and downloaded through iTunes only to be presented
with the symbol shown in Figure 1-7 next to each song.
Figure 1-7. This symbol is a source of confusion in some circumstances
In this case, I felt deceived because I paid for and downloaded
music, but wasn’t clearly informed that it would not actually be
available on my device and accessible offline. Others have had simi‐
lar issues with iCloud and iTunes. This situation was probably not
intentionally deceptive, but clearer messaging around the storage
location of music purchases would have helped prepare me. It’s not
just removing music that caused anxiety. When iTunes coercively
gifted U2 to all of its users, customers were mostly outraged. The
feeling of invasion and disregard for our own personal curatorial
efforts damaged trust.
Time
“We only get one life. Wasting someone’s time is the subtlest
form of murder.”
—Lindy West
There has recently been some great work on the influence of design
on users’ time. Specifically, Tristan Harris’ work, Time Well Spent,
addresses the issue of addictive interfaces versus mindful engage‐
ment with digital services. Here, we will look at some experiences
that could stand to be more respectful of users’ time.
At their core, services fell into one of two categories with regard to
respecting a user’s time: indifference and greed.
Time 
| 
7

Indifference
Examples in this section are indifferent to users’ time—they aren’t
necessarily asking for more of it but end up using it anyway.
System updates
System updates are a necessary evil for many of our modern elec‐
tronic devices, but fewer of us find or want to make time to upgrade
the software on our various operating systems. One example of this
pain point comes to us from console gaming systems. If you are a
cord cutter, you may fuel your living room entertainment via a Play‐
Station or Xbox console. You may be able to relate to coming home
after a long day, eager to catch up on the latest episode of your
favorite series only to have to sit through 15 minutes of system
updates (Figure 1-8).
Figure 1-8. Look familiar? System updates from a PS3 require user
attention and initiation
Many other devices have their share of required updates—but the
difference on smartphones and desktop computers is that updates
are optional and the apps are still usable, just in less recent versions.
While the PS3 does provide for automatic updates, the feature is not
enabled by default and requires a separate subscription service. Out
of respect for users’ time, the paradigm that services should emulate
is similar to Google chrome—automatic and in the background.
8 
| 
Chapter 1: Examining the Challenge: Evidence of the Problem

Redundancy
You’ve called your credit card company and entered your card num‐
ber and personal information during the automated portion of the
call, only to have the customer service representative ask for the
same information when you’re finally speaking with one of them.
This is not a digital UI example, but illustrates the need for effi‐
ciency. A recent statistic states that 72% blamed their bad customer
service interaction on having to explain their problem to multiple
people. Regardless of the medium—digital, phone, or in person—
designers should strive to minimize the amount of data entry
required of the customer. If we can abolish redundant data entry, we
probably will have saved the world lots of lost minutes.
Letting systems do the designing
It was quite surprising to see that one aspect of the new United Air‐
lines website actually takes a step backward in terms of respecting
the customer’s time (Figure 1-9). While many features of the new
design are quite welcome, such as the cleaner and more breathable
layout, one element feels like it could be a victim of a rigid underly‐
ing architecture.
Now, in order to log in, a frequent flyer number must be entered.
Unless you fly very often or have a great memory, it’s likely that you
can’t recall this number. So in order to sign in, you’ll have to click
Forgot, check your email and/or search for your number, then copy
and paste. Our guess is that United is attempting to simplify the
sign-in process, but the ideal credential would be a customers’ name
or email simply because we remember what those are. Signing in
with a name is also more human. In this example, the system’s needs
appear to have won out over the user’s needs, and the result will
probably impact lots of customers.
Time 
| 
9

Figure 1-9. The new sign-in process requires a frequent flyer account
number—something many people don’t remember
Settings fatigue
Back in 2011, Facebook changed its privacy policy a lot—so much so
that many users had a hard time keeping up. Part of the power of
Facebook is the ability to customize privacy in an extremely granu‐
lar way, but it comes at the expense of users’ ability to stay abreast of
the changes. For the sake of everyone’s time, changing the rules
should be reserved for special cases and fully communicated. To its
credit, Facebook has improved its UX for privacy settings a lot—it
now feels conversational and friendly (Figure 1-10).
10 
| 
Chapter 1: Examining the Challenge: Evidence of the Problem

Figure 1-10. This example represents efforts by Facebook to make pri‐
vacy settings more understandable and manageable—a great improve‐
ment from earlier times
Greed
Examples in this section compete for and try to intentionally con‐
sume our time and attention.
Notification inflation
Every service these days is trying to get our attention, and they are
not always polite about it! We’re all familiar with inflation in a mon‐
etary sense: increased currency in circulation causes each discrete
dollar to be worth less. A similar phenomenon is happening with
digital notifications. We’re drowning in them, yet the really impor‐
tant messages get lost in a sea of triviality. It is time to admit, for the
betterment of everyone’s time and attention, that push notifications,
left unchecked, have the power to divert countless people’s attention
on a daily basis. This is a difficult problem to solve for designers
who may be tasked with creating a communications method for one
app in particular. The designer might not be thinking about the
totality of the user’s experience across all apps and devices. With
regard to notifications, we are all yearning for them to be subtler,
smarter, and more considerate. I think we’re all looking for the app
Time 
| 
11

that only contacts us at the exact right time. In my case, that might
be when (1) I’m commuting, and (2) not already listening to Pan‐
dora.
Unexpected advertising
Advertisers will always be hungry for our valuable time and atten‐
tion, but there are some forms of this greed emerging lately that
cross over into disrespectful territory. For those of us old enough to
remember what it was like to only experience advertising via com‐
mercials on TV, we are perhaps conditioned to expect advertising.
However, on network television, ads were predictable. We could
plan on when the commercials would be aired, so at least we could
make use of them to take breaks and refill the popcorn, should we so
choose. On our modern equivalent of cable TV, Facebook and Inter‐
net surfing, we often get cornered with ads at unexpected times. The
most disrespectful, and now common, versions of these unexpected
ads occur a few seconds after you’ve already started engaging with
content. This article on new smartphone glass is a good demonstra‐
tion of this common paradigm. Another recent example was a Pan‐
dora ad that occurred right in the middle of a song. Of course,
advertisers need to help generate revenue, but are there ways that
are more respectful of users’ time? For example, users might still
want to read articles from some sources that tend to trigger ads, but
imagine if article links or headlines were labeled with a small “con‐
tains popup ad” logo—a warning label of sorts. This design conven‐
tion would allow us to choose how to spend our time, before we
click.
Mood
“Each one of us has the power to make others feel better or worse. Mak‐
ing others feel better is much more fun than making others feel worse.”
—Ralph Waldo Emerson
Perhaps the element of design that is most difficult to measure is the
impact it has on the way users feel. Did a digital experience make me
feel dumb? Was it frustrating? Some of these phenomena are subtle,
but differ from trust and time in that the clearest impact is on our
emotions. Some of these judgments are personal, but usually if one
person has a particular reaction to a service, they are in good com‐
pany. Before we look at designs to help uplift us, let’s look at some
frameworks for how design can negatively impact mood.
12 
| 
Chapter 1: Examining the Challenge: Evidence of the Problem

Designing for Designers
A few years ago, skeumorphism conceded the digital design trend
battle to flat design, but this paradigm change has not been without
casualties. One example of how the more utilitarian, flat aesthetic
falls short is in an interface some use every day: the iOS alarm clock
(see Figure 1-11).
Figure 1-11. What’s the problem with this design, keeping in mind that
at this moment, the alarm is sounding, and you have just woken up?
This design was changed to fit within a design framework rather
than place the user’s needs at the forefront. Since iOS7, virtual but‐
tons have been replaced in many cases with instructional text. .
The issue is that, for someone that has just awakened, the snooze tap
zone is awfully hard to find and very small—tapping snooze suc‐
cessfully on the first try can prove challenging and frustrating. It
would be preferable to have a design with a full-screen takeover tap
zone with just one word: snooze. In the older versions of this screen,
tap zones were still not big enough, but the bounding box for the tap
zone was clearly defined, allowing for greater success. The text was
also minimal and more digestible for someone who just woke up
(see Figure 1-12).
Mood 
| 
13

Figure 1-12. Pre-iOS7 snooze features minimal text and clearly defined
tap area
In Quarter 1 of 2015, Apple sold almost 75 million smartphones,
each loaded with the same alarm experience. Somewhere out there,
there’s a lot of alarm users. This example isn’t only about the alarm,
it’s about temporarily overlooking the user in order to fit within a
design framework. For those of you that never snooze, well, this
example is not for you.
Punitive UI
Here’s another example from iCloud. Many agree that iCloud is con‐
fusing, and in this specific example there’s a tone of language and
persistence with the communication around storage that has, over
14 
| 
Chapter 1: Examining the Challenge: Evidence of the Problem

time, increasingly felt like a lecture. For those users that don’t want
to manage their photos using iCloud, or find it confusing, the con‐
text of this message feels a bit punitive. iPhone users have probably
seen the screenshot shown in Figure 1-13 at some point.
Figure 1-13. For users that don’t understand iCloud, this alert could
cause digital anxiety
While this message may provide valuable communication, the fre‐
quency with which it appears along with a somewhat punitive text,
over time, wears on the user’s psyche. What did I do wrong? or
What’s wrong with my phone? are thoughts that come to mind. As
with the alarm example, when we stop to think about the number of
users who might be feeling confused based on the number of devices
out there, we could safely guess that at least thousands of people
might experience this type of digital anxiety.
Impact on Businesses
We’ve looked at a number of ways that UX can impact a user’s well-
being, but why should businesses care? Beyond the obvious desire to
provide efficient paths for users, how does respectful design impact
business?
Impact on Businesses 
| 
15

Today, digital touchpoints are the face of innumerable businesses,
and we should acknowledge that the digital “conversations” that they
facilitate should be subject to the same quality and respect as actual
conversations in a physical environment. In other words, customer
service begins on the landing page, not at a call center.
Once you think about interaction problems as customer service
problems, you can start to realize the value of keeping these interac‐
tions respectful. In the RyanAir example, it’s hard to say whether the
extra travel insurance revenue made up for the cost of confused and
deceived customers, but we do know that customer service is a key
reason why people choose one service over another. A recent study
found that 2/3 of customers would spend 13% more with a company
following an excellent customer service experience, and 55% of cus‐
tomers would cease buying from a company with poor customer
service. Furthermore, each interaction counts—it takes 12 positive
experiences to make up for one unresolved negative experience.
Not only do negative experiences influence customer behavior more
than positive ones, they are also more likely to be shared. A study
from the White House Office of Consumer Affairs found that news
about bad customer experiences is shared twice as often as positive
experiences. One avenue for sharing dissatisfaction is through
reviews, which are increasingly a fundamental gateway for attracting
or turning off customers. Recent statistics show that 85% of custom‐
ers say they will read up to 10 reviews before deciding whether to
trust a local business. And negative reviews matter. In a recent study,
Glassdoor found that 60% of job seekers would not apply to compa‐
nies with low reviews.
Beyond customer reviews, we know that bad publicity stemming
from unethical practices tarnishes the reputation of businesses.
Many have heard the infamous Comcast recording of a customer
trying to cancel service, and news recently broke of Volkswagen’s
emissions scandal. And while it’s hard to know the impact the Com‐
cast scandal had on their business, we do know that for VW, Swit‐
zerland banned the sale of some VW cars.
While UX designers are not always tasked with creating the reten‐
tion script for a cable company or strategy for dodging emissions
standards (thank goodness), as designers become more and more
involved in more aspects of businesses, we should take our sense of
16 
| 
Chapter 1: Examining the Challenge: Evidence of the Problem

ethics and respectful design with us to different disciplines within
our companies and clients.
At the heart of this argument is the idea that user experience is part
of customer service—the main difference today is that most of the
conversations we have are with pixels instead of people. Either way,
customer service is a key measure of business success. And studies
show that if we respect the user, business success will follow.
Impact on Society
So, why should everyone care about respectful design? The reason
becomes clear when we simply think about the sheer scale of our
daily digital interactions. Essentially, how many opportunities do
our digital services give us to waste time, feel deceived, interrupted,
or confused? To put things into perspective, recent Nielsen research
estimates that at the end of 2014, Americans used electronic media
over 11 hours a day. Another 2014 study estimates that Americans
spend 162 minutes on their mobile devices per day. And a most
recent study estimates that in the United Kingdom, the average per‐
son spends more than 8 hours on their phone and laptop combined
—more than the average night’s sleep.
Knowing these statistics, we invite you to participate in an exercise.
Stop for a minute and think about your daily digital usage. Think
about your digital interactions when you wake up, commute, work,
communicate, and recreate. Think about the various devices that
you call on to broker your digital conversations: smartphones, TVs,
laptops, desktops, tablets, smartwatches, fitness trackers... Where do
you think you fall on the digital usage spectrum?
If you’re like most people these days, you have more conversations
with your digital services than you do with your loved ones.
Another UK study suggests that in 2013, people spent more time
with their smartphones than with their significant others. And while
that is a social problem in and of itself, the relevant point here is that
we spend a lot of time on our devices, manipulating glowing UI,
tapping virtual buttons, waiting for screens to load, responding to
digital bids for our attention. Even if we might not be comfortable
admitting it, many of us know it to be true that we indeed live digital
lives. We have way more digital conversations than actual conversa‐
tions, which makes it important that our digital conversations be
Impact on Society 
| 
17

effortless, polite, even enjoyable. In this regard, respectful design is
crucial to our public health.
The studies referenced here are from the United States and the Uni‐
ted Kingdom, which accounts for a fraction of global digital usage.
When put into perspective, we realize that designers are in a posi‐
tion of power that comes with the responsibility to insert as much
civility into our work as possible. We aren’t just impacting the well-
being of one user or a handful of users, but millions. Beyond satisfy‐
ing business goals, we should keep in mind how our decisions on
usability will affect not only one application or website, but the
mental and emotional states of potentially millions of people who
engage with it.
18 
| 
Chapter 1: Examining the Challenge: Evidence of the Problem

CHAPTER 2
What We Can Do: Design Principles
for a Respectful Future
“The journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step.”
—Lao Tzu
We’ve looked at a number of examples of what not to do, but what
should we do instead? What single steps can designers take?
Pretend your UI is human
If we were to follow only one rule to establish ethical and
respectful UX, this would be it. Many of us have seen the skit in
which Google is replaced with a real person. Joking aside, the
general concept of imagining that the UI is human provides a
useful litmus test for whether an interaction is respectful. If this
was a human interaction, would you tolerate it? Don’t worry, in
case you have forgotten about how to achieve a civil human-to-
human conversation, here are some guidelines:
Be polite
Don’t be demanding. Use language that a user expects. Say
hello, please, thank you, and goodbye.
Listen and respond
Don’t make users wait excessively while you “load” the
answer. Provide many avenues for them to communicate
with you: text search, messaging, chatting, and voice con‐
trol.
19

Tell the truth
A user will always find out if you are lying, so save everyone
time and be transparent. Consider the Comcast example of
only providing an Upgrade tab. The functionality to make
other service changes is there, but you have to dig.
Put users before trends
Whether or not you agree with the iOS Alarm UI example, the
idea that designers sometimes forget the user’s needs in favor of
supporting a design trend is very real. When we forget the user,
we have lost our mission. Design fads and trends will come and
go, but what is most important is that we remember the goal of
respecting the user and solving the problem.
Leverage your data
By allowing customer data to inform designs, you can eliminate
redundancy within experiences and also be more polite when
interfacing with customers. In the call center example discussed
before, the system should know based on caller ID alone who
we are and even further, what we’re likely calling about. The
same is true for digital services. Say for the sake of argument,
we’re late on a credit card payment. If we were to log in to our
credit card portal, the first thing we would expect is for the UI
to display something like Hi there, did you know you’re late on
your payment?.
Acknowledge the entire experience
Often when we work on designing a website or app, we forget to
acknowledge that the user engages with many other services
too, sometimes immediately before and after ours. It’s easy to
fall into the trap of thinking the user is only involved with our
service and we make decisions that contribute negatively to the
user’s overall experience. For example, every app wants to send
users notifications, but if every app has their way, the user will
be overwhelmed with interruptions. As we design and build
services that have the capability of reaching out to customers
directly, we should keep in mind all the other apps trying to do
the same thing, and reach out in the smartest, not most frequent
way.
Anticipate the ads
The example of advertising with click-bait navigation exposes a
vulnerability in our design process. Much of the time, we design
20 
| 
Chapter 2: What We Can Do: Design Principles for a Respectful Future

around ad space. In our wireframes, the ad space is kind of a
placeholder, and in our visual designs, it’s usually a best guess.
Ad services fill in the necessary gaps with content of their own,
often out of the control of the designer. We can agree that this
example isn’t a good user experience and that the ad designers
are mostly responsible for these shortcomings. But moving for‐
ward, what control can we take back to ensure a great experi‐
ence, or at least one that doesn’t undermine the primary pur‐
pose? Should we design the ads ourselves? Should we have rules
for what types of ads should be allowed? Can we see the ads
ahead of time? Can we smartly anticipate ad content and use
those predictions to inform our work?
What We Can Do: Design Principles for a Respectful Future 
| 
21


CHAPTER 3
Looking Forward
So what might some of these principles look like put into action?
Here are a few thoughts, concepts, and scenarios that could help
provide for a more ethical and respectful future:
Messaging is the new medium
The world is moving toward messaging and conversations as
ways of transacting. Imagine if canceling a service was as simple
as sending a text message. There are already some services that
are beginning to base themselves entirely on messaging. Magic
and Facebook’s M are a couple of services that take the idea of
conversation as service to the next level. Apart from these per‐
sonal assistant solutions, can businesses leverage conversation
as a new way of servicing customers?
I know you know me
Given all the data that businesses have on their users, can’t they
guess why we are probably calling, or signing in? Let’s build a
system that makes some smart guesses. Similar to the credit
card example from before, can we save users time by proactively
making guesses about what they are most likely curious about?
The key here is that the user often knows what data the business
knows, so why not use it? Imagine if the next time you log into
your bank’s website, a chat box pops up and says, Hi, thanks for
your recent payment. I see that there was a strange charge on your
card—would you like to investigate that?. This ideal experience
could be a recording or a human; the key is, given all the data
23

we know they know, it’s possible to save time and get to the
heart of the issue more quickly.
HI is the new AI
There is an opportunity for human intelligence to come back
where it has been replaced. Is there a future where we interact
less with our digital interfaces and more with people, because
employees of the future are augmented with knowledge and
tools that outpace users’ ability to self-serve? Amazon’s mechan‐
ical Turk is a very compelling example of leveraging large num‐
bers of actual people to deliver answers and solutions. What if
the respectful designs of the future don’t involve self-serve UI at
all, 
but 
involve 
phone 
and 
chat 
experiences 
with
informationally-fortified humans that are extremely responsive,
helpful and efficient?
Updates, outdated
Imagine a world without system or software upgrades. What if
you subscribed to a service that provided upgrades piece-by-
piece and always in the background? Google Chrome seems to
accomplish this already. Imagine the time the world would save
with no more OS downloads or Saturday mornings spent
upgrading to the latest version of app version x or OS z.
Crowdsourcing honesty
The Dark Patterns team has started a great archive of tricky and
devious design patterns. Moving forward, let’s remain vigilant
and contribute to these archives. By raising awareness and
demanding respect, we can create a world that expects quality
and civil digital conversations.
The Notification Police
Let’s make it easy for users to take control of incoming bids for
attention. How about, when a notification comes in, the OS
gives a prompt asking Was this a good time to contact you?. Then
we can choose to work with the OS and help arrive at an algo‐
rithm together that benefits both of us. Similar to Pandora’s
thumbs up/thumbs down paradigm, a quick preference
expressed, over time, can build a more respectful notifications
service.
24 
| 
Chapter 3: Looking Forward

Emotional response
There have been some recent advances in real-time emotional
recognition by analyzing facial expression. In the near future,
how about creating digital experiences that respond to our
expressions, the way people would? What if new options are
displayed, in real time, that respond to my dissatisfaction? Per‐
haps we should leverage this technology to make interfaces
more respectful of our emotional reactions.
Looking Forward 
| 
25


CHAPTER 4
For Inspiration
So as we begin to think about our next design project, it will help to
view a few quick examples of services that in some way or another,
make us feel like our time, feelings, and trust matter:
Some examples that respect time
• Google Chrome can automatically update in the back‐
ground and requires no effort from the user.
• In offline mode, Facebook’s app clearly states that you can
continue to post. This saves users time by allowing them to
continue interacting while not connected (Figure 4-1).
Figure 4-1. Facebook app clearly messages offline capabilities
• Another example from a smaller service is from a local
realty page (Figure 4-2). We can appreciate how straightfor‐
ward the main call to action is about what will happen next.
It clearly lets the user know that they are “almost done” and
that there is bit of a process involved in getting a home val‐
uation. This is a great example of how simple language can
inform users how best to use their time.
27

Figure 4-2. Call to action sets user expectations for what
comes next
Some examples that earn trust
• Although this example doesn’t fix our notification overload
problem, the App Store messaging shown in Figure 4-3
provides a useful warning when about to download files
over cellular. This builds trust that Apple is on our side with
regard to data and cellular fees.
Figure 4-3. Messaging that may save us money helps to build
trust
• Those of us who use Gmail place a large amount of trust in
Google, so it is appreciated when some of its efforts further
that trust. While not revolutionary functionality, Google
and a number of services will let you know when suspicious
logins to your account occur. For example, after signing in
using a different machine, you receive an email notification
detailing the event (Figure 4-4). While the sign-in was
innocuous, it is comforting to know there are systems in
place that allow further trust in Google’s products.
28 
| 
Chapter 4: For Inspiration

Figure 4-4. Google’s notification service communicates that it
has the user’s best interests in mind
Some examples that improve mood
• Capital One’s credit card app designates a conversational
space that serves to greet the user with tips or light-hearted
conversation. While a matter of taste, we can argue that for
some, it strikes a great balance of polite, engaging, and
informative (Figure 4-5).
Figure 4-5. Whimsical and helpful messaging lightens the
mood and provides a conversational element
For Inspiration 
| 
29

• The Google homepage has a customized message and
design if it’s your birthday. Not necessary, but very welcom‐
ing and respectful (Figure 4-6).
Figure 4-6. Happy Birthday messages aren’t required of a ser‐
vice, but they sure are nice to have
• The popular workplace service Slack brings some welcome
personality by displaying quips as the service loads
(Figure 4-7) These display for varying lengths of time, but
provide enough variety to sometimes make users smile.
Figure 4-7. Loading messages add some personality to an
otherwise dry process
30 
| 
Chapter 4: For Inspiration

CHAPTER 5
For Designers: Choosing the
Right Work
There are additional steps you can take to bring ethics and respect
to your work. One of those steps is simply choosing respectful
projects to work on. When making this decision, it may help to have
an ethical compass for determining which companies will receive
your skills and perspectives.
I will often ask designers to identify their dream clients or projects.
After reflecting on this myself, I created a framework for how I
choose ideal projects. Not everyone has the privilege to choose
projects, but it’s helpful to know, if given the choice, how you would
go about making the best decision. Of the millions of design prob‐
lems that need solving, what calls to you and why?
Before any project, I will ask myself two questions—one selfish, and
one unselfish. First, I selfishly ask, Is this work interesting and will it
build my skills or grow my career as a designer? The less selfish ques‐
tion is Will solving this client’s problems make the world better or
worse off than before? Ultimately, is the work interesting, boring,
good, or evil, and to what degree? I created the chart shown in
Figure 5-1 so I could visually gauge each opportunity.
31

Figure 5-1. A useful chart to gauge potential work
“Good” means: Is it good for the world? Will helping client x or y
have an end result that will eliminate some human suffering, even if
on a tiny scale?
“Interesting” means: Is it stimulating for you as a designer? Is it a
new problem? Will it help grow your skills and keep you engaged?
Of the many combinations possible within this framework, I strive
to work in the upper-right quadrant, as it yields the most rewarding
work (Figure 5-2).
I invite you to try this exercise. In your opinion, what companies fall
on the right side of the graph for you? And then ask yourself what
initiatives within those companies would hold your interest and
improve your skills and career?
32 
| 
Chapter 5: For Designers: Choosing the Right Work

Figure 5-2. Rewarding work is both “good” and “interesting”
Now, imagine which companies and projects might fall into the
other zones.
Are you currently working on a soul-sucking project? Do you have
the option to work with clients on the right side of the graph? If not,
are you at least challenging yourself as a designer? These are the
questions I try and ask as much as possible. Because of the infinite
number of ways we can spend our time, why not try to do some‐
thing rewarding, or at least satisfying?
For Designers: Choosing the Right Work 
| 
33

Figure 5-3. Quick quiz: For you, what design work would fall into each
of the four quadrants?
34 
| 
Chapter 5: For Designers: Choosing the Right Work

CHAPTER 6
Final Thoughts
The Internet now permeates our daily lives on a massive scale. We
rely on it for work, to communicate with our loved ones, make
travel arrangements, pay our bills—and that’s usually just in the first
hour of our day. And right now, the portals to connectivity—our
digital devices and the services that flow through them—are the cus‐
tomer service representatives of connectedness. Every screen, portal,
button, notification, and message creates a conversation that can
either make our lives easier, more frustrating, or somewhere in
between. By examining the degree of respect in our digital services,
we can begin to expose its importance for our highly connected
lives. For the designers tasked with orchestrating these conversa‐
tions, let’s add a little bit of efficiency, friendliness, and honesty on
top of the core solution. Our users, businesses, and society will
thank us.
35


APPENDIX A
Further Reading
The goal of this report is to raise awareness for the value of respect‐
ful digital design, but it only scratches the surface. Many others are
working in depth on the subject of ethics and UX, so I encourage
further reading and involvement. Out of respect for your time, I’ve
compiled some key references:
Reference
Focus Area
Ethics of UX Research
Research
Software Engineering Code of Ethics
Software development
Dark Patterns
UX—Catalog of deceitful designs
Time Well Spent
UX—On engaging with technology meaningfully
Designing For Politeness
UX—Design and etiquette
The Ethics Of User Experience
UX—An overview
UXPA Code of Content
UX—Guidelines
37

About the Author
David Hindman is Interaction Design Director at Fjord in San
Francisco. Throughout his career, he has helped solve problems and
design digital services for some of the world’s most recognizable
brands. David began his career in design after studying a wide range
of academic subjects and after a decade of training in classical guitar
performance. He draws upon this diverse background to tackle
problems from a unique and well-rounded perspective. He holds a
BA in economics from Northwestern, a master’s in classical guitar
performance from Yale, and a MPS from NYU’s Interactive Tele‐
communications Program.

Colophon
The cover image is “The Cardsharps” by Caravaggio (circa 1594),
courtesy of the Kimbell Art Museum.

