DESIGNING YOUR GARDEN 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
A well designed garden, tailored to your own particular 
needs, will not only be beautiful and productive, but will give 
you and your family pleasure throughout the year. 
  
You don't have to be a design wizard - or even particularly 
artistic - to create a beautiful garden. The concepts of good 
design are simple to understand and straightforward to put 
into practice. 
  
Whether developing a new garden from scratch, or 
reshaping an existing one, understanding and developing 
basic design skills will help you achive good results, and 
more importantly, develop a garden with exactly the layout 
that is best for you. 
  
Changes in your garden's design need not be profound. 
Repositioning a tree, for example, erecting a screen, or 
changing one of your garden surfaces may be small 
adjustments, but each of them can have a profound effect 
on the overall appearance. 
 
2 - Decide what you want out of your 
arden  
g 
The first and most important step is to decide exactly what 
your garden means to you, and what you expect from it. You
may want:  
 
 
 
Somewhere to sit. Examples might be a terrace or patio.  
 
 
 
Somewhere for children to play. Sandpits, swings and 
climbing frames could all be incorporated into your garden's 
design, perhaps to be altered later, when they've grown up. 
 
 
 
A source of food. More and more people want to grow fruit 
and vegetables. In a small plot, a kitchen garden can be 
beautiful as well as productive.  
 
 
 
A special plant collection. A plant enthusiast's garden should 
offer different habitats including hot dry spots and cool 
shady ones.  
 
 
 
A showcase. Why not enter your local 'Best Front Garden' 
contest?  
 
 

 
A wildlife refuge. With increasing threats to natural habitats, 
our gardens are becoming important sanctuaries.  
 
 
 
Never be afraid to borrow ideas. Visit other gardens - there 
are thousands open to the public nowadays. Look at books 
and magazines and consider how features that appeal to you
could be adapted to your own garden.  
 
3  - Assessing what you've got 
Once you have decided what you want from your garden, 
the next step is to assess what is already there:  
 
 
 
Surrounding influences. Features of the surrounding 
landscape will influence your design. Objects of beauty - a 
church spire, perhaps - could become backdrops to your 
vistas; an ugly building, or noisy road will need concealing 
behind shrubs.  
 
 
 
The shape of your plot. Your design must lie comfortably 
within the dimensions of your plot. If the area has a strange 
shape - a triangle perhaps, or irregular boundaries - make 
sure you use the space efficiently.  
 
 
 
Soil, aspect and climate. The greatest enemy of any garden 
is wind. In an exposed area, therefore, your design must 
include shelter, such as fences, hedges or shrubs. Likewise, 
heavy shade, poor soil or a local frost problem will all 
influence your plans. 
 
 
 
Existing layout and design features. You must decide 
whether to keep these and incorporate them into your new 
design, or whether to remove them and start afresh.  
 
 
 
Make a list of your garden's strongest natural advantages - 
good soil, perhaps, or beautiful views. Your design should 
make the most of these advantages and thus help to 
neutralise any disadvantages.  
 
4  - Setting up your basic design 
Begin by making rough plans. Use graph paper and develop 
your plan to scale, but don't get too bogged down in the 
technicalities. Instead, plan a general layout and begin to 
arrange the various features within it, first on paper, then 
pacing them out in the garden. You can mark the areas out with
sticks and string. Illustration (1) demonstrates an example 
garden.  
 
 
 
Prioritise your features in order of desirability. There may not 

be room for everything, so decide which to sacrifice, or which 
are to be scaled down.  
 
 
 
Try to think of trees and shrubs in terms of their final size, 
rather than a couple of seasons after planting.  
 
 
 
If you have access to a photocopier, draw a general plan to 
scale, and make a number of copies. This will give you plenty of
scope to experiment with different layouts.  
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
5 - Creating a framework and forming the 
ayout 
l 
It is important, when designing your garden, to consider the 
area as a whole, and to mark out a general framework. The 
dimensions of a whole plot will make up a main frame, 
almost like a picture frame, and within that, you must decide
on important factors such as internal divisions, pathways 
and entrances.  
 
 
 
Try to arrange for several interesting vistas, since these will 
make your garden a pleasure to stroll around, as well as 
providing optimum views from the various key points.  
 
 
 
Some aspects of your framework will be pre-decided, and 
you must work with them: the position of the house, the 
main gate, where the doors and windows are situated etc.  
 
 
 
Final layout will depend on these, and on existing conditions.
You will probably want your sitting area, for example, in sun,
near the house, but with maximum privacy.  
 
 
 
Within these constraints, position such key features as 
archways, ponds, a lawn or borders where they will create 
the most pleasing effect.  
 
 
 
Never underestimate the importance of a view through the 
window - especially a window frequently used. Pathways 
that lead into the distance, attractive borders that change 
through the seasons, a thoughtfully sited pond - all are 
examples of garden design that can be enjoyed every day 
from indoors.  
 
6  -  Making internal boundaries  
Internal divisions and screens can be as important as 
boundary fences, since they divide up parts of the garden for
different uses and allow for changes in mood and style from 
one to another. Surprises are valuable in a garden's design. 
Route pathways round corners or through mysterious 
archways, leading them to a hidden feature - a rustic seat, 
perhaps, overhung with a fragrant climber.  
 
7  - Disguising unsightly objects 
Eyesores can be disguised in various ways. Often, designing 
a prominent vista so that it leads the eye away from any 
unsightliness will be enough to effect a disguise. Screens, 
especially those that can be furnished with growing plants, 
work well, as do hedges.  
 
 
 

Grow low shrubs or trailing plants over manhole covers, or 
create a special manhole cover feature.  
 
 
 
Fuel tanks, or other large objects need hiding. Make the 
screen a feature in its own right, however, rather than 
simply erecting it directly round the object.  
 
 
 
Unsightly gaps between buildings can be disguised with 
trellis.  
 
 
 
Hide awkward paving or ugly concrete with a layer of gravel, 
arranged with containers full of plants.  
 
 
 
Long grass, grown for wildlife or meadow flowers, can look 
untidy without a close-mown boundary around its edge. The 
neatly-mown strip will create a pleasing, contrasting line. 
You could even close-mow pathways through long grass. 
 
8  - Extra styling 
Once you have developed your garden's basic design, you 
may want to develop some special styling. Here are some 
simple ideas:  
 
 
 
Soften hard edges. Plant alpines or dwarf shrubs at wall 
bases and in paving cracks; allow perennials to spill over 
onto paving. Permit some plants to seed in pathways.  
 
 
 
Make sure you've maximised opportunities for climbers and 
wall plants.  
 
 
 
Keep adding containers to your garden. They do so much to 
enhance its interest.  
 
 
 
The garden floor - be it lawn, paving, concrete or gravel - is 
an important part of styling your garden. Gravel and grass 
allow for a very naturalistic approach, but with old stone 
paving, or perhaps wooden decking, you could develop a 
stylish garden surface which is both useful and beautiful.  
 
9  - Water features 
Water, though not essential, can be the making of a good 
garden design. As well as providing a beautiful and restful 
focal point, a water feature changes the light in a garden, is 
wildlife friendly, opens up opportunities for entirely new 
kinds of planting and is a constant source of fascination. 
Whether large or small, formal or informal, still or moving, a 
water feature can be the most valuable asset your garden 
has.  

 
 
 
If children or pets are likely to use your garden, you must 
consider their safety before deciding on a water feature. 
Unfenced pools of water are particularly hazardous, but a 
raised pebble pond, in which the stones protrude above the 
water, is usually an attractive and far safer alternative.  
 
 
 
1 0 - Blending functionality with design 
With the limited size of most gardens, it is important to put 
every square inch to good use. Apart from main beds and 
borders, there will be a whole range of other planting 
opportunities:  
 
 
 
The centre of a driveway can carry a good selection of low, 
mound forming plants.  
 
 
 
Your patio will look best if it is generously furnished with 
containers, not only of summer flowers, but with others, 
planted more permanently, for winter interest.  
 
 
 
Ensure that your fruit and vegetable garden is planted as 
attractively as possible, with plenty to fill gaps made by 
harvesting crops. Flowers among the vegetables can be 
welcome additions. If these are yellow, they will help to 
attract beneficial insects.  
 
1 1 - Planting as part of design 
Specific planting is discussed in other B&Q gardening 
leaflets, but here are some general rules when selecting 
plants for your newly designed garden.  
 
 
 
Only select plants that look attractive for much of the year. 
A spring-flowering tree should also have good autumn 
leaves, and perhaps a crop of colourful berries. Repeat-
flowering shrubs, such as roses, have more to offer than 
short-lived species like Forsythia. Evergreen shrubs are 
prettier, in January, than most deciduous ones.  
 
 
 
Plant for structure. Make sure your borders carry a good 
arrangement of structure plants - trees or shrubs - which 
will give the garden its backbone, winter and summer.  
 
 
 
Try to achieve a changing picture. Spring bulbs will ensure a 
cheerful beginning. Early summer perennials like Lupin and 
Poppy should give way to later displays of Phlox, perhaps, 
and Penstemons. Aim for a final climax in autumn, with 
Dahlias or Michaelmas daisies, and be sure to include winter 
treasures such as Witch hazel or Snowdrops.  

 
 
 
Plants will grow, so space them with the future in mind. 
Trees may need to be 20ft (6m) or more apart, shrubs up to 
10ft (3m), if they are large and vigorous. Perennials can be 
more crowded, because they can be lifted, divided and 
replanted every few years.  
 
 
 

