
DESIGN to
RENOURISH
SUSTAINABLE GRAPHIC DESIGN IN PRACTICE


DESIGN to 
RENOURISH
SUSTAINABLE GRAPHIC DESIGN IN PRACTICE
ERIC BENSON
YVETTE PERULLO

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2017 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
Version Date: 20160614
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-138-91661-6 (Paperback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been made 
to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all 
materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of 
all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not 
been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any 
future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or uti-
lized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopy-
ing, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the 
publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.
copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-
750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organiza-
tions that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for iden-
tification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging‑in‑Publication Data
Names: Benson, Eric, 1975- author. | Perullo, Yvette, author.
Title: Design to renourish : sustainable graphic design in practice / Eric 
Benson and Yvette Perullo.
Description: Boca Raton : Taylor & Francis, 2016. | Includes bibliographical 
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016018606 | ISBN 9781138916616 (alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Graphic arts--Environmental aspects. | Commercial 
art--Environmental aspects.
Classification: LCC NC997 .B38 2016 | DDC 740--dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016018606
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

v
CONTENTS
Foreword	
vii
Authors	
ix
Introduction: This Book as a Case Study	
xi
Chapter 1	 Beyond the Bottom Line	
1
Chapter 2	 The Hawk, the Squirrel, and the Oak Tree	
13
Chapter 3	 A Clear Picture	
29
Chapter 4	 Case Studies	
35
Modern Species: A Half-Box, Lock-Tabs, and Ethical Sourcing	
35
Swerve Design Group: Communicating Accessibility	
41
Studio EMMI: Environmental Graphics for Environmental Sustainability	
46
The Canary Project: A Multi-Use Book	
52
Designing Cultures Studio: Reversible and Recyclable Packaging	
58
Backyard Creative: Supporting Local Business	
63
Metalli Lindberg: Creating a Buzz	
71
La PAGE: Printed on Stone	
78
Ecocreative: Community-Owned Design	
84
Cast Iron Design: Sustainably Woven in the United States	
90
Chapter 5	 Today	
99
Chapter 6	 Tomorrow	
111
Appendix	
121
Glossary	
129
Further Reading	
135
Index	
137


vii
FOREWORD
What did you want to be when you were growing up? I’m going to guess that very 
few people reading this will say “graphic designer.” I certainly didn’t. Like most 
people, I wanted to be a rock ‘n’ roll space pirate. I also wanted to make the world 
a better place.
Unlike many people, though, I actually grew up familiar with graphic design, 
since my father taught it at a local university for over 30 years. I also grew up 
believing I could change the world for the better, because my mother started 
bringing me to social justice rallies and protests before I could even walk. By the 
time I came around to graphic design as a career choice, I had already graduated 
from college and was a full-on committed activist. So my challenge was how to 
merge these two parts of my life.
Graphic design is not the best way to change the world. There are plenty of 
other ways to have a real, direct impact on people’s lives. You could be volunteer-
ing in impoverished communities (here and abroad); you could start a nonprofit 
organization to work on social issues; you could be working to elect candidates 
who share your worldview; heck, you could be running for office yourself! But the 
fact of the matter is, if that appealed to you, you’d probably already be doing it.
I got into graphic design because I enjoyed the creative problem-solving chal-
lenges it offered and the fact that I could use my artistic skills in a way that would 
actually pay my bills. But I realized early on that I would need to make my chosen 
career and my personal ethics align if I was going to actually find any sustain-
able joy in life. It was at that point that I discovered the real potential for positive 
transformation that graphic design offered. Here was a field that was essentially 
touching every aspect of people’s lives, every day, everywhere around the world—
for better or worse.
The problem of course is the “worse” part. Graphic designers are complicit in an 
industry that creates literal mountains of waste, contributes to the destruction 
of natural habitats, and poisons waterways and the atmosphere. And that’s just 
the tip of the socially conscious iceberg. There is a much larger web of poten-
tial impact that spirals out from the computer you work on every day—from the 
treatment of workers at all stages along the production process to the powerful 
messages about body image, happiness, gender roles, and so much more that are 
being conveyed in the things we design. As graphic designers, we shape the world 
we live in both figuratively and literally. The good news is that you can use this 
power to do something better.
Doing good with graphic design is not easy. When I started out in this field in 
the early 1990s, there was no instruction manual for being a socially conscious 
graphic designer. Before the Internet arrived, finding like-minded people to learn 
from and collaborate with was extremely difficult. There were a smattering of 

viii
Foreword
books that touched on the topic, but their focus was mainly on industrial design 
and manufacturing. It would be years before I started discovering invaluable 
resources online like Re-nourish (www.re-nourish.org) and the people behind it. 
In the meantime I had to find a way to put my idea of ethical design into practice, 
and it took a lot of trial and error to figure out a system that would sustain the 
world and myself.
For example, I was once given the opportunity to do the most sustainable letter-
head design possible for a very forward-thinking client. I could work with expen-
sive (at the time) tree-free paper, print on a vintage letterpress, and use inks based 
on vegetable oil. Of course, these inks were not readily available at the time, but 
I found a supplier across the country willing to send me a small container of it—
enough for one print job. The box arrived at my office filled with Styrofoam pack-
ing peanuts, and I realized that any net benefit I had from avoiding the petroleum 
in the ink was more than compensated by both the petroleum-based materials 
used to package it and the fuel used for shipping it across the country. It was a 
stark reminder of the difficulties involved in trying to do good with design and 
the problem with having a narrow view of what constituted doing good work. 
In the intervening years, I realized that a much more nuanced approach was 
required to make a real impact.
And that’s what’s marvelous about what Yvette and Eric have put together in this 
book. They’ve done the footwork, so you don’t have to start from scratch. They 
offer practical advice and a clear systematic approach to making real change hap-
pen through your daily work as a designer. True, graphic design is not the best 
way to change the world, but it has the potential to be a really, really good way. It’s 
not about doing less bad, it’s not about achieving a net zero impact, but it’s about 
actually making the world a better place.
As a designer you have the opportunity to be at the forefront of a transformation 
for good. Are you ready to renourish our world? If so, read on…
Noah Scalin
Founder, Another Limited Rebellion
Richmond, Virginia
P.S. Doing good with design may seem to be something for just the activists, but 
caring about the environment is not radical and it’s not a political issue. It affects 
us all. Everyone needs air to breathe and clean water to drink, so we’re all in this 
together. And when you realize that you can make a difference with the work you 
do every day, suddenly the extra work involved becomes less of a burden.

ix
AUTHORS
Eric Benson was born in Arizona and raised in mid-Michigan where he later 
earned his BFA in graphic and industrial design from the University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, in 1998. His MFA thesis at the University of Texas, Austin, became 
the award-winning sustainable design website www.re-nourish.org. His work 
with Re-nourish translated into an academic career teaching graphic design at 
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. At Illinois, he runs Fresh Press 
Agri-Fiber Paper Lab, where he explores sustainable papermaking using corn 
stover, soy stalks, prairie grasses, and other waste fibers from local farms.
Eric’s creative works have garnered numerous design awards and are exhibited 
in notable venues like the Walker Art Center, the Smithsonian Cooper Hewitt 
National Design Museum, the Hammer Museum, the Contemporary Arts 
Museum Houston, and Rhode Island School of Design (RISD).
Yvette Perullo is a Boston-based designer and educator who believes good design 
values people and the environment, and improves lives. She earned her MFA in 
visual communications design from Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, 
and her MA degree in graphic design from the New England School of Art & 
Design at Suffolk University, Boston, Massachusetts where her research focused 
on developing tools and resources to encourage sustainable design practices—the 
foundation of her work with Re-nourish.
She has lectured internationally on sustainable graphic design and as a design 
­educator, Yvette focuses on integrating sustainability methodology into 
her courses. Yvette is the lead designer at Bartlett Interactive in Concord, 
Massachusetts, an agency with a commitment to sustainability and triple bottom 
line business practices.
Re-nourish is an award-winning and internationally recognized nonprofit 
organization that provides lectures, workshops, podcasts, and online tutorials 
to help designers create sustainably. The website provides resources and tools 
like a searchable greener paper database, a print project calculator, and a green 
certification system for studios/creative teams and projects.


xi
INTRODUCTION: THIS BOOK 
AS A CASE STUDY
“Designers are certainly among those whose positive contributions are 
essential to the building of a more humane world.”1
—Victor Margolin
When writing this book, we both went through the same serendipitous experi-
ence one thousand miles apart in the same week. While grocery shopping—Eric 
in Illinois and Yvette in Massachusetts—we noticed (more so than usual) the 
copious amounts of packaging and plastic that filled each fluorescently lit aisle. 
All of the graphic design in the grocery stores is just making a short pit stop 
before an eternity in the landfill. We both vividly remember feeling deflated yet 
more motivated than ever to inspire change as we discussed the experience after 
our coinciding shopping trips. Waste, and the endless connected problems asso-
ciated with it, is a wicked problem. It seems like it can’t be solved. We asked how 
can—and will—our profession ever evolve? Is it hopeless? What can we do?
Despite our good intentions at Re-nourish, we knew that behind all of the choices 
of paperboard boxes, plastic wrap, and styrofoam, there were designers churn-
ing out more waste, Lunchable after Lunchable and one 100-calorie pack after 
another. Individually wrapped and packaged to withstand a zombie apocalypse, 
all of these wasted resources make us wonder what we are doing to the planet, our 
health, and to our future economy?
It’s those questions that brought us together originally as a team. Since 2008, we 
have been working together with the sole goal of making the outcomes of the 
graphic design profession sustainable. To do so, we created Re-nourish, a non-
profit organization that provides online interactive tools, resources, a podcast, 
and consulting to create a positive change in our field.
Since being introduced at an AIGA (The Professional Association for Design) 
conference in Baltimore, Maryland, the two of us have continued researching, 
talking to, and collaborating with designers and educators, while also learning 
and delving deeper down the “rabbit hole.” We’ve lectured, written articles, and 
advised on many design and writing projects. As we are also educators, we’ve inte-
grated the topic into our classrooms (sometimes not so successfully) and into our 
own personal work (more successfully). Eric has even been making and research-
ing agricultural waste paper (corn stover, tomato vines, and prairie grasses to 
name a few) to test its commercial viability over paper from trees at Fresh Press, 
the microbrewery of paper, at the University of Illinois. What we have discovered 
over time is that sustainable graphic design for client-based projects was not hap-
pening as often or entering the mainstream as quickly as we hoped. The book 
was created to help speed up things by inspiring you and providing practical 

xii
Introduction
know-how to not only design to avoid possible negative effects but also design to 
create positive outcomes using a better process called systems thinking.
“So in the spirit of sustainability, why produce a book at all?” you might wonder.
To which we reply, “Good question!”
Let us explain...
The decision to write and produce a book was not an easy one. The publishing 
industry does not have a stellar reputation for being environmentally friendly. 
We pondered the idea of expanding our website instead; however, although the 
Re-nourish website serves as an online toolkit and contains inspirational and 
useful resources and case studies for designers, there was a need to dive a bit 
deeper than what an online platform can offer.
There was another, more pressing reason as to why producing a physical book was 
important. We were up to the challenge of trying to make this book a case study—
to push the boundaries of publishing. According to the Green Press Initiative, 
each year 30 million trees are used to make books sold in the United States alone.2 
While more and more publishers pledge to increase their use of sustainability cer-
tified paper with more recycled content, sadly it’s not quite mainstream yet and it’s 
also not enough. So we embarked on a two-year journey to make this book a case 
study and challenge the publishing industry to be more sustainable. Our goal was 
to produce a book that would be printed and bound in a manner that exemplifies 
the Re-nourish criteria for sustainability. As William McDonough and Michael 
Braungart stated in their 2002 book Cradle to Cradle, “this book is not a tree.” 
Instead, it was published using “recyclable” ink and plastic paper that could be 
infinitely recycled after the book’s useful days were over. We used Cradle to Cradle 
and their follow-up book The Upcycle, which is printed on chlorine-free paper 
with the same plastic paper cover, certified by the Forest Stewardship Council 
(FSC), as a baseline to make even bigger strides with our production.
After countless discussions with sustainability experts in the paper, printing, and 
forestry industries, we were able to put together an ideal list of requirements to 
make this book happen as sustainably as possible. These conversations led us to 
choosing Step Forward Paper™. Their commercial printing paper is made from 
60% wheat straw waste and 40% tree fiber certified by FSC®. Even with their 
manufacturing facilities currently set up in India, Step Forward Paper has among 
the lowest greenhouse gas emissions and the smallest environmental impact 
among all papers currently available in the marketplace. In fact, in a 2014 life 
cycle study, their paper ended up with around 50% smaller footprint than exclu-
sively virgin tree fiber paper.3 Although 100% post-consumer recycled paper has 
a slightly better environmental rating than Step Forward Paper (possibly due to 
its current geographic location), paper made from agricultural residue fiber holds 

xiii
Introduction
the potential to move away from using tree fiber altogether. This is the kind of 
positive market and inspirational impact we hoped to make by writing this book.
After choosing the paper, our online Re-nourish Project Calculator helped us to 
determine the optimum trim size of our work by “designing backward.” Using 
a 25″ × 38″ press sheet, we determined that an 6-3/4″ × 9-1/2″ final page size 
printed with no bleeds was the most efficient in maximizing the press sheet. With 
these design decisions, the trim waste on each press sheet was reduced to a grand 
total of 6″ at the bottom, which we would donate to a worthy nonprofit organiza-
tion for a minimally sized print job. As part of our mission, we were also deter-
mined (and in the end successful) to print the book in the United States where we 
are located and, as you’ll learn more about in Chapter 2, use systems thinking to 
reduce the entire environmental footprint of this book. Furthermore, we aspired 
to work with a printer with a strong ecologically and socially sound mission for 
their business: one that held environmental and work-safe employee certifica-
tions, that stocked and promoted high-content post-consumer recycled paper, 
that used low-VOC (volatile organic compounds) solvents and vegetable-based 
inks, that offered cold-glue melt for binding, that paid living wages, and that is 
located regionally to other vendors related to the production of the book.
Even after a year and a half of researching for and negotiating with the publisher, 
we were not able to achieve all of our goals to promote this book as a case study. 
Much to our dismay in the end, our publisher was not as dedicated to our goals 
as they had originally indicated. Cost was always the deciding factor in every 
decision (as one would guess). When we found ways to trim waste to save a buck 
that we could then reinvest in better materials and processes for publishing the 
book, the complex system of existing contracts our publisher had with vendors 
restricted any real social and environmental progress. (Publishers work exclu-
sively with select printers and are usually unlikely to source printing elsewhere.) 
The summer and fall of 2015 were spent haggling over printers and paper. The 
story is worthy of a book all to itself where, like the bards of Shakespearean times, 
we would recite our arduous and prolific journey to inch the publishing industry 
closer to stronger environmental business practices.
But, it came time to accept the fact that we would, in the end, have very little pull 
over final vendor choices. We may have lost a few battles in our odyssey, but we 
did achieve some fairly solid victories. Here is what we were able to do:
Ultimately, this book was printed by the Sheridan Group in Chelsea, Michigan. 
Sheridan is FSC and Rainforest Alliance certified—two of our “must haves” in 
selecting a reputable printer. Despite Sheridan’s efforts to source materials from 
ethical working conditions and comply with the FSC guidelines, their public 
environmental policies, however, are a bit vague. Sheridan does not have Ancient 
Forest Friendly or Green-e certifications or any carbon neutral programs in place. 
These are vital for a printer in our era of global warming to minimize negative 
environmental impact via logging and greenhouse gas emissions.

xiv
Introduction
Sheridan was able to print this book with a premium vegetable-based ink that 
does not contain any petroleum oil. Once the printer and ink was decided, we 
turned our focus toward paper. Despite our best efforts, Sheridan was not will-
ing to print on Step Forward Paper™ as we had hoped. The issue was twofold. The 
printer was concerned that the paper would cause problems on press, leaving 
dust and particles on the blankets, and a test run would prove too costly for the 
publisher and too time consuming for the printer. With the cost issue rearing 
its ugly head yet again, our second and third 100% post-consumer waste (PCW) 
paper choices were also out of contention.
In the end, our publisher presented us with their “best” option of Rolland 
Opaque paper for the cover, and 60# House White Matte 10% PCW for the 
interior pages. We were pleased that the printing and paper vendors were 
within relative close proximity to each other (Michigan and Canada) to mini-
mize transportation emissions. Rolland paper is manufactured using biogas 
energy in Quebec, Canada, and is FSC and EcoLogo certified with a 30% PCW 
content. The final 6-3/4″ × 9-1/2″ book size was dictated by the publisher. The 
press sheet size was never disclosed, so we are unable to accurately calculate 
our book’s final environmental impact and savings. But to provide you with an 
approximate level of information about our environmental savings and impact, 
we turned to our Re-nourish Project Calculator and Rolland’s Eco-calculator 
(Figure 0.1).
Figure 0.1  Approximate eco-savings for every 2,000 books (about 1.355 tons of 
paper) on 60# house White Matte 10% PCW paper. Calculation includes interior 
pages and covers.

xv
Introduction
While we hoped to make some important strides to influence market sustain-
ability decisions with the production of this book, we feel much can be learned 
from our lack of success in some areas. Even in our Sisyphean efforts, we did not 
concede easily and negotiated back and forth with the publisher up to and past 
the original manuscript deadline. In the end, we believe that the more designers 
push that boulder uphill, the more significant strides we can and will make. Like 
the publishing industry, graphic design still has a long way to go. There is much 
progress to be made together, and that’s why we wrote this book. We hope you 
enjoy what’s next.
ENDNOTES
	
1.	Margolin, Victor. 2007. “Design, the Future and the Human Spirit.” Design 
Issues 23 (3): 4–15.
	
2.	“Book Sector.” Green Press Initiative. http://www.greenpressinitiative.org/
about/bookSector.htm. Accessed February 6, 2016.
	
3.	“Expanded Comparative Life Cycle Study of Wheat Straw Paper.” Step 
Forward Paper. September 2014. http://stepforwardpaper.com/wp-content/
uploads/2013/01/Website-FINAL-PDF-Version-1.pdf. Accessed February 6, 
2016.


1
Chapter 1
BEYOND THE BOTTOM LINE
“I can’t imagine doing anything else.” We all have most likely made this statement 
about the profession. Graphic design is creative and logical, expressive and prac-
tical, and demanding and fun. You wear many hats and change them frequently. 
You might be brainstorming logo ideas one minute and sending out invoices or 
estimating project plans the next. In the same day you could be delegating tasks 
to colleagues, providing feedback to contractors, and presenting ideas to clients. 
Despite the diversity of the job and the many hats you don throughout the day, 
most graphic designers specialize or have a distinct passion for one area of design 
or type of working environment. Your area of expertise may be in print, exhibi-
tion, packaging design, interactive design, or traditional advertising. You may be 
working in-house for a company, running your own freelance business, or work-
ing at a large agency or a small design studio. Whatever your niche, the work has 
a significant positive or negative impact on our world. As designers, we relish the 
praise of satisfied clients, recognition by peers, and the return on investment of 
a successful campaign, but beyond the immediate influence of the work, there is 
much more that may not be measured or seen. What are the unintended conse-
quences of design work over time? How does the work impact the planet we live 
on? The last question is one more designers are thinking about as the realities of 
global warming and changes in our natural landscape like pollution, droughts, 
and deforestation reveal. There must be a shift in mindset away from only mak-
ing beautiful and economically driven work to include a better understanding 
and a strategy to stop the negative impacts of design work on the planet.
In recent years, we have all witnessed too many environmental disasters like 
the horrific 2010 BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, the 2014 tragic flooding in 
Pakistan, and the ongoing severe droughts and wildfires in the Western United 
States and Australia. It is highly likely that the latter of the series of tragedies 
have been fueled by global warming, one of the many reasons why design must 
change. Reversing global warming is the most important battle humanity faces 
in its history as it will have an impact on everything. It is true that the planet has 
experienced a warming before (roughly 6,000 years ago)1; however, this warming 
was caused by a natural cycle from cold to hot that occurs roughly every 100,000 
years.2 Starting with the industrial revolution, humanity found a way to uninten-
tionally “hack” the climate cycle (tens of thousands of years too early). Increased 
greenhouse gas emissions from transportation and mass production fueled by 
rising consumption (where design plays a major role) is how people have changed 
our atmosphere. The good news is that if civilization now knows how to break a 
climate cycle, it also means we now know how to fix it. 
But it’s not just the environment and human health that will be hurt by global 
warming; the economy will take a major hit as well. In 2015, the magazine 

2
Design to Renourish
The  Economist commissioned a study that showed inaction on global warm-
ing would cause a loss of up to 4.2 trillion dollars3 in the US economy alone. 
Designers’ livelihood will clearly be negatively affected by an economic loss of 
this magnitude. The worldwide economy and all living things on the planet are 
connected, and global warming is helping us all realize this more quickly and 
vividly. (We will explore this interconnectedness in Chapter 2.)
Three components that global warming will affect are the environment (animals 
and natural resources), the economy, and the people who live in and participate 
in both. This is commonly referred to as the triple bottom line (Figure 1.1). You 
may have heard this term before as it refers to the pursuit of growth balanced 
with social, ecological, and economic needs (or people, planet, and profit). All 
three parts of this concept are related, linked, and integral to a truly sustainable 
model of living in a healthy world. When applied to graphic design, the triple 
bottom line helps designers understand how print and digital work impact the 
overall health of the world. This book is about those impacts (both positive and 
negative), where the profession stands today, and most importantly what we can 
all do to make more sustainable work. 
THE GOOD
“The most important thing in design, it seems to me, is the consequence 
of your action, and whether you’re interested, fundamentally, in per-
suading people to do things that are in their interests”
—Milton Glaser.4
Graphic designers have had a hand in advancing the world economically and in 
shaping society and popular culture. Outcomes of design continue to help edu-
cate the public about important social issues, create tools to allow for an open 
exchange of information, improve the financial growth of organizations and the 
Figure 1.1  The triple bottom line.

3
Beyond the Bottom Line
people that work for them, and inspire people to make a difference in peoples’ 
lives. Graphic design work, although many times misunderstood or undervalued 
(if you have been asked to “make it pretty” you can relate), is an important fixture 
in our economy and society. If designers stopped doing their jobs, it would be 
very difficult for companies to communicate to their customers effectively and 
achieve their business or organizational missions. Beyond the questionable aes-
thetics that would exist without your thoughtful skills, more importantly society 
would face a challenge as access to valuable information would be hard to find, 
convoluted, and possibly even illegible. Let’s face it, good design is important. It 
lends credibility and visibility to an organization, an idea, or a message. Not only 
does it make economic and cultural sense but it can also be important for the 
health of our environment, which we will discuss later.
Let’s take a look at how effective design can have a positive economic influence. In 
a joint study conducted through Stanford University, it was found that a website’s 
aesthetic qualities are the most important when people make credibility judgments 
about an organization online. In addition, a company is perceived as more trust-
worthy if their website is easy to navigate.5 The visual design indeed directly reflects 
the professionalism and quality of an organization. The same perceptions learned 
from the web design study can then be applied to other designed material. Gaining 
trust from customers is paramount for a company. If a business looks legitimate 
and trustworthy, a potential client is more likely to do business with the organiza-
tion. This begins to build a client relationship which could potentially bring return 
business. And since it costs five times more money to attract a new customer than 
it does to keep an existing one, loyal clients can help maintain a consistent revenue 
stream.6 These relationships are beneficial for positive online reviews and referrals 
to friends and family, potentially leading to increased profits. It makes sense and 
cents. Good design can increase a business’ bottom line through strengthened con-
fidence in an organization’s products and services. This is just one example of how 
graphic design continues to have a profound impact on our economy, where it can 
be argued, improves the standard of living for all concerned. 
The results of effective graphic design also contribute significantly to making 
­people’s lives easier. As trained visual communicators, designers can turn com-
plex information into easily digestible messages. In high-stress situations, clear 
signage is particularly crucial in places like airports. Many airline travelers today 
are tired, rushed, or anxious (or maybe all of the above!). The stress of waiting 
in long lines and having tight connections are compounded in a poorly laid out 
airport. Well-designed signage that is understandable, even for those with visual 
impairments, helps ease stress and anxiety so that passengers can quickly navi-
gate to where they need to go on time. Color decisions and legible typography on 
screens and signage can make the difference between missing and making a flight. 
Even on a small scale, thoughtful design solutions can make everyday tasks 
easier and a lot less frustrating. While some of us swear never to do it again, 
most of us have put together our fair share of ready-to-assemble furniture. And if 

4
Design to Renourish
you’re like so many others, you just scan the pictures without actually reading 
the ­instructions. This is when well-done information design for a DIY bookcase 
instructions can make the difference between one that steadily holds your vast 
library of literature (preferably this book included) or one that collapses into a 
mangled pile of particle board and endless stream of expletives. 
Making people’s lives easier as graphic designers covers a wide range of areas 
from creating easy-to-follow assembly instructions to, more critically, signage. 
Visual design skills are also often put to use for worthy campaigns or causes. 
Human rights abuses, social inequality, environmental destruction, and even 
political campaigns are areas in which graphic designers have been instrumental 
in raising awareness and inspiring action. We discussed a bit earlier about how 
quality design can help build trust, and this is particularly true when motivating 
people to fund a worthy cause. Even the most generous of people will be wary 
about donating money if the organization appears less than honest. But when 
done well, designers’ skills are helpful when shedding light on issues or motivat-
ing people to take action to help others. 
Graphic designers have developed strategic branding campaigns and created 
innovative ideas to help worthy causes from local nonprofits to international 
organizations succeed. Some have motivated America’s young adults to get 
out and vote, spread awareness and helped raise money for cancer and AIDS 
research, educated people about the dangers of smoking and gained support to 
stop offshore drilling. Graphic design has the potential to make a huge difference 
and greatly benefit the economy and people’s day-to-day lives.
THE BAD
Planet
As we write this book, the levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere hover 
around 400 parts per million (ppm) according to the Mauna Loa Observatory 
in Hawaii. This is dangerously high. To put that number in perspective, scien-
tists say the carbon dioxide levels must be reduced to about 350 ppm to main-
tain a livable and thriving planet.7 While we can’t solve this alone, designers can 
make more responsible decisions in the choice of project outcomes, materials, 
and vendors to work with. We have begun this process as a profession to “do 
less bad” by investing in post-consumer waste papers, vegetable-based inks, 
environmentally certified products, and choosing vendors powered by renew-
able energy. Less bad is a start but it’s not enough to reverse the current trajec-
tory. If designers only strive for their work to have a net zero impact on the 
planet, that would keep the levels at or around the current 400 ppm. Designers 
can do better. There is an opportunity to renourish our world, to create work 
that helps to not only educate clients and audiences but also to have a posi-
tive impact on lives and the planet while reducing the levels of carbon dioxide. 

5
Beyond the Bottom Line
This is the 21st century design problem. Before we go into how to achieve this, 
let’s first review some of the reasons we have come to this fork in the road. 
Stylish design solutions that are created for clients usually only help create larger, 
unintended problems for the environment. Pulitzer prize winning author Russell 
Baker said, “(t)he American dream is to turn goods into trash as fast as possible.”8 
And not many designed items hit the garbage bin faster than packaging—a direct-
to-trash or “cradle to grave” contribution to the landfill problems. The lifespan 
of most packaging is incredibly short. All too often, the packaging of a product is 
either unnecessary or excessive and includes toxic materials like adhesives, coat-
ings, inks, or plastics. The problems that arise in the landfills from packaging and 
other printed “solutions” pose an environmental and health hazard. Leachate is 
an example of this. Leachate is the rainwater and other liquids that filter down 
through the landfill encountering plastics, papers, and other materials on its way 
to the bottom. It contains fairly high concentrations of harmful substances from 
the materials it came into contact with and poses very significant environmental 
and human health problems as a result. A large percentage of landfills leak this 
hazardous leachate contaminating ground and surface water nearby.
In addition, the decomposition of garbage in landfills releases methane, a potent 
odorless greenhouse gas that, with carbon dioxide, are some of the largest con-
tributors to global warming. Packaging, for instance, has significantly contrib-
uted to overflowing landfills. Ultimately, all that packaging  designers put their 
hearts and souls into ends up as beautifully designed trash. In landfills in both 
United States and France, for instance, packaging that could have been recycled 
or avoided entirely account for anywhere between 30% and 37% of the trash.9 
This is a perfect example of why a one-way system of treasure to trash is damag-
ing to our world and unsustainable at its core (Figure 1.2).
Figure 1.2  A linear paperboard supply chain.

6
Design to Renourish
But there is more to consider here than just the project’s likely last stop—the 
landfill. At the beginning of a new project, for instance, the simple act of choos-
ing paper and a printer has led to (over time) irreversible environmental damage 
like global warming, deforestation, and the shrinking polar ice caps. Physical 
projects require transportation by truck, rail, or air and are also hosted on large 
servers. The oil that fuels almost all the transportation and manufacturing is not 
only environmentally catastrophic in its drilling (recall the 2010 Gulf oil spill) 
but also in its own transport (for instance, the 2015 West Virginia train derail-
ment), and in its consumption (carbon dioxide and particulate emissions that 
cause global warming and respiratory problems). Added to this equation are 
other natural resources needed for manufacturing like plastics (made from oil), 
metals, wood, and water. 
Let’s go deeper into how graphic design work needs and affects our water sup-
ply. Everything that is created, and the technology that’s required, demands 
enormous amounts of water. The benchmark for water use in North America 
is 17,000 gallons per ton of paper. Multiply that by the millions of metric 
tons of paper produced globally and the amount of water consumed by the 
paper industry is hard to imagine. The computers used to create powerful 
and meaningful work guzzle up an enormous amount of water in their own 
manufacture. A single desktop computer requires an estimated 1.5 tons of 
water to fabricate!10 As water comes into the manufacturers to build our cre-
ations, it also flows out, but not in the same condition it entered. The polluted 
water enters rivers, lakes, and streams affecting clean drinking water, infect-
ing the fish that we eat, and harming other wildlife that is dependent on this 
water for survival. (We’ll further go into how design affects ecosystems in 
Chapter 2.)
People
We are all aware to some degree how a choice of paper could negatively affect 
the environment, and can guess, then, that such environmental impacts may 
have adverse effects on human health. But much less is mentioned about 
that paper’s effect on people and cultures. Paper companies worldwide pro-
vide quality jobs but have also been known to log forests or establish tree 
plantations without the consent of local communities or indigenous peo-
ples who have rights to that land. These people rely on the local forests for 
food, shelter, commerce, and spiritual ties. Unfortunately, entire villages in 
countries like Indonesia, Brazil, and Tanzania have been forced from their 
land, often through the use of armed police or the military, only to have 
their home destroyed by logging.11 Such practices leave the people with no 
means of survival. In some cases, protests against this “blood timber” have 
resulted in violence and casualties. Sadly, in 2014, four leaders from Peru’s 
Ashaninka people were assassinated for opposing illegal logging on their 
land.12 With so many other methods of creating quality paper from recycled 
or alternative fibers, why are designers still asking for and supporting the 
use of virgin tree fiber from old growth forests and risking such atrocities? 

7
Beyond the Bottom Line
It’s important to pose these types of questions more often and work to solve 
them with clients, managers, or printers. 
True sustainability takes into account human health, not merely physical well-
being but also strong social infrastructure, engagement, and social ties that lead 
to happiness and contentment. The preservation and perpetuation of strong soci-
eties and cultures are integral to the balance of the triple bottom line because for 
many, culture is a value system, something that is rooted in tradition, is cared 
about, nostalgic, or a way of life. Culture and social relationships offer happiness 
and comfort for many. Graphic designers have a huge influence on social and 
cultural sustainability through the sourcing of materials chosen for projects and 
the messages communicated in their work. 
Designers are trained to create beautiful, persuasive work that either elicits 
desire in the viewer or motivates an action. Effective visual communication 
can convince someone to purchase a new product or change his or her political 
or social belief structures. Graphic designers, with the help of marketing, often 
contribute to campaigns that appeal to very specific “target markets.” Knowing 
the audience or choosing a single group to focus on is imperative in order to 
create effective campaigns with positive returns for the clients. Unfortunately, 
this methodology has also been used in unethical ways to manipulate and 
prey on vulnerabilities. A sad example of this are the stereotyped images, lan-
guage, and campaigns cigarette companies used to advertise to predominantly 
poor African American communities. As a result, African American smokers 
are the only ethnic group to have suffered disproportionately from smoking-
related diseases in recent years.13 
Another example of unethical practices in advertising includes digitally altered 
models and actors in fashion magazines and campaigns targeting women and 
teens. Designers and photographers, armed with photo imaging software, slim 
down already thin models, increase muscle mass, enhance breasts, and remove 
pimples to perpetuate the idea that “perfect” is normal—that if we don’t look 
a certain way, we need to be “fixed.” Then these ideal images are used to sell 
the promise of happiness and unrealistic lifestyles. A disturbing example of 
this involves the advertising of dietary products to teenage girls. Many young 
women are already self-conscious about their changing bodies and many com-
panies have taken advantage of this. Similar advertisements for clothing, skin 
care, perfume, and other beauty products have used this same approach ask-
ing us to purchase more products to feel better about ourselves. With so much 
advertising exposure, these messages are really difficult to ignore and have a 
negative influence on all of our self-esteem. From an early age, we are bom-
barded with images and messages that reinforce the idea that to be happy and 
successful we must be ultrathin and flawless, which in addition to self-esteem 
problems can cause depression and eating disorders.14 In fact, 65% of women 
and girls suffer from eating disorders. Why would we, as a profession, want to 
help perpetuate that dysfunction?

8
Design to Renourish
Profit
However shameful it can sometimes be, advertising does work. More than 
$500 billion was spent on advertising globally in 201215 and is expected to 
increase by another 5.8% by the time you’re reading this book.16 Advertising 
lures consumers to purchase new products, too often contributing to the 
linear and unsustainable path of production, consumption, and disposal. 
Designer and educator, Victor Papanek referred to this consumerist model 
of “persuading people to buy things they don’t need, with money they don’t 
have, in order to impress others who don’t care.”17 A one-way system of con-
sumption and disposal results in dwindling and degraded resources. The 
effects of supply and demand are apparent when resources become scarce 
or more difficult to obtain resulting in increasing costs. This reminds us of 
our previous discussion on the environmental unsustainability of packaging. 
But outside of the environmental costs of packaging, what are the economic 
ones?
To start, packaging usually makes up around 10% to 20% of the cost of the items 
purchased.18 It is estimated that the packaging cost of some cosmetic products 
and toiletries may be as high as 30% of a product’s selling price.19 This cost is 
one aspect that adds to both the company’s and customer’s budget. Finding a 
way to minimize the packaging size and weight will definitely have an impact on 
lowering cost and consequently a positive impact on the environment. The next 
step would be to design packaging that actually “gives back” to the planet, one 
that enriches the soil when composted or removes greenhouse gases from the air 
while keeping costs down.
Graphic design work that is expensive to produce due to costly materials, exotic 
finishes, or specialty processes must be compensated for elsewhere. To recoup the 
price associated with design and advertising, organizations or businesses may 
make up the amount spent in other ways. Generally, the cost is regained at the 
expense of the consumer or, even worse, at the expense of the worker. Consumers 
may be compensating for the added cost of the packaging in which case the prod-
uct becomes unattainable to some people. Such a system seems acceptable when 
thinking about luxury items like big screen televisions, or celebrity-endorsed 
perfumes or watches; however, inequality becomes truly apparent when finan-
cial disparity affects basic needs items like food, medicine, education, and water. 
When access to these is limited due to cost, economic inequality has a negative 
affect across the entire triple bottom line. 
As we explained using packaging as an example, many issues in each com-
ponent of the triple bottom line overlap. The interconnectedness of all parts 
makes it impossible to divide each portion of the triple bottom line into three 
neat containers. It is useless to discuss packaging in isolation as an economic 
concern without mentioning its menace to people and the environment. 
As ­packaging impacts one component of the triple bottom line, it also affects 
all three. 

9
Beyond the Bottom Line
THE BETTER
Designers are making positive strides to forge a path toward sustainability, but there 
are still many obstacles to designing with the triple bottom line in mind. Faced with 
tight deadlines, a shortage of resources, and often a lack of support or buy-in from 
our manager or client, there are many challenges designers face on the job that the 
upcoming case studies will help answer. For instance, what can you do when pro-
posing sustainable alternatives, but the client won’t budge? Let’s look at things from 
their perspective for a moment to understand how they see a design problem. Not 
being familiar with the design process and the time required for quality work, many 
clients wait until the last minute—they needed a design solution and they needed it 
yesterday. Discussing different ideas like the triple bottom line, or using a tree-free 
paper, or a renewable energy hosting service takes time and a willingness to listen. 
Add to this the time it takes to discuss the positives of more sustainable choices with 
the printer and you’ve added hours, if not days, to the project. 
Clients may be more concerned with aesthetics or revenue over environmental or 
social impacts or possibly they have the preconceived notion that sustainable mate-
rials and vendors will be more costly than traditional ones. Some clients have such a 
tight budget that spending additional time on research into more responsible mate-
rials would net an hourly rate so low you might as well be working pro-bono. We 
do not necessarily believe that our clients intentionally want to pollute the planet, 
but rather time and money take precedence. That is what affects them directly and 
immediately. When time is short and money is tight, it’s difficult for clients or proj-
ect managers to look beyond the financial issues to address other larger ones. They 
are only focusing on the profit component of the triple bottom line. 
What if a client is open to working in a more sustainable way but the deadline is 
tight giving you or your team little time to research or talk with vendors? Such 
time constraints and inadequate resources are limiting and make obtaining the 
knowledge needed to make responsible decisions difficult. All designers under-
stand the need for immediacy and fast turn-around time. The short deadlines 
you are likely familiar with do not allow ample time for investigation into topics 
like sustainability that require more substantial research. There is no time! How 
can a design team possibly get clients to pay attention to how many trees are 
required to make the paper for a project or to the amount of carbon emissions 
from shipping the finished project from a printer in Asia when the project needs 
to be at the printer in an hour? Designing quickly is usually, and unfortunately, 
the solution. Designers need to keep clients and managers happy to keep the 
lights on and put healthy food on the table, so often you must do what they ask. 
If you are a print designer, you may have run into the following problem one too 
many times. You have chosen a beautiful 100% post-consumer waste recycled 
paper with all of the best environmental certifications; it’s Forest Stewardship 
Council (FSC) and Ancient Forest Friendly certified, processed chlorine-free, 

10
Design to Renourish
manufactured with renewable energy, and made locally. This paper has the 
­perfect color and ­texture. But later you learn that the client only needs to print 
a small number of pieces, maybe just a few hundred, but paper manufacturers 
only sell paper in full cartons. (Purchasing a full carton when only a small quan-
tity is needed is too expensive and wasteful.) Suddenly, the only choice is house 
paper that the printer has in stock. 
Perhaps, you or your team has been hired to design and develop a website. After 
accepting the job you realize the client has already secured web hosting and 
registration. The hosting service is powered by conventional energy, promotes 
its services through sexist advertising, and has been known to have some other 
unethical business practices. While unsustainable, this vendor’s business model 
does not align with the client’s ethos—or yours. The design team was planning 
instead to run this website on an employee-owned web hosting provider powered 
entirely by solar and wind energy. The choice of renewable energy by the team here 
is important as data have a large carbon footprint. Greenpeace estimates that all 
the server farms and networks worldwide would rank sixth among all countries 
for energy use.20 To add to this problem, the Internet is adding 830 million tons 
of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere annually.21 So choosing servers powered by 
renewable energy is paramount. However, a better hosting service is just one way 
to minimize the carbon footprint when designing for web and mobile. Decreasing 
the download time is another smart strategy. Designers can do this by better opti-
mizing images, videos, code, and content. In this example, less is more.
Design solutions that create more problems than they solve are not successful or 
effective graphic design. But asking how the design solution affects human health 
and well-being, the environment, and economic growth and equality is the first 
step in successful sustainable work. If designers begin by trying to improve the 
triple bottom line through a systems thinking approach (which we will define in 
Chapter 2), mapping out projects will help to visualize where certain choices have 
positive and negative impacts. Then designers can begin to work on creative solu-
tions to transform all of the negative impacts into a net positive—to renourish. 
This book features case studies describing how professional graphic designers 
developed innovative solutions to address similar scenarios described earlier. 
We’ll look at a variety of industries, not just the sustainable ones already on 
board. But first, in Chapter 2, we will explain the strategy of systems thinking 
and how including this in the design process will create outcomes that improve 
the triple bottom line.
ENDNOTES
	
1.	“The Mid-Holocene ‘Warm Period’” NOAA. August 20, 2008. http://
www.ncdc.noaa.gov/paleo/globalwarming/holocene.html. Accessed July 
23, 2015.

11
Beyond the Bottom Line
	
2.	“Astronomical Theory of Climate Change.” NOAA. April 6, 2009. Web. July 
27, 2015. http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/paleo/milankovitch.html. Accessed 
July 23, 2015.
	
3.	“The Cost of Inaction: Recognizing the Value at Risk from Climate 
Change.” The Economist. July 24, 2015. Web. July 27, 2015. https://www.
eiuperspectives.economist.com/sites/default/files/The%20cost%20of%20
inaction_0.pdf. Accessed on July 27, 2015.
	
4.	“Milton Glaser on Making Design History.” Creative Blog. November 25, 
2009. http://www.creativebloq.com/milton-glaser-making-design-history-​
11094202. Accessed February 20, 2015.
	
5.	 Fogg, BJ, Leslie Marable, Julianne Stanford, and Ellen Tauber. “How Do 
People Evaluate a Web Site’s Credibility?” Risingline. October 29, 2002. https://­
risingline.com/pdf/stanford-web-credibility.pdf. Accessed February 18, 2015.
	
6.	Lawrence, Alex. “Five Customer Retention Tips for Entrepreneurs.” Forbes. 
November 1, 2012. http://www.forbes.com/sites/alexlawrence/2012/11/01/
five-customer-retention-tips-for-entrepreneurs/#11bb158417b0. Accessed 
February 17, 2015.
	
7.	“CO2 Now.” https://www.co2.earth. Accessed February 26, 2015.
	
8.	Trashed. Directed by Bill Kirkos. USA: OXI Productions, 2007. Film. http://
www.trashedmovie.com.
	
9.	“Municipal Solid Waste Generation, Recycling, and Disposal in the United 
States: Facts and Figures for 2012.” US Environmental Protection Agency. 
February 1, 2014. https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-09/­
documents/2012_msw_fs.pdf. Accessed February 18, 2015.
	 10.	“Your Computer’s Lifetime Journey.” National Resource Defense Council. 
November 30, 2011. Accessed February 17, 2015.
	 11.	The Green Press Initiative. n.d. “Impacts on People.” The Green Press 
Initiative. http://www.greenpressinitiative.org/impacts/peopleImpacts.htm
	 12.	Baquero, Carlos. “Peru and COP 20: Among Violence and Forests.” Global 
Rights Blog. November 3, 2014. https://dejusticiablog.com/2014/11/03/peru-
and-cop-20-among-violence-and-forests/. Accessed February 17, 2015. 
	 13.	 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1998. “Tobacco Use Among 
US Racial/Ethnic Minority Groups—African Americans, American Indians 
and Alaska Natives, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders Hispanics: A 
Report of the Surgeon General.” Atlanta, Georgia: US: Department of Health 
and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National 
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on 
Smoking and Health. https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/sgr/1998/
complete_report/pdfs/complete_report.pdf. Accessed February 17, 2015.
	 14.	Miss Representation. Directed by Jennifer Siebel Newsom and Kimberlee 
Acquaro. By Atlas, J., Congdon, J., Dietrich, C., Raskin, J., and Siebel 
Newsom, J. USA: Virgil Films & Entertainment, Netflix, OWN: The Oprah 
Winfrey Network, Roco Films, 2014. Film.
	 15.	Johnson, Bradley. “10 Things You Should Know About the Global Ad 
Market.” Ad Age. December 8, 2013. http://adage.com/article/global-
news/10-things-global-ad-market/245572/. Accessed February 17, 2015.

12
Design to Renourish
	 16.	“Global Ad Spend Grows 3.2% in 2012.” Nielsen. April 11, 2013. http://www.
nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2013/global-ad-spend-grows-3.2-percent-
in-2012.html.
	 17.	Papanek, Victor J. 1985. Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and 
Social Change. 2nd ed., completely rev. Chicago, IL: Academy Chicago.
	 18.	Lane, Christian. www.In.gredients.com. Oct 8, 2010. Web. Oct 10, 2011.
	 19.	McDonough, William, and Michael Braungart. The Upcycle: Beyond 
Sustainability—Designing for Abundance. New York: North Point Press, 
2013. 170.
	 20.	Cook, G., Dowdall, T., Pomerantz, D., and Wang, Y. April 1, 2014. Clicking 
Clean: How Companies are Creating the Green Internet. http://www.
greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/legacy/Global/usa/planet3/PDFs/
clickingclean.pdf. Accessed August 6, 2015.
	 21	 American Chemical Society. “Toward reducing the greenhouse gas 
emissions of the Internet and telecommunications.” ScienceDaily. www.
sciencedaily.com/releases/2013/01/130102140452.htm. Accessed August 6, 
2015.

13
Chapter 2
THE HAWK, THE SQUIRREL, AND 
THE OAK TREE
WHAT IS SYSTEMS THINKING?
For a moment, try to remember your first semester in college. (It wasn’t that long 
ago, was it?) Think about the foundational art and design courses you took that 
term and the vocabulary your instructor covered in the first few weeks to help 
you better understand the worlds of art and design. Most likely you were intro-
duced to the German word Gestalt meaning “the whole is more than the sum of 
its parts” or a “unified whole.” Understanding the concept of Gestalt is a good 
starting point to explore how to think in systems. When we discuss “systems” in 
this book, we are not necessarily referring to what you may have already under-
stood as systems like letterforms in an alphabet or the components of a brand-
ing campaign, but rather to the scientific methodology used in natural sciences 
like biology and ecology. Environmental pioneer John Muir describes this con-
cept most clearly: “When we try to pick out anything by itself we find that it is 
bound fast by a thousand invisible cords that cannot be broken, to everything in 
the universe.”1 In other words, everything is connected on our planet and our 
natural systems depend on balance. So to think in systems, when it comes to our 
profession, it means we approach a design problem by being informed, aware of, 
and influenced by the impacts that our material and vendor choices have on one 
another, the planet, and consequently on ourselves.
The concept of systems thinking isn’t a new idea, but it is an emerging concept in 
the field of graphic design. For the unfamiliar, the description of systems think-
ing might seem unusual at first read and that is understandable since most of us 
have been trained to concentrate our attention on two things—how the design 
piece affects its intended audience and how it impacts the client’s revenues. To 
think in systems also includes those two aspects of the project, but additionally 
it considers: how the work we do is demanding our natural resources?, Where 
and how do we get materials to produce our projects?, Who and what is affected 
by our decisions?, and What will happen to the project after it’s handed over? It 
sounds a bit dizzying, but fret not, we’ll describe some practical ways to work 
in this method a bit later in the chapter. One thing is for sure, this paradigm 
shift in your design process will require a time investment and some more care-
ful and thoughtful planning and discussion with your team, vendors, and cli-
ents. However, the results of working this way will be greatly rewarding and will 
improve the work we do and the world we live in.

14
Design to Renourish
That is a pretty grand statement. Let’s investigate a small example to better 
explain how thinking in systems can improve the work we do. Historically, a 
graphic design problem is addressed in isolation that usually just considers the 
audience and the outcome. In common design situations, the designer or design 
team is tasked with a pre-determined solution from a client like “design a direct 
mail piece to encourage voting.” Typically, designers would then tackle the 
assignment by looking at a very small set of variables: text and image, paper, and 
a printer. The final format, already decided by the client, may have been chosen 
without first looking at the entire system of issues that cause the low voter turn-
out to begin with. With a systems thinking approach, defined by MIT scientist 
Donella Meadows, the designer and client would visually map out the design 
problem including the elements (people and resources), interconnections (rela-
tionships), and intended purpose (goal) and not solely focus on the tangible 
designed outcome. One would need to expand their view past the printer, paper, 
or mobile app to understand audience relationships, boundaries, values and 
then to natural resources, materials, vendors, distribution, and impacts. Solving 
the problem would require asking questions like: “What motivates citizens to 
vote?”, “Who are the current active voters?”, “How does socioeconomics impact 
the political system?”, and “Who do we need to collaborate with to gain better 
insight?” It might become clear after asking these questions and visualizing that 
system of interactions, that printing thousands of direct mail pieces is not the 
ideal solution for your client for various reasons. It is expensive, time-­consuming, 
and damaging to the environment as a considerable amount of carbon is emitted 
into the atmosphere, and it may not even serve the target audience.
It’s worth noting in this example that at 3%–4% response rate,2 direct mail is 
often not the most effective solution to most design problems. Understanding 
all the project variables, purposes, and impacts can lead to more effective, tar-
geted and responsible design. After asking meaningful questions and collaborat-
ing with the right people, the solution to the voter turnout problem may instead 
involve advocating change to public policies, connecting with an initiative that a 
nonprofit organization has already started in the community, and quite possibly 
developing an awareness campaign that includes alternative solutions such as 
digitally led creative or social media marketing.
The above example may better explain how systems thinking can benefit your 
design process and be a catalyst to improving the triple bottom line, but as visual 
people, what does it look like? One way to better visualize how thinking in sys-
tems works would be to imagine a natural food chain from the world of ecology. 
As children, we learned that there are predators and prey where, typically, the 
larger, stronger animal will eat the smaller, weaker one. For instance, a rattle-
snake is nourishment for a red tailed hawk, which in turn would have preyed on 
a gray squirrel that relied on the acorns that dropped from a nearby oak tree. The 
oak tree maintains its own health from the fallen leaves, insects, and mushrooms 
that decompose into the soil around the roots to provide nutrients. These plants 
and animals are affected not only by each other but also by the climate, weather, 

15
The Hawk, the Squirrel, and the Oak Tree
humans, or other animals. They are all interconnected, interdependent, and sus-
tainable without negative human interventions like deforestation, urban sprawl, 
or pollution. They also comprise two important facets of a living system—waste 
equals food (or natural materials that continuously help another part of the sys-
tem) and a living cycle (a circular process that repeats). In fact, a food chain, like 
the one mentioned above, is part of a larger food web which is just one small 
section of a much larger network that makes up an ecosystem. The world is defi-
nitely complex. From cells to insects, from animals to plants, from humans to 
machines, and everything in between are connected. When the same food chain 
analogy is applied to graphic design, the potential and real impacts that cer-
tain decisions have on the world around us become clear. For instance, a more 
responsible choice in something as seemingly simple as a paper selection could 
prevent unneeded carbon emissions, keep jobs in a community, and even save 
cute furry animals (Figure 2.1).
GRAPHIC DESIGN IS MORE THAN THE 
SUM OF ITS PARTS
The graphic design profession is in itself an ecosystem. Obviously, designers 
rely on clients to provide paying projects, while clients depend on a graphic 
designer’s creative and strategic expertise to resolve their communication and 
business needs. Besides that first level of interaction, there are many other col-
laborators whom you may rely on to help produce and deliver your projects and 
Figure 2.1  A sample biological system.

16
Design to Renourish
who in turn rely on you to continue to send them work. These partners include 
photographers, illustrators, writers, consultants, printers, paper manufacturers, 
developers, hosting providers, and so on—all those connected to the profession 
of graphic design and involved at various degrees. It doesn’t stop there.
At the beginning of this chapter, we asked you to think back to your first design 
foundation class and recall the term Gestalt. Again, we’ll use your design educa-
tion as a means to better understand how systems affect us as graphic designers 
and also how it affects the world around us. In school, it’s very likely you learned 
about two prolific designers, Charles and Ray Eames. This couple creatively and 
successfully dabbled in everything from graphics, furniture, sound, to film. In 
1977, they released a second version of their film Powers of Ten, which we’ll use 
here as an example to go deeper into the interconnected systems of the graphic 
design profession. Powers of Ten broke down the audience’s understanding of the 
universe into factors of ten through zooming in and out of our bodies, world, 
and universe. The movie began with an overhead view of a relaxing picnic in a 
park and zoomed out and upward by a factor of ten to show the incredible size 
and scope of our universe. The film then zoomed back to the picnic and into the 
human body to microscopic scale.
Let’s apply the powers of ten on the paper supply chain from the forest to the 
consumer as a means to show the complexity of the systems that design affects 
and that affect us. The paper used in design projects today predominantly comes 
from trees. The forest then is the starting point of the “paper trail” which becomes 
the magazines, books, and other print material that is created. When looking at 
the forest from a surface level, it can be seen solely as an input (wood) into the 
economy within the system. This economic input is based on the concepts of 
both stock and flows. They are two very important ideas to understand systems in 
general. In this logging scenario, the trees are called a “stock” or the resource that 
you can count and measure, while its movement in or out of the system (forest) 
is called the “flow.” To keep this system sustainable (or a living cycle), one would 
have to ensure that the input flow of new trees (combined with overall individual 
tree growth) is equal to the output flow of trees being cut down (wood) or leaving 
the “stock.” Currently, in the logging industry (and many other industries that 
graphic design relies upon), this system is not sustainable and is in fact ­broken. 
With a regrowth rate of thirty to a hundred years, the input flow (new trees) 
is not fast enough to match the current demands of the output flow (logging), 
which effectively means the demand exceeds the supply. In addition, as trees 
increase in age and size, the more carbon they continue to sequester. A newly 
planted tree, no matter how fast it may grow, would not, in the near future, catch 
up with the carbon sequestering capabilities of a more mature tree. The stock and 
flow of logging in our current system are unsustainable (Figure 2.2).
Zooming into this flow you can see that equipment is required to cut down a tree, 
and the machinery to be manufactured requires natural resources (e.g., metal). 
All of that metal needs to be mined or purchased from recyclers, then shipped, 

17
The Hawk, the Squirrel, and the Oak Tree
processed, shipped again, manufactured, and shipped once more to a store or 
warehouse. All of these steps require energy, resources, money, and ­people. 
Unfortunately, as it currently stands, most energy production requires fossil 
fuels, which are in limited supply and difficult to acquire. Because this planet is 
of a specific measurable size, the resources available can be quantified as well. In 
other words, there is a limit to what is available and, in the current way of work-
ing, people are using more than the planet will be able to provide. As many of us 
have learned from managing a monthly budget, if we spend significantly more 
than what we earn, the likelihood of going into debt is quite high, and it will 
take months to years of cutting back to replenish the accounts. The same holds 
true for the planet’s natural resources and the economy they provide for. Society 
can’t grow economically forever while voraciously subtracting resources from 
the assets side of the balance sheet. This again is the basics of a systems stock 
and flow where the goal instead should be creating a living or circular cycle of 
consumption and regrowth (or renourish). According to environmental analyst 
Lester Brown, humans already demand that the planet regenerates its natural 
resources by 30% more than what is possible.3 This is unsustainable.
Zoom in again on the forest and you can see the people involved: the employ-
ees at the logging and paper companies and quite possibly indigenous people 
to the area. Notice that the workers are employed (hopefully happily) by a com-
pany and are paid wages for their efforts. Optimistically, they make a living wage 
to cover their bills, are treated fairly, and are guaranteed some level of safety at 
work, which means they are given proper safety equipment (hard hats and cloth-
ing) that protect them from the weather and their working environment and are 
allowed time to take a break, relax, and eat. All of this food and equipment are 
also produced, sold, and delivered to stores and finally to the worker for con-
sumption. As you can see, the economy and the interconnected components of 
the graphic design profession alone are complex.
Before we leave this example, however, zoom in a couple more times in the for-
est when the trees are being cut down. When a gas-powered saw or vehicle is 
turned on or when a tree falls, carbon dioxide is released into the atmosphere. 
This contributes to the already large amounts of greenhouse gases floating in the 
air and one of their impacts: global warming. Furthermore, each tree is home to 
Outflow: Logging
Flow
Stock: Forest
Inflow: Tree growth
Figure 2.2  Basic stock and flow of a forest.

18
Design to Renourish
other biological ecosystems of mammals, birds, amphibians, insects, and fungi. 
From our chapter title, the squirrel and the hawk, like other animals, rely on 
trees for shelter and food. Losing their homes means they must adapt or perish. 
Trees, besides most importantly producing oxygen we need to breathe, are also 
important to slow erosion, clean the air and soil, absorb carbon dioxide, and pro-
tect and shelter other fauna and flora in the forest. Paper manufacturers and the 
lumber industry in general find themselves under great economic, governmental, 
or social pressure to mitigate the negative impacts caused by logging practices. 
In response, many of these organizations affiliate with third-party forestry certi-
fication programs like the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) or The Programme 
for the Endorsement of Forest Certification (PEFC) and engage in more sustain-
able forestry practices to balance consumer demand with preserving a healthy 
forest. Paper companies have had various levels of success globally in improving 
old practices in North America and Europe but have made only mixed progress 
in Asia, Africa, and South America.
To remedy past mistakes, many in the paper industry have also adopted sustain-
ability principles that include protecting old growth trees, avoiding clear cutting, 
and the planting of new trees—but not necessarily the same species of tree that 
was cut down. This is an issue that can create problems for the ecosystem where 
the original tree once stood. Not all trees are created equal when it comes to who 
they best provide shelter and food for. So even tree planting, as necessary as it is, 
needs to be thought about in systems as well. Biodiversity is another key compo-
nent of a living system.
Beyond the forest, there are other components of the paper supply chain: pulp-
ing, printing, distribution, use, and disposal with impacts and various levels of 
complexity in each step. Even digital design has some of the same components 
of the paper system like distribution, use, and disposal but is unique in other 
ways. There are the server farms that require great amounts of energy to run the 
machines that hold their petabytes of data. Energy is also used in manufacturing 
these machines. And don’t forget the world of digital crosses paths with the realm 
of paper quite often. Designers rely on laptops and desktops to design things that 
will be printed, hosted, or cut from other materials like plastics and wood. The 
files are transferred through FTP or other cloud services to commercial printers 
who then use large digital or offset machines to print on the paper a designer has 
chosen. People also print information from the web which can be less wasteful if 
an efficient way to print is designed into the process.
After we zoom in to see the sum of its parts, the field of graphic design is clearly 
much bigger (and always expanding) than what’s visible at first glance. So design-
ers must look deeper because there can be a disconnect between the chosen 
materials and their place of origin. The journey from natural resource extraction 
through manufacturing and delivery of the final product is not as transparent as 
it should be. Much of what happens before that paper (or other material) is deliv-
ered is hidden from view. However knowing where the materials come from, how 

19
The Hawk, the Squirrel, and the Oak Tree
they’re made, and how they get from there to here will help designers develop a 
more responsible and ethical outcome.
SYSTEMS THINKING STRATEGIES
So what basic strategies can be used to quickly begin using systems thinking 
in the design practice? To begin, let’s revisit design education and visualize the 
design process as a simple inverted pyramid divided into four parts (Figure 2.3). 
Historically, the focus in this process is to connect with the audience(s) and recog-
nize the goals of the client. In the 2002 book Cradle to Cradle, architect William 
McDonough and chemist Michael Braungart describe this practice of designing 
and manufacturing as “...focused on making a product and getting it to a cus-
tomer quickly and cheaply without considering much else.”4 Learning from what 
we’ve covered so far in this book, this aspect of the design process needs to shift 
to improve the triple bottom line and renourish what is taken away. However, 
the “inverted pyramid” design process does not need to be drastically altered or 
scrapped altogether. Instead, the standard four phases (research, ideation, refine-
ment, and delivery) can remain but the funnel form (pyramid) is converted into a 
more woven circular structure. In this new shape, each phase informs one another 
and is interdependent on the one that is before or after. Despite keeping similar 
phases, the process works differently. Systems thinking suggests using what Fritjof 
Capra calls the “language of nature” as a model to look backward, forward, and 
dig deeper into a past project or phase for guidance. In other words, as design-
ers, we must better understand how biological systems work and follow their lead 
in our decision-making processes. This is called biomimicry where designers use 
nature as a guide to create. In systems thinking, biomimicry is deeply embedded 
in the entire process of designing artifacts that follow a living cycle of balanced 
stocks (resources) and flows (manufacture and regrowth).
But how is designing in systems different in its process within this woven circular 
model? Designing using systems thinking is most successful when there is a clear 
project goal and you understand the relationships of the elements and connected 
impacts within the systems. So, instead of using only the inverted pyramid 
Ideation
Reﬁnement
Delivery
Research and
brainstorming
Figure 2.3  The inverted pyramid design process.

20
Design to Renourish
design approach, the systems design process involves four interlaced steps: deter-
mine project goals, map out the design problem, brainstorm design outcomes, 
and finally evaluate each possible project outcome. Compare that to the inverted 
pyramid and you can see that researching, ideating, refining, and delivering are 
all still part of our daily work, however renamed and integrated into a more cycli-
cal and woven process. This new shape allows designers to work forward and 
backward (Figure 2.4), weaving in and out rather than in a linear progression as 
new developments and advancements in one area may affect and inform previ-
ously mapped out ideas and information in another. Working this way will allow 
for the concept and project to evolve holistically. Similar to the Powers of Ten, 
zooming into each element and relationship will help determine the impacts and 
potential for success when it comes to a more sustainable outcome.
Determine project goals
This is the first crucial step to design in systems successfully. Here, the team 
determines the purpose of the project and eventually what it affects and how it 
will have impact. Without the collective comprehension of what the client truly 
needs, we all know, the results can miss the mark and be ineffective in achieving 
project goals as in the previous direct mail example. In meetings with the client, 
the initial conversation should not be about the solution or what is being made, 
but instead about understanding the needs, desires, and values of the audience(s). 
What is the problem to be solved? It’s also important to identify past successes, 
pitfalls, and establish a means to measure each. Does this “conversation map-
ping” take up more time in the design process? It may or may not depending 
on the complexity of the project and to what extent the team is already in the 
research and discovery phase of their design process. You may find that the 
process consumes more time initially, but it results in an effective outcome that 
eliminates the need for a time-consuming and costly secondary solution or “fix.”
Determine
project goals
Map out the
design problem
Brainstorm
design outcomes
Evaluate each
possible project outcome
Figure 2.4  Systems thinking process.

21
The Hawk, the Squirrel, and the Oak Tree
After the client discussion, the designer and the team should have a crystal clear 
idea of what the design problem is and what it is connected to. Usually, the results 
of a client meeting would be in the form of a shared and agreed upon written 
project or creative brief that the audiences’ values and triple bottom line goals—
except with systems thinking, the solution is removed from the document. Doing 
so avoids limiting the design outcome and allows for a much deeper exploration 
of the problem, resulting in creative solutions. Much of what is in this document 
could be very different from what the client wanted going into the conversations. 
Sometimes, changing a client’s perspective on something as supposedly simple 
as a color can be a challenge, so altering the entire scope of a project, one could 
imagine, could be quite a serious undertaking. If needed, even as daunting as this 
task this might be, it’s useful and necessary. As you might have experienced many 
times, client expectations can be unrealistic and unfortunately uninformed. This 
is when it is necessary to switch into your educator hat; it will come in handy 
throughout the phases of a project.
Map out the design problem
After the project brief, it’s important to create a list or map of the design prob-
lems and how the audiences are connected or affected by each. Remember think-
ing in systems is about understanding project impacts holistically and not just 
independently. To start this step, it’s helpful to find a large drawing surface like 
a whiteboard or chalkboard so that multiple people are able to participate easily 
and quickly. You can start simply by listing the design problem(s) on one side 
and the audience(s) in the middle. Draw lines to show connections from design 
problem(s) to an audience. Sticky notes are also useful so that pieces are easily 
repositioned and can be used to write smaller, detailed information. The idea is 
to sketch rapidly, erase, rearrange, brainstorm, and discuss. Using a computer 
to make a systems map is not ideal as this usually requires one person “driving” 
with multiple people acting as “backseat drivers.” Mapping effectively requires 
all hands on deck.
Now you are ready to determine the relationships and boundaries of the audi-
ences in the project. Creating user personas, as often done in User Interface (UI) 
and User Experience (UX) design, can be helpful for keeping the project and 
ideas focused and effective. Involving people from the community where the 
project will be implemented is always the best practice when developing user per-
sonas, but this is not always possible. Often designers rely on market research and 
interviews or information provided by the client. Some customer demographics 
will have overlapping needs and connections despite great differences in culture, 
gender, and geography, which is why creating user personas can help your team 
design to communicate effectively with the correct people.
At this point, you are only mapping the design problem and how the audiences 
are affected (Figure 2.5). In the next phase, solutions and other people are mapped 
into the system like the vendors who will help with implementation. The map will 
be fairly basic at this point in the process; however, more layers and details will be 

22
Design to Renourish
added along the way. The act of creating this map tasks us to look deeper into the 
design problems, who the audiences are, and how they are connected. As visual 
thinkers, designing this map of interconnections will only help designers see the 
beginning of the system more clearly. As you move into the next step, you should 
begin to think about documenting all of these elements in the context where this 
project exists. Could it be in a commercial or community space?, Both?, Will it 
require more partners to help complete?
Brainstorm design outcomes
With the basic systems map containing audiences and design problems in hand, 
it’s time to brainstorm ways to solve the design dilemma. The clear understand-
ing of the project goals, the audience needs, the diversity of the audience’s cul-
tural experiences, and how they are all connected are combined together to 
help you develop possible solutions for improving the triple bottom line. The 
ideal goal again is a living cycle where waste equals food. The beginning part 
of this phase is one we are all are familiar with; what needs to be created and 
why? Should this be print or digital? Both? Some hybrid solution connected 
to a service or something unexpected? The potential solutions you find most 
interesting and effective in solving the design problem should be layered on to 
the systems map.
What does it mean to map solutions? To begin with, define possible physical or 
digital outcomes of each design problem and place it within the system. Here 
again you can connect design problems with outcomes and ask what audience(s) 
would best relate to which solution? In answering that question, connect possible 
Figure 2.5  Basic systems thinking map.

23
The Hawk, the Squirrel, and the Oak Tree
outcomes with audiences and then detail out that relationship(s). For instance, 
think back to the triple bottom line—people, planet, and profit. With each 
potential outcome and connected audience further questions should be asked 
like, “will this outcome be cost effective for the client and audience(s)?” What 
will each solution be made from? Will the materials needed for the outcome 
require shipping or manufacture from overseas? Here, we are focusing on the 
profit component of the triple bottom line and describing how each solution 
can be effective with the systems of audiences and be economically viable as 
well (Figure 2.6). List them out on the map. This step will run smoother with 
color coding. Whether it be sticky notes or markers/pencils, assigning colors 
to connected design problems or audiences as well as differentiating positive 
from negative impacts will help you and your team read the map more easily 
and quickly.
Evaluate each possible project outcome
This is the most detailed and challenging of all the four phases. Again, we will 
need to embrace the concept of the powers of ten. In each of the previous project 
outcomes on the map, it is important now to delve deeper into their impacts out-
side of just the financial or usability ones. Connecting back to the triple bottom 
line, this fourth stage focuses not only on the “planet” component but also on 
“people” and “profit” once environmental impacts are learned. Again, systems 
thinking is not about isolating and exploring one element of a system, instead it’s 
about understanding how the elements in the project are interconnected and why. 
Figure 2.6  More detailed systems thinking map.

24
Design to Renourish
The woven circle model is a nice visual to describe systems thinking when it 
comes to design. Despite a phased-based design process, while thinking in sys-
tems, we are most importantly “weaving” back and forth between the phases as 
much as we are zooming into the details to better understand what project out-
come will best benefit the client and have the most positive effects on the triple 
bottom line. It may be necessary to revisit and modify previous decisions after 
making discoveries in these later steps.
With each potential project outcome that was determined in the previous phase, 
you defined the basic materials needed and how each part of the project will 
impact the audience(s). In this phase, the team must now resolve how the mate-
rial choices will have effects on the environment. List the materials you plan to 
use (plastic(s), paper, paperboard, etc.) for each outcome and dig into where and 
how they are manufactured. In this research, you should also choose vendors and 
know their locations to add to the map (Figure 2.7).
Obviously, the integral part of material choice is where it is sourced from, its 
impact, and overall sustainability. Graphic designers should aim here to choose 
Figure 2.7  Final systems thinking map.

25
The Hawk, the Squirrel, and the Oak Tree
vendors located close to one another (if something is being manufactured), near 
distribution centers, that use renewable energy, have trusted social and environ-
mental certifications, and use post-consumer waste materials. In general, using 
virgin materials (even those which are certified) will have a greater negative 
impact on the air, land, and water than those that are from post-consumer sup-
plies. Post-consumer, agricultural waste, and recycled materials, like paper or 
paperboard, tap into a waste stream and prevent discarded paper and other 
materials from heading to the landfill, require less energy and water to manufac-
ture, emit less greenhouse gases in production, and help in the effort to prevent 
deforestation. In fact, for example, with paper, each ton of 100% recycled fiber 
that ­displaces a ton of virgin fiber saves about 24 trees.5 As part of this decision-
making, ensuring you reduce material usage is always important.
Even more exciting is the idea of collecting agricultural residues (leftover stalks 
of corn, wheat straw, etc., from harvest) to manufacture paper and paper prod-
ucts. If you recall from the Introduction, our goal was to print this book on paper 
made primarily from wheat straw. With these types of papers, designers’ reli-
ance on trees is reduced (needed in our quest to slow global warming), using 
the agricultural waste stream to make a better compostable product instead. It 
is important to note, however, that the bulk of the leftover corn stalks and wheat 
straw is needed by the soil for nutrition (like the oak tree needs its fallen leaves), 
so we cannot take all of this crop residue to fulfill our needs. In a 2006 study by 
the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) on biofuels, it was found 
that up to 30% of the corn stalk remnants could be used without harming the soil 
nutrition.6 It’s a sign again that it’s best to design following our biological systems 
as a guide. As McDonough and Braungart state, “waste equals food.”
To truly quantify the environmental and social impacts of graphic design work 
would require a life cycle analysis (LCA). Performing a LCA requires money, time, 
and outside scientific partners. This is not something designers are necessarily 
trained to do or have the equipment to do quickly, but it is recommended and hope-
fully will become accessible to all designers in the near future. However, in gen-
eral, designing to minimize material, waste, distance traveled for distribution, and 
working with vendors that utilize renewable energy will reduce negative impacts. 
Those are basic strategies to remember but not the only ones to keep top of mind. 
Beyond specifying alternative, recycled, or post-consumer waste materials there 
are a number of different yet connected variables need to be explored. How can you 
reduce material use and design efficiently to maximize the materials you are using? 
Where are the vendors located? Are these vendors close to the resources being used 
in the project and to the distribution centers to cut back on the transportation 
emissions? Zooming into the systems map here allows for a look into these smaller 
but important connections which really do make a great impact on the planet.
For instance, it may be cheaper to print or purchase materials internationally 
instead of regionally, but besides the short-term economic benefits, what are the 
other long-term impacts? By using systems thinking, it becomes clear that there 

26
Design to Renourish
can be greater greenhouse gas emissions in shipping/distribution and less environ-
mental and social oversights to the final outcome. This is not desirable. There are 
more stringent and significant standards and certifications that North American 
and European printers must adhere to in comparison with some other countries. 
These standards and certifications help ensure fair wage and safety practices for 
their employees. This is not insinuating that every non-Western vendor doesn’t care 
for or pay fair wages to their workers, but certifications like Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration (OSHA), International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO), Better Business Bureau (BBB), B Corporation, and the Consumer Product 
Safety Commission (CPSC) guarantee legal and measurable benefits to employees, 
and these certifications are found more regularly in North America and Europe. 
Sustainability is also about justice. Clean air, water, and land combined with safe 
working conditions and equitable wage practices will create a thriving system. 
In nature, when there are more hawks than squirrels, there is less food and conse-
quently a disruption in the food chain which creates inequity and, in turn, starva-
tion. Comparably, less regulations on safety will lead to accidents, health hazards, 
worker frustration, and potentially protests creating a public relations nightmare 
and leading to economic disruption for the company. Respecting and emulating 
biological systems are the best ways to operate, and supporting vendors that use 
fair practices is ideal for healthy people, planet, and economy.
When zooming in on the impacts to the triple bottom line of each possible proj-
ect outcome, it is very likely you will stumble upon questions that you are unable 
to answer. For example, in the process of writing and planning for the ­production 
for this book, we also ran into moments where we were lost for answers. To rem-
edy this, we called in experts on paper, printing, and the environment. Thinking 
in systems means understanding the design problem as a whole and this includes, 
of  course, connecting with our collaborators. By reaching out to people who 
knew more than us on environmental policies, printing, and energy, we were able 
to present solutions to our design problems with this book and work toward the 
most responsible production approach possible. This strategy is imperative with 
implementing systems thinking effectively in one’s work. Designers cannot be 
experts in everything; therefore, it is wise to seek out specialists when researching 
materials and processes whenever necessary. Designers are not going to change 
the paradigm alone—allies and partners must do so together. However, it is true 
that individually each designer can make positive impacts with more informed 
and responsible decisions.
It is also important to note that by taking a deeper look into the system, problems 
can be located before they happen. Through the sharing of knowledge and ide-
ation through collaboration, graphic designers can work to develop effective, sus-
tainable solutions appropriate to the culture and environment in which projects 
will be implemented. Just like with the Gestalt theory we referred to earlier, any 
impact on one part of a design impacts the whole; it’s important to be mindful 
of how the impacts from a single decision affect other parts of the system from 
the people in the supply chain, to the animal habitats affected by the materials 

27
The Hawk, the Squirrel, and the Oak Tree
sourcing, to the financial limitations of the intended consumer. A decision on any 
part of a design requires that a balance process be in place for all other affected 
parts. The question of “which option meets the client’s needs while having the 
­greatest positive impacts?” is one that should be asked at all times during this 
fourth phase using your increasingly complex looking map of elements, interac-
tions, and outcomes as your guide.
GROWING FORWARD
This augmentation to the design process we present is a practice, like your own 
interests and techniques, in a state of growth and flux. We recognize the need 
for and encourage further experimentation with systems thinking strategies 
within this profession we care so much about. One aspect which needs more 
thought is that of “giving back” or “to renourish” during and after this design 
process. In our earlier examples in this chapter, we described methods to reduce 
the impact but not improve the world around us through design. This is clearly 
something that must be done considering the rate at which society is gobbling up 
natural resources and exacerbating the current and future negative impacts of 
global warming. Not cutting down trees, switching to a waste stream of agricul-
tural fibers for paper, and using renewable energy can be net zero activities, but 
a net positive activity is very much necessary. William McDonough and Michael 
Braungart call this the “upcycle” or adding “...value by transforming or reinvent-
ing an otherwise-disposable item into something of higher quality.”7 Planting 
considerably more trees than what is used; improving living conditions and 
socioeconomic standings; and restoring air, water, and soil to cleaner states are 
all examples of renourishing our world. However, currently, this way of creating 
is not taught in most schools (K-12 and higher education) or practiced consis-
tently within the corporate world. Instead, how humanity lives on the planet is in 
stark contrast to this model of renourishing.
It is our hope that by better understanding and embracing how the biological 
systems of the planet operate, change can be brought about in how people live 
and design. Making decisions to reduce impact is good; however, what has been 
damaged by our collective actions must be repaired. To think in systems means 
acknowledging that humans are only a small part of the huge web of life and 
depend on nature’s fruits for the freedoms they need and enjoy. In other words, 
we see ourselves not only as designers but also as human beings reliant on a much 
larger natural series of connected systems. “Seeing the whole” is the only ethical 
and just strategy for designing going forward. Patrice Martin from IDEO.org 
agrees, “(d)esign can change the world because it gets us to new answers and we 
desperately need new answers.”8 We urge you to seek new answers—to go outside 
and observe for yourself. You’ll be surprised by the inspiration everywhere when 
you stop to not just smell but watch the roses. In the next sections of the book, 
we will see some inspiring, in-depth graphic design case studies that use systems 
thinking for sustainable results.

28
Design to Renourish
ENDNOTES
	
1.	Muir, John. My First Summer in the Sierra. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin, 
1911. 110.
	
2.	“Response Rate 2012 Report: Data to Benchmark All Your Marketing 
Campaigns.” Direct Marketing Association. January 1, 2012. Accessed 
February 26, 2015.
	
3.	Brown, Lester. “Selling Our Future.” In Plan B 4.0: Mobilizing to Save 
Civilization, 15. New York: W. W. Norton, 2009.
	
4.	McDonough, William, and Michael Braungart. Cradle to Cradle: Remaking 
the Way We Make Things. New York: North Point Press, 2002. 26.
	
5.	Depending, of course, on the size of the tree. Kinsella, Susan. “Paperwork: 
Comparing Recycled to Virgin Paper.” Environmental Paper Network. 
April 1, 2002. http://environmentalpaper.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/
Paperwork.pdf. Accessed February 12, 2015.
	
6.	Andrews, Susan. “Crop Residue Removal for Biomass Energy 
Production: Effects on Soils and Recommendations.” USDA-Natural 
Resource Conservation Service. February 22, 2006. http://www.​nrcs.
usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/nrcs142p2_053255.pdf. 
Accessed February 12, 2015.
	
7.	McDonough, William, and Michael Braungart. The Upcycle: Beyond 
Sustainability—Designing for Abundance. New York: North Point Press, 
2013.
	
8.	 “The Human Center of Design: In Conversation with IDEO.org’s Patrice 
Martin.” Impact Design Hub. July 08, 2015. https://impactdesignhub.
org/2015/07/08/human-center-of-design-ideoorg-patrice-martin/#c77-blog.

29
Chapter 3
A CLEAR PICTURE
When we were planning this book, we came across several publications, case stud-
ies, and articles with examples of finished and theoretical design projects but found 
very little transparency with regard to how the case studies were chosen. This was 
somewhat surprising. Today, everything from business practices to personal behav-
ior is open to public scrutiny, especially on social media, which provide everyone a 
voice and a platform (for better or for worse). Organizations must now more than 
ever be transparent and ethical as these qualities are essential for fair business and 
for building trust. Go search #greenwashing on Twitter and you will scroll through 
countless instances where companies are publicly called out for dishonest declara-
tions of corporate responsibility. Graphic designers, of course, have a part to play 
in that. Designers and businesses must demonstrate trust together by providing 
the details of the safety, environmental impact, and benefits of the project to the 
users. We wanted to promote this principle, and knew you would be curious, so we 
included our set of selection criteria for all case studies featured in this book.
The questions we asked each designer or team are a part of our process for design-
ing using systems thinking explained in the previous chapter. For example, we 
wanted to know how the design team guided the project thinking about the triple 
bottom line, the client’s goals, and if there were financial and time constraints. 
We also asked what challenges were faced, how they were overcome, and finally in 
hindsight what could have been done differently to make the outcome even more 
sustainable. In addition to these questions, we also asked what materials were 
used, how waste and energy were minimized or eliminated, and what certifica-
tions the materials and vendors maintained to ensure that the triple bottom line 
was considered throughout the entire supply chain of manufacture and deliv-
ery. These are the same inquiries that we consistently undertake as we approach 
our own work and research, ensuring we exceed best practices and find new and 
innovative ways to incorporate systems thinking. We will wax philosophic about 
this in Chapter 6 of this book, which is inspired by the lessons learned from the 
case studies in Chapter 4.
We also felt that it was extremely important to include case studies that provided 
realistic paths forward to design more sustainably along with details and reflec-
tions from the designers or the team that made it all possible. That type of infor-
mation will serve as the best practices we consistently aim for in our own work 
and present on our site www.re-nourish.org. These methods can be a catalyst 
for increased momentum toward a more sustainable graphic design profession. 
We are always upbeat for a better today and tomorrow when we come across the 
case studies you will see in the next chapters but are frustrated, like many of you, 
about the pace at which the profession is adopting and implementing sustainable 
design practices with clients. Hopefully, these case studies will help speed up 

30
Design to Renourish
that dialogue and practical application. This is one of our many goals in writing 
this book.
Another aspect that we found curiously missing from the case studies in the 
books that came before ours was clear standards for inclusion into the publica-
tion. As interior design and architecture adopted LEED (Leadership in Energy 
and Environmental Design) certification in the mid-1990s as a method to better 
quantify the environmental benefits of building with more sustainable regional 
materials and designing for energy/water efficiency, we felt a similar model 
should be used not only to select the case studies for the book but also for the sus-
tainability of the profession. By using a transparent selection criteria for how the 
case studies were chosen help provide a measurable barometer as to what makes 
a graphic design project more sustainable. That information can be used as the 
starting point to design more responsibly.
A CONFUSION OF CERTIFICATION
Without clear guidelines, how, then, do we determine sustainability in graphic 
design? At times, it can be difficult to judge when one choice is more or less sus-
tainable than another. To confuse things, recent popularity of greener options 
globally has led to “greenwashing,” where misleading or false claims of environ-
mental friendliness have puzzled consumers. The term greenwashing is derived 
from the words “green” (environmentally sound) and “whitewashing” (to conceal 
or gloss over wrongdoing) and is applied when companies or their products are 
marketed to appear more environmentally sound than they really are. This has 
led to skepticism about eco-friendly claims and a dilution of the importance of 
sustainability. Because greenwashing is so prevalent, extra diligence is needed 
during research and decision-making to determine the most responsible materi-
als and vendors. Among the many areas designers should pay close attention, this 
is particularly true when choosing paper.
Although marketed as the most environment-friendly option, recycled tree fiber may 
not always be the ideal choice when it comes to paper (although if you are reading 
a paper version of this book, you are, in fact, holding 30% post-consumer tree fiber. 
And if you skipped over the Introduction (no!), go back and give it a read—we’ve 
spelled out how this book was made). Although seldom promoted, paper made from 
agricultural residue is the most sustainable option when considering the “ingredi-
ents” alone. This type of paper is made from the unused remains of food crops (like 
wheat) rather than plants specifically grown to make paper ­products (like bamboo). 
The stalks that remain from food crops are often discarded and burned, releasing 
carbon dioxide and creating air pollution. Paper made from agricultural residue can 
reduce both and save trees by replacing wood fiber for making paper.
However, choosing agricultural-residue paper also requires looking at other con-
nected factors. As thinking in systems reveals, there are many considerations 

31
A Clear Picture
when choosing paper, like where the paper is manufactured and how far it needs 
to be shipped. Designers must also take into account where the fiber was har-
vested, if it was bleached, if the paper was manufactured with renewable energy, if 
the company’s employment practices are fair, and how the company impacts the 
surrounding communities or treats its employees. That’s a lot of “ifs” and also a 
dizzying amount of information to research that can be accessible only through 
more corporate transparency. Certifications and standards can be important tools 
in this equation and are helpful to get the entire view of the triple bottom line. 
However, a product or material’s lack of certifications does not always indicate 
that a business is unsustainable or unethical. Applying for certifications can be too 
costly for small businesses even if they have already employed responsible envi-
ronmental and social practices. So however ideal a particular paper may appear, 
sometimes the shipping distance or a company’s treatment of its employees makes 
it a less sustainable choice than the one sourced more regionally or from a com-
pany that pays a living wage. Weighing the options and looking at all the con-
nected concerns help to make more informed decisions for sustainable outcomes.
PRINT VERSUS DIGITAL
We are often asked if digital solutions are more sustainable than print. The answer 
to this question is quite convoluted. Sometimes, it is best to create a digital out-
come, while other times, printing may be more effective in communicating the 
message. Considerations for choosing the right medium depend on the audience, 
participants, distribution area, materials, and vendors. Digital-only solutions, 
although they reduce paper use and transportation, may not be the ideal choice 
if the hosting company or data farm is powered by fossil fuels or conducts unfair 
labor practices for example.
The computers and other electronics necessary for digital work also become 
an environmental and human health hazard at the end of their lifecycles. It is 
­important to point out that this same problem exists in print design. Graphic 
designers use digital devices in the process of developing printed outcomes. 
Large- and small-scale printers, desktop and laptop computers, scanners, and dig-
ital cameras also end up in the landfill or are exported for dangerous disassembly 
overseas. Whether the end result is print or digital, hours are spent researching 
online, creating mockups, e-mailing, writing, sending files, and working in the 
cloud. Whether or not the work is finished at the digital stage, or the files are sent 
off to a printer, working on screen is embedded in almost all of graphic design. 
It’s critical when deciding between digital and print to look at the entire system 
in which your piece will live and die. Mapping out all the possible solutions and 
connected impacts is the best process to determine what to implement and why.
Digital or print, sustainable graphic design goes beyond a material choice or a 
web hosting decision. It must take into consideration all the places where project 
decisions make an impact, and instead of trying to only mitigate the negative 

32
Design to Renourish
impacts, design can be produced to have a positive, nourishing effect on the 
­environment, people, and the economy. This is sustainable graphic design and 
what the profession should ideally strive for.
OUR STANDARDS
Through research of industry and environmental statistics and trends, we devel-
oped a set of standards for Re-nourish that we used to judge the credibility 
of the case study submissions for this book. Most importantly, our standards 
imply that prior to the launch of any design project all the players involved spend 
time thinking about the triple bottom line and the impacts of their decisions. 
The standards on our site are not a certification by any means, instead a logical 
set of tiered benchmarks for continued improvement toward a triple bottom line 
approach to graphic design. With this assurance that specific criteria have been 
met and verified, designers can have the power to demonstrate sustainability 
efforts, facilitating the implementation of more sustainable design practices to 
clients and throughout the industry.
We not only used these standards as the goal but also accepted specific case stud-
ies that strived to be as sustainable as possible. The goal of the project should 
not merely be to find a solution that harms less but rather to improve the world 
through its creation. This is a challenging but attainable objective. All together, 
the case studies tell a story—one that is exciting and inspiring for the journey 
forward.
The Re-nourish standards for print/packaging or digital are divided into sec-
tions that detail specifics on materials, production, energy, process, and end-
of-life cycle. On our website, we have subdivided each type of design outcome 
(print or digital) into tiers that mimic the structure used by architects (LEED) 
for ease of understanding and also to help motivate all of us to keep pushing 
toward the highest ideal level of sustainable design. For this book, we didn’t 
categorize each case study using the tier-based system from our site in order 
to flatten the process, instead we chose the projects that reached closest to the 
optimum (tier one).
In our call for case study submissions, we chose the most relevant questions from 
our site’s existing standards questionnaire to build the most interesting story for 
each example. As we believe in full transparency, we have included the full list of 
criteria used to select the case studies in each project outcome category:
Source materials:
•	 The major material components for the project are compostable 
­biodegradable resins, or regional agri-fiber or agricultural residue 
(wheat straw, corn stover, hemp, kenaf, begasse, prairie grasses, etc.), or 
100% recycled material.

33
A Clear Picture
•	 Recyclable, reclaimed, and safer industrial materials (steel, aluminum, 
tin) that can be used for re-manufacture.
•	 Regional to the determined vendors.
•	 Manufactured by renewable energy (or less preferably, with renewable 
energy credits).
•	 Sourcing does not compromise local communities or harm biological 
systems.
Design:
•	 Easily disassembled (for multiple parts).
•	 Recyclable.
•	 No adhesives.
•	 Designed to minimize the amount of materials used (efficient use of the 
press sheet— rightsized and limited print runs).
•	 Minimize tertiary packaging (maximize amount of product shipped at 
once).
•	 Primary and secondary packaging must work together to reduce space 
and materials.
•	 Designed for intentional reuse and end-of-life material recovery or 
compostable.
•	 Digital projects have print-friendly options when applicable.
•	 Digital projects must meet accessibility guidelines as set forth by the 
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) where applicable, like cross-
browser and platform compatibility and ­accessibility (i.e., Alt text for 
images, transcripts for podcasts, closed captions for video/­animation, 
and keyboard input).
•	 Web-based projects minimize file sizes and use optimized and efficient 
coding strategies (HTML, CSS, and JavaScript minification) to reduce 
loading time.
Project messaging:
•	 The project must not impede basic human rights or be designed so as to 
negatively impact the biological environment.
•	 Must not knowingly communicate false claims or untruthful information.
•	 Environmental message (eco-audit or encouragement of reuse/recycle) 
on printed or digital outcome.
Inks:
•	 Vegetable-based inks with low volatile organic compounds.
•	 Less than 30% ink coverage and no bleeds.
•	 No metallic inks or foils, varnishes, laminates, and ultraviolet coatings 
(aqueous coatings, embossing, die cuts, and engravings are acceptable).
Design studio/agency:
•	 Files are transmitted online.
•	 Project is proofed onscreen as much as possible.
•	 Nonvital long distance client meetings are held virtually.
•	 Provides pro-bono work for, or donates to, charitable causes.

34
Design to Renourish
Design studio/agency and vendor practices:
•	 Have formal waste reduction/recycling policies in operation.
•	 Formal eco-preferable purchasing policies in operation.
•	 Pays local living wages and offers employee health insurance and 
benefits.
•	 Offers employee incentives for using public transportation, walking, or 
biking to work.
Design studio/agency and vendor energy and equipment:
•	 Hosting and/or data farms for design studio and client work are pow-
ered by 100% renewable energy (solar, wind, geothermal, etc.).
•	 Office/studio/business is powered by 100% renewable energy (solar, 
wind, geothermal, etc.).
•	 Formal energy reduction policy in operation.
•	 Utilizes equipment that is Energy Star rated (or internationally 
equivalent).
•	 Formal electronics recycling or donation policies in operation.
Note: The following case studies vary in both design process and outcomes, and 
also provide diverse examples in response to the different cultures where the 
projects are based. Where it makes sense, we have included lessons learned and 
areas for further exploration and opportunities. Most importantly, we hope these 
case studies will provide inspiration and serve as invaluable examples of how you 
can realistically incorporate systems thinking to improve the triple bottom line 
in your own upcoming design projects.

35
Chapter 4
CASE STUDIES
MODERN SPECIES: A HALF-BOX, LOCK-
TABS, AND ETHICAL SOURCING
About Modern Species
Modern Species is a sustainable branding 
and graphic design studio helping natural 
and organic product companies move their 
mission forward. We work with passionate 
people, both entrepreneurs and in-house 
teams, to help focus their vision and then 
make their dream a reality with beautiful 
print, packaging, and digital experiences. 
By consistently focusing on the economy, 
environment, and ethics, we’re able to help 
good companies fulfill their brand prom-
ises and increase their positive impact in 
their community and beyond. We do all of 
this because we believe that a more beauti-
ful, functional, and sustainable world is a 
goal worth pursuing.
What were the project goals?
Qet approached Modern Species with an 
idea for a skin care company compris-
ing products made from only the purest, 
freshest organic botanical ingredients. 
PROJECT CREDITS
Modern Species
Seattle, WA, USA
www.modernspecies.com
Creative Director
Gage Mitchell
Designer
Gage Mitchell
Copywriter
Lisa Brill
Copy Editor
Jennifer Stewart
CLIENT
Qet® Botanicals
Cross Plains, WI, USA
www.qetbotanicals.com

36
Design to Renourish
They had a name and most of the product formulas but needed a brand, 
­website, packaging, and sales collateral to get their vision off the napkin and 
into the market. As a small company launching with nearly 40 stock keeping 
units (SKUs), we had to find a way for Qet’s brand and package to make a big 
splash without piling up too much debt. Therefore, sustainability wasn’t only 
important to their ethos, but it also had the potential to stretch their start-up 
budget further, allowing them to launch a full line of products on day one. 
Although the entire project would be great to dissect, this case study will focus 
on the packaging (Figures 4.1 through 4.6).
We worked closely with the founders for about 10 months, first establishing the 
brand platform, setting a goal for the visuals, and then working through the 
design process on each deliverable from concept to launch. At each step, we con-
tinually asked ourselves how the ideas bubbling up might impact the environ-
ment, how it would impact the financial bottom line of the company (and thereby 
the sales price of the products), and how our choices might affect people and 
cultures along the supply chain.
Were the sustainable parameters for this project 
introduced by Qet, Modern Species, or both?
The parameters for the packaging were minimal. We had a basic idea of what 
packaging forms Qet would use and the range of sizes that would fit the 40 SKUs, 
but beyond that, we were all open to letting the right solution be uncovered by the 
design process. Sustainability was a must, of course, and a priority on both sides, 
but how that expressed itself was yet to be determined.
How did you guide Qet to the best possible solution to 
improve the triple bottom line?
After researching the industry and finding a lot of wasted material with exces-
sively large (and often redundant) boxes that held small bottles, we realized that 
Figure 4.1  Qet Botanicals sketches.
Figure 4.2  Qet Botanicals digital 
mock-ups.

37
Case Studies
finding the right label and box system was a great place to focus our sustainability 
efforts. Through a series of conceptual explorations we came up with a range 
of ideas for solving this problem that included ideas like hang tags, unfolding 
labels, and right-sized boxes. One of the ideas we ended up pitching to Qet was 
a half-box that would show off the product and save a ton of money by reducing 
materials and eliminating some of the finishing work and glues. Lisa, the founder 
of Qet, fell in love with the idea and we ended up choosing that direction to push 
forward. Throughout the rest of the process, we worked closely with Qet to make 
triple bottom line decisions like ethical paper sourcing, renewable and renewed 
materials, cost-saving methods of press sheet optimization, and much more.
Figure 4.3  Qet Botanicals product line.
Figure 4.4  Qet Botanicals half-box.

38
Design to Renourish
Figure 4.5  Qet Botanicals half-box.
Figure 4.6  Qet Botanicals product line.

39
Case Studies
What challenges did you encounter when trying to 
design the packaging in the most sustainable way 
possible? How did you overcome those challenges?
We wanted to find a way to eliminate the boxes all together but found there was 
no way to fit all the necessary information on the smaller bottles. We thought 
about a hangtag, but that took up too much shelf space and was practically the 
same size as the smallest bottle. So, instead, we came up with the half-box design 
to wrap around the smaller bottles as a great compromise between all products 
that have full boxes or no boxes at all.
Finding the right half-box design, paper weight, and lock-tab system to elimi-
nate the need for glues and have the box securely fasten onto the bottles was 
a bit of a struggle that we were eventually able to overcome with the help of 
our printer, DCG ONE. We also had to ensure that eliminating the protective 
boxes wouldn’t make bulk shipping too difficult, but Qet found that by reusing 
the boxes that the bottles and jars came in, they were able to ship the products 
safely in bulk.
For the labels, we used TerraSkin, which is a tree-free stone “paper” that requires 
no water to manufacture, would recycle easily with the glass bottles, and holds up 
against the essential oils in the skincare products.
How did you design the packaging to minimize materials?
By taking a strip of paper and die cutting a hole for the neck of the bottle and 
some lock-tabs, we were able to make a “box” that securely wraps around the 
smaller products vertically, giving us the extra label space we needed while show-
ing off the product, reducing material usage, and eliminating the need for glues. 
These half-boxes gang up a press sheet nicely, since they’re simple strips of paper. 
They also ship efficiently since they have no glue and can lay flat. Also, with the 
lock-tabs and bottle neck cut outs, we were able to eliminate the need for adhe-
sives. After purchasing the product, the consumer can either undo the tuck-flaps 
or tear the box away and recycle it with paper.
Which aspect of the project met Qet’s needs while 
having the greatest positive impacts on environmental, 
societal, cultural, and economic sustainability?
Although the entire brand launch was much bigger than just the packaging 
case study we’re outlining here, the solution we came up with allowed Qet to 
launch with a full line of beautifully packaged products on a start-up budget 
and, compared with industry standard (excessive boxes), was able to do so 
with a much smaller environmental footprint. Beyond that, we were able to 
specify materials and vendors that support ethical sourcing and workplace 
conditions.

40
Design to Renourish
Now that the project is 
complete, what would you have 
done differently to make the 
project more sustainable while 
still meeting the client’s goals?
Looking back on the project, we would 
have designed the labels differently to make 
them easier to print since we ended up hav-
ing to reprint (waste of materials) many 
of the labels for quality reasons (the faded 
flower behind the type caused lots of prob-
lems). We would also go back and make the 
recycling instructions on the labels more 
specific to include information about the 
lids, which we now know more about.
What advice do you have 
for designers just starting to 
integrate systems thinking into 
their client work?
My best piece of advice for designers want-
ing to be more sustainable is to be curious. 
Asking yourself, and others, what hap-
pens to a package after the consumer is 
done with it, where and how materials are 
sourced, or how your solution will work at 
scale, for example, is a great way to learn 
where problems exist. Once you know 
where you can make a big impact, you can 
focus your design thinking on those issues 
to find better solutions to difficult prob-
lems. The more you learn about the system 
within which your design solution lives, 
the smarter your designs will be and the 
better you will serve your clients.
Project Details
HALF-BOX PAPER
Mohawk Loop Smooth PC 100
Specs
130# Cover
100% post-consumer waste
Certifications
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
Green Seal
Green-e
Processed chlorine-free (PCF)
LABELS
TerraSkin
Certifications
Cradle to Cradle Silver Certified
BOXES AND STATIONERY 
PRINTER
DCG ONE
Seattle, WA
Certifications, partnerships, 
memberships
FSC
EnviroStar
Green Power Partnership
3Degrees, Green Up
LABELS PRINTER
Richmark Label
Seattle, WA

41
SWERVE DESIGN GROUP: 
COMMUNICATING ACCESSIBILITY
About Swerve Design Group
Swerve Design Group specializes in cre-
ative graphic design and engaging online 
experiences that move people to action. 
Beyond Swerve’s design work, their strate-
gic process navigates a path and strategi-
cally steers clients toward their marketing 
destination.
What were the project goals?
The Environmental Commissioner of 
Ontario (ECO) is the independent envi-
ronmental watchdog of the province. We 
were asked to design a report for them 
that could be printed with high environ-
mental standards and create online ver-
sions to increase access to the reports 
(Figures 4.7 through 4.10).
PROJECT CREDITS
Swerve Design Group
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
www.swervedesign.com
Creative Director
David Johnson
Art Director
Mark Haak
Designers
Mark Haak and David Johnson
CLIENT
Environmental Commissioner 
of Ontario
Ontario, Canada
www.eco.on.ca

42
Design to Renourish
Figure 4.7  Environmental Commissioner of Ontario report cover.
Figure 4.8  Environmental Commissioner of Ontario report interior spread 1.

43
Case Studies
How did you guide ECO to the best possible solution to 
improve the triple bottom line?
The original scope of the project was to design a printed report and create a 
downloadable PDF for their website, but we identified an opportunity to make 
the report more accessible and encourage ECO to print less reports in the future 
by creating ePub versions optimized by tablet/mobile phone.
What challenges did Swerve encounter when trying to 
design the project in the most sustainable way possible? 
How did you overcome those challenges?
The report has a lot of content, so it required a lot of pages to print. We worked 
to keep the page count as low as possible while still keeping the font sizes legible. 
We also printed separate English and French reports instead of combining them 
into one document so that we could reduce the print run by having a smaller run 
for the French version which had a smaller audience than the English version.
How did the Swerve Design Group design the printed and 
digital report to minimize the use of resources?
We suggested the client consider ePub versions as a way to test the accessibility of 
the report with a future goal in mind to move away from printing the publication 
and go completely digital, if possible. In the print design, we set suitable mar-
gins, font sizes, and page layouts to minimize the number of pages that needed 
to be printed. The printing itself was done in the most environment-friendly way 
we could to save resources. The project was printed on Canadian-made Rolland 
Enviro 100 paper. Rolland Enviro 100 is made entirely from recycled paper fiber 
which saves the harvesting of mature trees, reduces solid waste that would have 
Figure 4.9  Environmental Commissioner of Ontario report interior spread 2.

44
Design to Renourish
gone into landfills, uses 80% less water, resulting in less air and water pollu-
tion than conventional paper manufacturing. Rolland Enviro 100 is also made 
with biogas energy which is an alternative “green energy” source produced from 
decomposing waste collected from landfill sites.
Which aspect of the project met the ECO’s needs while 
having the greatest positive impacts on environmental, 
societal, cultural, and economic sustainability?
The project was a huge success. The paper was sourced locally and FSC certified, 
processed chlorine-free with 100% post-consumer waste fiber, and manufactured 
with biogas energy. We also included paper-free ePub versions for interactive 
online viewing on iPads and other tablets and mobile phones. This allowed us 
to increase the reach of the publication without printing any additional reports 
and gave us the ability to monitor the success of the ePub version to help ECO 
Figure 4.10  Environmental Commissioner of Ontario digital report.

45
Case Studies
move toward printing less reports in future 
years. We also recommended using Adobe 
InCopy for a more collaborative approach 
to editing copy and approvals which they 
now use as a standard on all their report 
processes.
Now that the project is 
complete, what would you have 
done differently to make the 
project more sustainable while 
still meeting the client’s goals?
We would love to see the report go entirely 
digital.
What advice do you have 
for designers just starting to 
integrate systems thinking into 
their client work?
Think about the big picture—what is the 
primary goal and what is the best way to 
communicate that goal? What formats 
can we use that will use the least amount 
of resources? Are there better approaches 
to take? Question everything, challenge 
existing processes, and explore the best 
solutions to reach those goals.
Project Details
PAPER
Rolland Enviro 100
Specs
100% post-consumer waste
Made with biogas energy
Certifications
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
Processed chlorine-free
EcoLogo
PRINTER
Warren’s Waterless Printing
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Certifications, partnerships, 
memberships
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
Ontario Environmental Leaders
ISO 14001
EcoLogo Environmental Choice 
Programs

46
STUDIO EMMI: ENVIRONMENTAL 
GRAPHICS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL 
SUSTAINABILITY
About Studio EMMI
EMMI set up her graphic design prac-
tice Studio EMMI in 2005. Studio 
EMMI designs identities, websites, cata-
logs, books, and environmental graph-
ics. Over the years, we have developed 
a strong track record and a long list of 
happy clients from the worlds of art, 
culture, commerce, and academia. Said 
clients come in all shapes and sizes, but 
they are all brands with vitality, passion, 
and direction.
Studio EMMI has always had a keen 
interest in environmentally sound solu-
tions. Besides designing, EMMI teaches 
at various UK universities and lectures 
regularly nationwide. She is the author of 
the book Common Interest: Documents 
and contributes to industry magazines 
on request (Figures 4.11 through 4.16).
PROJECT CREDITS
Studio EMMI
London, UK
www.emmi.co.uk
Creative Director
Emmi Salonen
Designers
Emmi Salonen
CLIENT
Contemporary Art Archipelago
Turku Archipelago, Finland
www.contemporaryartarchipelago.fi

47
Case Studies
What were the project goals?
The Contemporary Art Archipelago (CAA) exhibition consists of over 20 new, 
site-specific artworks and events realized in the Turku Archipelago in Finland by 
international and local artists during the Summer of 2011, between June 18 and 
September 30. CAA is encountered from cruise ships, small boats, along roads, 
virtually, on a remote islet, in the sea, on the airwaves, on the ferries, or even in 
a private home. The theme of the exhibition was the archipelago and its future as 
Figure  4.11  Identity in use on the leaflet covers—English and Finnish leaflets. 
(Courtesy of Jere Salonen.)
Figure  4.12  Outdoor signage, caption for the site-specific art work. (Courtesy of 
Stefan Crämer.)

48
Design to Renourish
a unique yet changing environment and mode of life. The context of the Baltic 
Sea was strongly present, yet CAA reflects the specificities of Turku Archipelago 
also against other similar environments and global changes. The artists exam-
ine, among others, alternative island lifestyles and livelihoods, transformations 
in ecological and cultural diversity, as well as desires projected onto islands and 
across the sea.
We were asked to create the overall identity and graphics for CAA. The identity 
spoke to art being entwined with its environment—the archipelago. The deliv-
erables included identity, website, leaflets, posters, signage, maps, captions, ads, 
and a book.
Figure  4.13  Leaflet inner layout, showing minimal use of color. (Courtesy of Jere 
Salonen.)
Figure 4.14  CAA location map, information graphics. (Courtesy of Stefan Crämer.)

49
Case Studies
Figure 4.15  Stationery design. (Courtesy of Jere Salonen.)
Figure 4.16  Outdoor sign, location mark. (Courtesy of Stefan Crämer.)

50
Design to Renourish
Were the sustainable parameters for this project 
introduced by CAA, Studio EMMI, or both?
We both together developed the sustainability parameters for this exciting 
project.
How did you guide CAA to the best possible solution to 
improve the triple bottom line?
In this project, the client was very keen to make everything as sustainable and 
environmentally friendly as possible in order to reflect the overall ethos of the art 
exhibition and commissions. We were lucky to have a wonderful client who did 
not need much guidance toward a more sustainable outcome.
What challenges did you encounter when trying to design 
the exhibition in the most sustainable way possible? How 
did you overcome those challenges?
The biggest challenge was that each leaflet and connected item had to be in three 
different languages: Finnish, Swedish, and English. With the leaflets, for exam-
ple, we needed more copies of the Finnish version, and less than half in Swedish 
and English. So to save on ink and materials in general, all text was printed in 
black, allowing us to print all of them first, maps and images, and then adding the 
three different language texts last.
How did you design the packaging to minimize materials?
There was no packaging as such. But the size of the signage was designed to get 
the maximum use of a sheet of wood, while maintaining the visibility of the 
roadside signage.
Which aspect of the project met the needs of CCA while 
having the greatest positive impacts on environmental, 
societal, cultural, and economic sustainability?
The suitability of the design solution and the importance of its functionality for 
the end user will always take priority over purely decorative elements. While the 
outdoor signage didn’t have a sparkly new look, its rustic feel fitted to the envi-
ronment and could be used as firewood afterward in the many saunas located in 
the area.
Now that the project is complete, what would you have 
done differently to make the project more sustainable 
while still meeting the client’s goals?
It would have been ideal to find a local printer to run the whole job but unfor-
tunately due to budget and lack of suitable paper, we had the identity stationery 
printed in the United Kingdom and the leaflets printed in Estonia.

51
Case Studies
The CAA book was published in late 2015. 
It will be an online document only, pre-
venting further print waste and use of 
material.
What advice do you have 
for designers just starting to 
integrate systems thinking into 
their client work?
Be clear about your goals and reasons. 
Find out what really matters to the client 
(not just what they have requested in the 
brief). Let these things influence you and 
your thought process in realizing the final 
outcome. Don’t get too stuck on thinking 
design has to take a certain shape or form 
because it is exhibition design, information 
design, or anything else you would typi-
cally create.
Project Details
PAPER
Context White by Paperback 
Co-op
Specs
100gsm
75% post-consumer waste/​
25% FSC-endorsed pulp
Certifications
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
NAPM Approved
SIGNAGE
Wood (after exhibition reused 
as firewood)
Certification 
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
PRINTERS
Geoff Neal Lithography
Middlesex, UK
Certifications, partnerships, 
memberships
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
Carbon neutral
ISO 9001 and ISO 14001
K-Print OÜ
Tallinn, Estonia
Certifications, partnerships, 
memberships
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
Programme for the Endorsement 
of Forest Certification (PEFC)

52
THE CANARY PROJECT: A MULTI-USE 
BOOK
About The Canary Project
The Canary Project is an art, design, and 
media studio dedicated to deepening the 
understanding of ecology. Originally 
founded in 2006 as a project to photo-
graph landscapes throughout the world 
where scientists are studying the impacts 
of climate change, we have since supported 
diverse projects involving more than 100 
artists, designers, writers, educators, and 
scientists.
Our focus is on cultivating research-­intensive 
projects that contribute to knowledge build-
ing and are able to communicate that knowl-
edge in a way that both respects complexity 
and inspires respect for life.
PROJECT CREDITS
The Canary Project
New York, NY
www.canary-project.org
Designers
Edward Morris and 
Dmitri Siegel
CLIENT
Metropolis Books
New York, NY
www.metropolisbooks.com

53
Case Studies
What is this project 
about and what were 
the project goals?
Green Patriot Posters (Figure  4.17 
through 4.22) is a multi-channel 
campaign centered on posters that 
encourage all US citizens to take part 
in building a sustainable economy. It 
was started in 2008 and is still ongo-
ing. Our goal is to invigorate the sus-
tainability movement with images 
of strength, urgency, optimism, and 
unity. We want the movement to 
connect with culture in a way that 
moves beyond clichés. To this end, 
we have commissioned posters from 
design leaders and developed an 
online community for sharing and 
voting on original designs. We have 
collected more than 800 designs to 
date and are constantly receiving 
new ones. It is our mission to dis-
tribute these designs as broadly as 
possible, which we have done via 
exhibitions, workshops, billboards, 
online sharing, spin-off campaigns 
(such as Vote the Environment) and 
a book (which is the topic of this case 
study).
We wanted to publish some of the 
posters we amassed in the course 
of The Green Patriot Posters proj-
ect and to expand the reach of the 
project. The goal was to dissemi-
nate the message as widely as pos-
sible  and to energize commitment 
to the sustainability movement. The 
publisher, Metropolis Books, shared 
this goal in every way. Metropolis 
Books is an amazing publisher that 
aims to “publish books that matter” 
and cites sustainability and the envi-
ronment among its core interests. Of 
course, the publisher also needed to 
make money with the book (lest it 
Figure  4.17  Green Patriot Posters book 
cover. (Adapted from Shepard Fairey, 
Global Warming, 2009, Shepard Fairey/
ObeyGiant.com.)
Figure 4.18  Essay by Steven Heller.
Figure  4.19  Nick Dewar, Simplicity is the 
Key to Successful Living, 2009.
Figure 4.20  Will Etling, Sustain, 2010.

54
Design to Renourish
Figure 4.21  Green Patriot Poster book cover (back). (Design by Dmitri Siegel and 
Edward Morris.)
Figure 4.22  Poster in Action: Jason Hardy, Bike Your City, 2010.

55
Case Studies
go out of business and become unable to publish any books that ­matter). Profit 
became a conflict when we raised the idea of using sustainable parameters to 
print the book.
How did you guide Metropolis Books to the best possible 
solution to improve the triple bottom line?
Deciding to print sustainably to the extent we wanted was a big problem, par-
ticularly two weeks before press. We decided it was not enough to simply use 
FSC-certified paper and print it in China. Our goal was to print domestically (to 
save on transportation emissions); we wanted to use renewable energy credits, 
etc. Further, we came up with the idea that the posters in the book should be 
detachable so that the book could actually be useful. Diana Murphy, co-publisher 
of Metropolis Books, was very receptive to the idea of printing sustainability but 
also understood the additional cost for doing it that way (particularly using a 
domestic printer rather than printing in China) was either going to completely 
destroy margins or make the book very expensive, thereby sabotaging our goal 
of reaching as many people as possible. We could not make a costly book that we 
were encouraging people to rip apart to use the individual pages as actual post-
ers. So Diana agreed that we would have to do the project with integrity or to kill 
it. That meant we would have to find donor money or some sort of subvention. 
And, we had two weeks to do it.
What challenges did you encounter when trying to design 
the project in the most sustainable way possible? How did 
you overcome those challenges?
The real challenge was cost, but that was a huge challenge. Initially, I had no idea 
what ­“sustainable printing” really meant. For this, Eric Benson, who was one 
of the designers included in the “Green Patriot Posters” book, and Re-nourish 
were of invaluable help. We literally would have had no idea as to what to do 
without this resource. To face the cost challenge, our first task was to figure out 
bottom line how much more it would cost to do it the right way. We got quotes 
from maybe five or six printers. Most were out of the ballpark expensive—about 
double or even triple the cost of printing in China. Finally, Monroe Litho gave us 
a great quote, which was still quite a bit higher than we needed. Now we just had 
to find really generous, like-minded funding partners who could save the project 
in two weeks! I want to point out that funders can be true collaborators and that 
is certainly true in this case. They are: the Environmental Defense Fund, Richard 
H. Goodwin, Judith Bell, Neva Goodwin, Gabe Nugent, Hiscock & Barclay, and 
one anonymous donor. My good friend Clay Rockefeller was also invaluable in 
spearheading the drive to find donors, as was my creative partner Dmitri Siegel.
How did The Canary Project design the book to use 
minimal materials?
The books were produced on a Heidelberg CD102 Offset Sheetfed Press 
­(maximum sheet 28″ × 40″). The size of the book was determined based on the 
28″ × 40″ sheet size to minimize waste, improve efficiencies in production, and 

56
Design to Renourish
maximize the printable area—97% of the 
paper was used, resulting in only 3% waste.
Which aspect of the project 
met Metropolis Books’ needs 
while having the greatest 
positive impact on the triple 
bottom line?
On the positive side: we not only did print 
the book sustainably (100% wind power, 
100% PCW fiber, soy inks, printed domes-
tically) but also designed the back of the 
book into a poster titled “Print & Design 
Responsibly!” that contained data on the 
environmental benefits of printing the 
book the way we did (258 trees preserved 
for the future; 744 lbs of waterborne waste 
not created, etc.). I think in many ways this 
back cover was the best part of the book. 
Even by simply picking up the book, people 
saw the message. A total of 10,000 cop-
ies of the book were printed, and it went 
on to be featured in many leading muse-
ums such as the Walker Arts Center, the 
Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian Museum, etc. 
The book greatly increased the visibility of 
the project and spread an important mes-
sage. It would have lacked integrity and 
failed essentially without the sustainable 
printing.
On the negative side: the reliance on donors 
presents an obvious problem—it can be 
nearly impossible to raise money, and it 
is not economically sustainable. Further, 
we tried to leverage our commitment to 
printing sustainably in order to get other 
authors to make the same  commitment. 
Unfortunately, we did not manage to con-
vince other authors to follow our lead.
Project Details
COVER PAPER
Mohawk Loop Antique Vellum 
Cover
Specs
18pt cover
80% post-consumer waste
INTERIOR PAPER
Mohawk ViaPC100 Text
Specs
18pt cover
100% post-consumer waste
Certifications
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
Green Seal
Green-e
Processed chlorine-free (PCF)
INK
Specs
Vegetable-based
PRINTER
Monroe Litho
Rochester, NY
Certifications, partnerships, 
memberships
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
Sustainable Green Printing 
Partnership (SGP)
EPA Green Power Partner
Certified Green Business

57
Case Studies
Now that the project is complete, what would you have 
done differently to make the project more sustainable 
while still meeting Metropolis Books’ goals?
I am not aware that there is anything more that we could have done to print 
the book sustainably. There were probably more that could have been done 
on the distribution side like not using shrink wrap or more emission-efficient 
shipping. However, we did not have control over these decisions unless we 
published a print-on-demand book, which would not have had the same cul-
tural impact. It’s likely we could not have the detachable pages with print-on-
demand publishing. The donor-dependent model was problematic in that it 
was not economically scalable or sustainable. That’s a big problem. It would be 
great to have publishers sign some sort of commitment letter and hold that out 
as a badge of honor. Who can lead the charge on this?
What advice do you have for designers just starting to 
integrate systems thinking into their client work?
Voice your passion! People really respond to emotional dedication. Obviously, 
you don’t want to hurt your business by being imperious, but you can be passion-
ate without pleading or being heavy handed. Explain why the values of sustain-
able printing align with the values of the client. Explain why ecology is the future 
in a positive way!!

58
DESIGNING CULTURES STUDIO: 
REVERSIBLE AND RECYCLABLE 
PACKAGING
About Designing Cultures 
Studio
The Designing Cultures Studio is an award-
winning studio specializing in visual com-
munication, branding communication, 
spatial design, and environmental graphics 
in the commercial and cultural fields.
Founded in 2008 by Jesvin Yeo, the studio 
has championed a range of design projects 
through the exploration of Singapore his-
tory, language, politics, everyday objects, 
as well as collaboration with international 
artists and traditional craftsmen.
The Designing Cultures Studio has been 
commissioned by government organi-
zations and international brands, such 
as National Heritage Board, Singapore; 
PROJECT CREDITS
Designing Cultures Studio
Singapore
www.designingculturesstudio.com
Designers
Jesvin Yeo and Alving Ng
Copywriter
Clarence Toh
CLIENT
Jay Cee Global Pte Ltd
Singapore
www.botanicascent.com

59
Case Studies
Tourism Board, Singapore; The Ministry of Education, The Ministry of 
Community Development, Youth and Sports, Singapore; Chinatown Business 
Association, Singapore; Santa Barbara Polo & Racquet Club; Botanicascent; and 
The Brand Union. Among other international design awards, the studio received 
are the Red Dot Award (Communication Design), A’ Design Award, Good Design 
Award, and iF Communication Design Award.
What were the project goals?
Organic products are usually viewed as expensive goods affordable only by the 
wealthy. Working to change that misconception, Botanicascent, a new skin and 
hair care brand by Jay Cee Global, aims to provide affordable and truly natural 
body care products. Working closely with small-scale local soapmakers to pro-
mote sustainable living within the community, every bar of Botanicascent soap is 
handmade by these soapmakers to ensure that each of the soap bars is made pas-
sionately and infused with real ingredients that are safe for all living things while 
raising awareness of the many benefits of using responsibly wild-crafted, natural, 
and organically grown botanicals. Seeing that traditional or hand-crafted pro-
duction has given way to machinery and factories, this project also seeks to pre-
serve the olive oil production of handmade soap technology by creating business 
opportunities for these local soapmakers.
Made and designed in Singapore, I was tasked to create a cost-effective, unique, 
and eye-catching packaging design that stands out from other Singaporean com-
petitors. The target audiences were young executives who use only the finest 
ingredients.
Were the sustainable parameters for this project 
introduced by Jay Cee Global, Designing Cultures 
Studio, or both?
The client inspired the sustainable parameters for this project. Before the start of 
the project, the client brought the design team and myself to visit the local soap-
makers and to understand the production process of the products. Motivated 
by the natural and organically grown botanicals used, we decided to design the 
packaging with sustainable materials.
How did you guide Jay Cee Global to the best possible 
solution to improve the triple bottom line?
As part of our effort to conserve the environment, instead of designing indi-
vidual packages for each type of soap bar, we designed a single package that can 
be used for every soap bar within the Botanicascent brand. The client appreciated 
the idea immediately, as it matched their mission to be eco-friendly and also cost 
effective.
We first studied and narrowed down soap bar products into two themes: organic 
and natural. Then we designed a reversible package that can be used for both 

60
Design to Renourish
types of soap bar. Using only folding, no glue, and one color printing, the beauty 
of the packaging lies in how a flat piece of material can turn into a floral illustra-
tion natural soap box with rolling movement and interlock. It is also reversible 
to form a solid-colored packaging for the organic soap bar (Figures 4.23–4.26).
In the area of social responsibility and economics, by using only one-color print-
ing, we were able to give the project to a small-scale local printer who owned only 
two-color printing machines.
What challenges did you encounter when trying to design 
the packaging in the most sustainable way possible? How 
did you overcome those challenges?
The one-color printing was the main challenge during the design process. 
Typically, packaging design of skin and hair care products is vibrant and uses 
four-color images. Therefore, when we proposed to use one-color and sans-serif 
fonts for the design, it raised a lot of questions as to what was suitable for ­women’s 
skin and hair care products. After a few rounds of discussions, we finally came 
to a solution of adding floral illustrations to give the packaging a softer feel. 
The client was happy after this change and accepted the design after seeing the 
mock-ups.
How did you design the packaging to minimize materials?
The design of the packaging minimized resources as it was a single design that 
can be used for every soap bar within the Botanicascent brand, whether it be 
green tea, lemongrass, or goat milk. The one-color printing solution also helped 
to cut back on ink usage.
Figure 4.23  Botanicascent Reversible Packaging Design. (Using a rolling movement 
and interlock, the design can be formed into a floral illustration and also a solid-
colored package.)

61
Case Studies
Which aspect of the project met Jay Cee Global’s needs 
while having the greatest positive impacts on environmental, 
societal, cultural, and economic sustainability?
We felt that the aspects that met the client’s needs and still had positive impacts 
on environmental, societal, cultural, and economic sustainability were: first, 
the packaging design met market criteria of performance and cost—it is easy to 
use and affordable; second, it enhanced the use of recycled materials—the 100% 
Figure 4.25  Botanicascent Reversible 
Packaging Design—solid color.
Figure 4.26  Botanicascent Packaging Design with handmade soap.
Figure 4.24  Botanicascent Reversible 
Packaging Design—floral Illustration.

62
Design to Renourish
recycled materials were safe and healthy for 
individuals and communities throughout 
their life cycle; third, the reversible design 
and single-color printing process helped 
to reduce waste and carbon footprint; and 
finally, through the affordable strategy, 
the long-term goal of this project aims to 
encourage more people to use only natural 
ingredients that are cruelty free and do not 
contain harsh chemicals, phthalates, harm-
ful synthetic oils, or artificial by-products. 
Ultimately, we hope what we designed can 
help create a world that we are proud to 
pass onto the next generation.
Now that the project is 
complete, what would you have 
done differently to make the 
project more sustainable while 
still meeting the client’s goals?
In retrospect, I would have given the pack-
aging a “second life” after the “purchase” 
stage. For instance, the packaging box can 
turn into a soap holder, or any other form 
of “second life” that can be extended from 
the packaging.
What advice do you have for designers just starting to 
integrate systems thinking into their client work?
My advice to young designers would be to try not to design packaging that needs 
to be created specifically for a client’s product, for example, the need to cast a 
mold to form the packaging. Instead, study all the existing materials, be cre-
ative, and come up with the best design solutions that meet your client’s need, yet 
improve the triple bottom line.
If possible, try your best to use materials that are made from raw ingredients 
that grow quickly, like bamboo. Bamboo is better than a normal tree because it 
only needs three years to reach its full height compared with a tree which needs 
more than ten years. Bamboo also requires no harmful agricultural chemicals 
to thrive. Bamboo fiber is also stronger and lighter than tree fiber, requiring less 
additives and brighteners to produce.
Project Details
PAPER
Cyclus Print
Specs
250gsm
Coated
100% post-consumer waste
Certifications
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
NAPM approved 100% recycled
EcoLabel
ISO 14001
Blue Angel
Processed chlorine-free (PCF)
PRINTER
Kelvin Printing Pte. Ltd
Singapore

63
BACKYARD CREATIVE: SUPPORTING 
LOCAL BUSINESS
PROJECT CREDITS
Backyard Creative
Nanaimo, BC, Canada
www.backyardcreative.ca
Project Management
Lisa Hemingway
Lead Designer and Art Direction
Lisa Hemingway
Brand Mythology
Megan Sheldon
Production Designer
Grace Cheng
Photographers
Landon Sveinson, Lindsay Janes
Website Development
Melanie Karlik
Copywriters
Leif Bogwald, Jenn Bogwald
Copy Editor
Mike Muir
CLIENT
Vancouver Island Expeditions 
Ltd (VIE)
Nanaimo, BC, Canada
www.VancouverIslandExpeditions.com

64
Design to Renourish
About Backyard Creative
Backyard Creative is a small graphic design shop operating on the inherent 
belief that high-quality design can effect positive change in our communities. 
Lisa Hemingway, the proprietor, is a collaborative creative strategist and graphic 
designer living and working in BC. Lisa believes good design not only communi-
cates efficiently and embodies the craft of design but also considers its environ-
mental, social, and economic impacts.
Describe the VIE project
Vancouver Island Expeditions (VIE), a start-up eco-tourism company, enlisted 
the help of Backyard Creative to bring their vision to life with strength and authen-
ticity. In collaboration with Megan Sheldon of Narrative Communications, we 
set out to define what their core values were and to capture a brand narrative that 
would see them through the start-up years and exude confidence in partners and 
guests alike. This definition process helped to solidify the company’s goals, audi-
ence, and positioning leading up to its launch.
Building on the work completed in the discovery phase and the brand narrative, 
we created a visual brand to communicate their company values and service, 
targeting an international clientele of primarily European travelers. We worked 
with local photographers, printers, and web developers because, like Backyard 
Creative, VIE believes in supporting local business. We produced user-friendly 
brand assets, templates, and print collateral before creating a flexible website that 
will continue to grow with the company.
What were the project goals? What did VIE want the end 
result to achieve?
The primary objective was to clarify VIE’s values and create a professional, trust-
worthy brand that both customers and partners could rely on. We discussed how 
a strong brand platform is essential in launching a business as you don’t often get 
a second chance to make a first impression. As VIE was a start-up, we worked 
with them closely to clarify their company’s values by going through Megan 
Sheldon’s in-depth “Brand Narrative” process before setting out to create a visual 
identity.
The secondary objective was to get people excited about curated small group 
travel and to build awareness of VIE’s new brand. VIE’s tours are the best way to 
see Vancouver Island, and their approach is unique. Without a strong visual pres-
ence for local competitors, the goal was to make VIE stand out as professional to 
their international and local audiences.
Another goal was to print all materials locally to support Vancouver Island busi-
nesses. As VIE services the tourism industry on Vancouver Island by creating 
partnerships with existing vendors (i.e., kayak companies, tourist attractions, 
B&Bs, etc.), it was important to our client that their promotions be done using 
local businesses to be consistent with their values.

65
Case Studies
Were the sustainable parameters for this project 
introduced by the VIE, Backyard Creative, or both?
VIE was attracted by Backyard Creative’s portfolio of work and values. We believe 
in supporting local business, reducing environmental impact, and educating. It 
was a mutual agreement to work with sustainability in mind which definitely 
made for much more productive meetings and decisions along the way.
How did you guide VIE to the best possible solution to 
improve the triple bottom line?
To start with, we discussed the desired marketing channels, costs, and target 
audience with our client at length before deciding a rack card would be the best 
use of their funds. We agreed that a multi-page document could become out of 
date quickly and seem wasteful to users, whereas a rack card would not need to 
be reprinted annually. As a result of these decisions, we were able to save money 
on printing, which enabled us to use 100% recycled paper, print a larger run, and 
use local photography.
We convinced the client not to purchase stock photography because we needed 
authentic, location-specific images to communicate their brand values. The goal 
was to support local photographers; however, a photo shoot was not possible due 
to the fact that this project timeline occurred during the tourism off-season. 
A few island photographers had collections of images they were willing to license 
to VIE. Even though this was more costly than purchasing stock photography, we 
were able to keep money in the local economy.
What challenges did you encounter when trying to design 
the project in the most sustainable way possible? How did 
you overcome those challenges?
The local printer was not FSC certified but we were able to print the business 
cards (Figure  4.27 through 4.34) on our preferred paper stock (100% PCW). 
However, this printer was unable to print the rack cards locally, so we hired a 
different company for this. The trade-off in this situation was paper choice. In 
order to print the rack cards locally and to keep the project affordable, we chose 
the printer’s in-house paper stock. Managing a project with two different print-
ers was a bit challenging. In the end, VIE felt it was more important to be able to 
support local businesses.
As is often the challenge with small businesses, we didn’t have a huge budget to 
work with. Our approach is always to prioritize client needs and work backward 
from the budget. It was certainly hard to manage the scope of this project but 
regular check-ins and clearly outlined deliverables in our agreement kept us on 
track. It’s always beneficial to have some flexibility in your agreement to be able 
to tackle little shifts in priorities as the project goes forward. On the contrary, it 
is also important to know what to constrain in order to keep the budget manage-
able for you and the client (who wants to pay you well!).

66
Design to Renourish
Figure 4.29  Sketches.
Figure 4.27  Story Tree.
Figure 4.28  Brand Narrative.

67
Case Studies
How did Backyard Creative create this project to use 
minimal materials?
Instead of a large brochure outlining all the tours, we designed a single rack card 
that would encourage potential clients to visit our website. On the backside, we 
made a checklist of all the experiences that one should have on Vancouver Island 
to reinforce the company’s core values. This decision was made to show potential 
VIE clients that this is a different, more thoughtful tour company which was 
focused on providing unique client experience, not just standard, in the most 
popular destinations.
Figure 4.30  Logo and variations.
Figure 4.31  Website. (Website wordpress theme was “Crux” created by CodeStag 
http://demo.codestag.com/?theme=crux and customized for VIE by developer 
Melanie Karlik.)

68
Design to Renourish
Figure 4.32  Business card.
Figure 4.33  Rack card.
Figure 4.34  Tour schedule.

69
Case Studies
Which aspect of the project met VIE’s needs while having 
the greatest positive impacts on environmental, societal, 
cultural, and economic sustainability?
The client has received a lot of positive feedback about their brand image since 
officially launching in May 2014. Leif Bogwald, VIE owner and travel curator, 
remarked, “I’ve definitely had great feedback on the brand and people have con-
tacted me based on what I think is a very professional look.”
The positive impacts, although difficult to measure, begin with VIE’s mission and 
purpose: “We create authentic, intimate and memorable visitor experiences while 
honoring the culture, heritage, and natural beauty of Vancouver Island. Discover 
places that inspire stories.” The client’s ethos to respect nature with low-impact 
tours and leave-no-trace hiking are promoted to all travelers. Working with local 
businesses and promoting other small businesses to help the tourism industry on 
Vancouver Island thrive have a positive impact on the local economy and resi-
dents. VIE promotes local traditions, customs, and “island” lifestyle by helping 
people take a pause and truly understand the culture on the island. Investing in 
VIE’s brand early on will contribute to the ongoing success of the company and 
will also result in the success of VIE’s collaborators.
Now that the project is complete, what would you have 
done differently to make the project more sustainable 
while still meeting VIE’s goals?
Although we’re very happy with what we were able to accomplish with a modest 
budget, we would have liked to spend a little more time polishing the website. Some 
of the pages need refinements on mobile and the Wordpress template; although 
well designed, they did have their limitations when it came to customization.
Although we were considerate of a European clientele, and installed a Google 
Translate ­plug-in, we would have also liked the chance to work directly with 
translators to ensure that the site communicated properly in other languages. We 
see this website as beta version 1.0 and look forward to refining it in the future 
with VIE.
To help garner excitement about small group travel, we proposed the creation of a 
blog and a Facebook page. As their business grows, we’d love to see more market-
ing by way of photos and stories on their website!
What advice do you have for designers just starting to 
integrate systems thinking into their client work?
Think about what the goals are for the project and question all constraints from 
the very beginning of the project. For example, when our client said, “We need a 
brochure outlining all of our tours,” we replied, “you need to communicate the 
variety of the tours that you offer to get the largest number of potential custom-
ers to your website.” By approaching the problem from the perspective of their 

70
Design to Renourish
key objectives, we eliminated the need for a 
multi-page print piece. Instead, we focused 
on featuring tours on the VIE website. The 
client’s budget was then freed up for more 
essential expenditures such as defining 
their brand narrative at the project start 
to focus on subsequent work and acquire 
high-­quality, local photography.
Also, it’s important to learn what your cli-
ent values and stay true to that throughout 
the process. For example, if the client’s 
business focuses on connecting and pro-
moting local businesses, be sure to work 
with local businesses when creating their 
promotional materials (i.e.,  use of local 
printers and photographers).
Finally, be sure to consider the end of the 
life-cycle first. It was important that the 
rack card extends beyond its main objec-
tive of driving people to the website or 
making an inquiry. For instance, our goal 
with the VIE rack card was to provide peo-
ple with a clear and attractive visual that 
they might pin up at home or at work to 
remind them of all the great experiences to 
look for when traveling.
Project Details
BUSINESS CARDS
Mohawk Options i-Tone 
Inxwell
Specs
130# Cover
100% post-consumer waste
Certifications
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
Green Seal
Green-e
Processed chlorine-free (PCF)
Carbon-neutral business
RACK CARD
TopKote Dull Cover
Specs
100# cover
10% post-consumer waste
Digitally printed
Certifications
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
PRINTERS 
Elite Image (Business Card)
Nanaimo, BC, Canada
Print Three (Rack Card)
Nanaimo, BC, Canada
Certifications
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
HOSTING
WebNames.ca
Vancouver, BC, Canada
www.webnames.ca

71
METALLI LINDBERG: CREATING A BUZZ
About Metalli Lindberg
Located in Conegliano Veneto near 
Treviso, Italy, Metalli Lindberg is a commu-
nications and design laboratory. Services 
include strategy, consulting, research, art 
direction, and publishing. The company 
creates advertising, design for print, iden-
tities, signage, interiors, websites, packag-
ing, exhibitions, and events materials.
With an approach that is based both on sci-
ence and art, the company’s designers see 
the choice of an image, a graphic sign, or 
a font type not as an end in itself but as a 
means of reaching a goal and of conveying 
a concept in a straightforward and origi-
nal way. The end result of this method for 
design problem solving is that “communication is visible, tangible and repre-
sents an intelligent and positive investment.” All of these factors support Metalli 
Lindberg’s goal of contributing to the world in which it resides, while disseminat-
ing values that include ethics and sustainability.
PROJECT CREDITS
Metalli Lindberg
Conegliano, Italy
www.metalli-lindberg.com
Art Director/Designer
Derek Stewart
CLIENT
Conapi
Monterenzio, Italy
www.conapi.it

72
Design to Renourish
What were the project goals?
Conapi is one of the most important cooperatives of beekeepers in Europe and 
represents nearly 600 beekeepers throughout Italy. We recognized a great oppor-
tunity for Conapi to share their endless resources, knowledge, and experience to 
help create more awareness of the current plight of declining bees in Italy. We 
developed a proposal for a series of coordinated materials, instruments, and ini-
tiatives to show the client how the project could be implemented. BEE ACTIVE! 
highlights the plight and decline in the bee population in Italy (as it is in the rest 
of the world). Our goal for the project, and that of our clients, was simply to create 
more awareness and to help people become a little more “BEE ACTIVE!” toward 
understanding and helping bees (Figures 4.35 through 4.42).
Were the sustainable parameters for this campaign 
introduced by Conapi, Metalli Lindberg, or both?
These were introduced by both the studio and the client, wherever possible. It was 
fundamental to the project that any materials produced were environmentally 
friendly and of a controlled quantity.
How did you guide Conapi to the best possible solution to 
improve the triple bottom line?
The client is already sensitive to certain issues due to the nature of their business 
and a background in organic farming. It was very important that the content 
was easy-to-read, stimulating, and accessible to create further interest and learn 
more about the life of bees. There was to be no sensational, dramatic, or banal 
content—only constructive and helpful information that could be appreciated by 
people of all ages. The use of materials was also important to reflect the nature 
of the initiative; hence, the use of the biodegradable honey tub and Crush paper, 
which is made with residue from food crops and post-consumer waste fiber. The 
paper is also manufactured with 100% green energy from hydroelectricity and 
emissions offset with carbon credits.
Figure 4.35  First BEE sketch.
Figure 4.36  First BEE identity.

73
Case Studies
Figure 4.37  First BEE cover.
Figure 4.38  First BEE interior spread 1.

74
Design to Renourish
Figure 4.39  First BEE interior spread 2.
Figure 4.40  First BEE honey tubs.

75
Case Studies
Figure 4.41  First BEE pins.
Figure 4.42  First BEE cards.

76
Design to Renourish
Which aspect of the project 
met Conapi’s needs while 
having the greatest positive 
impacts on environmental, 
societal, cultural, and economic 
sustainability?
The project was well received by both 
Conapi and the public. Members of the 
cooperative of beekeepers were especially 
pleased with the extra support. The project 
has also been a partner in a TV/publishing 
campaign and is currently active in some 
schools.
Now that the project is 
complete, what would you have 
done differently to make the 
project more sustainable while 
still meeting Conapi’s goals?
The project still continues. We are working 
with Conapi on the website and on an addi-
tional print project. Offering more activity 
and events on the web are in the pipeline, 
which will make the project more accessi-
ble to a greater number of people. There are 
also plans for the initiative to collaborate 
with other partners in the food sector.
What advice do you have 
for designers just starting to 
integrate systems thinking into 
their client work?
Integrating 
good 
systems 
thinking 
improves any project by making it more 
effective, richer in content, and more 
accessible to its audience. Systems think-
ing encourages creativity and can enhance 
project longevity, thereby creating commu-
nication that’s beneficial both to the client 
and/or the public.
Project Details
PAPER
Crush by Favini
Specs
15% process residues from 
organic products (citrus fruits, 
corn, olives, ­coffee, kiwi fruits, 
hazelnuts, and almonds)
30% post-consumer waste
GMO free
Made with 100% hydroelectric 
power
Certifications
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
PAPER CUP
Bioplat-Bio-line
Specs
Pure pulp solid board combined 
with PLA film
Certifications
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
100% biodegradable and 
compostable according to 
Standard EN 13432.
PRINTER
Eurostampa
Bologna, Italy

77
Case Studies
•	 Try to look at a project as openly as possible. Be curious. Research and 
brainstorm to assess what can be brought to the project within and 
beyond the requirements of the brief. Designers should be able to refer-
ence from as many sources of information as possible to enhance any 
design solution such as manufacturing, new methods and processes, 
visual techniques, specialist suppliers, sustainable materials and dis-
posal, etc.
•	 Map everything out with diagrams or infographics to present and 
accompany the client through the creative process. It’s often here that 
new ideas and opportunities arise.
•	 In addition to the brief, come up with an idea that can inform the client 
and engage the public on other issues to influence further awareness. 
For example, add information to the project regarding ethics, sustain-
ability or social responsibility, social concerns or lifestyle choices that 
can encourage behavioral change that have social value.
•	 Consider also both the environmental and social impact of production 
choices. Minimize use of materials and printing and assess the effects of 
distribution and mailing.

78
LA PAGE: PRINTED ON STONE
PROJECT CREDITS
La PAGE Original
Barcelona, Spain
www.lapageoriginal.com
Creative Director
Josep Martínez Ruzafa
Art Director
Sònia Martínez Ruzafa
Designers
Josep and Sònia Martínez Ruzafa
Copywriter
La PAGE Studio
CLIENT
EmanaGreen
Barcelona, Spain
www.emanagreen.com

79
Case Studies
About La PAGE Original
La PAGE Original is a graphic design and visual communication studio that 
was created in 1991. The company, composed of three people, implemented and 
managed EMAS registration (Eco-Management and Audit Scheme) in 2011. 
They incorporate environmental criteria in their projects as an opportunity to 
improve their professional skills and apply their potential as communicators to 
positively influence behavioral change toward a more sustainable society.
What were the project goals?
We wanted to demonstrate the advantages of using stone paper in a calendar 
(Figure 4.43 through 4.48). The main audience of this project was the potential 
clients who were already aware of environmental issues. However, we thought 
designers were an important target audience as well since we have the power to 
make better environmental choices during the development of a project. We felt 
that by making the calendar out of stone paper, we could prove its ecological 
worth through the design and manufacturing ­processes. Also, we were hoping 
to show the power and the responsibility we have as designers to choose bet-
ter materials, processes, and coherent messaging—this was the idea behind this 
project. We have to be clear and re-think the way we go forward with our projects.
Figure 4.43  Cover of stone paper calendar.

80
Design to Renourish
Figure 4.44  Environmental message for June 0,0 0,0: water. The stone paper needs 
0 liters of water for its fabrication.
Figure 4.45  Press sheet of the 12 pages of the calendar.

81
Case Studies
Another objective of this proj-
ect was to educate people about 
stone paper as a more sustain-
able alternative in the printing 
industry. We wanted to promote 
its 
environmental 
advantages 
focusing on communicating to 
designers, printers, and other eco-
friendly clients. The design of this 
table calendar was crafted with 
eco-friendly criteria and we also 
incorporated green messaging on 
every month related to sustainable 
design criteria.
How did you guide 
EmanaGreen to the 
best possible solution 
to improve the triple 
bottom line?
EmanaGreen was looking at mak-
ing a calendar that only communi-
cated the advantages of using stone 
paper, but we felt it would be a bet-
ter approach if the calendar itself 
were printed on stone paper. We 
offered this option to the client and 
through more discussion with the 
EmanaGreen team, we agreed that 
this was a better way to carry out 
the project.
This was an eco-friendly project since the beginning (designed in a studio 
with a certified environmental management system—EMAS, and zero CO2 
emissions) with a product (stone paper) that releases 50% less carbon dioxide 
than paper made from tree fiber. The paper also didn’t require water or toxic 
chemicals during its manufacture. We also worked with minimal materials 
and followed the same logic with inks. A big challenge was to print the whole 
calendar in a single printing, double-sided, with black ink. We made sure that 
the production was carried out by a press supported by our local government 
for environmental and sustainability issues. Since we used a small amount of 
resources, we managed to create a very economical product with strong social 
and environmental values.
Figure 4.46  Printout showing the transpar-
ency of the stone paper.
Figure 4.47  Calendar page in action.

82
Design to Renourish
What challenges did you encounter when trying to design 
the calendar in the most sustainable way possible? How 
did you overcome those challenges?
We have developed a system to measure the environmental impact of our proj-
ects based on a life-cycle analysis. We incorporate, in our methodology, criteria 
to design in a more sustainable way and are able to confront new challenges.
We always want to be able to give to our clients a budget that adjusts to their 
needs and find suppliers and producers who guarantee their social and environ-
mental commitments. That is one challenge we had to overcome. In this case, the 
characteristics of the paper required the printing process to be slower than usual 
(for an offset printer) and the attention during the process to be thorough. This 
meant we had to rely on the pressman to work out of his ordinary routine and to 
make this situation an opportunity to prove his commitment as a professional.
How did you design the packaging to minimize materials?
The calendar’s format takes maximum advantage of the stone paper and 
reduces waste. (The thickness of the stone paper was the thinner option from 
the ­manufacturer—100 microns.) Using the minimum amount of material cre-
ated the effect of transparency that allowed us to play graphically with the back 
impressions of each leaf. The front and back pages are made from the same stone 
paper material, and the binding element is a spiral of aluminum that is 100% 
recyclable and allows disassembly in an easy way. The graphics were made with-
out using bleeds in order to minimize ink usage.
Figure 4.48  Stone paper decomposes after a year in the sun and outdoors. The result 
is calcium carbonate.

83
Case Studies
Which aspect of the project 
met EmanaGreen’s needs while 
having the greatest positive 
impacts on environmental, 
societal, cultural, and economic 
sustainability?
The project was a great success. We got 
to accompany the consumers throughout 
the whole year. They used the stone paper, 
wrote in it, and understood day-by-day its 
qualities. We also had the opportunity to 
teach in a simple and direct way not only the 
advantages of stone paper but also how to 
reduce the environmental impact through 
better design decisions. We thought it was 
important to wake up the consciences of 
consumers with regard to environmental 
matters. In fact, many asked for a second 
edition for the following year.
Now that the project is 
complete, what would you 
have done differently to make 
the project more sustainable 
while still meeting the client’s 
goals?
Although the disassembly process for recy-
cling the aluminum spiral and the paper 
leaves is very simple, we thought it would be interesting to be able to achieve a 
mono-material design so that the whole calendar could be recycled at once.
What advice do you have for designers just starting to 
integrate systems thinking into their client work?
Design is a powerful profession. As the messages, objects, and experiences that 
we create go through hands, minds, and hearts, we have a chance to promote and 
achieve sustainability. We can build up a wider sense of sustainable culture through 
our work and suggest changes in lifestyles toward a more eco-friendly way of liv-
ing. We hope that innovative concepts such as reducing resources and waste, life-
cycle analysis, and sustainability become more of a part of the graphic design world. 
There are clearly important questions that need to be asked about the consequences 
of our choices when we design. We need to ask about the origin of the materials 
we use, who produces them, and what will happen when we no longer use them. 
The responsibility of our actions goes beyond only creative decision-making. We 
have to acknowledge our capacity to negatively impact the planet and also positively 
through our decisions. We have, therefore, to be respectful to the world around us.
Project Details
PAPER
FiberStone® Natural Stone 
Paper
Certifications
Cradle to Cradle (Silver)
INK
Specs
Vegetable (water based)
PRINTER
Grafiques Ortells SL
Barcelona, Spain
Certifications
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
EU Eco-Management and Audit 
Scheme (EMAS)
ISO 14001

84
ECOCREATIVE: COMMUNITY-OWNED 
DESIGN
About Ecocreative
Ecocreative is a multi-faceted creative 
consultancy for people and planet. We 
specialize in strategy, design, and com-
munications aimed at engaging the com-
munity. To establish the best opportunity 
for successful outcomes, Ecocreative works 
closely with leaders and ­decision-makers 
to better align action with organizational 
values.
Equal parts sustainable design studio, stra-
tegic advisory service, communications 
consultancy, engagement facilitator, prob-
lem solver, and think tank, Ecocreative 
operates as a change agent. Ecocreative’s 
depth of experience, knowledge, and 
impressive networks help organizations in 
the government, business, and community 
sectors navigate, communicate, and inno-
vate with confidence.
Ecocreative is one of Australia’s founding 
certified B Corps.
PROJECT CREDITS
Ecocreative
Adelaide, South Australia
www.ecocreative.com.au
Creative Director and Copywriter
Matthew Wright-Simon
Designers
Robin Green
CLIENT
District Council of Mount 
Barker
South Australia
www.dcmtbarker.sa.gov.au

85
Case Studies
What were the project goals?
In establishing a community open space featuring a wetland and walking trails, 
our local government client wanted to ensure members of the public would 
“watch this space” while land redevelopment took place.
Following site visits, research, and lots of conversation, we convinced our client 
to consider something that would celebrate local heritage and the materiality of 
railway transport in its design and storytelling approach.
Were the sustainable parameters for this project 
introduced by the District Council of Mount Barker, 
Ecocreative, or both?
As we were working with people outside of the client organization’s sustain-
ability division, engaging Ecocreative is where the client’s sustainability con-
siderations began for this project. Decisions regarding materials and processes 
were driven by our studio, with a particular focus on sourcing local materials 
and talent.
How did you guide the District Council of Mount Barker 
to the best possible solution to improve the triple bottom 
line?
Investigation into local social issues identified that high levels of unemployment 
was thought to be connected to vandalism of public property. Without having 
the opportunity to research in depth, we had a hunch that poorly designed public 
places might also be having an influence. We therefore determined that anything 
we designed would need to be the centerpiece of a new public design approach, 
look impressive, and be very robust in construction. It also had to look and be so 
“local” that it would be owned by the community. The creation of a laser-cut steel 
diorama helped build depth into storytelling about a township that had until this 
project been very hard to find.
What challenges did you encounter when trying to design 
the campaign in the most sustainable way possible? How 
did you overcome those challenges?
Challenges abounded with the project as it was created in the midst of a site 
under development, ultimately standing as the first part of a phased public park. 
Aside from issues related to site access, planned infrastructure, and services 
(including electricity for lighting), our options were limited only by budget and 
the availability of materials. We investigated using stone, metals, and even rail-
way sleepers from the nearby abandoned railway siding (from which we drew 
design inspiration)—all of which looked to be available without the need for 
freight. Unfortunately, once we requested access to this material, we learned 
that the site was considered of possible historical significance and could not be 
reused. Given that the possible plundering of a “heritage site” was not the ideal 
way to share a story of local history, we reconsidered our approach! We instead 

86
Design to Renourish
sourced stone quarried from nearby and the services of a local stonemason, 
secured railway timbers harvested from an Australian family-run business, and 
made use of structural weathering Corten steel which has very high levels of 
recycled content and eliminates the need for painting. We ensured lighting was 
energy efficient and recommend this be linked to light sensors and solar panels 
(slated for installation on a yet-to-be built toilet block).
How did you design all your pieces for the campaign to 
minimize materials?
Unlike much of our work, this piece needed to be imposing and to have real 
substance in the landscape. While we wanted to ensure the diorama was big, 
we still ensured the dimensions took into account the standard sizings of our 
defining materials—steel sheets and railway timbers, in particular. We used the 
full length of timbers, trimming down from this where necessary and eliminat-
ing offcuts, making full use of the timber profile. Knowing that the structural 
steel came in 2,400 mm × 1,200 mm sheets, we worked our design so as to make 
the maximum possible use of the sheet, with minimal offcuts. The selection of a 
structural weight meant we had no need to have additional supports in place and 
we minimized weld points. The diorama, timber uprights, and backing panel 
were partially prefabricated, and we then walled the structure in place with the 
help of the stonemason, using only the stone and concrete required. Our use of a 
durable automotive grade paint ensured strong color-fastness of the red backing 
panel, even though its west-facing aspect rendered it more vulnerable to UV fad-
ing (Figures 4.49 through 4.54).
Which aspect of the project met the District Council of 
Mount Barker’s needs while having the greatest positive 
impacts on environmental, societal, cultural, and economic 
sustainability?
The Byethorne Park diorama has been a great success, having stood for several 
years at the entrance to a now-popular public park, requiring no maintenance to 
date. We see that the flourishing heritage of the surrounding Nairne township 
and the connectivity of the community through urban design is in strong align-
ment with the optimistic approach we took to this work, given that so little was 
established, shared, or built beforehand. Our storytelling and design approach 
considered many of the strongest facets of Nairne’s environmental, economic, 
and cultural heritage, and we see that balance is being returned to the community.
Figure 4.49  Initial concept sketch.

87
Case Studies
Figure 4.51  Completed structure in situ, oblique view.
Figure 4.50  More developed concept sketch.

88
Design to Renourish
Figure 4.54  Diorama detail.
Figure 4.53  Details of historical story.
Figure 4.52  Front-on view of structure.

89
Case Studies
Now that the project is 
complete, what would you have 
done differently to make the 
project more sustainable while 
still meeting the client’s goals?
It is always interesting to reflect on a proj-
ect, especially when so little is set out in the 
form of a brief, timetable, or budget. With 
the benefit of more time, we believe we 
would have been able to research opportu-
nities to obtain local stone and timber to 
reuse, including the help of a local sawmill. 
We would also have been able to ensure 
link-ins with solar ­photovoltaics and bat-
tery storage, ­possibly enabling the feature 
to exist off-grid. A life-cycle analysis of the 
materials and processes would also have 
been ­helpful, especially given that what 
we delivered is something designed to last 
for decades with minimal maintenance.
What advice do you have for designers just starting to 
integrate systems thinking into their client work?
Our advice for designers who want to consider systems thinking is to ask as many 
questions as possible of clients and their stakeholders about why something needs 
to be created. Learn about the objective and how this project will affect positive 
change in a social and cultural context.
Project Details
MATERIALS
Corten steel sheets (10 mm 
thick), LED lights, housings and 
wiring, railway timbers, quarried 
stone with mortar, steel sheet-
ing with enamel paint and vinyl 
stickers, fixings, and concrete 
footings.
PRINTER/MANUFACTURER/
SCREEN PRINTER, ETC.
Signscope
Adelaide, South Australia

90
CAST IRON DESIGN: SUSTAINABLY WOVEN 
IN THE UNITED STATES
About Cast Iron Design
Cast Iron Design is an environmentally 
responsible design studio based in Boulder, 
Colorado. Its mission is to pair good design 
with positive impact by creating memo-
rable brands, implementing environmen-
tally responsible practices, and helping the 
design community do the same.
What were the project goals?
Anyone who has ventured into the world 
of seasonal cooking using farm-fresh 
ingredients knows it’s not an easy task. 
Huckle & Goose—a service centered 
around enabling, educating, and inspir-
ing people to cook and eat consciously—­
commissioned us to create an interactive 
web app that helps people plan and prepare 
meals with a focus on local foods and sea-
sonal cooking. The goal of the project was 
to change behavior by creating a digital 
tool to make the meal planning process 
easier and thereby less intimidating.
PROJECT CREDITS
Cast Iron Design
Boulder, CO
www.castirondesign.com
Designers
Jonathan Black and 
Richard Roche
Copywriter
Richard Roche
CLIENT
Huckle & Goose
New York, NY
www.hucklegoose.com

91
Case Studies
Were the sustainable parameters for this project 
introduced by Huckle & Goose, Cast Iron Design, or both?
Huckle & Goose approached us in part due to our commitment to environmen-
tal responsibility. They were very supportive of the sustainable solutions that we 
proposed—a dream client for a green graphic designer.
How did you guide Huckle & Goose to the best possible 
solution to improve the triple bottom line?
The key to a good client/designer relationship is trust. Once we built that trust—
fostered by honesty, kindness, thoroughness, and by genuinely caring about the 
client’s goals and ­mission—the rest was easy. Some of the sustainable solutions we 
proposed resulted in cost savings (e.g., designing for the press sheet) while others 
resulted in cost premiums (e.g., using organic cotton). The client was always able 
to see the benefits of environmental stewardship, both from an ethical perspec-
tive (doing the right thing) and a brand-building perspective (building trust and 
loyalty with their audience).
What challenges did you encounter when trying to design 
the campaign in the most sustainable way possible? How 
did you overcome those challenges?
Often the primary challenge for many sustainable print projects is the extra 
time required—time to research processes and materials, time for setting up 
press sheets, and everything else. For this specific project, we spent dozens of 
extra hours researching cotton production, woven label production, eco-binding 
options for journals, 100% recycled corrugated box sourcing, recyclability of var-
ious adhesive packaging tapes, and so on. We consider the time an investment 
into building our expertise and increasing our value to future clients.
Another challenge we faced was finding a top-tier, sustainably powered web host 
with a strong reputation for performance, reliability, and customer service. We 
instead decided to recommend the client offset their website’s energy use them-
selves. We purchased Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs) (in this case repre-
senting energy generated via wind power) through Terrapass and indirectly offset 
our hosting based on the average energy used for a single server, plus 25% extra 
(dictated by the minimum purchase required by Terrapass). Our host, and most 
hosting providers in general, would not divulge information about how many 
sites are hosted per server, but based on our plan allowance and the typical capa-
bilities of a server, we estimate the offsets purchased are at least four times the 
amount needed for our client’s site (and potentially even over 25 times).
How did you design all your pieces for the campaign to 
minimize materials?
We designed each print item backward, allowing the size of the press sheet to 
determine the size of the print piece (designing for the press sheet). This is a 
beginning step, which minimizes trim waste. The journals were designed with 
minimum impact (recycled materials) and maximum recyclability (dry toner 

92
Design to Renourish
inks, cotton thread). The cotton 
thread binding is distinctive and 
also highly recyclable (the cotton 
thread becomes part of the pulp 
mixture when recycled).
The nature of a fabric tote encour-
ages reuse, and the tote’s construc-
tion is sturdy, which is an important 
aspect of longevity and therefore 
­sustainability (Figure 4.55 through 
4.62). In addition, the tote is made 
of 100% organic cotton, which can 
be composted at the end of its life.
The press kit boxes were printed 
with a fun “reuse this corrugated 
container” statement on the inside 
of the box, which reminds the 
audience to reuse the box while 
integrating a bit of wit and charm 
to the piece. We also specified 
WAT (water-activated tape), which 
is best for recyclability; however, 
most WAT is reinforced with fiber-
glass strands to add strength. These 
fiberglass strands are unnecessary 
for most lightweight contents so 
we opted for a nonreinforced paper 
tape. The tape we specified uses a 
starch-based adhesive that is bio-
degradable, making the tape 100% 
recyclable.
Which aspect of the project met Huckle & Goose’s needs 
while having the greatest positive impacts on environmental, 
societal, cultural, and economic sustainability?
The most successful outcome of the project, in terms of end result and posi-
tive impact, was the tote bags. The client championed a tote that had a positive 
impact on environmental and social sustainability (especially when com-
pared with conventionally produced totes) and was exceedingly pleased with 
the end product. Although the totes were produced in fairly small quantities, 
the research that went into finding the most eco-friendly solution possible 
made us proud of the accomplishment. As a result, the totes are an exemplary 
case study in sustainable design. We were able to find a tote manufacturer that 
Figure  4.55  All of the totes had the same 
woven label on the inside which described 
the sustainability credentials of the materials 
and manufacturing of the custom totes.
Figure 4.56  Front of business card showing 
blind emboss.

93
Case Studies
sources its organic cotton from 
a farm in Texas. Conventional 
cotton is one of the most chemi-
cally dependent crops in the 
world, so sourcing organic cot-
ton (­typically grown overseas) 
was critical. The cotton was 
then woven in South Carolina 
(again, a process often exported 
overseas) before being cut, sewn, 
and printed in New Hampshire. 
To top things off, we were able 
to find a manufacturer in the 
United States (an exceedingly 
rare find for small runs) to create 
the custom woven labels for the 
inside of the bag which served 
to identify the product, educate 
the ­consumer about sustainabil-
ity, and—equally important—­
provide a chuckle or two.
Now that the project 
is complete, what 
would you have done 
differently to make the 
project more sustainable 
while still meeting the 
client’s goals?
The die cutting process is a great eco-friendly way to create a unique visual dis-
tinction with a printed piece (since there’s no ink or materials involved beyond 
the creation of the die itself), but we learned that it could cause a significant 
amount of trim waste for small items like business cards.
What advice do you have for designers just starting to 
integrate systems thinking into their client work?
Systems thinking involves breaking from the status quo in the way you 
think about design, and often it necessitates spending considerable amounts 
of time researching sustainability options. Sustainability research is a bit 
like investigative journalism. You start with a Google search, try to make 
sense of a material safety data sheet (MSDS), call a sales rep to find out 
more information, corroborate or refute that information, and continue the 
cycle until you have a well-rounded collection of facts. It’s a necessary exten-
sion of the designer’s role as a problem solver, yet the time spent upfront 
can be ­daunting. At the same time, it’s an exciting pursuit that provides an 
Figure  4.57  Journal cover and end sheet 
detail.
Figure 4.58  Journal interior detail.

94
Design to Renourish
Figure  4.59  The press kit opens up to reveal a hand-addressed written envelop 
attached to the inside of the lid.
Figure 4.60  Inside bottom of the screen printed box.

95
Case Studies
immediate sense of accomplishment and satisfaction, and in the long term can 
add ­considerable value to your design practice.
Furthermore, some other good advice we learned is that when beginning a print 
project, we always include production oversight into our estimates. This is a key 
component of green design that is commonly overlooked.
Figure 4.62  Kid tote.
Figure 4.61  Full stationery set (business cards, letterhead, and two sizes of hand-
embossed envelopes).

96
Design to Renourish
Project Details
PAPER
Mohawk Loop
Journal Cover Specs
Antique Vellum
80# Cover
50% PCW recycled fibers, 50% 
virgin fibers
Letterpress printed
Journal Interior Specs
Smooth Ivory
24# Writing
100% post-consumer waste (PCW) 
recycled fibers
Digitally printed with dry toner
Business Card Specs
Antique Vellum (Milkweed)
160# Double Thick Cover
100% post-consumer waste (PCW) 
recycled fibers
Letterpress printed, blind 
embossed, and die cut
Letterhead Specs
Smooth (Ivory)
24# Writing
100% post-consumer waste (PCW) 
recycled fibers
Laser printed on-demand by client 
to minimize waste
Envelope Specs
Antique Vellum (Milkweed + Birch)
80# Text
100% post-consumer waste (PCW) 
recycled fibers
Blind embossed with hand 
embosser
Mohawk Loop Certifications
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
Processed Chlorine Free (PCF)
Manufactured carbon neutral 
(RECs certified by Green-e®)
Green Seal Certified
Acid Free
JOURNAL ENDSHEETS PAPER
French Paper Company
Specs
Steel Blue
80# text
100% recycled fibers (30% post-
consumer, 70% pre-consumer)
Manufactured carbon neutral (with 
on-site hydroelectricity)
Digitally printed with dry toner
Certifications
Processed Chlorine Free (PCF)
PRESS KIT MAILER
Globe Guard Corrugated Tuck 
Mailer
Specs
100% recycled fibers (% PCW 
varies)
Interior protected with 100% 
recycled kraft tissue paper
Exterior sealed with kraft paper 
non-reinforced WAT (water acti-
vated tape)
Screen printed with water-
based inks and nontoxic 
­biodegradable screen reclaiming 
chemicals
Certifications
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
Processed Chlorine Free (PCF)

97
Case Studies
TOTE BAGS
Enviro-tote Market Tote and Mini 
Tote
Specs
Unbleached organic cotton grown 
in Texas and woven in South 
Carolina, USA
Cut, sewn, and screen printed 
using phthalate-free inks in New 
Hampshire, USA
Interior label made in Vermont, 
USA (unknown cotton blend, not 
organic)
JOURNAL INTERIORS & PROMO 
CARDS PRINTER
Colt Printing
Boulder, CO
BUSINESS CARDS & JOURNAL 
COVERS PRINTER
Smokeproof Press
Boulder, CO
TOTES
Enviro-tote
Bedford, NH
Certifications
Fair Labor Association, Category 
C license
BOXES
Printed in the Cast Iron Design 
screen printing studio,
Boulder, CO.
HOSTING
Linode
Certifications
W3C compliant
Renewable Energy Certificates 
(RECs) through Terrapass


99
Chapter 5
TODAY
The goal we set forth in the planning stages of this book was to map a sustain-
able path ahead for the graphic design profession. We would base this on best 
practices, practical insights gleaned from case studies, guidance from industry 
experts, and our own experience. We didn’t necessarily believe that the direc-
tion forward would be presented in a neat and tidy package, but there are some 
smart connected approaches for a more responsible design practice we charted 
out for you in this chapter. Despite the impactful lessons, it seemed that for 
every positive best practice tip we received or piece of upbeat news we read, 
environmental and social progress were tempered by dire international reports 
on global warming impacts, oil spills, wildlife extinction, or arduous politi-
cal battles between ideology and common sense. Although discouraging and 
sometimes hopeless, it made us realize how important designing for sustain-
ability truly is.
We also found somewhat unsurprisingly that in our professional lives, consis-
tently implementing sustainability best practices and our systems thinking 
strategies proved difficult at times. It was especially challenging when a project 
timeline was too aggressive or the client was not of the same mindset. We often 
came across clients unwilling to try new approaches fearful of the immediate 
cost being more important than future gains or were mired in the past—“we 
always do it this way, why change it?” These obstacles, however, made us ask our-
selves again the very same questions that inspired us to write this book. How 
do we integrate systems thinking and sustainable outcomes with everyday print 
or digital projects? How do we effectively convince our clients or our employers 
the importance of sustainable design? There isn’t always a bullet-proof answer 
that works in every scenario, but clear case studies in this book and beyond offer 
strategies that can help.
The underlying theme of all the case studies, however, is that to design sus-
tainably, it’s important to understand that our world is connected by a bal-
ance of interlocking biological ­systems—systems which should be mimicked 
as opposed to being destroyed through design work. These systems are sus-
tainable where the stocks and flows are circular and replenishing. This fact 
clearly indicates that graphic designers must become more skilled at creating 
responsibly in this teeming world of complex and delicate ecosystems. This 
takes time. Time which must be spent exploring, trying, failing, and trying 
again to learn more about designing with systems and sharing this knowledge 

100
Design to Renourish
(yet another reason why we wrote this book). The path forward is one like your 
grandfather described to you as his childhood journey—uphill both ways and 
full of potholes.
INSIGHTS FROM OUR CASE STUDIES
When we sent out the call for submissions for this book, we were optimisti-
cally looking to learn how designers persuade hesitant or resistant clients to 
implement triple bottom line focused projects using systems thinking. Since 
this process is relatively new to graphic design, we knew it would be a chal-
lenge to locate exclusively case studies that implemented systems thinking. 
Within the submitted case studies, we found that a few studios were mapping 
systems of interaction and impact internally or with their client, while a few 
others were actually thinking in systems whether they realized it or not. That 
was promising. However, all the case studies we received did not meet our sec-
ond goal of achieving balanced triple bottom line results with resistant clients. 
Instead, all of the ten case studies involved a studio or designer working with 
like-minded clients.
Despite this, all the case studies combined provide an interesting snapshot of 
where graphic design is today with regard to sustainability and systems think-
ing. We feel as a collective that these projects’ stories can help shift our role 
as graphic designers from strictly service providers to systems design strate-
gists and eventually help transform the profession into one with a healthier 
and more sustainable future. The valuable reflections from each of the case 
studies illustrate how the design studio or designer proposed unique sustain-
able solutions to various obstacles when working with clients and vendors. 
When there were bumps in the road, the designers challenged the traditional, 
resource-intensive, and “easy” status-quo solution to achieve the most sustain-
able result. This section of the chapter is a general overview of all the case stud-
ies’ best practices that, most importantly, are extremely practical and can be 
implemented today. The collection of lessons learned is also a living document 
that the graphic design community can continue to explore and build upon 
with ideas for future projects and challenges. All of the following tips are more 
easily implemented by designing using systems thinking. Zooming in and out 
of different social, environmental, and economic relationships helps designers 
understand the opportunities, impacts, strengths, and weaknesses of differ-
ent design decisions. Beyond trying out the techniques described in the case 
studies, it is paramount that time and practice is invested in systems thinking. 
Understanding how one can design more meaningful, sustainable, and usable 
outcomes with biological systems as a guide will provide a means to reach the 
seemingly unattainable triple bottom line.

101
Today
Map the project and its impacts
As described in Chapter 2, to think in systems means understanding that our 
world is interconnected and consequently a general knowledge of our biologi-
cal systems is vital to create positive impacts. Environmental Studies Professor 
David Orr elaborates: “(d)esigning with nature disciplines human intentions 
with the growing knowledge of how the world works as a physical system. The 
goal is not total mastery but harmony that causes no ugliness, human or eco-
logical, somewhere else or at some later time. And it is not just about making 
things, but rather remaking the human presence in the world in a way that 
honors life and protects human dignity.”1 Understanding the project goals and 
mapping the audiences, outcomes, vendors (and their geographic locations), 
and finally evaluating the possibilities from these will help visualize where your 
decisions have positive and negative effects. Modern Species found that “(o)nce 
you know where you can make a big impact, you can focus your design thinking 
on those issues to find better solutions to difficult problems.” Metalli Lindberg’s 
case study explains that mapping using diagrams or infographics often leads to 
unexpected or fresh ideas and that’s when new business and creative opportuni-
ties can arise.
Backyard Creative’s brainstorming sketches and story tree is another example 
of an approach to mapping. In our own experiences with mapping, we’ve used 
pretty much anything handy from the ubiquitous Post-It notes to white boards or 
the backs of used napkins from the local coffee shop. (Generally, we’ve found that 
mapping out the project by hand has proven much more effective for team col-
laboration and rapid visualization.) Reviewing this map or, even better, creating 
one with the client is a more convincing method to ensure a solutions approach 
to a balanced triple bottom line and also serves as a guide to navigate the designer 
and the client through the creative process.
The argument against using systems thinking suggests if you are always trying 
to focus on the entire system, then you will never be able to focus on any one 
thing, and you may never find solutions to anything. We disagree. It’s like saying, 

102
Design to Renourish
“If it’s too difficult, don’t try.” So the suggestion of working with the client is 
an important one as creating a map as a team or simultaneously with the users 
allows more eyes on the prize of positive impact. As working in groups some-
times necessitates, the creation of the map can also be broken into more man-
ageable chunks assigned to smaller teams tasked to focus exclusively on people, 
planet, or profit, or instead to delegate duties to gather data or explore alternative 
materials and ideas. Whichever way you complete this map of the project, be 
aware that designers are not experts in everything and sharing it with your team 
or client will be most beneficial and effective. Freelancers, usually working solo, 
may face some additional challenges with systems thinking, where group discus-
sion is important. We suggest again that creating a map with the client will help, 
but remember there is always a large network of peers that can be available for 
brainstorming over a Fair Trade cup of Joe.
Work locally and choose renewables
Backyard Creative and their client, Vancouver Island Expeditions, made working 
with local vendors a priority. Compared with large chain stores, locally owned 
businesses reinvest a much larger amount of their revenue back into the local 
economy. This is called the Local Multiplier Effect. On average, for every one dol-
lar spent at a local business, about half of that dollar, 48% to be exact,2 is rein-
vested in local area, while, in comparison, a chain store only reinvests roughly 
15 cents of that same dollar back into the community.3 Many studies have also 
shown that median income has risen faster in communities with more thriving 
local businesses, as larger international box stores can depress wages and benefits 
and decrease the number of retail jobs in the area.4 Dr. Stephen J. Goetz from 
Penn State University proved (in both rural and urban settings) communities 
with “larger density of small, locally owned businesses experienced greater per 
capita income growth between 2000 and 2007.”5
The positive effects of doing business locally do not end there (Figure 5.1). 
Supporting local businesses also helps develop a better sense of community by 
strengthening social and economic relationships which in turn can lead to hap-
pier people and greater resident retention. In fact, a 2011 study found that “(c)oun-
ties with a vibrant small-business sector have lower rates of mortality and a lower 
prevalence of obesity and diabetes.”6 Walkable downtowns, greater community 

103
Today
pride, and increased civic participation combine to provide clear opportunities 
for folks to work together for mutual benefit. From an environmental perspec-
tive, by simply reducing the distance traveled to transport goods and resources 
some of the carbon footprint of the design supply chain can be mitigated. In 
short, local businesses can help improve the triple bottom line.
From another case study, Ecocreative’s collaboration with the District Council of 
Mount Barker created a successful project that sourced local materials and talent. 
In their project, not only were the materials local, they were also sustainable. This 
emphasizes the importance of designers sourcing materials locally and working 
with nearby vendors who use renewable energy. Choosing materials manufac-
tured with, and incorporating production processes fueled by, renewable energy 
will minimize the need to drill or extract oil from tar sands, deep from under 
the ocean floor, or next to sensitive wildlife areas. Similar to how choosing local 
helps raise median income, if, in the United States, we increase our renewable 
energy production to 25%, that same amount of electricity (from fossil fuels) can 
create up to three times more jobs.7 However, as we all know, this isn’t the case 
yet. The dependency on fossil fuels for graphic design work is pervasive. Printing 
inks and finishes are petroleum-based. Paper and pulping mills, printing presses, 
and data hosting centers require a lot of energy to function. Computers and other 
technologies used throughout the design process along with shipping raw mate-
rials and finished designed products necessitate burning oil, coal, and natural 
gas. All of the steps in the current process lead to deforestation, create pollution, 
and hasten the rate at which our climate is warming. This linear and destructive 
design process must change.
But how can a designer on the job help support this necessary step in our pro-
fession’s transformation? The market follows consumer demand and increases 
or decreases supply accordingly. Divesting from oil and coal and investing in 
renewables is just one way to speed up a societal shift away from a dirty carbon 
culture to one that is more clean and healthy. By choosing petroleum-based inks 
Figure  5.1  For every one dollar spent at a local business, about 48 cents is rein-
vested in local area, while a chain store only reinvests about 15 cents back into the 
community.

104
Design to Renourish
or materials from across the globe, one supports a carbon-based economy—the 
opposite of what is needed. As designers, we are all connected to this problem and 
indirectly responsible for the mess our decisions can make. Instead of working 
with vendors who rely on fossil fuel for energy, we can avoid another catastrophic 
oil spill like the BP Deepwater Horizon or Exxon Valdez and work with vendors 
that support and use renewable energy. As comedian Bill Maher sarcastically 
said, “You know what happens when windmills collapse into the sea? A splash.”
Learn about materials and manufacturing
This seemingly obvious bit of advice may be among the most important, and 
the most time consuming. This is why the designers at Cast Iron Design equate 
sustainability research to investigative journalism and comment that extra time 
is needed in a systems thinking process to ensure you have explored not only the 
bigger picture but also the details. This is not time wasted, however. The knowl-
edge gained from learning about materials and manufacturing processes are 
valuable to help educate clients and stakeholders and for making sound design 
decisions. It is also useful to help inform and inspire other designers to embark 
on the path toward sustainability. As the gatekeepers who stand in between the 
client and the consumer, graphic designers can control what enters the world, 
good or bad. Question “what is good?” and find ways to make that happen.
La PAGE designers also recommend asking manufacturers about the origin of 
all possible materials and design for recyclability or reuse once the materials 
are not in use. This involves systems thinking and mapping the type of possible 
materials, their geographic locations, and impacts of each. This initially takes 
time, but once you acquire information about a material or other ­designers 
share that knowledge with each other, the mapping and decision-making 
­processes will go faster.
In general, virgin materials should be replaced with predominantly post-­
consumer ones that renourish our society and planet. For example, designers 
Jesvin Yeo and Alving Ng at Designing Cultures Studio advise using mate-
rials that are made from raw ingredients that grow quickly—like bamboo. 
Agricultural residues like wheat straw have a quick growing cycle and can be 
turned into paper products that have a considerably smaller environmental 

105
Today
footprint when compared with tree fibers. Wheat straw, which has less than half 
the ­environmental footprint of 100% virgin tree fiber paper,8 is also becoming a 
popular substitute for tree fiber paper with mills in operation or being launched 
in India, Canada, and the Pacific Northwest of the United States. Going for-
ward, designers can tackle the concept of “to renourish” by growing fiber for 
paper through the planting of native grasses in areas that need soil remediation 
(brownfields) with additional compost to clean and improve soil. Also, with 
smarter crop rotation, farmers can grow food like wheat during one season and 
then canola the next or plant winter cover crops (between growing seasons) like 
vetch, oats, or rye to add much needed nitrogen to the soil, improve the soil’s 
ability to hold water, and control weeds (avoiding fertilizers, pesticides, and river 
runoff). The waste from all of these plants can be turned into commercial paper 
products—which can also help support farmers. This paper and packaging can 
be collected later and used as compost (to also improve soil) or recycled (with 
the right municipal multistream recovery system)—leaving trees standing. This 
is becoming ever more important. The designer as a citizen must increasingly 
support processes that sequester the carbon from our atmosphere to slow the 
negative repercussions of global warming.
Minimize materials and design backward
When design projects take the form of physical objects, it’s important to remem-
ber the familiar 1970 mantra of “reduce, reuse, and recycle.” At a glance, it’s 
easy to notice that “reduce” comes first in the slogan and actually for a really 
good reason. While recycling is advertised and promoted the most out of the 
“Three R’s” as an eco-friendly exercise, it is reduction where emphasis should 
be placed. Reducing material used, from a basic perspective, can save the cli-
ent money and, in turn, reduce waste and negative environmental or social 
impacts. However, there are even more critical reasons to minimize the amount 
of material that is used in print, exhibition, or signage projects. The reduction 
of material usage is paramount due to growing global populations, consequent 
increased consumption and waste, and dwindling new resources. It is worth 
remembering as well that our planet is warming, which will create extreme shifts 
in weather, temperature, and rainfall (as we’re already seeing in various parts 
of the Western United States, Australia, and Brazil) making access to food and 
other natural resources difficult and more expensive. Naomi Klein, in her 2014 

106
Design to Renourish
book This Changes Everything urges a return for wealthy Western nations to the 
consumption levels of the 1970s (falling in line with our hippie mantra) to slow 
our carbon emissions and rising global temperatures. Questioning the initial 
project outcomes, choosing vendors that use renewable energy, and minimizing 
material use and waste are just three connected ways graphic designers can help 
to improve our planet.
From a different case study, Swerve Design shared how they minimized materi-
als by considering which printed formats and sizes would use the least amount 
of resources. Cast Iron Design found that allowing the size of the press sheet to 
determine the dimensions of the print piece is helpful to minimize trim waste 
and help stay under budget. Today, they specifically use the Re-nourish online 
“Project Calculator” to size all their print projects efficiently for the press sheet. 
Lisa Hemingway at Backyard Creative uses the same method to consider the 
end of the project lifecycle first. She considers where the project will “die” and 
designs in reverse. This concept is called “designing backward.” Designer Brian 
Dougherty uses this phrase to describe his studio Celery Design’s creative process 
and explained it in detail in his 2008 book Green Graphic Design. Dougherty’s 
book has clearly inspired many designers from our case studies and his method 
of designing backward is a practical strategy to follow while making detailed 
decisions about your project in your systems map.
Be passionate and excited about creating a more 
responsible outcome
Enthusiasm is contagious. Any designer that has ever successfully pitched a 
project understands that when you love what you do, and the more passion-
ate and convincing you are, the more likely the client is to jump on board. 
This rings true when it comes to educating a client about designing sustain-
ably. Enthusiasm helps make a presentation and a message much more power-
ful because that energy comes through in your body language and in what you 
say. Edward Morris from The Canary Project explains that people respond to 
emotional dedication, suggesting that designers can explain why the ethics of 
sustainable design align with the values of the client. When the designer and the 
client are working together toward a common objective, it is highly likely to be 
successful and sustainable.

107
Today
This enthusiasm about sustainability can also “add considerable value to your 
design practice,” according to Cast Iron Design. They believe that sustainability 
is “an exciting pursuit that provides an immediate sense of accomplishment and 
satisfaction.” As designers, we have an obligation to improve lives through the 
things that we make. When a design project is completed sustainably, designers 
can take pride knowing that they are stewards of the earth and control the ways 
in which they impact people, the planet, and the economy.
Enthusiasm also intensifies focus. The competitive nature of many designers 
pushes us to continue to improve and step forward with each project until some-
day the profession of graphic design is working to renourish our world, its people, 
and all living things.
Build trust and stay true to values
Building trust is a crucial requirement in sustaining any professional relation-
ship, whether it is about creating confidence and loyalty on the end-user side or 
establishing rapport between the designer and the client (or supervisor). With 
the latter, it is crucial that when trying to convince a client to work together 
toward sustainable design solutions that they have faith in you and your ideas. 
As you may recall, our first step in the woven circular model of systems thinking 
is to “listen to the client and collectively determine project goals.” This is a vital 
first step to build a lasting professional relationship and to understand the goals 
and values of both parties. Architect William McDonough believes in putting 
values first. Doing so helps businesses “set purposeful goals and seek continuous 
improvement in everything they do.”9 It is important to learn about the client’s 
values and adhere to them throughout the process. Studio EMMI also finds this 
to be true and suggests to “(f)ind out what really matters to the client (not just 
what they have requested in the brief).” As designers, we can honor our clients’ 
values, possibly even building on them, and work to follow those values through 
their visual communication.
In the case study from Cast Iron Design’s Jonny Black, he explains that the key 
to a good client/designer relationship is trust fostered by honesty, kindness, thor-
oughness, and by genuinely caring about the client’s goals and mission. Once 
that trust was established, he explains, “the rest was easy.”

108
Design to Renourish
Challenge existing processes and project constraints
This piece of advice was the most popular among the designers highlighted 
in this book. Designers from Modern Species, Swerve Design, Studio EMMI, 
Metalli Lindberg, and Ecocreative all suggest asking questions and learning 
about where and how your design ­solutions will live and die. Be curious and ask 
as many questions as possible of clients and their stakeholders to learn about 
why a project needs to be created. Zooming out on the systems map to think 
about the big picture and potential impacts helps inform more questions and 
inspire potential solutions. At the same time, our design process should always 
include a research phase that informs the brainstorming. These ideas should be 
discussed, revamped, and explored in detail to determine their potential positive 
and negative impacts. (From our “Powers of Ten” example in Chapter 2, this step 
is visualized as zooming in.) Furthermore, as you weave back and forth between 
idea generation, discussion, and analysis, “be curious” as both studios Modern 
Species and Metalli Lindberg suggest. By finding out what really matters to the 
client and what they are trying to achieve—beyond what has been requested in 
the brief—might lead to alternative, more effective, and sustainable solutions 
than what the client initially brought to the table.
There will be tradeoffs
When a successful project does happen, it’s wonderful; however, making it hap-
pen on the first try is not always possible, particularly when working toward 
sustainability. Often, there will be compromises or tradeoffs. But designers 

109
Today
can use these opportunities to push the boundaries of their own creativity 
and problem-solving skills, as partner and creative director Gage Mitchell at 
Modern Species did in his Qet Botanicals project. The original goal for the 
packaging design was to eliminate the box altogether but there was no way to 
fit all the necessary information on the smaller bottles. Instead, the idea of a 
half-box emerged from ideation and discussion. The smaller box minimized 
material use and was made from 100% postconsumer waste–recycled paper 
that has all the trusted certifications like FSC, Green Seal, Green-e certified, 
and Processed Chlorine Free.
In another scenario, the positive social impact of a design solution may out-
weigh the possible negative environmental impacts resulting from the produc-
tion or disposal of a design. For instance, one of the most effective ways to 
engage non-native speaking, low-income communities can be through printed 
materials. To promote a beneficial new government service to a ­low-income 
community, the most effective solution could be creating a ­brochure in several 
languages. The value of the design solution cannot be weighed independently 
from the purpose of the design. There is a tradeoff that occurs when consider-
ing the most effective method for communication with no simple solution. The 
choice to print thousands of brochures, as described in the example above, 
consumes natural resources, adds to pollution, and costs taxpayers’ money. 
However, the end result educates the community about an important service 
that improves the standards of living and provides an important benefit for 
many. In this case, the designer can employ innovative ways to create and pro-
duce the brochure sustainably. The process can involve a give and take, and is 
often very challenging.
Tradeoffs are commonplace when designing for sustainability and take some 
­creative problem-solving—a skill that just so happens to be the strength of graphic 
designers, although, sometimes it means piling on more work. Backyard Creative 
worked with two different printers in order to produce both pieces locally, and 
when Cast Iron Design could not find a suitable web hosting company powered 
by renewable energy, they recommended that their client purchase Renewable 
Energy Credits to offset the energy used in hosting their website. While the effec-
tiveness of energy credits is highly debated, this was the next best alternative to 
using renewable energy in Cast Iron Design’s situation. To ensure their energy 
uses would be covered with room to spare, they purchased more than four times 
the amount of credits necessary. Working to find suitable alternatives when the 
initial idea doesn’t work takes dedication and passion (and if you’ve made it this 
far into the book, you’ve proven to have both traits).
Designers can create a better world, but it will require a shift in the process to 
systems thinking and a change in behavior. Designer Mike Montero, from Mule 
Design Studio in San Francisco, suggests that as designers, “we need to fear the 
consequences of our work more than we fear the consequences of speaking up” 

110
Design to Renourish
as “(we) are responsible for what (we) put into the world.” Design, although not 
singularly, is largely responsible for increases in the speed of global warming, 
deforestation, pollution, and other ills; however, graphic designers can be an inte-
gral part of the solution.
ENDNOTES
	
1.	Orr, David W. 2004. The Nature of Design: Ecology, Culture, and Human 
Intention. Oxford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom.
	
2.	“The Multiplier Effect of Local Independent Businesses.” n.d. American 
Independent Business Alliance. http://www.amiba.net/resources/­multiplier-
effect/. Accessed September 11, 2015.
	
3.	This statistic is specific to the US, but similar results happen in other coun-
tries as well.
	
4.	Neumark, David, Junfu Zhang, and Stephen Ciccarella. 2008. “The Effects 
of Wal-Mart on Local Labor Markets.” Journal of Urban Economics 63 (2): 
405–30.
	
5.	Fleming, David A, and Stephan J. Goetz. 2011. “Does Local Firm 
Ownership Matter?” Economic Development Quarterly 25 (April): 277–81. 
doi:10.1177/0891242411407312.
	
6.	Blanchard, Troy C., Charles Tolbert, and Carson Mencken. 2011. “The 
Health and Wealth of US Counties: How the Small Business Environment 
Impacts Alternative Measures of Development.” Cambridge Journal of 
Regions, Economy, and Society 8. doi:10.1093/cjres/rsr034v1.
	
7.	 “Benefits of Renewable Energy Use.” n.d. Union of Concerned Scientists. 
http://www.ucsusa.org/clean_energy/our-energy-choices/renewable-energy/
public-benefits-of-renewable.html#.V6Ol-WXwzrk. Accessed September 11, 
2015.
	
8.	 Offsetters. 2014. “Expanded Comparative Life Cycle Study of Wheat Straw 
Paper.” Step Forward Paper. http://stepforwardpaper.com/wp-content/uploads/​
2014/10/SFP-life-cycle-study-final-141009.pdf. Accessed September 11, 2015.
	
9.	McDonough, William. “Driving Sustainable Transformation via the Power 
of Design.” The Guardian. August 19, 2013. https://www.­theguardian.com/
sustainable-business/sustainable-transformation-power-design. Accessed 
September 11, 2015.

111
Chapter 6
TOMORROW
“Don’t stop thinking about tomorrow, Don’t stop, it’ll soon be here,” sang 
Fleetwood Mac in 1977; however, as we save drafts of this book to the cloud, 
while receiving real-time news on a smartwatch millions of times more power-
ful than the Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC) in 1969, it seems like we’re living 
in the future now. It makes us wonder what lies ahead for us as graphic designers. 
Our case studies highlight some great practical and inspirational strategies for 
designing more sustainably today, but how will they change in the approaching 
decades? If anyone were required to accurately predict the future of the profes-
sion, they would have a difficult time doing so. The incredibly quick techno-
logical advances in computing that has taken place over the past 30 years have 
helped the world become a lot more connected and consequently socially aware. 
This current “information age” has allowed designers to explore new areas to use 
their expertise, make more money (for some), and expand their skillsets beyond 
simply print, signage, and branding. Graphic design has changed drastically 
since the days of only controlling where ink falls on paper. Many design vision-
aries in 1996 would be hard pressed to imagine the world as it is now—mobile 
apps and devices, cloud computing, social media, and most importantly how 
we, as designers, have helped to damage our planet.
Hopefully, your design studies would have introduced you to Victor Papanek 
(who we quoted in Chapter 1) whose work dates further back than the past 
30 years to the 1960s. He may not have been able to predict how fast technol-
ogy has changed and influenced our profession, but 50 years ago he was able to 
get a few other things right. He wrote in Design for the Real World that “... by 
creating whole species of permanent garbage to clutter up the landscape, and by 
choosing materials and processes that pollute the air we breathe, designers have 
become a dangerous breed.” He also suggested that “(d)esign, if it is to be ecologi-
cally responsible and socially responsive, must be revolutionary and radical.”1 
Both thoughts are indeed radical and sadly a wake-up call that in the 1960s went 
largely ignored. But effects of global warming are difficult to ignore now—the 
extreme weather happening all over the globe is nature’s air horn blasting in our 
ears to pay attention, to evolve.
It’s fair to say then that the future of graphic design is intrinsically tied to how 
society chooses to tackle not only global warming but also the growing divide 
between the extremely wealthy and the poor. Designer and educator Bernard 
Canniffe passionately lectures on the designers’ connection not only to the econ-
omy but also to the members of the community. His work shows quite well that 
“graphic design needs the middle class.” The middle class makes up the bulk of 
the population in the United States (where Re-nourish is located) and has been 
the backbone of labor and economic growth for decades. However, as Picchi is the 

112
Design to Renourish
economic backbone of America, then the country is developing ­osteoporosis.”3 
Sustainability can only occur when there is balance in the triple bottom line of 
people, profit, and planet. This means that society must remedy the income gap. 
Equity is a must.
We believe that the destiny of graphic design is, yes, tied to what happens with 
technology, culture, economy, and environment. And considering the facts 
before us, we feel strongly that systems thinking is the best process to design in 
harmony with nature. The last part of this book describes our own detailed and 
sometimes lofty predictions for the graphic designer as a creative person and also 
as a citizen.
A RADICAL TRANSITION
Systems thinking is the path forward. It is the only current conceivable way to 
continue designing effectively. The design process must align to bio­mimicry. 
The outcomes must strive to make lives better keeping in mind that readability, 
beauty, and usability aren’t the only elements that make design work prolific. 
Outcomes that help the client keep the air and water clean, the planet free of 
burning fossil fuels, are affordable and fairly sourced, are manufactured locally 
under safe working conditions, and contribute to gender equity and in general 
higher pay are “good design.” Along the way, this would require minimizing 
and choosing materials from waste streams, creating work that lasts longer and 
can be later reused, recycled, or upcycled. Clearly, creating a digital experience 
would avoid the use of materials from the perspective of the graphic designer, 
but it would not absolve designers of responsibility. Energy (from hosting), 
impact of experience, user privacy, accessibility, and usability are all pivotal 
to an outcome that attempts to balance the triple bottom line. Achieving this 
lofty goal requires a better understanding of our complex profession, its audi-
ences, and the potential positive and negative impacts of the work. Systems 
thinking provides an opportunity by co-designing with clients to map out the 
audience(s), materials, vendors, and potential design outcomes while zooming 
in and out of each to find a balanced triple bottom line result to instruct the 
final design decision.
This future of graphic design will evolve from a radical transition for sure. 
However, it is one that is needed. As Papanek described design work as perma-
nent garbage that pollutes the air and land, designers can instead create work that 
does the opposite—causes no harm and improves lives. Humanity is not stron-
ger than Mother Earth. Naomi Klein argues that “our economic system and our 
planetary system are now at war.”4 In other words, the way all economies (and 
consequently design) function in which overconsumption and infinite growth 
are worshipped is not only unsustainable but also literally in opposition to one 
another. The way design is created and consumed will have to change now, not 
sometime down the line. This will take everyone, and it means (as you saw in the 

113
Tomorrow
case studies) that you individually can make a difference one design decision at 
a time.
Design must course correct to choose renewable energy vendors in addition to a 
new and more effective design processes via systems thinking. Already the design 
school at Carnegie Mellon has completely overhauled its entire design curriculum 
to focus on what they call “Transitional Design.” They hope this new design edu-
cation will help to prepare and empower future designers for the changes ahead. 
Carnegie Mellon has readily made their entire educational materials online and 
open-sourced5 for other design educators across the world to share experiences and 
learn different ways to teach systems thinking to their students.
OPEN-SOURCE KNOWLEDGE SHARING
Education is precisely where this great transition should start. Systems thinking 
should be taught in colleges and universities; however, if you have already com-
pleted your degree (and will miss out on this training), there is obviously another 
way to learn—on the job. Friends working next to you and remotely have much to 
offer and it’s often through colleagues that information is shared. Lessons learned, 
like those from the case studies in this book, are prime examples of how knowl-
edge is shared with one another as new projects begin. As pointed out earlier, those 
who are transitioning their design process to think in systems will most likely find 
they need to add additional time for client projects at the outset (something, of 
course, many clients don’t like to hear). What is needed is open-source, online (and 
books like this one) depositories of best practices, vendors, materials, and discus-
sion forum that can be used to avoid pitfalls and save precious time spent research-
ing and problem-solving issues other designers/agencies have experienced. From 
our case studies, we learned that Cast Iron Design “... spent dozens of extra hours 
researching cotton production, woven label production, eco binding options for 
journals, 100% recycled corrugated box sourcing, recyclability of various adhesive 
packaging tapes, and so on.” This was a definite investment for their client, but in 
the end, the information gathered could also be shared with the design community. 
The great news is that Re-nourish, the Living Principles, and other resource-driven 
initiatives are platforms for open-source knowledge that have helped lead the way 
for websites like the recently launched National Materials Marketplace. This pilot 
project is a joint venture led by the Corporate Eco Forum (CEF), United States 
Business Council for Sustainable Development (US BCSD), and the World Business 
Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) to connect international compa-
nies with an online database that helps customers reuse or exchange materials and 
to help establish a revolving supply chain.6 This type of online resource can help 
eliminate waste, reuse and recycle materials, cut costs, reduce carbon footprint, 
and hopefully speed up the educational process on how to design using systems 
thinking. However, our online resources can be larger than simply a virtual mar-
ketplace to buy/sell reused or recycled materials, they can also feature a means for 
sharing and discussing best practices for implementing systems thinking.

114
Design to Renourish
MORE EXPERIENCE-BASED OUTCOMES
The future discussed so far in this section exclusively involves only the physi-
cal outputs as a profession. The planet’s damaged biological systems combined 
with the dire consequences resulting from global warming demand that we all 
produce and consume less stuff. This includes the amount of physical work that’s 
done. This is clearly controversial and not something anyone, including us, wants 
to hear; however, a forecasted 4°C global temperature increase by the end of the 
21st century will be devastating to our global community. Designers can decide 
to design a better tomorrow today or precariously wait and let this current path 
literally pave the way for us. The latter will be catastrophic. This points to immi-
nent changes for the graphic design profession. Looking ahead, we believe expe-
riences will matter more than objects. Recent psychological studies have shown 
that spending money on experiences “provide(s) more enduring happiness” than 
purchasing a product.7 Creating fleeting moments whether good or bad, finds 
psychology Professor Thomas Gilbert, generate more happiness and better sto-
ries that help to improve the construction of individual identities and personal 
connections with others. The graphic designer already does create experiences 
digitally within the service and branding industries. The sense of interaction and 
joy (hopefully) one feels from using a web or mobile app or the sense of excite-
ment an audience feels while watching the captivating opening credits of a film 
are two examples of many that define experiential design. Also, branding which 
traditionally was logotypes and taglines on printed brochureware is now defined 
by the customer experience whether it be in a store or online. No longer only 
focused on what the customers see, branding is now about what people feel when 
interacting or thinking about a brand. These experiences can be more lasting, 
fulfilling, and memorable if the designer involves not just the client but also the 
user in a more collaborative design process. Many design studios like IDEO and 
Frog are well-versed in user-centered design and provide great online toolkits to 
help enhance and develop an effective design experience. Using these resources 
and improving upon them through trial and error will only help navigate the 
profession forward.
Already there is an example of what could be part of the future in the recent 
growth in the sharing economy—or the reuse of excess goods, skills, space, ser-
vices, or even money. Companies like Airbnb, Etsy, Kickstarter, and Freecycle use 
design successfully to help create revenue streams sharing or reusing goods and 
services. Usually nothing physical is actually created in this experience, which 
does help the triple bottom line in many ways. Design in the sharing economy 
reduces consumption of new items while still adding revenue into the economy, 
allows access to services to many who can’t afford them otherwise, and also helps 
reduce dangerous greenhouse gas emissions from manufacture and transport of 
new goods. And if you recall the importance of the local multiplier effect, you’ll 
recognize that sharing resources locally will also help improve the community 
much more effectively.

115
Tomorrow
It’s also important to note that creating great experiences will require energy to 
power. It may also mean needing connected objects and printed or digital cam-
paigns for folks to know that this experience exists. If physical ephemera are 
needed as part of an experience, they will hopefully be designed and manufac-
tured with strategies like the ones learned from our case studies to help achieve 
sustainability. At any rate, the first step to thinking in systems that we proposed 
earlier is still valid in creating an enduring experience—knowing the most effec-
tive outcome for the goals of the project. Asking more strategic, poignant, and 
informed questions of the client is a vital part to move beyond pre-determined 
outcomes allowing the discussion to open up to the possibility of designing for an 
experience or service. Then, including those potential outcomes and audiences in 
your systems map while also researching their impacts are crucial to thinking in 
systems as a designer.
OUR COLLECTIVE AND 
INDIVIDUAL VALUES
The notion that science will save us is the chimera that allows the pres-
ent generation to consume all the resources it wants, as if no genera-
tions will follow it. It is the sedative that allows civilization to march 
so steadfastly toward environmental catastrophe. It forestalls the real 
solution, which will be in the hard, nontechnical work of changing 
human behavior.
—Kenneth Brower8
However, before any real transition can happen, the graphic design community 
together and individually must reflect upon on our values. Designers as citizens 
have an obligation to be respectful to all fellow human beings and to the planet 
we share. As a collective, designers must ask what issues are important? What 
do we want to make and why? What are the ethics of the design profession and 
consequently how do they affect the planet, economy, and society? If sustain-
ability is a high priority, it will mean a transition that necessitates rethinking of 
what is being made and the way in which design is practiced and approached.
This will be difficult. Should designers decide between making a decent paycheck 
or designing only for clients with ethical compatibility to themselves? Should 
designers refuse to take on a project unless the client does business in a way that 
supports social and environmental initiatives? The short answer is no. While 
some of the most enjoyable and rewarding work can be for good causes, mak-
ing a living and having a responsible design practice do not need to be mutually 
exclusive. The designers in Chapter 4 have outlined practical lessons on how to 
design to improve the triple bottom line while working with clients. Our systems 
thinking process can help plot out that course and also be a visual reference point 
throughout the process. There is no need to turn away freelance work or quit your 

116
Design to Renourish
job when a request comes in to develop chewing gum packaging, for example. 
Instead, you can think and design in systems to direct the focus of your work 
toward a positive impact. Yes, even with designing chewing gum wrappers.
Professional graphic design organizations like Society of Graphic Designers of 
Canada (GDC) and the AIGA (The Professional Association for Design) both 
propose standards of professional practice that define the expectations of their 
member’s actions toward ethical behavior and socially and environmentally 
responsible design. The standards are a suggestion, however, and paying mem-
bership dues does not bind a designer to adhere to these organizations’ values.
So how do designers join forces and design for the greater good when there are 
no current guidelines, rules, or checks and balances? Does the future of design 
require something like a physician’s Hippocratic Oath where designers pledge 
to do no harm? Canadian graphic designers can apply to become GDC certified 
indicating a high level of professional standard has been met as well as pledging 
a commitment to an ethical and sustainable practice as outlined by the GDC. 
Perhaps, there is a possibility where designers worldwide, much like electricians 
or architects, must be registered and certified in order to practice professionally. 
Before becoming certified, a graphic designer would be required to complete 
rigorous sustainability training and subsequent follow-up training as new tech-
nologies emerge and discoveries are made. There could be a metrics in which to 
quantify the impacts of design work, similar to the way LEED certification mea-
sures the impacts of buildings, interiors, and neighborhoods for both sustain-
ability and community benefits. With this system for graphic design, there is 
hope that all design work would be measured against a set of standards regard-
ing environmental, social, and financial impacts plainly accessible to the public 
for ultimate transparency. It would be important with any sort of certification 
that the emphasis is placed on impact and not aesthetics limiting a designer’s 
creative freedom. Deregulate imagination!
DESIGN TO RENOURISH
The sustainable design discussion seems to usually focus on the notion of reduc-
ing the negative impacts of designed outcomes. Designers hear that by using 
recycled paper and vegetable-based inks, they’re “saving the environment” or 
by leaving a female model’s blemish un-Photoshopped they’re boosting women’s 
collective self-esteem. Actions like these do indeed help graphic design move 
closer to becoming more sustainable (so keep on doing them!), but they still have 
a negative environmental, social, or financial impact—just less so.
The title of this book, we believe, is also a part of the future for graphic designers. 
Design to renourish means that design outcomes and process could work not 
only to minimize negative consequences but instead, and even better, create posi-
tive effects. This is a future where graphic design work improves and replenishes 

117
Tomorrow
resources—in other words, that chewing gum package adds value to the triple 
bottom line in having been made.
Designing to renourish is not a new idea generally—being only slightly more 
common in other design fields like industrial, product, and furniture design—
but it still hasn’t been applied to the design profession in a significant way. 
Herman Miller has numerous Cradle to Cradle CertifiedCM products in its 
furniture lines that epitomize the idea of design to renourish. Each part of 
these products can be easily replaced, recycled, or put back into the system to 
create new parts. Their furniture is not only safe from harmful chemicals and 
processes but Herman Miller is also on a path to becoming carbon neutral by 
2020 and currently uses 100% renewable energy in all their facilities. The goal 
in truly sustainable design is to “close the loop” where nothing becomes waste. 
This is done by using materials that can either be recycled into new products 
or returned to nature through composting.
Similar to Herman Miller, Gavin Munro, from Derbyshire, England, makes chairs. 
Instead of cutting down trees for the lumber, he grows, trains, and grafts small 
trees to grow into chairs. Munro avoids much of the greenhouse gas emissions 
from typical furniture making, instead allows his growing chairs to absorb carbon 
dioxide, prevent soil erosion, provide shelter for wildlife, and add beauty to his 
outdoor factory—a farm. Branches from each tree are trained to grow into a plastic 
form of a chair he designed; once ready, the branches are pruned to “­harvest” the 
chair. The tree can be used again as it is not cut down. Instead, it is only pruned, so 
any new shoots can be trained to make a new chair. Now imagine for a moment if 
these very same principles could be applied to graphic design work!
Gaining in popularity, the concept of repurposing waste is another approach to 
sustainable design. Today, with landfill space busting at the seams and the price 
of new materials increasing, companies are figuring out ways to reuse this abun-
dant resource—waste. United Airlines is developing a better jet fuel using oils 
extracted from animal and vegetable fats from household trash. While the envi-
ronmental footprint of air travel is hefty, using garbage as fuel can help mitigate 
the economic and environmental impact of flying. The airline company is now 
preparing to construct a facility that will produce about 10 million gallons of 
ethanol annually using household garbage.9
Clothing companies like Patagonia and Outerknown are already ahead of the 
game when it comes to making new products from trash. Sustainable practices 
have been a mainstay in Patagonia’s mission. Their pledge to corporate respon-
sibility and environmental advocacy led them, as early as 1993, to create a fleece 
jacket from recycled plastic soda bottles. Now recycled content can be found in 
many of their clothing products.10 Outerknown, founded by pro-surfer Kelly 
Slater, includes 100% recyclable clothing made from reclaimed fishing nets, 
carpet, and other nylon waste from the Pacific Garbage Patch.11 An intriguing 
quality of nylon is that it can be broken down and re-born an infinite amount 

118
Design to Renourish
of times into new clothing, while still keeping the same quality as a fabric. Kelly 
Slater is designing one way to help clean up the ocean from its plastic nightmare 
and turn that into a sustainable clothing company—closing the loop.
When applying these very same principles to graphic design, we can find ways 
to turn “trash into treasure” and create materials that can be infinitely recycled, 
upcycled, or composted (think agricultural fibers) so that the things we cre-
ate continue to provide nourishment for healthy growth. Because the work we 
do as designers affects living systems, graphic designers can create in inno-
vative ways to make those systemic impacts positive. If humans continue to 
believe that they hold dominion over nature as we have done for three centu-
ries, we will leave an inhospitable mess for future generations. Our legacy as a 
people and designers will be an unlivable planet (with a struggling economy) 
that no longer provides clean air, water, and abundant resources. Because we, 
as a society, are idle or too stubborn, future generations will inherit a planet 
that will make them sicker. Design must work to improve the triple bottom 
line. To do this, nature must be the example, where waste equals food (as Bill 
McDonough and Michael Braungart famously proposed). In nature, waste like 
fallen flower petals and seed casings are nourishment for more things to grow. 
(Remember the hawk, the squirrel, and the oak tree?) It makes sense then that 
designers can use this as a guide, so that when a designed piece is no longer 
needed, it provides the materials for new products or it delivers nourishment to 
the soil for new growth. Only by following nature’s systems can the profession 
design to renourish.
We firmly believe the idea of designing to renourish is not far-fetched. The 
inspiration to make it happen is all around us in nature. Blogs, magazines, 
conferences, exhibitions, and books provide designers with a lot of inspira-
tion for beautiful new work but nature is the model for a process to build. 
Nature works through a complex network of interconnected systems that are 
self-perpetuating and healthy (when humans don’t get involved). It is logical, 
then, that creating and thinking in systems is the right way to design. As we 
combat global warming, wealthier economies need to produce and consume 
less (as other nations grow—as sustainability also includes equity) altering 
not only how but what we create. Designed experiences in a sharing economy, 
we believe, will be a big part of our future. But whatever our future holds, 
we can and will build a stronger design community together through this 
journey—and you won’t be alone. Resources like re-nourish.org are places to 
share and learn from others about systems thinking. In-person meetups and 
social media like Twitter and Facebook are also perfect for swapping tips and 
inspiration. The momentum will be contagious. This paradigm shift will also 
require allies, clients, and partners to work together. Designers must change, 
and it will, of course, be a challenge. We must act together now to make our 
design work sustainable as global warming will not wait. This is the mission 
and it starts today onward!

119
Tomorrow
ENDNOTES
	
1.	Papanek, Victor. 2005. Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social 
Change. 2nd ed. Chicago Review Press, Chicago, IL.
	
2.	 These statistics are from the Pew Charitable Trust and show a considerable drop 
in families still in the middle class since 2000. In some of the worst cases, there 
are losses of up to 5%. http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/
blogs/stateline/2015/3/19/the-shrinking-middle-class-mapped-state-by-state. 
Accessed September 25, 2015.
	
3.	Picchi, Aimee. 2015. “America’s Incredible Shrinking Middle Class.” CBS 
News. March 23. http://www.cbsnews.com/news/americas-incredible-
shrinking-middle-class/. Accessed September 25, 2015.
	
4.	Klein, Naomi. 2015. This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. The Climate. 
Reprint edition. Simon & Schuster, New York, NY, p. 21.
	
5.	You can locate these Transitional Design course materials online at 
https://www.academia.edu/13122242/Transition_Design_Overview. This 
site will require setting up a free account to view any resources. Accessed 
September 25, 2015.
	
6.	“New Online Marketplace Will Allow US Companies to Exchange 
Underutilized Materials.” 2015. Sustainable Brands, July 8. http://www​
.­sustainablebrands.com/news_and_views/next_economy/sustainable_
brands/new_online_marketplace_will_allow_us_companies_exchan. 
Accessed September 25, 2015.
	
7.	Kumar, Amit, Matthew A. Killingsworth, and Thomas Gilovich. 2014. 
“Waiting for Merlot: Anticipatory Consumption of Experiential and 
Material Purchases.” Psychological Science 25 (10): 1924–31.
	
8.	 Brower, Kenneth. “The Danger of Cosmic Genius.” The Atlantic. October 27, 
2010. 
http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2010/12/the-danger-
of-cosmic-genius/308306/. Accessed September 25, 2015.
	
9.	 Phillips, Ari. 2015. “This Airline Just Invested Millions Into Turning 
Garbage Into Jet Fuel.” Think Progress. July 3. http://thinkprogress.org/­
climate/2015/07/03/3676300/united-airplanes-​powered-by-household-­
garbage. Accessed September 25, 2015.
	 10.	n.d. Patagonia. http://www.patagonia.com/us/patagonia.go?assetid=2791. 
Accessed September 25, 2015
	 11.	Chow, Lorraine. 2015. “Pro Surfer Kelly Slater Launches Clothing Line 
Made From Ocean Trash.” EcoWatch, July 20. http://www.ecowatch.
com/pro-surfer-kelly-slater-launches-clothing-line-made-from-ocean-
trash-1882072696.html. Accessed September 25, 2015.


121
APPENDIX
RESOURCES
These resources are the ones we have curated and spent time personally investi-
gating and vetting through external sources, and also match Re-nourish’s own 
principles of transparency and actively move the design sustainability movement 
forward.
PACKAGING
GreenBlue
www.greenblue.org
GreenBlue is an environmental nonprofit organization dedicated to the sustain-
able use of materials for designers. GreenBlue has made great strides in the use of 
healthier products and services for home, work, and recreation while promoting 
responsible use and material recovery.
The Sustainable Packaging Coalition
www.sustainablepackaging.org
The Sustainable Packaging Coalition (SPC) is a project of GreenBlue that is com-
mitted to the creation of environmentally and economically responsible packag-
ing. They are the go to online resource for the most up-to-date information and 
strategies for sustainable packaging.
PAPER AND PRINTING
Canopy
www.canopyplanet.org
Canopy is a nonprofit organization dedicated to protecting the environment. 
Together with their partners, Canopy helps create sustainable purchasing guide-
lines and develops comprehensive solutions that protect our forests. One of their 
biggest areas of focus currently is the promotion of agricultural fiber paper as the 
best alternative to tree fiber.

122
Appendix
Conservatree
conservatree.org
Conservatree is a not-for-profit organization dedicated to providing fair and 
reasonable information about paper. They provide information for purchasing 
paper and paper reduction techniques, educational resources surrounding con-
servation and environmental issues, consulting, and recommendations for poli-
cymakers and legislators.
Green Press Initiative
www.greenpressinitiative.org
The Green Press Initiative works to advance awareness and provide educa-
tion regarding the environmental and social impacts of the US book and 
newspaper industries. They deliver toolkits for publishers and printers to help 
start ­responsible environmental policies to aid in this advancement of greener 
presses.
Environmental Paper Network
environmentalpaper.org
The Environmental Paper Network (EPN) is a reliable and credible voice on 
pulp and paper sustainability. The EPN is a network of over 100 organizations 
working for social justice and conservation presented by the expanding forest, 
pulp, and paper industry.
DIGITAL
Green Certified Site
www.co2stats.com
Green Certified SiteTM is a web badge that calculates a website’s environmental 
footprint, provides suggestions for making a website more energy efficient, and 
automatically offsets the site’s carbon footprint through contributions to wind 
and solar farms. While the benefits of carbon offsets are heavily debated (see 
“Carbon Offsetting” in the Terms and Definitions section), there are multiple 
other beneficial tools offered through this resource.
The World Wide Web Consortium
www.w3.org
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) is an international community that 
develops open standards to ensure the long-term growth of the web that is acces-
sible to all. One of W3C’s primary goals is to make the benefits of the web ­available 
to all people, whatever their hardware, software, network infrastructure, native 
language, culture, geographical location, or physical or mental ability.

123
Appendix
CERTIFICATIONS
Ancient Forest Friendly
canopyplanet.org/ancientforest
This certification is among the most reliable paper designations available. Ancient 
forest-friendly paper is chlorine-free, includes no ancient or endangered forest 
fiber, and is made with a high percentage of recycled or straw paper content. Any 
virgin tree fiber used must be certified by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC). 
One can be assured that ancient forest-friendly paper is among the most sustain-
able papers on the market.
B Corporation
www.bcorporation.net
B Corp certification is a third-party certification requiring companies to meet 
social sustainability and environmental performance standards, and account-
ability standards. Certified B Corps (which currently total over 1,000) offer a pos-
itive vision of a better way to do business by creating benefits for all stakeholders, 
not just shareholders. They believe the global economy can be a force for good if 
businesses do no harm and benefit all.
Blue Angel
www.blauer-engel.de
The Blue Angel is a German environmental label that guarantees that a prod-
uct or service meets high standards when it comes to its environmental, health, 
and performance characteristics. In the process, these products and services are 
always evaluated across their entire life cycle. In order to reflect technological 
advances, the Federal Environmental Agency reviews these criteria every three 
to four years. This process requires companies to constantly improve the envi-
ronmental friendliness of their products over time.
Business for Social Responsibility
www.bsr.org
The mission of Business for Social Responsibility (BSR) is to work with busi-
ness to create a just and sustainable world. BSR’s role is to catalyze change 
within business by integrating sustainability into strategy and operations, 
and to promote collaboration among companies and their stakeholders for 
systemic progress. Like B Corporation, they believe that the “role of busi-
ness is to create and deliver products and services in a way that treats people 
fairly, meets individuals’ needs and aspirations within the boundaries of our 
planet, and encourages market and policy frameworks that enable a sustain-
able future.”

124
Appendix
Chlorine Free Product Association
www.chlorinefreeproducts.org
The Chlorine Free Products Association (CFPA) is a trustworthy, independent 
not-for-profit accreditation and standard setting organization. They focus on 
promoting sustainable manufacturing practices, implementing advanced tech-
nologies free of chlorine chemistry, educating consumers on alternatives, and 
developing world markets for sustainably produced third-party-certified prod-
ucts and services.
Cradle to Cradle Products Innovation
www.c2ccertified.org
Cradle to Cradle Products Innovation is an open-sourced product and materi-
als certification system developed by McDonough Braungart Design Chemistry 
(MBDC). Cradle to Cradle or C2C-certified materials meet the following basic 
criteria: 
•	 Made using environmentally safe and healthy materials
•	 Designed for recycling or composting
•	 Produced with renewable energy, and energy and water efficiency
•	 Incorporates strategies for social responsibility
Cradle to CradleSM also refers to a design system in which products are created 
within closed loops, resulting in a waste-free manufacturing process. Material 
inputs and outputs are seen either as technical or biological nutrients; technical 
nutrients can be recycled or reused with no loss of quality, while biological nutri-
ents can be composted or consumed.
Consumer Product Safety Commission
http://www.cpsc.gov
The Consumer Product Safety Commission is an American governmental safety 
agency that reports to the United States Congress. They aim to protect the public 
from unreasonable risks of injury or death associated with the use of thousands 
of consumer products under the agency’s jurisdiction.
EcoLabel
www.ec.europa.eu/environment/ecolabel/index_en.htm
The EU EcoLabel helps designers identify products and services that have a 
reduced environmental impact throughout their life cycle, from the extraction of 
raw material through to production, use, and disposal. Recognized throughout 
Europe, EU EcoLabel is a voluntary label promoting environmental excellence 
which can be trusted as it is set through a regulation of the European Parliament 
and of the Council, and the ­criteria are ­developed and revised in a transparent 
way by a group of experts and stakeholders.

125
Appendix
Eco Logo
www.industries.ul.com/environment/certificationvalidation-marks/ecologo-
product-​certification
Eco Logo is a popular North American environmental labeling program that 
incorporates life-cycle analysis originally developed by the Canadian govern-
ment and now managed by UL, a global independent science safety company. 
Although a paid certification system (with fees in the $1,500–$5,000 range), 
the EcoLabel is widely accepted as a valid labeling system that meets ISO 14024 
standards.
Forest Stewardship Council
www.ic.fsc.org
The Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) is a certification system that pro-
vides standards and assurance that a wood product came from a sustainably 
managed forest. For a paper brand to be FSC Certified, it must follow what 
is called a “chain of custody” process where the wood pulp was harvested 
responsibly from a FSC-certified forest, produced by a FSC-certified mill, 
and finally given to a printer who is also FSC certified. Currently, FSC is the 
only widely accepted international certification program among independent 
environmental advocacy groups but not all FSC-certified papers are equal. 
The three main certifications are the 100% label, mixed sources label, and 
recycled label. The FSC is a positive step forward to prevent illegal logging 
and consequent deforestation by putting public pressure (through certifi-
cation) on manufacturers to adhere to more stringent standards with their 
wood-based products.
Green Seal
www.greenseal.org
Green Seal is a not-for-profit organization that uses life cycle–based sustainabil-
ity ­standards to offer third-party certification for products, services, and compa-
nies. They hope to empower consumers, purchasers, and companies to create a 
more sustainable world.
Green America
www.greenamerica.org/greenbusiness/certification.cfm
Green America is a membership-based not-for-profit organization that hopes 
“to harness economic power—the strength of consumers, investors, businesses, 
and the marketplace—to create a socially just and environmentally sustainable 
society.” Green America focuses on economic action to solve social and envi-
ronmental problems, empowers and mobilizes people to take action, works on 
social justice and environmental responsibility, and helps to stop abusive prac-
tices while creating healthy, just, and sustainable practices.

126
Appendix
Green-e
www.green-e.org
Green-e is an independent consumer protection program monitoring the sale of 
renewable energy and greenhouse gas reductions in the retail market. Green-e 
offers certification and verification of renewable energy and greenhouse gas miti-
gation products and projects.
ISO
www.iso.org
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) is the world’s largest devel-
oper and publisher of international standardization systems. ISO implements 
proprietary, industrial, and commercial standards worldwide.
ISO 14000 addresses “environmental management.” This refers to what the 
organization does to minimize harmful effects to the environment caused by its 
activities, and to continually improve its environmental performance.
ISO 9000 addresses “quality management.” This refers to what the organization 
does to fulfill quality requirements and applicable regulatory requirements while 
aiming to enhance customer satisfaction. The organization must also continue to 
improve its performance in pursuit of these objectives. Both of these are impor-
tant factors that help to gauge the triple bottom line performance of a company.
Rainforest Alliance
www.rainforest-alliance.org
The Rainforest Alliance works to conserve biodiversity and ensure sustainable 
livelihoods by transforming land-use practices, business practices, and consumer 
behavior. They work with forward-thinking farmers, foresters, and tourism 
entrepreneurs to conserve natural resources and ensure the long-term economic 
health of forest communities. In order for a farm or forestry enterprise to achieve 
Rainforest Alliance certification, or for a tourism business to be verified, it must 
meet rigorous standards designed to protect ecosystems, safeguard the well-
being of local communities, and improve productivity. The Rainforest Alliance 
then links these farmers, foresters, and tourism businesses to the growing global 
community of conscientious consumers through the green frog seal. Designers 
can look for this frog symbol and be rest assured that their paper choice is com-
ing from a sustainable source.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
www.osha.gov
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is an American govern-
mental agency that was started with the passing of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Act in 1970. OSHA’s directive from Congress is to assure safe and health-
ful working conditions for working men and women by setting and enforcing 

127
Appendix
standards and by providing training, outreach, education, and assistance. If you 
are a designer outside of the United States, you should look for vendors that are 
certified by comparable organizations or governmental agencies.
Sustainable Green Printing Partnership
sgppartnership.org
The Sustainable Green Printing Partnership (SGP) is a not-for-profit organization 
that provides a sustainable foundation by promoting best practices, networking, 
and innovation among raw material manufacturers, converters, printers, finish-
ing facilities, trade associations, and print buyers. They are the leading certifier of 
North American printing facilities with an in-depth and affordable certification 
process.
DESIGN RESOURCES
Re-nourish
www.re-nourish.com
Re-nourish is a registered 501(c)(3) not-for-profit organization that provides 
online tools advocating awareness and action for systems thinking in the com-
munication design community. Re-nourish believes that “good design” values 
people, the environment, and improves lives. Re-nourish aims to help the prac-
ticing communication designer, educator, and student make positive, greener, 
and pragmatic design decisions. Our tools and resources are created to be 
straightforward and implementable now. Our case studies, articles, and blogs 
provide inspiration and knowledge to help designers implement more sustain-
able strategies.
Lovely as a Tree
lovelyasatree.com
Lovely as a Tree is a London-based organization that aims to enable and inspire 
British graphic designers to make more environmentally friendly choices in their 
work. Lovely as a Tree provides steps for reducing your design footprint, finding 
more sustainably sourced paper and printers, sourcing sustainable design case 
studies, and educating as to how to choose a greener printer.
GreenBiz
www.greenbiz.com
GreenBiz is a content-rich online resource packed with articles, white papers, and 
webcasts for businesses and entrepreneurs. They hope to advance the opportuni-
ties at the intersection of business, technology, and sustainability, and promote 
the potential to drive transformation and accelerate progress—within compa-
nies, industries, and in the very nature of business.

128
Appendix
Inhabitat
inhabitat.com
Inhabitat is a creative weblog devoted to the future of design, tracking the inno-
vations in technology, practices, and materials that are pushing architecture and 
home design toward a smarter and more sustainable future. They provide daily 
inspirational content to connect the design community with the latest sustain-
able design innovations and projects.
The Association of Registered Graphic Designers of Canada
www.rgd.ca/resources/sustainability.php
The Association of Registered Graphic Designers of Canada (RGD) promotes the 
education and sharing of knowledge, research, advocacy, and mentorship. The 
RGD provides professional design standards and best practices in the profession 
and has adopted a sustainability policy on responsible design for people, planet, 
and profit.
The Society for Experiential Graphic Design
segd.org/explore/sustainability
The Society for Experiential Graphic Design (SEGD) is an association of design-
ers “who create content-rich, emotionally compelling, experiential spaces for a 
wide range of environments, from hospitals and transit hubs to museums and 
educational campuses.” This sustainability section of their site provides articles 
and tips for the experiential designer to incorporate into his or her daily practice.
The Living Principles for Design
livingprinciples.aiga.org
The Living Principles website and blog is a social platform where designers 
can ­co-create, share, and showcase best practices, tools, stories, and ideas for 
enabling sustainable action across all design disciplines. Beyond providing an 
online social space for designers to learn about and share their experiences with 
sustainability, The Living Principles also details a framework of environmental, 
social, economic, and cultural sustainability guidelines that can be woven into a 
graphic designers’ daily practice.

129
GLOSSARY
Agricultural Residue
The unused remains of food crops, such as wheat, flax, or corn, that are often 
disposed of by burning in the field, creating air pollution. In North America, 
million tons of agricultural residues are produced annually.1 As a by-product of 
the primary food crop, agricultural residue does not add to the agricultural foot-
print or reduce the availability of food crops. Selling this fiber to paper mills can 
reduce air pollution, save trees by replacing wood fiber for making paper, and 
increase farm earnings. This is currently the most sustainable source for paper 
fiber and our favorite.
Agri-Fiber Paper
Paper made from nonwood agricultural fiber. These fibers fall into three main 
categories:
	
1.	Dedicated fiber crops grown specifically for use in paper products such 
as hemp, bamboo, or kenaf.
	
2.	Agricultural residues diverted from the farming waste stream (see defi-
nition of agricultural residues).
	
3.	Industrial residues leftover as by-products of other fabrication processes.
Because each source of agri-fiber has different environmental requirements 
and impacts, there is no simple answer to the question, “which is better?” But 
choosing agri-fiber papers based on regional logistics can often reduce the 
environmental footprint of the project and is recommended as a potential area 
of savings.
Biodegradable
The ability of a substance to be broken down by biological agents, such as bac-
teria and other enzymes, into basic components. Although there is no univer-
sal definition or certification regarding biodegradability, the US Federal Trade 
Commission has issued the following guideline in its Guide for the Use of 
Environmental Marketing Claims: “A marketer making an unqualified degrad-
able claim should have competent and reliable scientific evidence that the entire 
item will completely break down and return to nature (i.e., decompose into ele-
ments found in nature) within a reasonably short period of time after customary 
disposal.”2
Carbon Dioxide
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is a naturally occurring odorless and colorless gas in 
the earth’s atmosphere. Together with other greenhouse gases (like methane 
and nitrous oxide), CO2 contributes to climate change by absorbing the sun’s 
natural radiation and reflecting it back to the earth’s surface. Although CO2 

130
Glossary
occurs naturally through processes like photosynthesis, human-caused CO2 
emissions have increased dramatically since the Industrial Revolution. The 
burning of fossil fuels, industrial manufacturing, and other everyday acts all 
contribute to increased carbon dioxide levels, in turn contributing to climate 
change.
Carbon Footprint
The total amount of greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, 
hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, and sulfur hexafluoride) emitted over 
the full life cycle of a product, service, organization, or individual. Carbon foot-
prints in the era of global warming are to be avoided; however, getting to know 
an exact footprint is challenging as calculations vary wildly, but the most com-
monly accepted standard is the Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Protocol developed by 
the World Resources Institute and the World Business Council for Sustainable 
Development. Simplified calculators to aid self-awareness are available from 
Climate Crisis and the Environmental Protection Agency, but more rigorous 
methodologies like the GHG Protocol should be used for organizational report-
ing and decision-making.
Carbon Neutrality
The state of balancing one’s carbon emissions with an equivalent in carbon 
­offsets. The term is misleading, however, as it implies that one’s greenhouse gas 
emissions can be rendered harmless by investing in an equivalent amount of 
­offset units (see “Carbon Offsetting”) and is often used to directly imply that a 
product or organization emits no greenhouse gases at all. Re-nourish discour-
ages the use of the term on marketing materials or in messaging claims.
Carbon Offsetting (or Carbon Credits)
The act of investing in projects that reduces greenhouse gas production through 
the purchase of carbon offset units. A single carbon offset unit is equivalent to 
one metric ton of carbon dioxide (or its equivalent in other greenhouse gases). 
Individuals and organizations can purchase carbon offsets as a way of mitigat-
ing the carbon dioxide emissions resulting from everyday practices like travel, 
energy use, and waste disposal.
Typically, the money from carbon offsetting goes toward funding renewable 
energy, energy efficiency projects, or GHG sequestration. The US government 
regulates certain corporate carbon offsets through cap and trade agreements, 
while the voluntary offset market is growing.
There is much debate about the efficacy of carbon offsetting; proponents argue 
that it can help drive awareness by placing a monetary value on carbon emissions, 
while opponents argue that voluntary offset programs may actually increase car-
bon emissions by providing an excuse to consume more. Essentially, it can allow 
one company to buy the rights to pollute more from another and thereby not 
actually decrease, in the end, any carbon in the atmosphere.

131
Glossary
Clearcutting
A process in which all trees in a selected area are felled in a logging operation. 
The effect on the environment can be extremely devastating due to the destruc-
tion of fire-preventing buffer zones; loss of habitat for animals, insects, and bac-
teria; increased global warming through release of carbon dioxide and loss of 
carbon sequestration; and soil erosion. Clearcutting often paves the way for con-
verting the former native forest into farm land for monoculture, cattle rearing, or 
agriculture, thereby increasing the negative environmental and human impacts 
over clearcutting and replanting alone.
e-Waste
e-Waste, or electronic waste, refers to electronic devices that are near the end 
of their useful life and are classified as universal waste. Certain components of 
some electronic products contain hazardous contaminants, such as lead, mer-
cury, cadmium, and beryllium, which when thrown away end up in landfills or 
incinerators. If informally processed, e-waste can cause serious health and pol-
lution problems. Currently, electronic waste is one of the fastest growing compo-
nents of our planet’s waste stream.
Greenhouse Gas
Emitted gases that trap solar radiation, contributing to the destruction of the 
ozone layer and climate change. The most common greenhouse gases are those 
recognized by the 1997 Kyoto Protocol: carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, 
hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, and sulfur hexafluoride.
Greenwashing
The act of misrepresenting one’s behavior or product to appear more environ-
mentally sound than it may in fact be. The term, derived from the words “green” 
(environmentally sound) and “whitewashing” (to conceal or gloss over wrongdo-
ing), is generally applied when significantly more money or time has been spent 
advertising being eco-friendly, rather than actually implementing environmen-
tally sound practices. Greenwashing can include focusing on one environmen-
tal benefit while ignoring the other harmful impacts, making unsubstantiated 
claims of being sustainable, or outright lying about environmental benefits or 
certifications.
Leachate
This is a toxic liquid that is produced when rainwater filters through landfill 
waste and reacts with the chemicals and other materials in the waste. Leachate 
can enter groundwater sources, posing significant environmental and health 
problems as a result.
Life-Cycle Analysis
Life-cycle analysis (LCA) is a technique to evaluate the environmental impacts 
associated with the creation of a product, process, or service. LCA is assessed by 
inventory analysis, impact analysis, and improvement analysis where material 

132
Glossary
inputs and environmental outputs are thoroughly examined. There are software 
and companies that specialize in this analysis.
Monoculture Plantation
The practice of growing one single crop over a wide area. In forestry, it refers 
to the planting of one species of tree crop without biodiversity. To ensure that 
only one species of trees grow, the trees are usually sprayed with harsh chemi-
cals, contaminating local waterways and communities with devastating effects 
on wildlife and human health. Monoculture is rarely good for our natural 
environment.
Post-Consumer Waste
Paper or paper products that have reached the consumer before being discarded 
and collected again for recycling. For example, paper and cardboard collected 
from a curbside recycling program are considered to be post-consumer waste 
(PCW). PCW paper products have a longer life cycle than simply “recycled” 
paper products, with less of an environmental impact overall. Products made 
with PCW paper are usually labeled as such, and the more PCW content, the 
better.
Pre-Consumer Waste
Paper and paperboard waste collected during manufacturing or printing that 
never actually made it to the consumer. It includes scraps, trimmings, make-
ready sheets, and unused copies which may have been over-ordered or over-
printed. Products made with any amount of pre-consumer waste paper can be 
labeled as “recycled”; therefore be sure to look for products that include the high-
est amount of recycled content.
Rightsize
Rightsizing reduces packaging materials by designing to minimize empty 
space while still protecting the product inside. This design approach will help 
save natural  resources in the manufacture of the packaging and the ensuing 
transport of the products.
Sludge
The waste material left over after pulping and deinking in the papermaking or 
recycling process. Although some sludge is produced in the virgin papermaking 
process, far more is produced in the deinking process before recycling. Other 
materials that drop into the sludge include clay coatings, fillers from the previous 
paper, paper clips and staples, fibers too short to be made into paper, leftover ink, 
and so on. To avoid sludge, minimizing ink coverage on a printed piece can help.
Triple Bottom Line
The pursuit of growth that is in balance with ecological, social, and economic 
needs.

133
Glossary
Upcycle
A term coined by William McDonough and Michael Braungart, upcycle refers to 
the process of converting a material into something of similar or greater value in 
its second life.
Virgin Tree Fiber
Virgin tree paper is made using 100% brand new pulp. The methods used to har-
vest trees for paper production are endangering the survival of forests all over 
the world. Logging companies engage in clearcutting forests, which involves the 
felling and removal of all trees from a given tract of forest.
Volatile Organic Compounds
Carbon compounds that evaporate or vaporize readily under normal conditions. 
Indoors, they can cause eye, nose, and throat irritation; headaches; loss of coor-
dination; nausea; liver and kidney damage; and issues with the central nervous 
system. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are also suspected to cause cancer 
in humans. VOCs, such as methane, contain greenhouse gases that contribute to 
increased global warming. In the graphic design profession, VOCs can be found 
most readily in printing inks, toners, plastics, and adhesives.
Zero Waste
Zero waste suggests that the entire concept of waste should be eliminated. It 
means considering the entire life cycle of products and services from the design 
phase with waste prevention in mind. Using recycled or compostable materials 
that are again recycled or composted after use are just two strategies that can help 
lead to a zero waste design project.
ENDNOTES
	
1.	Canopy’s Second Harvest Campaign. Canopy.
	
2.	Guides for the Use of Environmental Marketing Claims (“Green Guides”). 
2012. Federal Register Notices Vol. 77, No. 197. 16 CFR Part 260. Federal 
Trade Commission.


135
FURTHER READING
Sustainable Design
The Upcycle: Beyond Sustainability—Designing for Abundance
William McDonough and Michael Braungart
North Point Press, 2013
Design Futuring
Tony Fry
Bloomsbury Academic, 2008
User Experience in the Age of Sustainability: A Practitioner’s Blueprint
Kem-Laurin Kramer
Morgan Kaufmann, 2012
Design Is the Problem
Nathan Shedroff
Rosenfeld Media, 2009
Design Citizenship
The Design Activist’s Handbook: How to Change the World (Or at Least Your Part 
of It) with Socially Conscious Design
Noah Scalin and Michelle Taute
HOW Books, 2012
Developing Citizen Designers
Elizabeth Resnick
Bloomsbury Academic, 2016
Systems Thinking
Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature
Janine M. Benyus
Harper Perennial, 2002
The Systems View of Life: A Unifying Vision
Professor Fritjof Capra and Pier Luigi Luisi
Cambridge University Press, 2014
Thinking in Systems: A Primer
Donella H. Meadows
Chelsea Green Publishing, 2008


137
INDEX
A
Ancient Forest Friendly, 123
Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC), 111
Association of Registered Graphic 
Designers of Canada (RGD), 128
B
“Backseat drivers,” 21
Backyard Creative, 63–70
about, 64
advice, 69–70
brainstorming sketches, 101
challenges, 65
improvement of triple bottom line, 65
lessons learned, 69
minimized use of materials, 67
positive impact, 69
project description, 64
project goals, 64
sustainable parameters, 65
B Corporation, 26, 123
Better Business Bureau (BBB), 26
Biofuels, study on, 25
Biomimicry, 19
Blue Angel, 123
Bottom line, see Triple bottom line
Brainstorming, 1, 19, 27, 108
Business for Social Responsibility, 123
C
Canary Project, 52–57
about, 52
advice, 57
challenges, 55
improvement of triple bottom line, 55
lessons learned, 57
minimized use of materials, 55–56
positive impact, 56
project goals, 53–55
Canopy, 121
Case studies, 35–97
Backyard Creative, 63–70
Canary Project, 52–57
Cast Iron Design, 90–97
Designing Cultures Studio, 58–62
Ecocreative, 84–89
La PAGE Original, 78–83
Metalli Lindberg, 71–77
Modern Species, 35–40
Studio EMMI, 46–51
Swerve Design Group, 41–45
Cast Iron Design, 90–97
about, 90
advice, 93–96
challenges, 91
improvement of triple bottom line, 91
lessons learned, 93
minimized use of materials, 91–92
positive impact, 92–93
project goals, 90
sustainable parameters, 91
CEF, see Corporate Eco Forum
Certifications, 123–127
Ancient Forest Friendly, 123
B Corporation, 123
Blue Angel, 123
Business for Social Responsibility, 123
Chlorine Free Products Association, 124
Consumer Product Safety 
Commission, 124
Cradle to Cradle Products 
Innovation, 124
EcoLabel, 124
Eco Logo, 125
Forest Stewardship Council, 125
Green America, 125
Green-e, 126
Green Seal, 125
International Organization for 
Standardization, 126
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, 126–127
Rainforest Alliance, 126
Sustainable Green Printing 
Partnership, 127
CFPA, see Chlorine Free Products 
Association
“Chain of custody” process, 125
Chlorine Free Products Association 
(CFPA), 124
Climate cycle, unintentionally 
hacking of, 1
Conservatree, 122
Consumer Product Safety Commission 
(CPSC), 26, 124
“Conversation mapping,” 20
Corporate Eco Forum (CEF), 113
Corporate responsibility, dishonest 
declarations of, 29

138
Index
CPSC, see Consumer Product 
Safety Commission
Cradle to Cradle CertifiedCM products, 117
Cradle to Cradle Products Innovation, 124
D
“Designing backward,” 105–106
Designing Cultures Studio, 58–62
about, 58–59
challenges, 60
improvement of triple bottom line, 
59–60
minimized use of materials, 60
positive impact, 61–62
project goals, 59
sustainable parameters, 59
Design problem, mapping out of, 21–22
Design resources, 127–128
Association of Registered Graphic 
Designers of Canada, 128
GreenBiz, 127
Inhabitat, 128
Living Principles for Design, 128
Lovely as a Tree, 127
Re-nourish, 127
Society for Experiential Graphic 
Design, 128
Digital, 122
Green Certified Site, 122
World Wide Web Consortium, 122
Digital versus print, 31–32
Direct mail response rate, 14
E
Ecocreative, 84–89
about, 84
advice, 89
challenges, 85
improvement of triple bottom line, 85
lessons learned, 89
minimized use of materials, 86
positive impact, 86
project goals, 85
sustainable parameters, 85
EcoLabel, 124
Eco Logo, 125
Environmental Paper Network (EPN), 122
Experience-based outcomes, 114–115
F
Facebook, 118
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC), 9, 18, 125
Freelancers, 102
G
Gestalt, 13
Glossary, 129–133
Green America, 125
GreenBiz, 127
Green Certified Site, 122
Green-e, 126
Greenpeace, 10
Green Press Initiative, 122
Green Seal, 125
H
Half-box design, 39
I
IDEO.org, 27
Inhabitat, 128
International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO), 26, 126
“Inverted pyramid” design process, 19
L
“Language of nature,” 19
La PAGE Original, 78–83
about, 79
challenges, 82
improvement of triple bottom line, 81
lessons learned, 83
minimized use of materials, 82
positive impact, 83
project goals, 79–81
LEED (Leadership in Energy and 
Environmental Design) 
certification, 30, 32, 118
Lessons learned
Backyard Creative, 69
Canary Project, 57
Cast Iron Design, 93
Designing Cultures Studio, 62
Ecocreative, 89
La PAGE Original, 83
Metalli Lindberg, 76
Modern Species, 40
Studio EMMI, 50
Swerve Design Group, 45
Life cycle analysis (LCA), 25
Living Principles for Design, 128
Local Multiplier Effect, 102
Lovely as a Tree, 127
M
Mapping of solutions, 22, 31
Material choice, integral part of, 24

139
Index
Material safety data sheet (MSDS), 93
Materials and manufacturing, learning 
about, 104
Metalli Lindberg, 71–77
about, 71
advice, 76–77
improvement of triple bottom line, 72
lessons learned, 76
positive impact, 76
project goals, 72
sustainable parameters, 72
Modern Species, 35–40
about, 35
advice, 40
challenges, 39
half-box design, 39
improvement of triple bottom 
line, 36–37
lessons learned, 40
package design, 39
positive impacts, 39
project goals, 35–36
sustainable parameters, 36
MSDS, see Material safety data sheet
N
National Materials Marketplace, 113
O
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA), 
26, 126–127
One-way system of consumption and 
disposal, 8
Open-source knowledge sharing, 113
Outerknown, 117
P
Packaging
companies, 121
cost, 8
GreenBlue, 121
standards, 32
Sustainable Packaging Coalition, 121
Paper industry, remedy of past 
mistakes, 18
Paper and printing, 121–122
Canopy, 121
Conservatree, 122
Environmental Paper Network, 122
Green Press Initiative, 122
“Paper trail,” 16
Patagonia, 117
Powers of ten, 16, 23
Print versus digital, 31–32
Profit, 8
Programme for the Endorsement of Forest 
Certification (PEFC), 18
Project goals, determination of, 20–21
R
Rainforest Alliance, 126
Re-nourish, 127
Resources, 121
RGD, see Association of Registered 
Graphic Designers of Canada
S
SGP, see Sustainable Green Printing 
Partnership
SKUs, see Stock keeping units
Social media, 111
behavior open to public scrutiny on, 29
marketing, 14
swapping tips on, 118
Society for Experiential Graphic Design 
(SEGD), 128
SPC, see Sustainable Packaging Coalition
Standards, 32–34
design, 33
design studio/agency, 33, 34
inks, 33
project messaging, 33
source materials, 32–33
vendor energy and equipment, 34
vendor practices, 34
Status quo
breaking from, 93
solution, 100
Stock keeping units (SKUs), 36
Studio EMMI, 46–51
about, 46
advice, 51
challenges, 50
improvement of triple bottom line, 50
lessons learned, 50
package design, 50
project goals, 47–48
sustainable parameters, 50
Sustainable Green Printing Partnership 
(SGP), 127
Sustainable Packaging Coalition (SPC), 121
Swerve Design Group, 41–45
about, 41
challenges, 43
improvement of triple bottom line, 43
lessons learned, 45

140
Index
minimized use of resources, 43–44
positive impacts, 44
project goals, 41
Systems thinking, 13–28
argument against using, 101
“backseat drivers,” 21
basic map, 22
biomimicry, 19
brainstorming of design outcomes, 
27–28
“conversation mapping,” 20
description of, 13–15
design problem, mapping out of, 21–22
detailed map, 23
direct mail response rate, 14
ecosystem, 15–18
as emerging concept, 13
ethical strategy, 27
final map, 24
“flow,” 16
Gestalt, 13
growing forward, 27
“inverted pyramid” design process, 19
LEED certification, 30, 32
“paper trail,” 16
possible project outcomes, 
evaluation of, 23–27
powers of ten, 16, 23
project goals, determination of, 20–21
“stock,” 16
strategies, 19–27
“upcycle,” 27
T
TerraSkin, 39
Today, 99–110
brainstorming, 101, 108
building trust, 107
“designing backward,” 105–106
enthusiasm, 106–107
existing processes and project 
constraints, challenge to, 108
Local Multiplier Effect, 102
materials and manufacturing, 104
positive effects of doing business 
locally, 102, 103
status-quo solution, 100
tradeoffs, 108–110
work locally and choose renewables, 
102–104
Tomorrow, 111–118
collective and individuals values, 
115–116
design to renourish, 116–118
experience-based outcomes, 114–115
open-source knowledge sharing, 113
radical transition, 112–113
Tradeoffs, 108–110
Transparency, 29–34
confusion of certification, 30–31
print versus digital, 31–32
standards, 32–34
“Trash into treasure,” 118
Triple bottom line, 1–12
the bad, 4–8
the better, 9–10
brainstorming, 1
effective graphic design, 3
the good, 2–4
one-way system of consumption and 
disposal, 8
packaging cost, 8
planet, 4–7
profit, 8
unethical methodology, 7
Triple bottom line, improvement to
Backyard Creative, 65
Canary Project, 55
Cast Iron Design, 91
Designing Cultures Studio, 59–60
Ecocreative, 85
La PAGE Original, 81
Metalli Lindberg, 72
Modern Species, 36–37
Studio EMMI, 50
Swerve Design Group, 43
Trust, building, 107
Twitter, 118
U
Unethical methodology, 7
United States Business Council for 
Sustainable Development 
(US BCSD), 113
“Upcycle,” 27
User Experience (UX) design, 21
User Interface (UI) design, 21
V
Values
collective and individuals, 115–116
staying true to, 107
W
Waste, repurposing of, 117
World Business Council for Sustainable 
Development (WBCSD), 113
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), 122

