Designing  
for the Future
A Curated Collection of Chapters  
from the O‘Reilly Design Library
FREE  
DOWNLOAD

©2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. D1813
Short. Smart. 
Seriously useful.
Free ebooks and reports from O’Reilly 
at oreil.ly/fr-design
Data-Informed 
Product Design
Pamela Pavliscak
Laura Klein
Design for  
Voice Interfaces
Building Products that Talk
Free ebooks, reports and other articles​ on UX design,
data-informed design, and design for the IoT.
Get insights from industry experts and stay current
with the latest developments from O’Reilly.

Designing for the Future 
A Curated Collection of Chapters from the O'Reilly Design Library 
 
 
UX and interaction designers are facing many new challenges as more and 
more connected products come online. Whether it’s for “calm 
technology,” just-beneath-the-skin embeddable devices, or robot swarms, 
designers are actively seeking advice for dealing with cutting-edge projects. 
This sampler from the O’Reilly Design Library will help you navigate the 
unmapped territory ahead.  
 
With a collection of chapters from the library’s published and forthcoming 
books, you’ll learn about long-standing principles of Industrial Design, as 
well as “touchpoints” where business and customer needs intersect, tactics 
and actionable methods for presenting your designs to stakeholders, and 
more.  
 
This sampler includes excerpts from these books: 
 
 

Calm Technology 
Available here 
Chapter 1. Designing for the Next 50 Billion Devices 
 
Understanding Industrial Design 
Available here 
Chapter 4. Enduring 
 
Design Leadership 
Available here 
Chapter 5. Planning for the Future 
 
Designing for Emerging Technologies 
Available here 
Chapter 8. Embeddables: The Next Evolution of Wearable 
Tech 
 
Mapping Experiences 
Available here 
Chapter 8. Envisioning Future Experience 
 
Articulating Design Decisions 
Available here 
Chapter 13. Designing for Vision 
 
 

Amber Case
Calm 
Technology
DESIGNING FOR BILLIONS OF DEVICES  
AND THE INTERNET OF THINGS

1
[ 1 ]
Designing for the Next 
50 Billion Devices 
Four Waves of Computing
The first wave of computing, from 1940 to about 1980, was dom­
inated by many people serving one computer. This was the era of the 
large and limited mainframe computer. Mainframe use was largely 
reserved for technically proficient experts who took on the task of 
learning difficult, poorly designed interfaces as a source of professional 
pride.
The second wave, or desktop era, had one person to one computer. The 
computer increased in power, but it was still tethered into place. We 
saw the era of desktop publishing and the user interface replace diffi­
cult to use text inputs of the generation before. 
The third wave, Weiser posited, would be the Internet, many desktops 
connected through widespread distributed computing. This would be 
the transition between the desktop era and ubquitious computing. It 
would enable many smaller objects to be connected to a larger network. 
The final wave, just beginning (and unevenly distributed), has many 
computers serving each person, everywhere in the world. Mark Weiser 
called this last wave “Ubiquitous Computing” or “Ubicomp.” 
Weiser’s idea of Ubiquitous Computing was that devices would out­
number individuals globally by a factor of five or more. In other words, 
if there’s a world population of 10 billion (which Weiser considered not 
so far-fetched in the next century), then 50 billion devices globally is a 
conservative estimate. Obviously, the ratio will be much higher in some 
parts of the world than others, but even this is beginning to level off. 

2  |   CALM TECHNOLOGY
Some of us are still interacting with one desktop, but most of us have 
multiple devices in our lives, from smartphones and laptops to small 
tablets and Internet-connected thermostats in our homes.
What happens after we have many devices serving one person? We 
run up against limits in data access and bandwidth which may lead 
us, through necessity, into the fourth wave, an era of Distributed 
Computing. Figure 1-1 illustrates these four waves of computing.
FIGURE 1-1
Waves of computing—inspired by Mark Weiser and John Seely Brown’s Four 
Phases of Computing in the Coming Age of Calm Technology, Xerox PARC, 
October 5, 1996 
Ubiquitous Computing describes the state of affairs in which many 
devices in our personal landscape possess some kind of processing 
power but are not all necessarily connected to one another. What we 
know today as the “Internet of Things” is meant to describe a network 
between many devices, so represents a networked stage of Ubiquitous 
Computing; it also implies that many everyday objects, like your ten­
nis shoes, may also become wirelessly connected to the network, open­
ing up a whole range of new functionality, data collection, and also 
security risks. Although it might be great to be able to track your daily 
steps, it might not be as nice if that data falls into the wrong hands. 
In Distributed Computing, every device on the network is used as a 

 1. Designing for the Next 50 Billion Devices    |  3
potential node for storing information. This means that even if a cen­
tral server is taken out, it is still possible to access a file or piece of infor­
mation normally hosted by the central server, because these bytes of 
information are “distributed” throughout the network. 
FIGURE 1-2
Centralized, decentralized, and distributed systems (Paul Baran, RAND 
Corporation, On Distributed Communications, 1964; http://www.rand.org/
content/dam/rand/pubs/research_memoranda/2006/RM3420.pdf) 
Weiser’s original vision for Ubicomp also included a philosophy about 
how to handle the increase in devices per person. What happens when 
50 billion devices are out there? In a world like this, the way devices 
communicate with us is crucial. If we were to expand their number, 
but maintain our current standards of communication, we’d soon find 
ourselves—our entire world—buried under an indistinguishable pile 
of dialog boxes, pop-up boxes, push notifications, and alarms.
THE WORLD IS NOT A DESKTOP 
Gone are the luxurious dinosaurs of desktop era, where code could be 
the size of a CD-ROM and be updated every two years. The act of using 
a desktop computer is an all-consuming process and a luxury that not 
all current devices have.

4  |   CALM TECHNOLOGY
Desktop applications were able to take advantage of many resources in 
terms of processing power, bandwidth, and attention. A smaller, con­
nected device today may work on tiny processors and need to make use 
of what they have. 
Small devices must be cheap in order to be ubiquitous. They must be 
fast in order to be used. They must be capable of easily connecting if 
they are to survive. We’re looking more at a whole new species than we 
are a mechanical set of items. That means nature’s laws apply. Fast, 
small, and quickly reproducing will end up being part of the next gen­
eration, but good design can make products that span multiple genera­
tions, reducing complexity and support. 
We’re moving toward an ecosystem that is more organic than it is 
mechanical. We have computer viruses that operate similarly to the 
way the same systems in nature do. In this new era, code bloat is not 
only unnecessary—it is dangerous.  To follow this analogy, a poorly 
written system invites illness and decay. 
THE GROWING EPHEMERALITY OF HARDWARE 
In the desktop era, hardware was stable. You bought a computer and 
kept it for several years—the hardware itself was an investment. You’d 
change or update the software very infrequently. It would come on a 
CD-ROM or packaged with the computer. Now, people hold onto the 
data streams and the software longer than a device itself. How many 
different phones has the average person used to connect to their profile 
on Facebook? Facebook, despite comprising dozens of rapidly shifting 
apps and programs, is more stable as a whole than the technology on 
which it is used. 
No longer do people buy devices to use for a decade; at times, technol­
ogy will be upgraded within a single year. Companies and carriers are 
now offering monthly payment plans that allow you to be automati­
cally “subscribed” to the latest device, eliminating the process of buy­
ing each device as it comes out. It’s an investment in the functionality 
and the data, not the device itself. It’s more about the data than the 
technology that serves it; the technology is just there to serve the data 
to the user. 

 1. Designing for the Next 50 Billion Devices    |  5
In the past, technology’s primary value lay in hardware. Now a greater 
value lies in user-generated content. This means the simplest technol­
ogy to get to that data wins; it’s easier to use, develop, support, and 
maintain. 
THE SOCIAL NETWORK OF 50 BILLION THINGS
In the future, connected things will far outnumber connected people. 
Consider a social network of 50 billion devices versus a social network 
of 10 billion humans. The social network of objects won’t just be about 
alerts for humans via machines, but alerts from one machine to another. 
With so many objects and systems, one of the most important issues 
will be how those separate networks communicate with one another. 
This can lead to some real problems. Have you ever been stuck in a 
parking garage because the ticket machine won’t accept your money? 
When an entire system is automated with no human oversight, it can 
get stuck in a loop. What if a notification gets stuck in one system and 
can’t be read by another? What if a transaction drops entirely? Will 
there be notifications that the system failed, or will humans be put on 
pause while a human operator intervenes? 
Technology in the real world can’t work well all of the time. In reality, 
things mess up when you need them most. Like when you can’t get 
to the AAA app when your car is on the side of the road, or when you 
can’t access your insurance card when you get to the emergency room 
because your phone is dead or your card is at home, and your life is at 
risk. 
Designing for the Next 50 Billion Devices 
Tech can’t take up too many resources in the future. The most efficient 
tech will eventually begin to win out, as resources, time, attention, and 
support become scarce commodities. People should make less complex 
systems or suffer the consequences. 
Though technology might not have a limit, we do. Our environment 
also has limited connectivity and power. Things are going to become 
much more expensive over time.

6  |   CALM TECHNOLOGY
The IDC Futurescape Worldwide Internet of Things (IoT) 2015 report 
predicts that “IT networks are expected to go from having excess capac­
ity to being overloaded by the stress of Internet of Things (IoT) con­
nected devices” in just three years. 
This means that devices using too much bandwidth will experience 
connectivity and performance issues, and generate unnecessary costs. 
Solving this bandwidth limitation will take a combination of solutions, 
all of which need to happen at some point.  One solution is Distributed 
Computing, which might be a natural outcome of bandwidth and con­
tent restraints. Another solution is to limit bandwidth usage by placing 
limits on how large websites and content can be.  Updated protocols 
and file formats may also help. We’ll examine some of these solutions 
later in this chapter. 
 Where did telephone lines, the electrical grid, or modern roads come 
from? All of these required an invested government and business-based 
effort. Without them, we wouldn’t have the access and connectivity we 
have today. 
Today’s telecom carriers and Internet providers build competing, 
redundant networks and don’t share network capacity, which makes 
it much more difficult for devices to communicate with one another. 
It is ultimately in companies’ best interests to build more bandwidth 
as they grow, but the costs associated with this development could 
harm initial earnings and allow competitors a leg up while they build. 
Telecom and Internet providers might be forced to work differently 
in the future. If they worked together, they might be able to devise a 
way to share costs and rewards of building the infrastructure. If not, 
the government might need to take over this role, much like President 
Eisenhower’s creation of the Interstate Highway System to eliminate 
unsafe roads and inefficient routes.  
LIMIT BANDWIDTH USAGE
Both the websites we visit and the devices we use to get there are 
designed to be resource-intensive. Websites that require significant 
bandwidth can slow down entire networks. The average smartphone 
user today is now able to stream a variety of online media at will, over 
cell networks and WiFi. All of this volume and inefficiency is eating 
up the bandwidth that will soon be needed to connect the Internet of 
Things. This is already causing corporate conflict, with users caught 

 1. Designing for the Next 50 Billion Devices    |  7
up in the middle. In 2014, the Internet service providers Comcast and 
Verizon were caught throttling the traffic from video-streaming service 
provider Netflix. Netflix countered this limitation by paying the provid­
ers for more bandwidth, but even then, Verizon was caught throttling 
Netflix traffic after it paid for better network performance. 
Over time, bandwidth constraints might naturally push people to 
write software that uses less bandwidth. Companies that do well in the 
future might use technologies and protocols that rewrite the fabric of 
the web, instituting protocols that eliminate redundancy in streaming 
data to many devices. 
A distributed Web in which many devices also act as servers is one way 
the web can evolve and scale. Instead of many devices requesting data 
from a single server, devices could increasingly request chunks of data 
from one another. We’re seeing slow developments in this area today, 
and hopefully many more in the future. 
DEDICATE SEPARATE CHANNELS FOR 
DIFFERENT KINDS OF TECHNOLOGY
Connected devices could have their own connected channels. Dedicated 
channels could also serve as a backbone for devices to communicate in 
case of emergencies. That way, one network can still stay up if the other 
one becomes overloaded, so that millions of people streaming a popu­
lar video won’t get in the way of a tsunami alert or a 911 call. 
USE LOWER-LEVEL LANGUAGES FOR MISSION CRITICAL SYSTEMS
If we’re going to be building truly resilient technology, we need to bor­
row a page from the past—where technologies were made with very 
low failure, or had enough edge cases. Edge cases are unpredictable 
problems that arise at extremes. For instance, a running shoe might 
work well on typical pavement, but melt on track material on very hot 
summer days. Oftentimes edge cases are discovered after products 
are launched. In the worst circumstances, they may cause recalls. In 
June 2006, a Dell laptop burst into flames during a technical confer­
ence in Japan. The issue was a defective battery prone to overheating. 
This prompted a worldwide recall of laptops that contained the battery, 
but not before six other people reported flaming machines. Edge cases 
are a fact of life for all products. They might be difficult to predict, 
but there are some ways to lessen the blow. If possible, involve indus­
try veterans in your project and have them help think through various 

8  |   CALM TECHNOLOGY
methods, edge cases, and ways that the software or hardware could go 
wrong. Chances are, they’ve seen it all before. With their help, a crisis 
or uncomfortable situation could be prevented. 
FIGURE 1-3
The first web server on the World Wide Web was a NeXT workstation (a 
NeXTcube) used by Tim Berners-Lee at CERN. The document resting on the 
keyboard is a copy of “Information Management: A Proposal,” which was 
Berners-Lee’s original proposal for the World Wide Web. Photo by Coolcaesar 
at the English language Wikipedia [GFDL or CC-BY-SA-3.0], via Wikimedia 
Commons
If we’re making devices that absolutely need to work, then we can’t use 
the same development methods we’ve become accustomed to today. We 
need to go back to older, more reliable methods of building systems 
that do not fail. 
COBOL was the first widely used high-level programming language for 
business applications. Although many people consider the language to 
be old news today, it is worth noting that “70-75% of the business and 
transaction systems around the world run on COBOL. This includes 
credit card systems, ATMs, ticket purchasing, retail/POS systems, 
banking, payroll systems, telephone/cell calls, grocery stores, hospi­
tal systems, government systems, airline systems, insurance systems, 

 1. Designing for the Next 50 Billion Devices    |  9
automotive systems, and traffic signal systems” and “90% of global 
financial transactions are processed in COBOL.” Cobol may be com­
plex to write, but the systems that use it run most of the time. 
FIGURE 1-4
The partially peeled off label on the NeXT cube reads: “This machine is a 
server. DO NOT POWER IT DOWN!!!” Literally if this computer were turned off, 
there would be no Internet. Credit: Ibid
CREATE MORE LOCAL NETWORKS
Today only slightly inconvenient if websites like Twitter go down or 
become overloaded. What’s less cute is when the lock on your door 
stops working because your phone is out of batteries, or your electric 
car only works some of the time because it is connected to a remote 
power grid. The advice above is especially crucial for people and agen­
cies building websites: the real world is not a website. 
Do we really want the lights in our homes to connect to the cloud before 
they can turn on or off? In the case of a server failure, do we want to be 
stuck without light? No, we want the light switch to be immediate. A 
light switch is best connected to a local network, or an analog network. 
It’s OK for a website to go down, but not the lights in your house. 

10  |   CALM TECHNOLOGY
We need to prioritize the creation of a class of devices that do things 
locally, then go to the network to upload statistics or other information. 
Not all technology needs to operate in this fashion, but the physical 
technology that we live with and rely on daily must be resilient enough 
that it can work regardless of whether or not it is connected to a network. 
DISTRIBUTED AND INDIVIDUAL COMPUTING 
Increasingly, our computing happens elsewhere. We make use of data 
on the cloud that’s far away from us, all the while having perfectly 
advanced computers in our pockets.  There are loads of privacy and 
security issues with so much data going up and down to the cloud. A 
December 2014 report on the future of the Internet of Things made 
a prediction that within five years, over 90% of Internet-of-Things-
generated data would be hosted in the cloud. Although this might make 
the access to data and the interaction among various connected devices 
easier, “cloud-based data storage will also increase the chance of cyber 
attacks with 90 percent of IT networks experiencing breaches related 
to IoT,” as the amount of data generated by the devices will make it an 
attractive target. 
As an illustration of this point, in 2014, the iCloud photo storage 
accounts of 100 celebrities were hacked and nude photos of several 
A-list celebrities were leaked onto the web. One way to reduce the inse­
curity of cloud-based data storage is to have devices run on private local 
networks. Doing so would prevent hackers from hacking all of the data 
from the cloud at once, even if some opportunity is lost in connecting 
to larger networks in real time. 
The best products and services in the future will make use of local net­
works and personal resources. For instance, if sensitive data is stored 
on shared servers in the cloud, there are privacy and security issues. 
Sensitive data is better stored close to the person, on a personal device 
with boundaries for sharing (and protections preventing that private 
data from being searched without a warrant), and backed up on another 
local device such as a desktop computer or hard drive. Individual 
Computing will help keep personal data device where it is safe instead 
of remotely stored in a place where it can be compromised. Storing data 
on your personal device will also speed up interaction time. Your appli­
cations will only go to the network if they absolutely need to. 

 1. Designing for the Next 50 Billion Devices    |  11
In the era of Distributed Computing, there will also be more options 
for where data is stored. Table 1-1 lists several data types and pro­
vides suggestions for the best places for each type to be stored. It also 
shows the potential consequences in case the security of this data is 
compromised. 
TABLE 1-1.Suggestions for how to store various data types, and potential 
consequences of security failure 
DATA TYPE
BEST LOCATION FOR 
DATA 
CONSEQUENCES IF 
DATA IS LOST, OR 
THE NETWORK IS 
COMPROMISED OR 
DISRUPTED 
Sensitive/personal data 
Personal device such 
as a phone, laptop, 
backup hard drive or 
home computer 
Loss of employment; 
bullying or social iso­
lation, which could 
potentially lead to 
suicide
Medical data
On a local device that 
can be shared with 
medical profession­
als on a timed clock 
(“Share your data with 
this system for this 
purpose for a spe­
cific period of time”; 
afterward, the data is 
deleted and the system 
sanitized) 
Blackmailing; loss of 
employment 
Business data (LinkedIn 
profile) 
On publicly accessible 
servers (shared) 
N/A: This data was cre­
ated with the intention 
of sharing it 
Home automation 
system
On a local network 
within the home with­
out access to a larger 
network. 
Loss of access or con­
trol to lights, thermo­
stat, or other home 
systems 
INTEROPERABILITY
One of the biggest technology issues in the future is going to come 
from systems that don’t talk to one another. Without connectivity 
throughout different networks, people can get caught in very difficult 
situations. 

12  |   CALM TECHNOLOGY
I rented a car once for a conference in Denver, Colorado. Initially it 
seemed fine, but once I got it onto the highway, the car wouldn’t go 
above 30 miles per hour. 
I pulled into a parking lot and called emergency roadside assistance. 
Instead of being instantly connected to an emergency line, I was put 
on hold for 22 minutes. I was told to leave the car in the lot and a tow 
truck would come pick it up. I was going to be late for my meeting, so I 
called a cab and headed into town. I figured I’d cancel my entire rental 
car reservation for the trip. 
On the fifty-minute cab ride to the hotel, I called Hertz to cancel the 
car reservation. I was put through to four different people, connected 
by a support person to two discontinued support numbers, and had to 
explain my situation every time. They wondered where the car was. I 
told them emergency roadside assistance had picked it up. They didn’t 
have confirmation of the pickup or who I was. Each time I called I 
needed to restate my information. 
I finally got them to cancel the rental, and I asked for a confirmation 
code. Three days later, I got the charge for the full rental. I had to get 
corporate to call a special number to reverse the charge and explain the 
situation. I was stuck in an automation trap. The systems didn’t talk to 
each other. 
How can one product inform another? What can be done to inform 
people in different systems the entire way through a system? The real 
world runs on interconnected systems, not separate ones. Without 
ways of informing other systems, or at least informing people who are 
manning other systems, you can get completely stuck. 
HUMAN BACKUP
Without feedback, people won’t be able to tell what’s going on with 
a system. They might assume something is happening when it isn’t, 
or get frustrated or stuck as automation increases. For critical sys­
tems, always ensure people are around in case something breaks, and 
make sure there are systems that pass information from one system to 
another in human-readable fashion! 
The Future of Technology 
Poorly made products are everywhere, waiting for innovation. 

 1. Designing for the Next 50 Billion Devices    |  13
We are accustomed to buying products as they come out,in seasons. 
People are advised not to buy an Apple product halfway through a life­
cycle, but to wait for the next one. We discard the old for the new. And it 
makes sense: devices quickly become incompatible with current hard­
ware and software. The last few generations of devices are unusable, 
somewhat toxic garbage that gets shipped off to the landfill. 
The past was about having very few high-quality products in the home. 
Already we’re finding people moving from the suburbs to walkable 
communities in the city. The question is: Can we improve the future 
in time to prevent the worst outcomes in terms of pollution, a growing 
population, and a warming climate, or are we going to be too late? 
Want to make great products? Improve the mundane! A high-qual­
ity product can keep you employed for the rest of your life, and your 
community, too. So many of us are caught up in designing something 
“new” that we forget that we can simply improve what’s already around 
us. All of those things you don’t like in your everyday life, but put up 
with? Ripe for innovation! Design them in a way that lasts for more 
than a couple of years and you will be on your way to a successful and 
beloved product with passionate users. 
Conclusions
In this chapter, we covered the four waves of computing and what that 
means for the future of connected devices. We also covered how the 
future of technology will run into issues such as bandwidth and design 
limitations, and some possible outcomes for the future of technology 
and humanity. 
Weiser and Brown hinted at a number of guidelines in their published 
work. In the following chapter, we’ll take these guidelines and put 
them into an organized philosophy of designing Calm Technology. 
These are the key takeaways from this chapter:
• We’ve gone from many people to one computer, to many comput­
ers per person. The next wave of computing will make demands on 
us in terms of privacy, security bandwidth, and attention. 

14  |   CALM TECHNOLOGY
• We can no longer design technology in the way we designed for 
desktops. We need to think about how we’ll design for the next 50 
billion devices. We can help make the future more reasonable by 
writing efficient code, using lower-level languages for mission-crit­
ical systems, and creating more local networks. Consider distrib­
uted and individual computing, and design with interoperability 
in mind.

Simon King & Kuen Chang
Understanding 
Industrial  
Design
PRINCIPLES FOR UX AND  
INTERACTION DESIGN

Chapter 4 
 
Enduring 
Create long-lasting value 
“What works good is better than what looks good, because what works good lasts.” —Charles 
Eames  
 
 
Designers strive to improve the world, looking for user needs and situations where a new 
product or experience could make a difference. The typical design process, with its inspiration 
and input from users, provides confidence that a solution will work today but often has less 
consideration for the future. Needs change, technology expands, and context shifts. Beyond 
fulfilling the needs of today, how can a design create long-lasting value? 
 
The reasons to create a new product are usually well intentioned, but in the mid-20th century a 
less honorable purpose for newness was popularized. Planned obsolescence became a 
common business strategy to incentivize customers to keep buying. In this approach, products 
are purposefully designed to be replaced on a regular basis, due to artificially limited durability 
or the psychological obsolescence of yearly model updates.1 There is little regard for the long-
term needs of users and even less for ecological sustainability. As we will discuss in the 
Sustainable chapter, designers have a responsibility to avoid unnecessary waste and disposal. 
Longer-lasting products are better for users and for the environment. 
 
When discussing the quality and longevity of products a common trope is that “they don’t make 
them like they used to.” This attitude is usually paired with an example of an enduring product, 
one that someone has owned for years or passed down between generations. Beyond an 
engineered durability, the basic requirement of not breaking or falling apart, what makes people 
keep a product in their lives? An enduring design has both functional and emotional durability, 
getting better or more meaningful the longer it’s used. 
 
There are some contexts where longevity is unnecessary, where disposability is appropriate to 
offer safety, convenience, or integration with a time-limited event. Consider the case of single-
use drug injectors, on-the-go food packaging, or conference badges. On the other end of the 
spectrum there are major purchases such as cars and appliances that most people plan to keep 
for a long time. Most products live in-between these poles, where an enduring design may be 
valued but is rarely offered. 
 
Digital products won’t end up in a landfill but their longevity is no less important. We increasingly 
rely on digital systems to support our lives, providing information retrieval, health monitoring, 
security, commerce, or communication. When these systems are short-lived their obsolescence 
                                                 
1 Made to Break: Technology and Obsolescence in America  By Giles Slade (pg 5) 

can cause very real pain and annoyance. Finding, switching, and re-integrating our lives with a 
new digital product is not as trivial as it appears. In theory, digital products should be able to 
outlast their physical counterparts by shifting and adapting their form over time. This requires a 
different kind of design process though; one of continual evolution and co-development with the 
changing needs of users. 
 
In this chapter we will look at ways of designing enduring products, both physical and digital, by 
examining the qualities that can encourage longevity. An enduring product might wear in instead 
of wearing out, or represent the quintessential version of its category. It could be highly tailored 
to an individual user, or adaptable to change and easily serviced. These qualities represent 
different approaches to promoting longevity, but consistent between them is a shift in mindset 
where designers must strive to make something useful, usable, and desirable both today and in 
the future. 
Worn In 
 
For physical products, one of the biggest inhibitors to longevity is the simple fact that, over time, 
things wear out, causing the user to discard them earlier than they otherwise would. Engineers 
are continually developing new ways to enhance the durability of materials and finishes, but 
designers can also play a role by looking at the problem from a different angle. What if a design 
could “wear in” well instead of wearing out? 
 
The idea of a product wearing in, or breaking in, is familiar from clothes and accessories. A 
leather wallet in your pocket fits better over time, an often worn hat becomes perfectly shaped to 
your head, and your favorite pair of jeans just keep getting more comfortable. We think of these 
items as improving over time, at least up to a point, because their materials soften and mold 
themselves to our bodies through use. 
 
In some instances, a worn in product is a matter of pride, or at least accomplishment. Websites 
devoted to raw denim enthusiasts post photographs of worn-in jeans and jackets alongside 
details on how old they are and how often they’ve been washed.2 The appearance of authentic 
wear and tear on a pair of raw denim jeans has reached a point where the UK denim brand Hiut 
has employed “fifty denim breakers to wear in jeans before they’re sold, or auctioned, to 
customers.”3 Hiut’s “No Wash Club” celebrates customers who wear their jeans without washing 
them for a full six months, the base requirement to join the club.4 
 
The fervor around raw denim can seem overblown at times, but in a world where many products 
are designed for planned obsolescence it’s a good example of not just a product, but a business 
model, built around longevity. Contrast that to the world of consumer electronics, where it made 
international news that the first buyer of an iPhone 6 in Perth, Australia dropped the phone upon 
                                                 
2 "Fades Archives." Rawr Denim. Accessed March 12, 2015. http://www.rawrdenim.com/fades/. 
3 Ferrier, Morwenna. "The People Who Are Paid to Break in Your Designer Jeans." The Guardian. November 28, 2014. Accessed 
March 12, 2015. http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/nov/28/men-paid-break-in-designer-jeans-hiut-denim. 
4 "The No Wash Club." Hiut Denim. Accessed March 12, 2015. http://hiutdenim.co.uk/pages/the-no-wash-club. 

opening the package.5 Many smartphone buyers put their pristine new purchase in a protective 
case immediately, in an attempt to keep it free of scratches and even fingerprints. The fades 
and rips of a worn in pair of jeans are judged as a beautiful accomplishment, but a scratched up 
iPhone is simply worn out. 
 
Figure 4.x Simon Heijdens, Broken White Dishes 
 
Wearing well isn’t the only way to promote longevity, but when designers intentionally plan for 
how a product will wear they are one step closer to an enduring design. Consider the Broken 
White collection by London-based designer Simon Heijdens, in which a ceramic dish has unique 
characteristics such that “during the time it is in the user’s life, it would tell and show an evolving 
story.”6 The dishes appear to be undecorated when purchased, but through normal use they 
reveal small crack lines below the ceramic surface. These cracks “slowly begin to form a floral 
decoration that grows, like a real flower would.”7 
 
The concept behind the Broken White dishes is to go beyond fulfilling the basic functionality of a 
plate and reveal something more through use, an experience that renders “them increasingly 
precious to the user over time.”8 There is an element of surprise at work here, where the end 
state of the design is unknown, and the user feels a sense of participation in its conclusion. 
Even when the pattern of cracks is fully revealed, the story behind the dish contributes to its 
timeless nature, an interesting artifact in a person’s cupboard to be celebrated and talked about 
for a long time. 
 
Figure 4.x Cups with Hidden Decoration 
 
The notion of surprise is a quality often found in products that are designed to intentionally wear 
in. In his Cups with Hidden Decoration collection, ceramicist Andy Brayman creates anticipation 
for an eventual surprise by hiding a unique message that can only be revealed through wear. 
The cups are ringed with a 23K gold glazed band, which covers a printed question, statement, 
or instruction that is only revealed once the user has worn away the glaze.9 The gold band, 
which is placed where the user would naturally hold the cup, creates a “kind of lottery ticket”10 
that the user scratches off very slowly, through normal actions like holding the cup or running it 
through a dishwasher. The anticipation of revealing the hidden sentence imbues the product 
with long-term value, a reason to keep the mug around and to choose it from the cupboard so 
that day’s minor wear can contribute to the eventual disclosure of the message underneath. 
                                                 
5 "First Buyer Drops Brand-new IPhone 6." BBC News. September 19, 2014. Accessed March 12, 2015. 
http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-29275039. 
6 Heijdens, Simon. "Broken White / Blanc Cassée." January 1, 2004. Accessed March 12, 2015. 
http://www.simonheijdens.com/projects/Broken White/Broken_White-Simon_Heijdens-.pdf. 
7 Ibid. 
8 "Broken White." SlowLab. Accessed March 12, 2015. http://www.slowlab.net/broken white.html. 
9 "Cups with Hidden Decoration." The Matter Factory. Accessed March 12, 2015. http://matterfactory.com/2009/07/08/cups-with-
hidden-decoration/. 
10 Kane, Lily. "Making the Most of the Margins." American Craft Council. May 12, 2009. Accessed March 12, 2015. 
http://craftcouncil.org/magazine/article/making-most-margins. 

 
At the University of Brighton, Jonathan Chapman is a Professor in the Sustainable Design 
program, where he champions the idea of “emotionally durable” design through his own 
research, classes, and workshops with industry partners. Chapman argues that design can 
move us away from a “throw away” culture by highlighting the journey an object has been 
through and celebrating the memories that we share with it. In his broadened definition of 
durability, he encourages designers to frame the challenge of longevity so that it’s “just as much 
about emotion, love, value and attachment, as it is fractured polymers, worn gaskets and blown 
circuitry.”11 
 
Figure 4.x Emma Whiting Stain Sneaker 
 
The sportswear brand PUMA is one of the companies that has partnered with Professor 
Chapman to explore the topic of emotional durability. As part of a student competition hosted by 
PUMA, Emma Whiting created the Stain Sneakers, a pair of white canvas shoes that features 
an invisible pattern printed with stain resistant coating. As the shoe accumulates dust, dirt, and 
grime, a series of PUMA logos is slowly revealed, becoming more visible as the shoe gets 
dirtier. Stain Sneakers inverts the fashion trend of celebrating brand new sneakers by turning 
unavoidable wear into a positive outcome.  
 
For companies like PUMA, the business case behind an emotionally durable design requires 
longer-term thinking, but it’s not incompatible with company goals such as growth and 
profitability. As Chapman notes, "When consumers develop empathy with products, a visceral 
empathy is nurtured with the brand; customers are subsequently kept loyal and market share is 
healthily sustained."12 Considering the business case for longevity is an important part of the 
design process and a key factor in promoting an alternative to planned obsolescence. A product 
can only last for a long time if a company invests in making it in the first place. 
 
Figure 4.x Nest Thermostat 
 
When products are enhanced with sensors and computation they gain entirely new ways of 
wearing in, using algorithms and data to mold themselves to a user’s behavior over time. Just 
as a new pair of leather shoes needs to be broken in, these devices need to learn our habits 
and preferences in order to provide their full value. Take for example the Nest Thermostat, 
which is designed to go through a learning period after being installed. The Nest records the 
user’s manual temperature adjustments, along with the timing of those adjustments, until it can 
detect a pattern and begin automatically scheduling the appropriate changes. 
 
                                                 
11 "Love Objects: Emotion, Design and Material Culture." Objects and Remembering. June 30, 2014. Accessed March 12, 2015. 
https://objectsandremembering.wordpress.com/2014/06/30/love-objects-emotion-design-and-material-culture/. 
12 Chapman, Jonathan. Emotionally Durable Design Objects, Experiences and Empathy. London: Earthscan, 2005. 134. 

This capacity to learn is something the company refers to as Nest Sense,13 which uses data 
from a combination of near and far field sensors, along with algorithms that are regularly 
improved through updates to the product’s firmware. Nest considers every interaction “a way for 
the user to communicate with the device about his or her preferences for a particular 
temperature at a particular time and day of the week.”14 Critically, this includes lack of 
interaction as well, using motion sensors to determine that a user is at home and inferring that a 
non-action is an expression of satisfaction with the current temperature. It also involves learning 
about the home environment, tracking how long a room takes to heat or cool so that it can 
improve its ability to reach a particular temperature at a specific time.15 
 
Once Nest has learned your behavior and preferences there is an incentive to continue using 
the thermostat. This can contribute to longevity, but also raises questions about whether Nest’s 
data profile is intended for “wearing in” or “locking in,” where a company sets up purposeful 
switching costs that create barriers to competition. The difference between wear-in and lock-in 
can be found in the reason someone continues to use a product. For a product to wear in well, it 
needs to learn from a user’s behavior over time, developing a kind of human and machine 
relationship that would need to start over if the user switched to a competitor. A system 
designed to lock someone in might also result in product longevity, but based on an artificial 
hostage taking rather than the desire for a continued relationship. For example, a user has 
purchased music files that are DRM encrypted, which prevents them from playing on a 
competitor’s platform. 
 
To further emphasize the difference and intent between wear-in and lock-in, a product that 
wears-in should work well with others. In traditional products, physical materials can mold to a 
user’s behavior to improve the product over time. But Nest Sense uses data as its material, 
which allows for improvements to extend beyond the Nest Thermostat, making other products 
better as well. Using the Nest API, a product can be certified as something that “Works with 
Nest,” enabling both products to work better together. For example, an LG refrigerator can go 
into energy saving mode when the Nest detects that inhabitants have left the home, the 
Jawbone UP24 band can trigger a temperature change when the user goes to sleep, and a 
Whirlpool dryer can delay running if Nest informs it that electricity will be less expensive later. 
 
Although the way that the Nest changes over time is significantly different than the Stain 
Sneakers or Cups with Hidden Decoration, these products share the quality of reflecting their 
relationship with a user. They feel human in their recognition that a relationship changes over 
time, and in their subtle shifting of appearance or behavior each day. This stands in contrast to 
products that age poorly, where changes in appearance or functionality are always framed as a 
decline, gauged by how much they’ve worsened since they were removed from their packaging. 
An enduring product is one that gracefully embraces change. 
                                                 
13 "An Introduction to Learning on the Nest Learning Thermostat." Nest Support. November 4, 2014. Accessed March 12, 2015. 
https://nest.com/support/article/An-introduction-to-learning. 
14 Nest Labs, Enhanced Auto-Schedule. November, 2014. Available from:  https://s3.amazonaws.com/support-
assets.nest.com/images/Whitepapers/Nest_Auto_Schedule_Whitepaper.pdf. 
15 "Inside & out." Nest. Accessed March 12, 2015. https://nest.com/thermostat/inside-and-out/. 

Quintessential 
 
“It is usually the inconspicuous objects which really mean something to us.” —Naoto Fukasawa 
 
Design is sometimes positioned as a way to make something special, so it stands out from 
other, “less designed” options. But in fact, everything is designed, both the ordinary, plain 
version and the flashy one with patterns and flair. It’s easy to spot this misunderstood definition 
when people refer to a product as having “less design” or being “un-designed.” What they really 
mean is that the product has not drawn attention to itself; it has not announced itself as 
“special.” But as the Industrial Designer Japser Morrison has noted, “things which are designed 
to attract attention are usually unsatisfactory.”16 He believes that “special is generally less useful 
than normal, and less rewarding in the long term.”17 
 
One path to an enduring design is to avoid fashion and seek normality. If a product is designed 
around the latest trends in presentation, shape, color, pattern, structure, or interaction then it will 
feel dated in a shorter period of time, triggering people to move on to a new, more “now” 
version. When a product is closer to the quintessential essence that defines a product category 
it may not attract as much attention in a catalog or showroom floor, but it will likely remain in a 
person's life for a longer period of time. Purchasing a trendy product is like starting two lifespan 
countdown timers: one for when the product will break and one for when its style is out-of-date. 
The latter is sure to happen first. 
 
The topic of quintessential design was explored in 2006 by Jasper Morrison and Naoto 
Fukasawa through an exhibition and book called Super Normal. The pair curated a collection of 
objects that represent archetypical forms, including both anonymous classics whose creators 
have been lost to history and contemporary objects by famous Industrial Designers. The show 
prompted reflection on the purpose of design and how one can evaluate the essential qualities 
of an object. In discussing his selection process, Morrison defined Super Normal as something 
a product becomes through use. You can’t fully judge a product at first glance, but only through 
“more of a long-term discovery of the quality of an object, which goes beyond the initial visual 
judgment and basic assessment that we make of things when we first notice them.”18 
 
This assessment of a physical product over time draws a parallel to Interaction Design, which is 
notoriously hard to evaluate through static images or basic descriptions. The kind of evaluation 
that Morrison refers to is revealed through living with something, exposing it to a variety of 
situations, and testing it against the unpredictability of life. Quintessential forms have more 
longevity because they’ve gone through a process of evolution, their form refined for their 
purpose by many different people through an evolutionary-like process. The wild mutations that 
Darwin observed in living creatures can be seen in products too, but these fashion-driven 
novelties don’t tend to survive very long. 
                                                 
16 Morrison, Jasper, and Naoto Fukasawa. Super Normal. Lars Mu ller Publishers, 2007. 29. 
17 Ibid. 
18 Morrison, Jasper, and Naoto Fukasawa. Super Normal. Lars Mu ller Publishers, 2007. 99. 

 
Fukasawa has described his process as beginning with a study of archetypal form, which he 
then refines to “suit today’s lifestyle.”19 This is what separates Super Normal or quintessential 
design from nostalgia. It is not about slavishly maintaining a design from the past, nor being 
different for its own sake. The middle ground of Super Normal involves finding the essence of a 
design and then updating it with modern possibilities such as new materials or technology. 
 
Figure 4.x Jasper Morrison's Crate 
 
This approach can be seen in Morrison’s work as well, such as his 2008 piece for Established & 
Sons called simply “Crate.” The design was inspired by a wooden wine crate that Morrison used 
as a bedside table. He found the anonymously designed object fit his needs quite well, so he 
designed a similar one, built from higher quality materials. His refined crate is constructed from 
Douglas-fir instead of cheap pine, and is built with stronger joints for increased stability. Visually, 
however, aside from a small stamp on the side, there is little to distinguish Morrison’s Crate from 
the typical anonymous design.20 
 
The normality and lack of personal expression in Morrison’s Crate caused a bit of controversy 
when it was first released, based somewhat on the $220 price tag but also because of an 
expectation that famous designers should be leaving their mark in less subtle ways. We are 
used to designers having a signature style, and products being instantly recognizable as part of 
a particular brand or collection. There are times when that kind of personal expression or 
branded style is desirable, but if the goal is to create an enduring design then the discriminating 
and incremental improvement of Crate is completely appropriate. It’s no surprise that both 
Fukasawa and Morrison have worked with the Japanese firm Muji, a company founded on the 
intersection of two ideas: “no brand (Mujirushi) and the value of good items (ryohin).”21 
 
It is fairly straight-forward to design for the essential qualities of a crate, but what about Internet 
of Things products that have increased complexity due to embedded computation and network 
connectivity? Because these devices are both physical and digital they encounter a broader set 
of situations that could cause them to become out of date. Designers can’t control all the factors 
that cause a product to become obsolete, but there’s no reason to throw out years or decades 
of design evolution just because a product is now “smart.” 
 
Figure 4.x Kevo Smart Lock (outside photo with light ring activated) 
 
Take for example the Kevo Smart Lock, a connected door lock that uses Bluetooth to enable a 
Smartphone to lock and unlock your home.22 On the digital side, Kevo offers an app with many 
expanded capabilities over a traditional lock such as time-limited electronic keys and an access 
                                                 
19 Morrison, Jasper, and Naoto Fukasawa. Super Normal. Lars Mu ller Publishers, 2007. 101. 
20 Carlson, Julie. "Update: Jasper Morrison Crate Controversy: Remodelista." Remodelista. April 21, 2008. Accessed March 12, 
2015. http://www.remodelista.com/posts/postscript-jasper-morrison-crate-controversy. 
21 "About MUJI." MUJI USA. Accessed March 12, 2015. http://www.muji.us/about-muji/. 
22 "The Key Evolved." Kevo Smart Lock. Accessed March 12, 2015. http://www.kwikset.com/kevo/. 

log of home entry and exit. However, the physical form of the lock from outside the house looks 
very typical, with a standard deadbolt appearance including a slot for a traditional key. The 
design blends in with its surroundings and doesn’t draw attention to its new capabilities or 
enhanced behaviors. The lock is activated by simply touching it, which triggers Bluetooth to 
connect to your phone and authenticate access. The additional feedback necessary for this new 
interaction is handled through a circular ring of light, which is hidden until the user touches the 
lock. 
 
If a “smart” device adds new capabilities to an existing product, then designers should try to 
build upon the essential qualities of that product category. It might be tempting to announce 
exciting new capabilities through a radical look and feel, but that will make the product seem 
dated in a shorter period of time. Instead, consider what new behaviors and feedback need to 
be enabled and how those can best be integrated into a trusted and familiar form. 
 
What does a quintessential design mean for a purely digital product? Many of the same 
approaches of avoiding the latest trends and fashions apply equally well to an on-screen 
environment. There are always fads in Interaction Design that can betray the era in which a 
website or system was designed. Ultra-tiny pixel fonts, animated website intros, and parallax 
scrolling are examples of fashionable styles that helped websites look modern and fresh, right 
up to the point where they seemed passé. 
 
As with physical products, the quintessential design of a digital product involves finding the 
essence of that product’s use and purpose. What actions is the product trying to support? What 
are the qualities of the information? What methods of presentation, navigation, consumption, 
and sharing most naturally support that information? An enduring design prioritizes core actions 
and content while getting out of the way by minimizing interface chrome, using direct 
manipulation where possible, and ensuring that graphics and animation are used in meaningful 
ways. 
 
One can see this focused prioritization at its extreme by looking at some of the longest-lasting 
software programs still in use today, the command-line tools of the UNIX operating system. The 
UNIX design philosophy encourages programs that are extremely focused, doing one thing well 
and working in a modular manner to accept and send input and output from other tools. In his 
book on the UNIX philosophy, programmer Mike Gancarz extolls principles such as “Small is 
beautiful” and “Make each program do one thing well.”23 This philosophy has helped the UNIX 
operating system steadily improve over many years, without the need to rewrite everything as it 
evolved. 
 
Figure 4.x iA Writer with Focus Mode 
 
Simple, focused tools are not exclusive to command line programs. In recent years, a number of 
desktop and mobile applications have differentiated themselves by addressing a singular task 
                                                 
23 Gancarz, Mike. Linux and the Unix Philosophy. Amsterdam: Digital Press, 2003. 8. 

with clarity of purpose. One example is iA Writer, whose designers call it a “machine for 
writing,”24 that strips away all but the essential qualities a writer needs to focus on their words. 
There are numerous distraction-free text editors designed to help writers focus, but achieving 
that goal requires nuance, a design that gets to the essence of the action, not just a minimal 
feature set. 
 
iA Writer has unique features, such as a “Focus Mode” where the sentence you are currently 
writing has more prominence than others. But creating a quintessential tool for writing is less 
about any particular feature than finding the right balance and structure for all of them. A key 
part of the design is deciding where the purpose of the application begins and ends. As with 
UNIX tools, iA Writer is designed to be part of an overall workflow, not a monolith end-to-end 
solution. The goal is to prioritize writing, and thus not editing, formatting, or embedding 
references. This separation of tasks means that iA Writer can strive to be the writing tool that 
users choose for a long time, even if they change their preferred footnote manager or layout 
program in the future. 
 
As discussed with Super Normal products, one can only evaluate if a product has achieved an 
essential quality through use. On the iA Writer website, they attempt to convey this through 
testimonials, including one from the American writer Augusten Burroughs, author of the 
bestselling memoir Running with Scissors. According to Burroughs, the “program is the single 
most useful and remarkably clever—invisibly so—device for writing.” He continues, saying that, 
“Only at first glance does it appear to be an ordinary text editor. Once in use, I discovered that 
while it has only a tiny number of features, each is just the one you want.”25 The creators of iA 
Writer say that receiving this feedback gave them goosebumps, and it should. This is what you 
hear when you’ve designed an enduring product: clever but invisible utility revealed through use 
by having just the right number of features. 
 
Designing a quintessential product is a humble act, a removal of the ego and an acceptance 
that the best, most long-lasting design may not be the one that stands out from the crowd. The 
notion that a product, physical or digital, can be refined to its essence is in some ways similar to 
the idea of invisibility that typographic scholar Beatrice Warde promoted. In her 1932 essay The 
Crystal Goblet or Printing Should Be Invisible, Warde said that, “Type well used is invisible as 
type, just as the perfect talking voice is the unnoticed vehicle for the transmission of words, 
ideas.”26 A quintessential design is not truly invisible, but like good typography, it doesn’t stand 
out because its form is so appropriately aligned with its purpose. 
Tailored 
 
Industrial Design has historically been associated with mass production and products designed 
for a broad audience. New manufacturing capabilities developed during the first and second 
                                                 
24 "Writer for Mac." IA. Accessed March 12, 2015. https://ia.net/writer/mac. 
25 "A. Burroughs on IA Writer." IA. October 19, 2010. Accessed March 12, 2015. https://ia.net/writer/updates/the-pleasure-of-the-
text. 
26 Bierut, Michael. Looking Closer 3: Classic Writings on Graphic Design. New York: Allworth Press, 1999. 57. 

Industrial Revolutions catalyzed the profession and created a consumer culture accustomed to 
repeatable goods, where each instance of a product conforms to the same design and quality. If 
a mass-produced product is lost or damaged it can be replaced with an identical copy as easily 
as taking a trip to the store. The one-off creations of craftsman in pre-Industrial times may have 
been better suited to an individual’s unique needs, but mass manufacturing offered desirable 
tradeoffs such as consistency and cost savings. 
 
In an attempt to better meet people’s needs, while still appealing to a broad audience, 
companies will often segment their customers into groups based on interests or behavior. If the 
overall segment is large enough, then this approach allows a mass-produced product to 
address more specific needs while still justifying the upfront cost of production. Chris Anderson, 
author of Makers: The New Industrial Revolution argues that we are entering a new era in which 
truly individualized products can be affordably offered at scale, a kind of Third Industrial 
Revolution that “is best seen as a combination of digital manufacturing and personal 
manufacturing.”27 In this new era, companies can design for the smallest possible segment, a 
single person. 
 
Anderson points towards the Maker movement as the dawning of this new era, highlighting early 
adopters who embraced technologies such as 3D printing and open source hardware. Today, 
these systems have matured beyond their hobbyist origins, enabling businesses to embrace 
mass customization over mass production. In a world where manufacturing is digital, why 
should every product be the same? By combining rapid manufacturing with the communication 
possibilities of the Internet, companies can get input from a user and dynamically tailor a design 
before its physically made. 
 
Tailoring products to better fit the unique needs of an individual has been shown to increase 
customer loyalty,28 but is also believed to reduce the “replacement rate” of a product,29 meaning 
that people will continue to use a bespoke design for a longer period of time. This is a different 
approach to longevity, one based on upfront perfection rather than molding to a user over time. 
There’s no need to keep searching for a better product if the one you have is perfect for you. 
 
Figure 4.x Normal earbuds photo / app screens 
 
Normal is a company founded on the idea that products should be custom made for individual 
users. Nikki Kaufman, the Founder and CEO, had trouble finding earbuds that fit her well, a 
common problem since ergonomic designs for the ear are notoriously difficult. The shape of 
each human ear is unique, to the point that computer vision researchers have suggested using 
                                                 
27 Anderson, Chris. Makers: The New Industrial Revolution. New York: Crown Business, 2012. 41. 
28 Spaulding, Elizabeth, and Christopher Perry. "Making It Personal: Rules for Success in Product Customization." Bain & 
Company. September 16, 2013. Accessed March 12, 2015. http://www.bain.com/publications/articles/making-it-personal-rules-for-
success-in-product-customization.aspx. 
29 Boër, Claudio et al.. Mass Customization and Sustainability: An Assessment Framework and Industrial Implementation. London: 
Springer, 2013. 188. 

ears instead of fingerprints to identify people.30 Some earbuds address this challenge by 
designing for an “average” ear, while others like the original iPod earbuds are round, which 
seems to defy the shape of any human ear. Kaufman found herself surrounded by 3D printing 
technology at the New York inventions lab Quirky when she realized that headphones were a 
product in desperate need of a more individualized fit. 
 
Normals are in-ear headphones that are 3D printed to perfectly fit your ears. Custom earbuds 
are not a new idea, but they were previously limited to a high-end market where a fitting session 
involves sitting very still as silicon is squirted into each ear to make a mold. With Normals, this 
fitting is done through an app, which prompts users to take a photo of each ear while holding up 
a quarter for scale. This photo is used to create a custom “earform,” one for each ear, that is 3D 
printed in a storefront factory in New York. The app allows users to pick the color of the earform, 
cord, and housing, all of which is assembled and shipped within 48 hours. 
 
The name Normal is a reversal of a problem people often express, that “my ears are so weird, 
nothing fits.”31 This kind of self blame is similar to when a user struggles with poorly designed 
software, faulting themselves for usability challenges rather than the product designers. In a 
world of mass produced physical products, finding a good fit can be a foraging expedition, and 
there’s no guarantee that anything will work perfectly. This is where the company’s slogan 
expresses a new vision for tailored products, the normalization of the idea that “One Size Fits 
None.” 
 
Figure 4.x Vitsoe 606 Universal Shelving System 
 
The uniqueness of our bodies is matched only by the idiosyncratic environments we inhabit and 
the collections of belongings we fill them with. Every person lives side-by-side with their unique 
assortment of items, trinkets, and oddities that they struggle to find the perfect place for in a 
home that was built without knowledge of these particular items. Storage solutions abound, 
many of them offering flexibility and modularity, but none as tailored and designed for longevity 
as the Vitsoe 606 Universal Shelving System, designed in 1960 by Dieter Rams. 
 
Included in the cost of the Vitsoe 606 is the planning service, which begins with a conversation 
and a photograph. The individual in need of shelving measures the room in question and 
discusses their needs with a Vitsoe planner, who explains that the process is more of a 
collaboration, in that “we don’t plan a system for the customer, we plan a system with the 
customer.”32 This handholding is allowed to take as long as necessary to find the perfect 
combination of shelves and drawers, custom designed for a particular wall with all its constraints 
                                                 
30 Mosher, Dave. "Ears Could Make Better Unique IDs Than Fingerprints | WIRED." Wired.com. November 12, 2010. Accessed 
March 12, 2015. http://www.wired.com/2010/11/ears-biometric-identification/. 
31 Morell, Katie. "Nikki Kaufman of Normal: Custom Earphones Without the Custom Price Tag." OPEN Forum. October 1, 2014. 
Accessed March 12, 2015. https://www.americanexpress.com/us/small-business/openforum/articles/nikki-kaufman-normal-custom-
ear-puds-without-custom-pricetag/. 
32 "606 Universal Shelving System." Vitsœ. Accessed March 12, 2015. https://www.vitsoe.com/us/606. 

of outlets and lighting fixtures. When the design is complete, the unique set of components is 
packed and shipped to the customer’s home. 
 
Vitsoe was founded on the idea of “designing down-to-earth furniture that could be used for as 
long as possible.”33 Although the planning process results in a custom fit for your home today, 
the 606 system is designed around interchangeability, with components that can be rearranged 
and added to over time. It is not meant to be permanently installed, but to move with you and 
your stuff, reconfigured as necessary for each location. After a move, the planners will take into 
consideration the pieces you already own and suggest additions or changes to perfectly fit the 
new space. The company values longevity, marketing the fact that they have been making the 
same product for over 50 years and encouraging customers to have confidence in starting small 
and adding more later, even if it’s just “one more shelf in 20 years’ time.”34 
 
Information about a person is the enabler of any tailored product, whether customized to fit their 
body, home, or life. The internet has made it easier to learn about and communicate with 
potential customers, which has driven a 21st century boom in personalized products. The desire 
for mass customization in physical products is partly influenced by expectations that users bring 
from the digital world, where a certain level of tailoring is expected due to the inherently dynamic 
quality of the medium. It’s no longer surprising that the Amazon homepage is full of products 
based on our browsing history, or that Google prioritizes search results that are relevant to our 
location. Tailoring is often a key value proposition for digital products, whether it’s Netflix 
highlighting a movie you’d like to watch or Foursquare sending you a push notification that 
you’re near an interesting restaurant. 
 
In the early years of the web, knowledge about a user and their preferences had to be built up 
over time and was limited to what they chose to reveal to that specific site. Today, the 
possibilities have changed, as data collected elsewhere can more easily be imported, shared, 
and utilized. Consider what happens when a website or app requires someone to log-in via 
Facebook Connect. Linking a Facebook account to this third party not only eases the 
onboarding process but also provides a wealth of personal information including a user’s 
demographics, preferences, interests, and friends. This allows the product to offer a tailored 
user experience from the very first moment. 
 
The increased ease in sharing and importing personal data means that digital products must do 
more than simply provide access if they wish to achieve longevity. What matters is the specific 
way that a product tailors the data, creating a relationship with the user that feels more like a 
helpful guide than a system to be used. Enduring products blend into the fabric of your life, 
becoming something you increasingly rely on even as you think less about them.  
 
The more information a product has about your preferences, history, schedule, contacts, 
finances, health, and travel plans, the more it can predict the actions you’ll want to take and 
                                                 
33  Vitsœ, 606 Universal Shelving System. 2010. Available from: 
https://www.vitsoe.com/site/download/331/606_Universal_Shelving_System_brochure.pdf. 
34 Ibid. 

automatically provide the information you need. One can see this in Google Now, where the 
company that wants to “organize the world’s information and make it universally accessible and 
useful,”35 is going one step further to provide “the right information at just the right time.”36 The 
premise of Google Now is that Google knows you so well they can deliver the right information 
without you having to search for it. Music to listen to, groceries to buy, traffic alerts, sports 
scores, schedule reminders, or nearby attractions are all served up contextually based on where 
and when Google thinks you’ll need that information. 
 
In his 2007 TED Talk, digital visionary Kevin Kelly reflects on the first 5,000 days of the web, 
and ponders what will happen in the next 5,000.37 One of the trends he sees is that we are 
becoming codependent on digital products, increasingly at a loss without access to the 
information and capabilities they provide. We already outsource our memory to Google, 
permitting ourselves to forget a phone number or address because we know how easily we can 
find it. Kelly acknowledges that some people perceive this as a problem, but he takes a long 
view of technology and points to our dependency on other systems we rarely think about such 
as the alphabet and writing. In Kelly’s envisioning of the future, the web will become more 
personalized in a good and supportive way, but that “total personalization in this new world will 
require total transparency.”38 
 
Total transparency sounds like a scary idea, but Kelly takes pains to differentiate this concept 
from total surveillance. In Kelly’s optimistic view the notion of transparency “suggests a more 
active role, rather than an imposed view. You have to BE transparent.”39 Of course in recent 
years the issue of Internet privacy has come to the forefront after the Edward Snowden 
revelations of NSA domestic spying. We have at least partially gone down the wrong path, the 
one where the web resembles a panopticon prison, where all of our actions can be seen without 
us knowing if someone is watching. 
 
Design has a role to play in the debate between surveillance and transparency. One definition of 
privacy is “the choice to reveal oneself selectively,”40 which Interaction Designers can support 
by providing people control over how their data will be captured, used, and shared. The benefits 
and tradeoffs of transparency should be made clear. If a user chooses greater transparency 
they will receive a more tailored experience that improves over time. If they choose not to share, 
a standard experience will always treat them like a stranger. 
 
                                                 
35 "Company." Google. Accessed March 12, 2015. https://www.google.com/about/company/. 
36 "What Is It." Google Now. Accessed March 12, 2015. https://www.google.com/landing/now/#whatisit. 
37 Kelly, Kevin. "The next 5,000 Days of the Web." TED. December 1, 2007. Accessed March 12, 2015. 
http://www.ted.com/talks/kevin_kelly_on_the_next_5_000_days_of_the_web. 
38 Ibid. 
39 Kelly, Kevin. "Total Personlization Needs Total Transparency." The Technium. May 5, 2008. Accessed March 12, 2015. 
http://kk.org/thetechnium/2008/05/total-personliz/. 
40 Hughes, Eric. "A Cypherpunk's Manifesto." A Cypherpunk's Manifesto. March 9, 1993. Accessed March 12, 2015. 
http://www.activism.net/cypherpunk/manifesto.html. 

While physical products are just entering an era of mass customization, digital products are 
struggling with the ethical challenges that emerge when you know so much about a user. As 
computation is embedded into objects, these privacy considerations will find increasing 
relevance in the world of physical products. Even today, the personal data captured to tailor a 
Normal headphone or Vitsoe shelving unit should raise questions about how that data is stored, 
used, and shared. Tailoring is a powerful option to create enduring products that blend 
seamlessly into our lives, but that comes with a new level of responsibility to provide both trust 
and control. 
Adaptable 
 
A traditional human-centered design process involves observing user needs and designing 
products, services, and systems to address them. This process is well intentioned, meant to 
make sure that people’s needs and desires are prioritized above engineering possibilities or 
business imperatives. However, it can also lead designers to focus too narrowly on situations 
that exist today, neglecting how people’s lives might change over time. Architect Christopher 
Alexander contrasts this to the way that nature works, where you have “continuous very-small-
feedback-loop adaptation going on, which is why things get to be harmonious  If it wasn’t for 
the time dimension, it wouldn’t happen.”41 No matter how well suited a product is for today, to be 
enduring it must adapt to a changing world and evolve over time with the needs of its users. 
 
When designing for adaptation, there are two distinct approaches a designer can take, 
depending on how well they can foresee a future state. Adapting to anticipated changes means 
that user needs are structured in a predictable progression. If a design can evolve to support the 
next known step then it can effectively replace one or more products. Adapting to unanticipated 
changes, such as shifts in technology, society, or policy, requires a more flexible approach. 
Unplanned product evolution is a process of co-creation with users. 
Anticipated Changes 
 
Figure 4.x Fold Pot 
 
The Fold Pot by Italian designer Emanuele Pizzolorusso is an example of a simple product that 
adapts to accommodate an anticipated change.42 A houseplant is expected to grow, at least if 
properly cared for, and will eventually need to be transplanted into a larger pot to make room for 
its lengthening roots. The Fold Pot, which is made of flexible silicon, can adapt to support a 
growing plant by flipping up the folded sides to double its capability when the time comes to add 
more soil. The pot looks “correct” whether folded up or down, supporting two stages of the 
plant’s growth without compromising its design during either one. 
 
                                                 
41 Brand, Steward. How Buildings Learn: What Happens after They’re Built. London: Penguin Books, 1995. 21. 
42 "FoldPot 3pcs Set ~ Growing Plant Pots." Shop by Pizzolorusso. Accessed March 12, 2015. 
http://shop.pizzolorusso.com/product/foldpot. 

Similar to plants, products designed for babies and young children are ripe for adaptation due to 
the rapid pace in which they are otherwise outgrown. Many parents choose to purchase a baby 
crib that can later convert to a toddler bed, a sensible adaptation that increases longevity and 
saves storage space. When a child is ready for more nighttime freedom the side rails of the crib 
can be removed without rearranging the whole room. 
 
Figure 4.x Kalon Studios Echo Crib + Echo Bed 
 
The Echo Crib, by Los Angeles design firm Kalon Studios, is a beautiful example of crib to bed 
adaptation. Its solid maple construction is meant to last for generations, but can also grow with a 
single child in a few different ways. The rails can be removed, turning the crib into a toddler bed, 
and the optional Echo Bed conversion kit aesthetically integrates curved safety rails for a more 
gradual transition from crib to bed. The designers believe that “Graduating from a crib to a bed 
is a milestone for children that should be fully experienced.”43 To achieve that goal the bed is 
set low to the ground, allowing a child to build confidence by easily climbing in and out once t
rails have been removed. 
he 
 
Charles and Ray Eames explored modularity in their much of their work, including their classic 
fiberglass chairs which feature a wide variety of interchangeable bases. Their approach 
provides an instructive example of how modularity alone is different from designing for 
adaptation. On Herman Miller’s website, users can configure an Eames chair for a dining room, 
office, nursery, or school by selecting from a diverse set of shells, bases, colors, and finishes. 
The bases can technically be swapped out later, but this is not the primary positioning or intent 
behind the design. The modular system was originally chosen for manufacturing efficiency and 
affordability, not to encourage adaptation of a single chair over time. Swapping out a base to fit 
a new need is clearly possible, but not explicitly encouraged, as evidenced by the fact that 
Herman Miller’s website does not offer bases and shells separately. 
 
Figure 4.x Orbit Infant System (SmartHub) 
 
A more explicitly adaptive use of a modular base can be found in the Orbit Infant System, a 
series of products and add-ons designed to ease the transition of a moving a baby between car, 
destination, and home. Created by Orbit Baby, the system is centered around a standardized 
SmartHub base that allows the Orbit car seat, stroller seat, or bassinet to snap securely into 
place and rotate forward, backward, or sideways. The SmartHub can be installed in the 
backseat of a car, but is also integrated with the Orbit stroller and rocker bases, allowing for 
numerous combinations including a car seat on a rocker, stroller seat in a car, or a bassinet on 
a stroller base. A key goal for the system, which any parent can relate to, is to transport a child 
without waking them up. 
 
Figure 4.x Orbit Infant System (Upgrade Kit and/or Sidekick) 
 
                                                 
43 "Echo Toddler Bed (or Conversion Kit)." Kalon Studios. Accessed March 12, 2015. http://kalonstudios.com/shop/us/echo-toddler-
bed-76. 

The Orbit Infant System can also adapt to support a growing child, since the toddler car seat 
snaps into the SmartHub as easily as the infant version. If a second child is born, the stroller 
can be extended with another base using the Helix Plus Double Stroller Upgrade Kit. Older 
children can ride alongside an infant using the Sidekick Stroller Board add-on, a foldable 
wooden extension styled after a skateboard with grip-tape on top. 
 
It’s telling that the designers at Orbit Baby have referred to their product as a system since 
founding the company. When a product offers a significant level of flexible adaptation, beyond 
the simple two stage transformation of the Fold Pot, its value is inherently located in the 
connections between its parts. The individual components have innovative features on their 
own, such as the one-handed collapsing of the stroller base, but their value is only unlocked 
when combined with other parts of the system. There is a network effect within the Orbit Baby 
product line, where adding a new component that uses the SmartHub increases the value of all 
the Orbit products a parent already owns. 
 
Anticipating the changing needs of a parent with a growing child, or a second child, is relatively 
straightforward. The Orbit system gets better over time, as new extensions are designed, but all 
of the additions so far have remained in the realm of infant transport. Imagine if Orbit branched 
out further, designing components that are optimized for moving groceries or postal mail instead 
of children. This kind of radical shift in purpose or use case is rare within physical products, but 
happens all the time in the digital world. 
 
Startups refer to a shift in user group or product focus as “pivoting,” and many try to pivot as fast 
as possible to discover the most desirable and profitable outcome. Perhaps the best known 
example of a radical pivot is Flickr, which began as a photo sharing feature within an online 
game called Game Neverending. As the photo feature got popular, the rest of the product was 
scrapped and the startup pivoted to focus fulltime on photo sharing.44 A fundamental shift of this 
proportion is obviously jarring to an existing user base, but it highlights the essentially mutable 
nature of digital products. An enduring digital product continually adapts, in ways both small and 
large, to accommodate shifts in technology and user needs. The end result may include 
changes the designers never anticipated. 
 
Unanticipated Changes 
 
Designers are used to observing a need in the world today, whether functional or emotional, and 
crafting a particular experience to satisfy that need. How can designers plan for unanticipated 
changes in the future? How can they design for the unknown? Although the future is murky and 
unpredictable, designers can put structures in place that allow products to adapt over time. 
 
Designing a user experience is like a bit like creating a script for the user, not a rigid one like in 
a movie with set lines and linear scenes, but a flexible one in which every moment has a range 
                                                 
44 Graham, Jefferson. "Flickr of Idea on a Gaming Project Led to Photo Website." USATODAY.com. February 28, 2006. Accessed 
March 12, 2015. http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/tech/products/2006-02-27-flickr_x.htm. 

of possibilities and potentialities depending on the actions a user takes. This script defines the 
intended experiences a designer has in mind for the user and, during the design process, a 
series of scenarios might be developed to communicate this intentionality to stakeholders. 
However, once a product is out in the world, a user can rewrite the script of a product in various 
ways. They can appropriate, misuse, and combine products, using them for unplanned 
purposes and in unplanned contexts. 
 
The philosopher Don Ihde uses the term “multistability” to refer to technologies or products that 
are successfully used in a different ways based on context.45 Because of their wide reach, most 
digital experiences achieve some form of multistability, where users redefine the purpose of the 
product in an unexpected way. Websites and apps that allow for user generated content or 
communication will regularly have users who ignore, subvert, or simply reinterpret the purpose 
of the platform. They successfully use the capabilities provided for means other than intended, 
such as stores who use Instagram as an ecommerce platform.46Other times, users try to extend 
a system’s existing capabilities, exposing a desire for features that don’t exist. For example, 
when users on a discussion forum create site-specific shorthand to make searching more 
effective. 
 
When users reinterpret or extend a product, designers have a choice to either ignore, actively 
prevent, or incorporate the new usage. A high degree of multistability could mean that a product 
is bumping up against a different world than it was designed for, one where needs have 
changed or society has shifted. Or perhaps it’s just kids messing around. Figuring that out, and 
adapting as necessary, is how product evolution is co-developed with users. Designers have 
two main roles to play: encourage multistability and pay attention to whether the official identity 
of a product needs to change. 
 
One way to encourage multistability is to design products where users can easily perceive the 
capabilities and limitations of the system. Ubiquitous computing pioneer Mark Weiser refers to 
this as being “seamful,” in contrast to being seamless. Designers often strive for seamlessness, 
where all parts of a system work flawlessly, and invisibly, to support a singular experience. The 
problem with this approach is that the underlying enablers of the experience are effectively, or 
literally, sealed away from the user. This creates a tightly controlled “script” for the product, 
removing some autonomy from the user, and requiring that everything work flawlessly behind 
the scenes. In contrast, if there are visible seams, ideally what Weiser called “beautiful seams,” 
then users can more easily understand and adapt the capabilities of a product. 
 
Professor Matthew Chalmers, of University of Glasgow, has further explored Weiser’s notion of 
seamful design. One example he gives is the status bar on a mobile phone, which could 
technically go beyond signal strength to indicate the specific cellular tower it’s connected to. 
Normally this information is hidden, but exposing it could help users know when a phone is 
                                                 
45 Verbeek, Peter. What Things Do: Philosophical Reflections on Technology, Agency, and Design. University Park: Pennsylvania 
State University Press, 2005. 136. 
46 Wortham, Jenna. "On Instagram, a Bazaar Where You Least Expect It." Bits. March 8, 2014. Accessed March 12, 2015. 
http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/03/08/on-instagram-a-bazaar-where-you-least-expect-it/. 

jumping back-and-forth between two different towers.47 Extending that example, the physical 
casing of the phone could use color or texture to indicate the location of embedded antennas, 
helping users to avoid accidently attenuating the signal with their hands. Recognizable seams 
help users develop a mental model for how a product functions and find workarounds for when it 
doesn’t. 
 
The most direct way that a digital product can reveal its seams is by exposing an API, or 
Application Programming Interface. An API allows users, or user/developers anyway, to directly 
access the capabilities of a product, separate from the official experience that designers have 
created. Many popular products have APIs, including Flickr, Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter. 
This is why third-parties are able to build entirely new Twitter clients, tweaking the official design 
or offering new ways to use the platform. 
 
Twitter also provides an instructive example of how to pay attention when users extend a 
product. The core features that define Twitter today, @ replies, #hashtags, and retweets, are all 
features that were originally developed by users.48 Early adopters used the constraints of 140 
characters per message in creative ways, adding codes such as @, #, and RT that other users 
copied in their structure and meaning. As their usage reached a critical mass, Twitter added 
official support for these conventions. It’s possible to find the user who first used a hashtag or 
retweet, but the individual is not the point. The adaptation was necessary because the collective 
decided that’s how the product should evolve. 
 
Figure 4.x YY singer screenshot 
 
Sometimes the collective leads a product down an entirely different path than the designers 
originally intended. Take for example the Chinese video-based social networking site YY. The 
website began as place for gamers to stream video games as they played, letting others around 
the world watch as they vanquished foes on virtual battlefields. Because typing is difficult while 
gaming, the site included a high-quality audio feed for users to chat or talk about game strategy. 
Over time, the company realized that some users weren’t playing games at all—but singing—
using the audio stream as a platform for karaoke. 
 
YY didn’t shut down these singers who appropriated the website for performances, but they also 
weren't sure how to respond. As an experiment, they created a contest where they gave users 
virtual tickets to vote for their favorite performers. A light bulb went off when they noticed that 
users were selling their tickets on Taobao, a Chinese online marketplace, for roughly 25 cents 
apiece. After that, YY embraced singing as an official use of the site and developed a variety of 
virtual currencies at different price points that users can gift to their favorite performers. If you 
like a singer, you can give them an emoji lollipop, cotton candy graphic, or throw virtual roses on 
their stage. These simulated gifts translate into real money, and the singers get a cut of the 
                                                 
47 Chalmers, Matthew, and Ian Maccoll. "Seamful and Seamless Design in Ubiquitous Computing." Workshop At the Crossroads: 
The Interaction of HCI and Systems Issues in UbiComp, 2003, 17. 
48 Seward, Zachary. "The First-ever Hashtag, @-reply and Retweet, as Twitter Users Invented Them." Quartz. October 15, 2013. 
Accessed March 12, 2015. http://qz.com/135149/the-first-ever-hashtag-reply-and-retweet-as-twitter-users-invented-them/. 

profits. Streaming video games are still allowed on YY, resulting a strange kind of split 
personality, but karaoke now drives over half of the company’s revenue.49 
 
We have looked at two different scales of unanticipated adaptation. Turning hashtags into 
search links was a small but powerful improvement to Twitter, while YY underwent a larger 
transformation in features, identity, and business model. Organizational learning theorist Chris 
Argyris calls these “single-loop” and “double-loop” changes. In a single-loop, adaptations can 
move a product forward but are largely meant to maintain equilibrium, like a thermostat turning 
on and off. In a single-loop adaptation designers tweak the system to support evolving needs of 
existing users. In a double-loop, minor adjustments are not enough, and major new features or 
a new identity might be necessary. Double-loop changes are rarely anticipated by a designer 
and are commonly driven by what economist Eric von Hippel refers to as “lead users,”50 people 
who are not satisfied with existing products and hack or appropriate others to approximate the 
experience they want. Lead users may be extreme, but designers should pay attention because 
what seems unique today may be commonplace tomorrow. 
Repairable 
 
Everything will eventually break. Whether physical or digital, some part of a product or system 
will stop working no matter how durable or adaptable. Enduring products plan for this eventuality 
and are designed to be easily repaired, preferably by the user. Today’s products are complex, 
involving scores or hundreds of components. Repairability avoids having to throw a product 
away when just one of those parts fails. 
 
In the past, America had a stronger culture of repair, where one was expected to take worn out 
shoes to a cobbler, or a broken radio to the service center. The increased pace of consumerism 
and mass production have changed that, though this shift is not universally felt around the 
world. Take for example India, where lower incomes drive demand for increased longevity and 
city streets are filled with repairmen who specialize in particular items from umbrellas, to bikes, 
to cellphones. In America, where cobblers and other repair crafts are in steady decline,51 people 
seem more willing to just throw things away. But the culprit is not only disposable income and 
callous attitudes. Products are no longer made to be repaired. The soles of shoes are 
irreversibly attached with glue, appliances fit together with irreplaceable plastic snaps, and 
electronics prioritize thinness over repairability. 
 
The difficulty of repairing modern products has gotten so bad as to spawn advocacy groups. 
The Repair Manifesto is one such call to arms, highlighting environmental, budgetary, 
educational, and empowerment reasons for repairable design.52 Another is the Right to Repair 
                                                 
49 Chace, Zoe. "YY Changes Its Tune After Karaoke Is A Hit." NPR. December 15, 2014. Accessed March 12, 2015. 
http://www.npr.org/2014/12/15/370878848/yy-changes-its-tune-after-karaoke-is-a-hit. 
50 Von Hippel, Eric. Democratizing Innovation. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005. 22. 
51 Dydzuhn, Karen Kovacs. "Cobblers in Decline." Westport News. June 21, 2011. Accessed March 12, 2015. http://www.westport-
news.com/news/article/Cobblers-in-decline-1433387.php. 
52 "Self-Repair Manifesto." IFixit. Accessed March 12, 2015. https://www.ifixit.com/Manifesto. 

group, which fights for legislation that gives car owners the tools and information to fix their own 
vehicles, or take them to independent repair shops.53 Vehicles have had a historically strong 
repair culture, but as they become increasingly embedded with computation and sensors, 
manufacturers are requiring that repairs happen only at authorized shops. The Digital Right to 
Repair coalition calls for similar action from medical device companies, electronics 
manufacturers, agricultural conglomerates, and data centers.54 Their argument is that 
companies are creating a monopoly on repair and unfairly restricting what consumers can do 
with the products they own. In some instances the government has responded against this 
corporate suppression of user autonomy, such as the recently passed bill that requires wireless 
companies to unlock a user’s phone.55 
  
Autodesk, makers of design and engineering software, maintain a knowledge base on how to 
design for improved product lifetimes. One of the tools they offer is a quick reference guide, a 
helpful list of tangible considerations that make a product easier to disassemble, repair, or 
upgrade.56 Not every product can achieve all of their suggestions, but checklists like this are a 
useful tool for designers to share with team members and a goal they aspire to achieve. 
 
Fig 4.x Flor modular carpet system 
 
One of the goals on the Autodesk list is “Use modular assemblies that enable the replacement 
of discrete components.” A great example of this principle in action can be seen in the carpet 
company Flor, which has rethought how floor coverings should be assembled and replaced. 
Instead of a giant roll of carpet, Flor is a modular system of carpet squares, 20 inches on each 
side, which can be assembled by the user to make custom rugs. The Flor system allows a rug 
to be tailored to your space and personal style, but also makes damage incredibly easy to 
repair. If a stain occurs, from a pet accident or a spilled glass of wine, then only the affected tiles 
need to be replaced. 
 
Fig 4.x Teenage Engineering OP-1, with accessories 
 
Another Autodesk guideline is to “Make replacement parts available and affordable.” This is of 
course not always under a designer's control, and highlights the need to champion repairability 
throughout all roles in the organization. One example of a design-led approach can be found in 
the company Teenage Engineering, makers of the OP-1 portable synthesizer. Replacement 
parts and add-on knobs for the OP-1 are available from the company, but users often 
complained of the high cost, which was largely driven by shipping. To address these concerns 
the company released CAD files of the parts, so users can 3D print them on their own. If a user 
                                                 
53 "Right To Repair Coalition." RightToRepair.org. Accessed March 12, 2015. http://www.righttorepair.org/. 
54 "Home." Digital Right to Repair. Accessed March 12, 2015. http://www.digitalrighttorepair.org/. 
55 Bessler, Abigail. "Obama Signs Bill "unlocking" Cell Phones." CBSNews. August 1, 2014. Accessed March 12, 2015. 
http://www.cbsnews.com/news/obama-signs-bill-unlocking-cellphones/. 
56 "Improving Product Lifetime." Autodesk Design Academy. Accessed March 12, 2015. 
http://academy.autodesk.com/library/sustainable-products/improving-product-lifetime. 

doesn’t have access to a 3D printer they can order these versions through the Shapeways 
service at significantly lower cost than directly from Teenage Engineering.57  
 
The stated goal of releasing the CAD models for the OP-1 accessories was to make users 
happy. This kind of attitude is the exact opposite of planned obsolescence, and results in a high 
degree of loyalty and user evangelism for the product. The open source accessories are not 
encumbered by license restrictions, which allows users to modify them or build their own knobs, 
cranks, or wheels to enhance their synthesizer. Releasing the source for parts that are still in 
production may not be viable for every company, but should at least be considered for products 
and accessories that are no longer officially supported. Imagine a product “sunsetting” process 
where a company no longer takes responsibility for repair, but hands over the necessary tools 
and information to the user community. 
 
For physical products with embedded computation, hardware components aren’t the only type 
of repair to consider. The firmware and software drivers that allow these products to boot and 
connect to other devices can break when changes are made to the underlying operating system 
or third-party APIs. Generally, users consider these fixes the responsibility of the company, but 
this kind of support doesn’t last forever. Similar to releasing CAD files for parts, companies 
should consider enlisting the open source community to repair their legacy products. Some 
companies avoid this problem completely by using open source components from the start, 
such as Buffalo routers, which pre-install the open source DD-WRT firmware.58 
 
Fig 4.x iFixit screenshot 
 
Along with obtaining parts or source code, users need access to technical documentation to 
guide them through a repair process. Older electronics, like CRT televisions, used to tuck a 
printed repair manual inside of the casing itself, but most products today aren’t even designed to 
be repaired. The website iFixit seeks to remedy this situation through a wiki-based structure 
where detailed repair manuals and step-by-step photographic teardowns can be collaboratively 
created by users. The founders of iFixit “believe that the easier it is to fix something, the more 
people will do it.”59 They see their information platform as a social good that “lengthens the life 
of products and conserves vital resources.”60 
 
There are many important roles in supporting repairability, but the underlying iFixit philosophy is 
one that designers everywhere should strive towards. What small change in a design could 
make it easier for a user to repair a broken product? If we want our products to endure, we have 
a responsibility to empower users to repair them. 
                                                 
57 "Teenage Engineering Make CAD Files Available to 3D Print Replacement Parts." Shapeways Blog. September 24, 2012. 
Accessed March 12, 2015. http://www.shapeways.com/blog/archives/1647-teenage-engineering-make-cad-files-available-to-3d-
print-replacement-parts.html. 
58 "Wireless Networking." Buffalo. Accessed March 12, 2015. http://www.buffalotech.com/products/wireless/wireless-n-routers-
access-points. 
59 "Media Info." IFixit. Accessed March 12, 2015. https://www.ifixit.com/Info/Media. 
60 Ibid. 

Layers of Change 
 
In this chapter we have looked at various approaches to promoting product longevity. Each of 
these qualities can be designed for individually, but combining different techniques may prove 
more valuable. The longevity of buildings is an analogous example we can look to for 
inspiration. Buildings routinely outlast their original occupants and even their original purpose. 
To do this, they change over time, in similar ways to what we’ve discussed for products. 
Architect Frank Duffy has said that “there isn’t such a thing as a building A building properly 
conceived is several layers of longevity of built components.”61 Stewart Brand expanded upon 
Duffy’s notion of layers that change at different rates in his book How Buildings Learn. 
 
Figure 4.x Layers of Change Diagram 
 
Brand’s “shearing layers” provide a common sense way to think about various time scales within 
a single design. The six layers (Site, Structure, Skin, Services, Space Plan, and Stuff) 
accelerate as they move inward. Any homeowner can relate to his observation that the exterior 
skin of a building will last a couple of decades, while services like plumbing, HVAC, and 
elevators might change in half that time. A space plan might adjust every five years, while our 
stuff—from furniture to books—moves around all the time. 
 
For products, the time periods are generally shorter, but similar to buildings every product has 
components that can change at different rates. Consider this attempt to map a smartphone onto 
Brand’s building layers: 
 
Site 
company, brand 
Structure 
processor, touch screen, charging port, battery, sensors 
Skin 
color, headphones, OS theme 
Services 
operating system, application launcher 
Space Plan 
apps, plug-ins, protective case 
Stuff 
music, photos, video, text 
 
The mapping between buildings and smartphones isn’t perfect, but it doesn’t have to be, 
because every product can have its own unique number of layers. Each layer changes at a 
different speed, but in relationship to the ones below and above it. Slower layers tend to 
constrain faster ones, so choices made about Structure limit the possible Services and 
decisions about Space Plan affect the possible Stuff. Many products today are part of a larger 
ecosystem of products and services, so designers should consider all parts of that ecosystem 
as they map out how various layers enable and constrain each other.  
                                                 
61 Brand, Steward. How Buildings Learn: What Happens after They’re Built. London: Penguin Books, 1995. 12. 

 
What are the layers of change for the product you’re designing? What approaches to longevity 
are appropriate for each layer? As designers, we want our work to provide lasting value in the 
world. Using the techniques in this chapter we can intentionally design for longevity, creating the 
conditions for a product that works well today and in the future.  

Richard Banﬁeld
Design 
Leadership
HOW TOP DESIGN LEADERS BUILD AND GROW 
SUCCESSFUL ORGANIZATIONS

Planning for the
Future
Introduction
Designers, and especially digital designers, are often creating work on the cutting
edge of technology. This can be both exciting and frustrating. Getting a grip on
which technologies will survive the market’s demands and which are just passing
fads can feel like a daily investigation. As my ten-year-old son said when he was
asked what career he wanted one day, “How can I know that? The things I’ll be
working on haven’t even been invented yet.” We live in a time where things
change so fast that even the not-too-distant future can seem ambiguous. Know-
ing how to plan for a future that is unclear can be a design leader’s most chal-
lenging strategic task. External forces aren’t the only thing leaders need to
concern themselves with; their entire company is also looking to the leader to
show the way forward.
Given the ambiguity of the future, the act of planning can seem daunting to
many design leaders. Seasoned designer and leader, Jules Pieri, CEO of Grom-
met, puts planning into perspective when he says, “Today in this business, it
isn’t as simple as, ‘Oh, this is my planning week’ or ‘This is a planning meeting.’
I have to step back at the beginning of every year and write what is called a CEO
letter. I reﬂect on the top learnings from last year and the top goals of the coming
year. That is probably the only formal time when I absolutely am thinking that
way. But the rest of the year, it’s about connecting the outside world to the one
inside this business. As one of my investors said to me, ‘Jules, your job is to be
out there and absorb it. You’ve got to do that. Nobody else can.’ That was actually
kind of liberating...because [he said it during] a heavy operating phase....[I]t gave
me permission to do some things that I wouldn’t do before. Design leaders
73
| 5

might feel they don’t have the time to do this, but it’s their responsibility.” Lifting
your head out of the daily operations and focusing on the outside world is a
requirement of leadership. As the saying goes, it’s the leader’s role to work on the
business—not in the business.
I’m personally a big fan of planning in both my personal and professional
life. For me, it’s a process that evolved from simply writing a few annual resolu-
tions to creating detailed plans for each aspect of my life. My favorite planning
trick is to pretend I have to present my plan to a large audience of my peers. It
forces me to think through the elements that might be questioned by others in
similar positions to me. Preparing a keynote presentation for this ﬁctitious audi-
ence seems to trick my brain into taking each goal or step more seriously. I’ve
heard of other leaders who make their plans more visible by creating vision
boards or timelines. These techniques might seem quaint until you realize these
are exactly the same methods used to design products and websites. Mood
boards, experience maps, user stories—they are all just formalized processes for
visualizing and planning for an unknown future.
Natural Planners Versus Learned Planning
I wondered if our design leaders were natural planners or whether it was a skill
they developed over time. My personal experience was that planning was a
learned skill, but from observing my fellow studio owners in action, I discovered
that some leaders come to this work more naturally. Either way, eﬀective plan-
ning skills generally come with experience, and the extent of the planning that’s
required changes as the needs of the organization change. “I would not say I’m a
great planner. I think it’s something I’m becoming better at,” says 352 Inc.’s
founder Geoﬀ Wilson. “I think historically our agency was lacking a little bit of
vision because of the fact that we lived very day-to-day and didn’t necessarily look
long-term. Today, I do think planning is very important from both a strategic per-
spective as well as from a ﬁnancial perspective, and it’s something that I’m
becoming better with and more disciplined about.” Even well-established compa-
nies like 352 Inc. seem to learn the value of planning only when they reach a cer-
tain maturity.
In the case of whether to plan or not, size does seem to matter. Smaller com-
panies worry less about long-term planning. It’s just not that important to them.
However, the growth of a studio or ﬁrm means new attitudes about planning are
necessary. Success up until then can often be attributed to having really talented
people, so a lack of planning doesn’t aﬀect their outcomes too much. I call this
74 | DESIGN LEADERSHIP

the “smart-lucky-strategy.” A small group of smart and lucky people can get away
without a strategy for some period of time—sometimes years. The problem
comes when projects get more complex, the group grows, and communication
becomes harder or good luck dries up. A growing organization demands a diﬀer-
ent approach.
Planning strategies vary among design leaders. “Am I a planner? Yes and
no,” says Sarah Tesla. “I plan ahead enough in order to feel conﬁdent about my
next move and whether or not I would fail in that move. But beyond that, no. I
like to have big ideas that would be interesting to reach, but I’m a little bit more
of a ‘live in the moment’ kind of person than I am a meticulous planner.” Every-
one we spoke to approaches planning a little diﬀerently, but they all acknowl-
edged that it is essential.
Even if you’re not a live-in-the-moment type of person, Tesla’s approach to
crafting a big idea that’s interesting to her is exactly where good planning starts.
Regardless of the size of your group or organization, you’ll need a clear vision of
where you’re headed—the clearer the vision, the better. Clear visions also need to
engage your emotions. Big ideas create motivation and excitement for the team
trying to reach them. Big ideas are worth getting out of bed and going to work
for. Small ideas are easily forgotten. When we started Fresh Tilled Soil 10 years
ago, we convinced ourselves we could be the ﬁrst choice of user-experience
designers for all category leader clients. It was an insanely big goal for two guys
in a basement without much experience in this space. We are a decade into our
journey, and we hear weekly from our prospects and clients that we were indeed
their ﬁrst choice. In hindsight, our big, hairy, audacious goal doesn’t seem so
scary after all.
Reﬂecting on the need to adjust planning habits, Velir’s Dave Valliere con-
ﬁrms that for him it’s an evolving skillset. His approach to planning has gone
from passive to proactive. “I would say that over the last few years, my desire to
plan ahead has changed. When I ﬁrst moved into my role in leadership, it was
very reactive. I think we hit an inﬂection point as an organization. About ﬁve
years ago, we were about 50 people. We didn’t have a lot of organization, both in
our own internal structure and how are the staﬀ organized—literally any sort of
organizational structure around our process for delivering to clients. We had a lot
of issues with deployments to production that were causing outages for clients.
Albeit they weren’t huge outages, but they were noticeable.” Valliere admits that
sometimes it’s the pain and frustration of a situation that forces the learning
moment. Under the pressure of fast growth, the solutions to planning for a more
PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE | 75

stable future often require some quick experimentation. “During that time, I was
very reactive to those situations. We were trying to plug holes. And sometimes
when you’re plugging those holes, you’re only aware of what’s right in front of
you and not looking a little bit more broadly or a little bit over the horizon. It was
hard to be more strategic and think about planning. We were growing a lot and
we were adding a lot of new staﬀ. We were onboarding a lot of new accounts. Fig-
uring out an organization that scaled to support that while you’re in some of
those issues at the time is a little messy. You’re trying things around an organiza-
tional structure. And I do remember a couple of instances where we tried some-
thing from an organizational management structure that just wasn’t right and
had to switch it around.”
Valliere stepped back from the Band-Aid approach to planning and spent
about a year thinking about what was going to have the biggest impact on Velir
over the next 10 years. By spending a lot more time thinking about the steps that
would get them there, he was able to gain control over their growing pains. He
continues, “What will get us to that space? Do we really want to double-down as
an implementation ﬁrm? Or do we want to expand into a more full-service
agency where we’re oﬀering services that go beyond just pure development and
implementation? These were the things I was thinking about.” By asking the
right questions, he was able to work with his executive team to ﬁnd the answers.
The next stage was planning the steps that would implement those answers.
“This was important, both from the perspective of building a portfolio and get-
ting the right staﬀ involved and trained. So I would say from that perspective,
we’ve been able to think more and plan more. For me, things have gotten more
comfortable. I’m a lot more eﬀective at thinking about what we want to be doing
in terms of these new service areas, and then asking, ‘[W]hat are the steps that we
can then step through over the next however-amount-of-time-it-will-take to try to
get there?’”
“I think it’s been a mix of both natural and learned skills,” says Scott Bald-
win of Yellow Pencil. “I’ve always been a ‘zero inbox’ kind of guy, just about. I’m
pretty good at kind of trawling through...my information. But I think a lot of it is
just coming down to having a clear head and taking clear actions at the right
times.” Having a clear head means having the strategies to deal with everything
from email to annual budgeting. Developing these strategies often comes from
experimenting with what works for your style of leadership. Being in touch with
your leadership style helps you choose the best planning methods. “We’ve taken
an absolutely strategic approach to planning,” says Jason Grigsby of CloudFour.
76 | DESIGN LEADERSHIP

1 Strengths Finder 2.0 by Tom Rath - http://www.strengthsﬁnder.com/home.aspx
“A few years ago, we did a bunch of Strengthsﬁnder1 exercises. These are the
tools found in the Strengthsﬁnder books.” By identifying what the executive team
was good at, they were able to ﬁnd solutions that best meshed with their
strengths. “I don’t think I can turn oﬀ that strategic part of my brain. According
to the Strengthsﬁnder tools, I fall into the achiever, strategic, futuristic cate-
gories. I spend way, way too much of my time in thinking mode. ... A lot of what
we’re doing is trying to ﬁgure out how we will get to where we want to go.”
That Pesky Ambiguous Future
We also asked the design leaders what they see when they look at the industry as
a whole. We wanted to know what they see coming down the line in the way of
opportunities, challenges, and trends. Dominic Bortolussi of The Working Group
sees a future where clients want more than just design and development serv-
ices. “I think one thing that we’re uncovering for ourselves is that as the size of
our clients grows—they’re getting bigger and bigger, national and international
companies—we’re realizing that they’re looking for someone who provides more
than just the production, more than just slapping design on a piece of software.
They’re looking for the smarts and the strategy in advance of that. We’ve always
provided that, but we never focused on that until recently because our genesis
was as a development shop.”
As design teams grow and their skills go beyond pushing pixels, the desire to
take on more strategic work increases. More strategic work means more internal
planning. Delivering on complex projects requires teams with training in strate-
gic thinking. “In the past, we were just the guys behind the scenes who’d be cod-
ing the apps,” says Bortolussi. “As the size of our projects has grown, the need
for that type of strategy has grown. That means that agencies like ours are going
to need to be able to oﬀer more and more of that type of work in concert with the
development process. Using the agile process, which is something that we’ve
adopted over the last three or four years, strategic thinking is very tightly inter-
twined with the production. Every cycle...goes through a piece of strategic process
and strategic thinking about what you want to develop and why you want to
develop it and how to prioritize that.”
The lesson here is that planning for successful outcomes at the project level
also means ﬂexing your planning muscles at the company level. The two are
PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE | 77

always connected. You can’t deliver strategic value to your clients if you can’t
answer those questions for your own design organization. “Educating our clients
into that process is going to lead to better things, better production, better soft-
ware,” continues Bortolussi. “I think that’s a common theme that we’ve seen
with a lot of our peer agencies around here. Rather than just being the design
and dev shops, they’re being asked their thoughts and expertise on how to design
a [website] for a client based on their business needs.”
Habanero Consulting has been in business for two decades, and CEO Steven
Fitzgerald is planning for several more decades of business. With so many short-
term-focused planning methodologies like Agile and Lean gaining popularity,
you might mistakenly think that long-term planning was only for your dad’s gen-
eration. You’d be wrong. Whether they actively plan for the future or not, all our
design leaders think about what the long-term future will mean for their teams
and opportunities. Planning far ahead can seem daunting, but that far-away
future appears to excite our design leaders. “That’s what’s fascinating and cool
and, frankly, super inspiring for me,” says Fitzgerald. “We’re very detailed on
measuring employee engagement and workplace health. Aside from some sys-
tems issues, one of the key areas for us to get better at and, as a company, to
improve engagement in right now is clarity of vision. We’ve been on a three- or
four-year journey to get clear about where our next step is and where we’re
going....I said to the team, ‘There’s a change in the world that we feel we want to
play a role in.’ It’s all related to our purpose around helping organizations and
people thrive. My belief is that we need to create a long-term vision that says,
‘These are our values, this is the opportunity in the market, this is where the
world’s going to spend their money...,’ and then position ourselves—to poorly
quote Wayne Gretzky—[to] skate to where the puck’s going to be in terms of the
market.”
Planning for the future means picking a strategy that isn’t going to fade with
time. Hitching plans to trendy technologies or fashionable industries can often
result in temporary success. To be able to deliver on a long-term plan, our design
leaders always reference the core of why they are in business. Aligning their
plans to the fundamentals is how they ensure a timeless strategy. “I think vision
needs to come from thinking about why you exist, your purpose, [and] under-
standing how that will most successfully unfold over time,” says Fitzgerald. “You
need to think about the other market dynamics and the other realities of that. We
want to drive our vision based on how we can best live our purpose over time.
That gives me a diﬀerent perspective to think about where we want to go as a
78 | DESIGN LEADERSHIP

2 Owner Camp is a retreat held several times a year by the Bureau of Digital for owners and senior execu-
tives of design studios.
company and the role we want to play in creating this bigger change. It’s related
to the impact we can have on our customers and their cultures, and helping their
organizations thrive.”
“For me, it’s constantly learning,” Greg Hoy says of thinking about the
future and the surprising rewards it brings. “One of the absolute gifts that hap-
pened to me was starting Owner Camp.2 One of the motivating factors was to
create a potentially alternate revenue stream moving forward. I didn’t anticipate
that it would provide so much professional development opportunity for me.
Talking to people like yourself who do what [you] do and learning from them,
and learning what the life cycle of a leader might be. For me, I’m kind of in the
awkward teenage years of running an agency. I’ve got braces and headgear and
I’m still trying to ﬁgure out [whether I am] doing the right things. At the end of
this, are we’re going to blossom or are we going to have to retreat? You think
about all those things. You think about what constantly energizes you moving
forward.”
Aligning Plans to Culture
The size, structure, and culture of your design team will often have a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the plans you create. Each group will be diﬀerent, and it’s the
responsibility of the design leader to recognize what the organization can hon-
estly support. Planning to do something just because everyone else is doing it is
naive at best and disastrous at worst. Just like the individual strength-ﬁnding
exercises, leaders need to ask what their organization excels at doing. This also
means recognizing what their weaknesses are. For companies that have the cul-
ture or structures that support developing their own internal products, this can
mean they are able to support plans for that. “One thing that I really want to get
into as an agency is to be able to develop our own products and start to have
product revenue...to complement our service revenue,” says Geoﬀ Wilson. “This
is scary for agencies. Usually you hear horror stories of this not working, but
we’re trying to be very, very disciplined about it. I think that’s really important for
our long-term survival. I think that to have a diversiﬁed stream of income, so it’s
not 100% client-services-focused, is where I want to see us get to.”
“Our planning for the future is really about ﬁnding a way to keep the culture
and grow the culture, because we think that the success of our future is predomi-
PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE | 79

3 Update: Funsize recently hired a head of business development.
nantly [reliant] on our culture,” says Funsize founder Armendariz. “Our business
comes from word of mouth, so to date we’ve never invested any money in mar-
keting or business development.3 A lot of our business comes from the fact that
people know we have a very good culture, and a lot of the cool things that we’re
doing come from the culture. In terms of how I see it, most of my planning is
going to be involved in maintaining, grooming, and bettering our culture.”
“I would say, fairly loose,” Brian Williams says of their approach to connect-
ing plans to any one technology or sector. “Our view is that change is inevitable.
We’re in an industry that’s constantly changing. Stuﬀ that works now won’t work
in two years, didn’t work two years ago, that sort of thing. We‘re constantly see-
ing that, whether it’s the tech stack that we’re using [or] the process that we’re
using, the tools are always changing [and] the client’s needs are changing. Since
we sometimes work with startups, we have to be cautious of their ups and downs.
Some of the startups are hot right now, but when that bubble bursts in a year or
two, they’ll be gone. So we can’t be overly reliant on that.”
Relying too much on one market sector or trend is dangerous. Flexibility
with planning is always a balance between what’s good for the organizational cul-
ture and what’s good for the market. Greg Hoy conﬁrms Williams’ line of think-
ing, “You have to keep asking yourself, do client services still energize you
moving forward? Does focusing on a particular niche energize you more than
another? Can you construct an organization around you to keep you motivated so
you are in that niche and constantly energized? I think about that stuﬀ a lot. I’m
not the guy to be designing sites and performing critiques and things like that,
but I think I oﬀer some experience in other areas that some newer people in our
oﬃce don’t have that I could potentially leverage into some new business oppor-
tunities for us. I’m always thinking about what’s next and how I can add value to
the organization, [and] we’ve kind of ﬁlled the stuﬀ that I used to do with other
very talented people.”
Williams goes on to describe how they avoid the rollercoaster ride associated
with tech trends and fashionable industries. “So we have built the entire struc-
ture around this bet on change. Our future planning is often saying, ‘Well, what
are we interested in doing in terms of the teams? What kind of technologies do
we want to play with? When we look out two years from now, or ﬁve years from
now, what types of clients do we want? What types of solutions are we trying to
solve?’ That sort of thing, but it’s not very rigid. We’re not trying to make an exact
80 | DESIGN LEADERSHIP

plan for how to get there. We want to have a clear vision in terms of what we’re
trying to achieve, but we...accept the fact that change is going to be constant.”
Connecting plans to a timeless vision works best for design organizations.
Instead of choosing a trending technology, design leaders focus on the underly-
ing reason that technology exists. For example, social media isn’t the trend, it’s
the desire for humans to remain connected so they can share information. That
basic human desire probably won’t ever go away. A smart design leader sees that
and gears their plans to leverage that in their choice of tactical investments.
This focus on the underlying principles of human behavior is not just limi-
ted to technology and industry verticals. Design leaders also recognize that foun-
dational principles relate directly to how they lead, manage their people, and
curate their cultures. “Some of this is the trendy management approaches we see
and hear in the media,” observes Williams. “You hear it all the time. One exam-
ple is to ﬁre people quickly. It’s not meant in a callous way at all because it’s
doing nobody any good to have the wrong person in the organization. We learned
pretty quickly that I don’t like that ‘hire slow, ﬁre fast’ kind of thing. I think the
idea of ﬁring fast is a little too cold for our structure and culture. I think the idea
of ﬁnding people who are unhappy and unsuccessful, and [ﬁguring out] a way to
get them out of the organization [and to a place] where they will be happy and
successful is a good thing. I think that’s important.” Williams goes on to explain
that when he needs to let someone go, he’ll spend a lot of time ﬁnding the right
place to send that person. Identifying job opportunities helps them leave with
their head held high and without having to face the ﬁnancial challenges of being
unemployed. Williams believes that planning for those outcomes reinforces the
culture of his company and ensures a more positive future for everyone on the
team.
Planning for Success, and Not the Other Thing
In the absence of a plan, leaders will very often end up at the helm of a rudder-
less ship. Worse still is that someone else’s plan might hijack the ship and set it
on a path that has dire results. This hijacking happens subtly and often goes
unnoticed until it’s too late. It starts with something small like a request from a
client to do a non-core project. A client suggests that the design ﬁrm adopt a new
project that’s out of their wheelhouse so that the client’s needs can be addressed.
Next thing you know, the design ﬁrm is hiring people they don’t really need for a
project they don’t really want. The client isn’t at fault. They just see a competent
design partner suggesting they can respond to a request. Before long, the design
PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE | 81

leader ﬁnds herself running a business that’s spread too thin and has no pros-
pects for the services they currently oﬀer. These distracting events aren’t a prob-
lem if you’re focused on what you stand for and how you’ll get there. The
problem is when you have no plan. So how then do successful design leaders
plan for a positive outcome?
The ﬁrst step appears to be getting the company plan aligned with what the
ﬁrm can be really good at, and aligned with the reality of the market. Knowing
your cultural strengths, understanding the market trends, and then connecting
the dots is the best way to start. Steven Fitzgerald explains how they identiﬁed
their sweet spot, “We’re in a really interesting industry right now where in the
long term we feel that technology, process, and culture in our organizations need
to come together in diﬀerent ways than they do right now.” Says Fitzgerald, “The
product design industry uses technology in a way that’s oriented around making
processes easier. We know that there’s massive opportunity for technology, pro-
cess, and culture to play a role in changing how people relate to each other, how
they relate to their organizations, how great their careers are, and the productivity
those organizations get from those people.”
Developing a strategy isn’t just about ﬁlling a need. It’s a careful study of
what the restraints are for a solution to be created, and then determining which
policies and guidelines will get the company to the point where they can deliver
the solution to their clients. “It’s not simply using technology to make something
like a payroll process simpler or a supply chain simpler,” Fitzgerald continues.
“That’s what technology is used for today, and it’s very important, but it’s using
the combination of technology, process, and culture to shift the overall experi-
ence that people have. We need to change the experience that organizations have
with their people, and change the whole dynamic so we create more thriving
organizations.” This big-picture thinking described by Fitzgerald elevates the
planning out of the minutia of what tech to focus on and up to the level of creat-
ing transformative experiences that are timeless.
That’s just the ﬁrst step. The next step is ﬁguring out how to communicate
that transition to the market so they can see the value of these solutions. “We
have to create a bit of a shift in the next ﬁve years,” says Fitzgerald. “The question
is, how do we get our market and our customers thinking about us more in
terms of some of those bigger cultural changes? How do we become transforma-
tion agents?” These challenges do not only present themselves to larger design
ﬁrms but are important for internal design groups and smaller consultancies to
consider as well. User-experience and product designers are frequently lumped
82 | DESIGN LEADERSHIP

in with graphic designers and engineers. Crafting a strategy that diﬀerentiates
solutions and illustrates relevant outcomes is the biggest challenge. “Our indus-
try, and organizations like us, are typecast as technology companies or design
organizations or agencies,” Fitzgerald says. “It’s tough to get out of that typecast,
to get involved in the right conversations, to be involved in organizational
change, to get into the meat of that. Yet we know that what we have to oﬀer is
critical to create those outcomes in the organizations we’re dealing with, so we
have to overcome that hurdle.”
It’s clear that in order to remain relevant, design leaders will need to focus
less on individual technologies and more on product-wide or organizational solu-
tions. Leaders will have to focus on not being known just as a technology-
oriented or design-oriented consulting ﬁrm but one that is associated with very
speciﬁc business outcomes. It could be experiential or cultural change, but it
can’t just be about technology. “I think [we made mistakes] around being too
broad on our tech stack, for example,” says Williams. “We realized pretty quickly
that trying to be a technologist that could work in any tech stack really just meant
that we weren’t very good at anything. It’s easy to sell that way but not necessarily
the way to do our best work, so narrowing in and being more specialized has
been good.”
Connecting the Dots
It might seem obvious that plans should have some return for the organization,
but it’s worth understanding how that happens. Returns take many forms and
may not always be ﬁnancial. Non-ﬁnancial plans tend to be long-term in nature
and thus can be more complicated to address when short-term needs, like cash
ﬂow, are on the organization’s mind. For design leaders to create continuity
between planning and returns, there has to be a link to what the plans will mean
for the people in the organization. If the team can’t see the returns that will
result from the design leader’s plans, they will be less motivated to make the
behavior changes required to reach the planned goals. This is why the diﬃculty
in measuring the returns on cultural and brand-speciﬁc plans makes them easy
to ignore. The link between ﬁnance and nontangible outcomes is sometimes
hard to describe, so it’s essential that design leaders develop the communication
tools to deliver this message clearly.
Communicating plans to the team consistently and eﬀectively is a skill all
design leaders need to have. Communicating a vision so that everybody else gets
involved isn’t just about presentations and motivation posters on the studio wall.
PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE | 83

Sarah Tesla of Make describes the components of communicating a plan to the
team when she says, “It should be a combination of two things. One is the vision
of the business. This might not be something that you plan for formally, but it’s
important that everyone is on board with that vision. The second thing is beneath
that. It’s planning from a ﬁnancial perspective, and certainly there’s a bit more
ﬁscal responsibility there. You can’t...be too reckless and say to the team, ‘Oh
well, money could run out and, you know, we’ll just ﬁgure something out when
we get there.’ No, it’s not quite like that. I’ve got more of my shit together in that
space. And not that it’s always perfect, but it’s healthy enough that it doesn’t feel
too challenging.” Tesla makes it clear that things are always changing. Even
when plans are made, there should be an understanding that feedback will be
received and adjustments are not far away. “If anything, you should plan for your
vision to change and evolve. You have to be open to that, and not attached to
things. I set the tone for what the vision might be, but ultimately I’m looking for
cues from everyone on the team to...give me an indication of what could be the
best way forward.”
“I live in the future,” says Jules Pieri. “I don’t think of it as a formal process.
It’s more about making connections. I have to expose myself to ideas and tech-
nologies regularly to do that....So it means getting out of the oﬃce, it means read-
ing, it means talking to people and applying discipline I learned early in my
career as a designer. Nobody’s paying me to design the past, or even the present,
right?” Pieri is a consummate design leader and it’s clear that she uses her
design training in her everyday thinking. Researching ﬁrst, then making connec-
tions to possible solutions is in her bones. “As CEO, I had to ﬁgure out how to
get the information I needed to do that job. To me, that always meant hitting the
road, ﬁguratively and literally. Talking to customers, looking at competition, look-
ing at the capabilities of my own company. Once I have the information, it’s a
sort of [a] blend of instinct and reaction to reality.”
Vince Lavecchia of Instrument explains how they connect the dots on big,
long-term projects like building a new oﬃce to house their 100-plus employees.
These types of projects aﬀect both ﬁnancial and cultural outcomes. “We deﬁ-
nitely look at the ﬁnancial goals and say, ‘Hey everyone, we’re building a build-
ing.’” Lavecchia knows that having a creative workspace allows his team to
generate better quality work so investing in a new oﬃce is essential. Oﬃce space,
team size, reputation, and quality of work all mingle to create a reputation for the
ﬁrm that keeps the work coming in. He’s quick to point out how these things are
intertwined. “We know we want to maintain a certain level of success and perfor-
84 | DESIGN LEADERSHIP

mance on the ﬁnancial side and that’s going to allow us to keep reinvesting in the
company. We just have to be responsible to those numbers, but once you set
those goals, then it’s just about having the discipline to force everybody to man-
age their projects and their teams to reach those goals. In that way, we are not
ﬁnancially focused because we ﬁrmly believe that if we do insanely good work,
we’re going to keep getting insane work, and people will naturally ﬁnd out about
us and see it and want our work. We create demand by putting out insane work.
We keep the supply managed so that we’re always in demand. We’ve been inten-
tional about hiring size and not blowing up. We could deﬁnitely be larger if we
wanted to maximize money, but we’ve intentionally been careful about that.”
Connecting Plans to Speciﬁc Revenue Outcomes
Many of the design leaders we interviewed have routines around their planning
processes. For some of the more seasoned leaders, these routines are deeply
ingrained in their everyday activities. You might even say they are habits. Under-
standing that these habits or routines have the ability to bring plans to life is
something the design leaders talk about frequently. “I never, never, never slow
down on the sales side even though we could be busy and we would have client
work booked out for the next six months,” says Brian Williams about the time he
spends actively implementing his plans for the future. Williams’ daily activities
are seen through his lens of what will happen in the months ahead. “That might
seem like forever and we might feel like there’s no need to sell, but six months
goes by very quickly and all of a sudden we might have nothing in the pipeline.
Always be selling is a big thing.” William’s insistence on thinking about selling
means he’s constantly planning for positive sales outcomes. This is a good
reminder that planning isn’t always an annualized event but a daily habit that
can be reinforced through ritual and routine. Making the time for daily reﬂection
and connecting big-picture goals to daily activities is another thing that makes
these design leaders successful.
Allotting time to planning new initiatives and integrating them with daily
activities doesn’t happen by accident. Geoﬀ Wilson describes how they plan to
take ideas that the team has and deliberately turn them into products that can
generate new revenue. “We ask each team to think of at least one product idea
that they as a team would get behind and would like to bring to market. We get
all of our teams together and they think of ideas. We go over the ideas with them
over the course of a few months and then we solidify the idea that each team is
going to pursue.” What Wilson does next is an example of thoughtful planning.
PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE | 85

4 MVP: Minimum Viable Product
“Once we have these ideas, we give each of our teams three days. We take three
days oﬀ of client work, shut the whole entire agency down...and we do a hacka-
thon, company-wide.” This focused time allows his teams to get the work done
without distractions. Instead of giving them something superﬁcial, suggesting
20% of their time towards these projects, Wilson dedicates the entire company’s
resources to the project. This planning gets the best results in the shortest
amount of time.
Planning these high-impact projects this way has signiﬁcant time advan-
tages, but it’s the entire experience that Wilson is excited about. Not only is his
team building something of value but they are reinforcing positive team dynam-
ics and bonding culturally with one another. “It’s a tremendous event [and] a lot
of fun. Everyone gets really into it. People stay up late all three nights. Both years
we’ve done it, we’ve had at least one team stay up all night....At the end of the
three days, they have to a do a business pitch where they have to pitch the con-
cept for their business product. This is similar to how they might pitch a venture
capitalist for investment. They have to pitch the concept of their product and they
have to demo their product, whatever they were able to get accomplished in the
three days. They do a live demo for us and they do this to a panel of judges. We
bring in external judges to help us judge it. This year, [we brought in] Dan Mall
from SuperFriendly and Andi Graham, owner of Big Sea. We had six judges in
total and they helped us judge the diﬀerent projects and pick the winner. We give
the winning team two months oﬀ of client work to build an MVP4 of their prod-
uct to allow us to actually bring their product to market, and if the product pro-
duces any revenue for the company in the future, we share a percentage of [it]
with the team.”
Sales and spin-oﬀ products aren’t the only way to plan for positive bottom-
line results. Packaging knowledge or services can be just as eﬀective in planning
for new revenue streams. Several years ago, we launched an apprentice program
that quickly became a source for new talent at Fresh Tilled Soil. Within a few
semesters, the program was generating hundreds of thousands of dollars in reve-
nue. Our experience wasn’t unique. Other design leaders have used their indus-
try knowledge to build teaching and apprenticeship programs. Jason VanLue’s
Envy Labs turned their online design skills platform, Code School, into a million-
dollar business that eventually sold to Pluralsight for $36 million. “Right now
I’m very, very passionate about teaching,” says Dan Mall. “I ﬁnd I get the most
86 | DESIGN LEADERSHIP

fulﬁllment out of that. And SuperFriendly is a small company. It’s one person,
one employee. I have no plans to grow larger than one employee, but the thing
that I’m doing right now is I run an apprenticeship program. I do a 9-month
apprenticeship with people that have an appreciation for design and development
but don’t know anything about it. My goal is to get them from zero to sixty in
nine months. The future for me, if all goes well, is to run full-time apprentice-
ship and maybe another business. SuperFriendly the agency, the collaborative, is
its own business. SuperFriendly the apprenticeship, or SuperFriendly the acad-
emy or whatever, becomes its own business as well.” These planned-for out-
comes have a double or even triple bottom line because they add value to the
organizational culture, improve revenues, and lift the community as a whole.
Be Bolder and Wiser
In the interviews with the design leaders, we asked what advice they would give
to a younger version of themselves. “I thought about that recently because I spent
a lot of time wandering in my twenties, playing music and working odd jobs and
not really getting my shit together,” says Smallbox CEO Jeb Banner. “It wasn’t
until I met my future wife that things started to click in a lot of ways. To my
younger self, I’d say, ‘Enjoy the chaos and forget the bad times more. Enjoy the
openness,’ and probably mostly, I’d say, ‘Don’t be ashamed. Don’t be shy. Don’t
be afraid to put yourself out there. Be bolder.’”
Some suggestions for planning in ambiguous times are more practical. If
you’re a new design ﬁrm like Funsize you might not have the experience and his-
tory for your banking partners to support you in times of need. In those
moments the best advice is to treat cash as king. “Well, the ﬁrst thing that we
did,” says Anthony Armendariz, “is get the AmEx card and get the line of credit.
We’d talk to other design companies and we’d came back and say, ‘Okay, let’s get
the line of credit.’ We were so new that we hadn’t ﬁled our ﬁrst year of taxes so
we couldn’t get the line of credit. What can we do? Well, we pretty much always
had three to six months of cash in the bank, to make sure that if for some reason
we lost all of our business today, we could cover payroll for six months. We don’t
necessarily like being that cash heavy, but that’s provided us with the ability to
not freak out about things like that.” Being ﬁnancially literate and conserving
cash ﬂow isn’t just being practical; it’s a requirement of keeping a business in the
black. Getting the right guidance on fundamentals like this separate, healthy
design businesses from those that barely survive month to month.
PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE | 87

Nothing escapes reality. Even big hairy audacious goals need a roadmap to
get them to their destination. Planning for a better future means getting practi-
cal. Big goals need big plans. “I plan to change the way businesses work,” says
Banner of his long-term goals. “I feel very strongly that the workplace is fucked
up. Someone mentioned at a conference that 20% of employees are engaged by
their work, and that, to me, that is the big opportunity. If we want to build really
meaningful brand experiences, it starts with the employee or creator experience.
Everything I’m doing right now is moving towards, ‘how can we build a more
meaningful employee experience for us, as well as the sister companies and our
clients?’ These plans are not there yet on a thought leadership level, so I want to
push myself into that realm as a thought leader. I need to do more writing. I plan
to write a book this year. I’m taking a month oﬀ in July to do some introspection
and writing. I’m sketching out ideas right now, and I’m open to it being whatever
it becomes.”
Staying Relevant
Whether design leaders make big plans or small plans, they all need to connect
to what the market needs are at that point in time. With the constantly shifting
technologies, methodologies, and skills needed to deliver value, possibly the big-
gest challenge is remaining relevant to clients. “At a very high level, I think stay-
ing relevant, is the biggest challenge”says Armendariz. “This was the core topic
of the presentation that I gave at a conference recently. If you look at history, in
our early days of designing digital products, we had a bit of a mish-mash of dif-
ferent skills. Because of interactive authoring tools and animation tools, we knew
a little bit about motion graphics, we knew a little bit about sound and audio, we
knew a little bit about interaction design, visual design, and we used all these
tools ... and canvases that we worked in. Then as the web got more mature and as
iOS was released, our skills got a little bit narrow. We developed these very nar-
row skillsets. Now if you look at the way that technology is going, not just in the
user interfaces themselves but all the diﬀerent kinds of digital products that are
out there, if we don’t stay sharp across a wide range of skillsets, I think we could
very easily see ourselves being irrelevant. It happens so fast that it might not nec-
essarily be three years from now, but maybe even a year from now.”
Focusing in on one or two areas seems counterintuitive but it’s the only way
to keep ahead of the shifting landscape. You can’t make everyone happy by
spreading yourself too thin across dozens of domains. Being relevant to everyone
means you’re no longer relevant. “In our shop, we only do design, so this might
88 | DESIGN LEADERSHIP

make more sense when I say this. We’ve learned very quickly we can’t just get
away with delivering ﬂat PSDs and wireframes and prototypes anymore. If we
can’t ﬁgure out how to bridge that gap between design and technology, and speak
the same language that an engineer is speaking and working in their environ-
ment, which honestly is the canvas—Photoshop isn’t the canvas, the technology
is—then we’re going to be irrelevant. I’ve already seen a lot of other design shops
struggling with that. I think we need to put a lot of planning for the future in that
area. We need to always be building new skills in that area.”
Final Word
Planning isn’t a solitary exercise. Design leaders can’t be expected to take on the
challenges of the future without help. The best plans happen when the design
leaders get input from their team, their advisors, and their partners. Our inter-
views conﬁrmed that the most successful design leaders rely on outside input. “I
honestly don’t think that I would be able to do what we do without my partners,”
says Devbridge Group cofounder Aurimas Adomavicius. “When we founded the
company, there were ﬁve of us. Now, we’ve grown to eight partners in the busi-
ness. I really don’t think we would be who we are if it were just myself alone or
the original founding three. It’s also been incredibly important for us to bring in
partners as we grow who are much more sophisticated in speciﬁc areas than we
are. We started this business without really having done this before....We knew
tech, we knew design, but we didn’t know how to build a business. As we scaled
and as we’ve brought in partners, we looked for people who were phenomenal in
their areas or known in the community for engineering. Then we brought in a
person who did product ownership at Rolls Royce.” Adomavicius explains that as
his team grew, he actively planned to hire people with speciﬁc skills to get the
business to its destination. “As you assemble that team, you can bring in these
players that will essentially lift the organization to a diﬀerent level when they join
the company. Then we formed the functional board out of the shareholders in
the organization. We’re considering now also creating an outside advisory board
where we can bring in some other people that we’ve established relationships
with over the course of growing this business, ... either partners in some of the
ventures we’re in, or just people that we really respect and we’re friends with,
who can potentially help guide us in the future.”
PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE | 89

Key Takeaways
• Great plans ﬁrst require a clear vision, guiding principles, values, and
action steps.
• Creating plans allows you to focus the business activities and avoid distrac-
tions.
• Planning is a team sport. Get help from partners, advisors, mentors, and
team members.
• The future is ambiguous so plans never survive intact. Make plans that are
ﬂexible enough to adjust to an ever-changing future.
• Planning for the future is often about ﬁnding a way to keep a culture that
works.
• Big goals are worth getting up for but can only be achieved when you have
clear plans.
• Companies and teams don’t grow linearly. Plan for spurts of fast growth
with slow periods in between.
• Long-term planning is not fashionable, but it’s still the best approach to
return value to the company and the team.
90 | DESIGN LEADERSHIP

Jonathan Follett, Editor
Foreword by Saul Kaplan
Designing for 
Emerging 
Technologies
UX FOR GENOMICS, ROBOTICS, AND  
THE INTERNET OF THINGS 

205
[ 8 ]
Embeddables: The Next 
Evolution of Wearable Tech
ANDY GOODMAN
Technology That Gets Under Your Skin
Wearables are getting all the headlines at the moment, but future head-
lines will be all about embeddables, tiny computing devices implanted 
inside your body that monitor your health, improve your functioning, 
and connect you to the digital world.
In addition to wearables, there is currently a lot of buzz in technology 
and design circles about living services, the Internet of Things, and 
smart materials. As designers working in these realms, we’ve begun 
to think about even more transformative things, envisioning a future 
in which evolved technology is embedded inside our digestive tracts, 
sensing organs, blood vessels, and even our cells. Everyday objects will 
become responsive and predictive, connecting us to the data sphere 
and reducing the distance between our skin and the surfaces of the 
technological world around us. As Figure 8-1 depicts, what we see fur-
ther out, beyond the realm of wearables and implants, is the future 
symbiosis of the human body and the machine.
In his 2005 book Radical Evolution: The Promise and Peril of Enhancing 
Our Minds, Our Bodies—And What It Means to be Human (Broadway 
Books), Joel Garreau explores the progression toward a post-human 
future deﬁned by four converging technologies that are going to radi-
cally transform our interaction with the world: genetics, robotics, infor-
mation, and nanotechnology. He dubs these the GRIN technologies, 
and they will drive the development of embeddable devices. With a 
few exceptions such as pacemakers and artiﬁcial hips, technology has 

206  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
always been at one distance removed from our bodies and brains. Not 
for much longer. The interface between the manufactured world and 
humans is going to become almost invisible.
Figure 8-1. The future symbiosis of the human body and the machine
The monolithic device with a screen might be on the verge of disap-
pearing. It is being enhanced with numerous smaller devices, which 
might soon replace it as the way to access information. We will arrive 
at a more ambient experience in which sensors capture information 
about us and feed that information into systems quietly working away 
in the background. Wearables will give way to embeddables, nano-scale 
machinery inside our bodies, which can monitor, modify, assist, and 
enhance us.
These systems will act as mental and sensory prosthetics, increasing 
exponentially our knowledge, perception, and manipulation of the 
world around us. The early uses we are seeing in domains such as 
healthcare and ﬁtness will extend further to virtually any domain we 
can think of. Communications, entertainment, socializing, learning, 
work, even self-actualization—any human activity we can think of is 
going to be modiﬁed and ampliﬁed with an invisible mesh of data and 
processing that we will drift through, mostly obliviously.

 8. EMBEDDABLES: THE NEXT EVOLUTION OF WEARABLE TECH   |  207
Embeddables are not just going to be a revolution in functionality, but 
will dramatically alter how people ﬁt into society, affect human psy-
chology, and even propel us toward intellectual transcendence.
Just looking at visual experience and sensing, we can see how this 
could come about. Imagine being able to perceive different light fre-
quencies, the world in microscopic detail, or far distant objects in the 
universe. This would have a profound effect on our understanding of 
reality and our place within it.
Before we can start dreaming about the evolutionary acceleration that 
might be granted by these technologies we have to come back down 
to Earth for a while. There are many practical barriers that need to be 
considered. Embeddables will be sitting so close to us that the right bal-
ance between unobtrusiveness and practicality will have to be found. 
Systems that can predict and even meet our needs without us having to 
intervene will be the ones that resonate and ﬁnd an audience. 
We can already see with the rather too rapid backlash against Google 
Glass that people are very particular about what they put onto their bod-
ies and how “social deviance” could become a big barrier to adoption. 
Parodies of people wearing Google Glass on shows such as Saturday 
Night Live and the fact that the New Yorker has dubbed early adopters 
“Glassholes” shows exactly the problem with wearable tech. It can open 
us up to ridicule. The designs of future wearables will need to subtly 
integrate with our clothing and our bodies or become fashion state-
ments in their own right if they aren’t to become an evolutionary dead-
end on the technology tree.
Likewise, the design paradigms that we invent for these ambient sys-
tems in which the entire body becomes an interactive canvas will 
need to steer clear of a different kind of social deviance. Maybe in the 
future we will become accustomed to the jerking, twitching, winking, 
nodding motions of the Glass wearer in the way that it has become 
socially acceptable to browse your phone while someone is talking to 
you (“phubbing”), but for now it looks deeply peculiar.

208  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
Although conversations on the subject are not mainstream yet, embed-
dables are emerging as a new topic for debate. According to a recent 
panel at Venture Beat “‘Wearable’ computers will soon be inside us.”1 
Embeddables are going to have signiﬁcant consequences for the deliv-
ery of digital services as screen-based interaction becomes less promi-
nent, and possibly even disappears.
This chapter discusses the scientiﬁc, social, and creative context of the 
embeddable revolution. It addresses what you, as a designer or engi-
neer, will need to take on board to operate in this space. What was once 
a craft based on visual cognition will change dramatically into one that 
takes account of other senses and will need to be based on a much 
deeper understanding of human culture, rituals, psychology, physiol-
ogy, and motivation.
Permeable Beings: The History 
of Body Modiﬁcation
To see the future, ﬁrst we must understand the past. Humans have 
been interfacing with technology for thousands of years. We seem to 
be intrinsically built to desire this communion with the manufactured 
world. This blending of the mechanical and biological has often been 
described as a “natural” evolutionary process by such great thinkers as 
Marshall McLuhan in the 1950s and more recently Kevin Kelly.2 So, by 
looking at the long timeline of body modiﬁcation we can see waves of 
change and future ripples.
For as far back as we have physical evidence, humans have been chang-
ing the appearance of their bodies deliberately both for art and seduc-
tion and as an unconsciously instinctive action. The purpose could 
always be distinguished as one of two categories: ﬁrst, to modify states 
of social acceptance; second, to improve physical attributes and to repair 
or mask damaged or aging body parts. Far from the religious ideal of 
humans being born perfect, it is quite clear that we are painfully aware 
of our physical shortcomings and will do sometimes quite extreme 
things to present a more pristine, memorable, or powerful image. 
1 Young Sohn, Samsung chief strategy ofﬁcer at MobileBeat 2013, San Francisco (http://bit.
ly/1CJ3Lwf)
2 What Technology Wants! by Kevin Kelly (Viking, 2010)

 8. EMBEDDABLES: THE NEXT EVOLUTION OF WEARABLE TECH   |  209
The resigned, almost welcoming capitulation to aging and death that 
shaped religious and philosophical narratives of early human cultures 
is certainly no longer a norm (if indeed it ever was).
Few people are totally content with the bodies they ended up occupying, 
but recently, we have developed the capability to change them in much 
more fundamental ways, from the gene up. The enhanced human will 
have improved attributes such as sensing and thinking (aided by com-
putation), and better physical characteristics, such as endurance, resis-
tance, and longevity. If you think this is a distant prospect, recent devel-
opments in artiﬁcial organ technology and robotics are bringing this 
sci-ﬁ scenario closer than we might imagine. Although it is too early to 
agree with Aubrey De Grey’s assertion that we will be the last genera-
tion to experience death,3 it is safe to say that our children and grand-
children will certainly have a very different physical life experience that 
any humans who came before.
If we previously deﬁned the two primary categories of body modiﬁca-
tion as “decoration” and “optimization and repair,” there is now a third 
category of body modiﬁcation brought about by the GRIN technologies. 
We can call this extension. Even though it is unlikely that we will be 
able to fundamentally change our physiology—we aren’t likely ever to 
be able to ﬂy for instance—there are myriad enhancements available to 
our standard functioning that will boost us in a dizzying range of ways.
Decoration, Meaning, and Communication
Before we plunge through into this future of the extended human, it 
is worth thinking a little about the past, to see from where the motiva-
tions and roots of this seemingly universal urge came. What is it that 
made people so yearn to change themselves, and what is it about this 
urge that in the end makes us human?
MARKING THE SKIN
Tattoos have been a part of human culture as far back as we can ﬁnd 
evidence. The earliest records are from the Palaeolithic era, 35,000 
years ago. We can only assume that we humans have been marking 
3 “I think it’s reasonable to suppose that one could oscillate between being biologically 20 
and biologically 25 indeﬁnitely.” —Aubrey de Grey, 2005

210  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
our skin even further back in prehistory. The reasons have varied over 
time. Otzi the Iceman from 33,000 BC had what is known as acupunc-
ture tattoos; these symbolic dotted and dashed lines were placed as a 
method to “heal” various parts of the body. Tattoos have often been 
used to supposedly confer magical powers.
Later, the Picts in Britain used Woad markings to scare their enemies. 
This theme continues in many other cultures where the tattoo is the 
mark of the outsider and the underclass. Japanese and Chinese ban-
dits used tattoos to mark themselves as a member of a criminal frater-
nity, and still do to this day. The art receded in Western culture for a 
long period but was reintroduced in the nineteenth century by explor-
ers returning from the Paciﬁc and Southeast Asia. Tattoos then began 
the slow transition from a sign of someone outside of mainstream cul-
ture toward their present manifestation as a commonplace decorative 
lifestyle choice.
PUNCTURING THE FLESH
In parallel to skin coloration is the practice of piercing, puncturing, or 
putting objects inside the skin for ritualistic and decorative purposes 
or to communicate meaning. One of the most graphic and memorable 
is the Sioux Sun Dance during which young males enter manhood by 
twirling around a pole on ropes attached to their bodies with sticks 
pierced through their chests. Less dramatic but even more invasive are 
the stacked hoop necklaces worn by young Masai women in Kenya, the 
horriﬁc practice of Japanese foot binding, and the extreme physical acts 
of the Indian sadhu or European monk scourging himself with whips 
and branches. It is a short distance from these practices to the extreme 
body modiﬁers, reshaping their form to ones they ﬁnd more pleasing, 
even if it means having surgery to appear more like a tiger or a Vulcan 
(whether they live longer or prosper more has yet to be determined).
Self-injury and mutilation is deeply ingrained in culture and cannot be 
ignored in the continuum of embedding. These have strong historical 
precedents in Shamanic ritual and are in a way a distant beacon that 
anyone who desires to modify their body heads to in some sense. Body 
dismorphism and gender reassignment, female genital mutilation, and 
eunuchisation exist in many societies. Whether we see these acts as 
extreme behavior, oppressive cultural ritual, or as just a quirky part of 
the spectrum of human sexuality and self-image is not the discussion 
for today.

 8. EMBEDDABLES: THE NEXT EVOLUTION OF WEARABLE TECH   |  211
RESHAPING THE BODY
Changing the body, its shape, its color, even its gender is becoming 
acceptable in contemporary society; the roots of this inevitably go back 
further than we would imagine. Many cultures have long traditions of 
surgically changing the sex organs, for ritual or social purposes, or of 
performing dramatic reshaping of other body parts.
Although many of these examples can be shocking from our current 
perspective, we can think of extreme body modiﬁers as potential “early 
adopters,” and in the same way that tattoos and piercing have become 
an everyday fashion statement today, perhaps these more extreme 
modiﬁcations will become normalized eventually. A Terminator-style 
robotic eye projecting scarily from your head might be just seen as a 
cool accessory 20 years from now, especially if it plugs you in constantly 
to the grid and means you never need to miss a tweet or a Facebook 
status update.
THE FUTURE OF BODY DECORATION
What would the embeddable version of Facebook be like? We can 
maybe see some premonition of it in a recent advertising stunt in Japan 
in which young women were paid to have advertising displayed on 
their skin; a few rather foolhardy individuals have even agreed to have 
brand logos tattooed on their bodies. No doubt some clever marketing 
company in the future will persuade people to plaster themselves with 
advanced OLED ﬁlms and spray their hair with nanoparticles that can 
change color, the pixel becoming molecular.
In this perhaps quite unappealing future we lease our skin to advertis-
ers who can display their latest products and services across the surfaces 
of our bodies. Animated soda jets shooting up your chest, and tropical 
holiday montages rippling across your back. Sponsored narcissism!
SCREENS AND INDICATORS ON SKIN
The ground breaking work done at MIT by Pattie Maes to turn the 
Internet into a sixth sense explores how micro projectors and gestural 
interaction can lead toward intangible interfaces that ﬂoat around us 
and hover over the surface of our bodies. It is not a big leap to imagine 
a more advanced technology wherein the glowing pixels are actually 
under the surface. Emails could appear on the back of your hand, a ﬁn-
gertip could go blue when you are mentioned in a tweet, or an entire 

212  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
display with all your social messages could appear on the inside of your 
wrist or open palm. Bizarre, maybe, but our constant need to be con-
nected could see this kind of scenario happen (Figure 8-2).
Figure 8-2. What would the embeddable version of Facebook be like?
We do like to have and hold shiny plastic and metal devices, but they 
are pretty annoying as well, getting stolen, running out of batteries, or 
being dropped and shattering on hard surfaces. Beyond the physical 
inconvenience of a device with a screen there is a deeper problem hap-
pening; this is the “connected but alone” alienation created by screen 
devices.
SCREENING OUT THE WORLD
Screen is an interesting word; it simultaneously means an object we 
look at and something behind which we hide. Even a small hand-sized 
device becomes a barrier in social situations, absorbing our gaze and 
taking us elsewhere, away from our present company. Soon, however, 
we might be able to discard the screen altogether. Voice-activated tech 
such as Siri, Tellme, Google Voice, Kinect, and Nokia Drive all lead 
toward zero UI.
Zero UI refers to systems by which our movements, voice, and glances 
can all cause systems to respond to us through our environment. 
At its extreme, it implies an invisible user interface (UI) without a 
screen where natural gestures trigger interactions, as if the user were 

 8. EMBEDDABLES: THE NEXT EVOLUTION OF WEARABLE TECH   |  213
communicating to another person. It would require many technologies 
to converge and become signiﬁcantly more sophisticated, particularly 
voice recognition and motion sensing.
Advanced context-aware automation will take us to the brink of a truly 
connected world in which sensors and embedded intelligence help us 
glide through space, subtly enhancing us and adding layers of informa-
tion to the world. Humans are, in the end, analog beings. Our digital 
tools should only be an aid to reality; they should not replace it.
So, a combination of pigment altering implants—some kind of evo-
lution of OLED technology—voice control, and ambient sensing will 
actually allow us to ditch the device entirely, to achieve a kind of telep-
athy, and for the body to become a remarkable interface to the digital 
world. The hope would be that this would actually begin to break down 
the barriers of atomization and disconnection that we have blindly put 
up around us in the march to the future. The likely truth is probably 
that we would become even more distracted, self-absorbed, and discon-
nected from the physical world around us.
Optimization and Repair
The amazing thing about the body, and the mind likewise, is how mal-
leable it is, how easy it is to change it though habitual activity (either 
toward reﬁnement or toward degeneration). We are not just permeable 
beings, we are ﬂuid beings.
The speculative futurists writing at the beginning of the twentieth 
century proposed a future human, thin, weak, and with poor eyesight, 
but always with a giant head and brain. I suspect they would be very 
surprised to see what we have become a century later. Even now we 
ﬁnd this image compelling. Dr. Alan Kwan4 has imagined what we 
will look like 100,000 years from now, with the need to have adapted 
to space travel, and he revives that familiar image of the large-skulled, 
saucer-eyed alien.
In contrast to supposed evolution to a big-brained weakling, the body 
is now hard and taut, we are taller, we live longer, and we run faster, 
jump higher, throw farther, and hit harder than those early futurists 
4 Dr. Alan Kwan, M.Sc., Ph.D. Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, Washington 
University and MIT

214  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
could ever have imagined. Rather than diminishing the importance of 
the body, our techno-knowledge era has deiﬁed it, made it something 
to worship, strive toward, and attain, whether by hard graft or quick 
expensive shortcuts.
The science-ﬁction trope of the not-too-distant scenario in which we 
are plugged into some virtual reality simulation while our bodies waste 
away in nutrient pods would seem to be a complete misdirection. 
Rather than becoming immaterial and disconnected from the body, 
our contemporary self-image is becoming even more located in our 
physicality, our looks, our youthfulness, and our ﬁtness.
STOPPING THE CLOCK
The counterpart to optimization of the body is repair of the body, with 
the aim of delaying the onset of aging. Until very recently, this has 
involved very crude types of body part replacement, with some of 
them of questionable beneﬁt. As medical science and genetics has pro-
gressed, we are ﬁnding that there are some signiﬁcant barriers that 
will limit our ability to stop the clock. Our cells have a deﬁnitive lifes-
pan, known as the Hayﬂick limit, which determines how many times 
an organism’s cells can recycle before they die. In humans, it is 50. 
Almost all animals share this property and it is for very sound evolu-
tionary purposes. It seems like the battle against the onset of death is 
doomed to failure; the only way to stop the cell clock from counting 
down would be to introduce telomerase into the cell. The problem with 
this is that instead of dying slowly of aging, you will with almost 100 
percent certainty die quickly from cancer. 
The notable exception to the aging process was thought to be the spe-
cies of lobsters found off the coast of the northwest United States. 
Theoretically immortal, these creatures simply did not age, and their 
cells did not grow older; they just keep growing bigger and bigger. Sadly 
it has been recently proven that they do succumb to old age, but not in 
the way we would consider normal. They become so big that eventually 
they don’t have enough energy to molt and die inside their shells.
THE ARTIFICIAL BODY
Almost a million people in the United States have certain joints replaced 
every year. This is a relatively new science, with the ﬁrst hip joint sur-
gery being as recent as 1948. This type of surgery has of course much 
older and cruder antecedents with varying levels of effectiveness. Glass 

 8. EMBEDDABLES: THE NEXT EVOLUTION OF WEARABLE TECH   |  215
eyes are still in use and peg-legs seemed to work pretty well for pirates, 
but one wonders how useful a set of wooden teeth would be. It is actu-
ally apocryphal that George Washington had wooden teeth; in fact, he 
sported a rather fancy pair made from metal, ivory, and actual human 
teeth. Happily, the science of body part replacement has accelerated 
dramatically in recent decades.
Now, of course, we are progressing rapidly into two exciting areas: very 
advanced robotic prosthetics, and 3D printed body parts. These tech-
nologies seem destined to be immensely important to humanity as we 
struggle to repair the damage that we inﬂict upon ourselves through 
the simple act of living.
Great leaps forward in robot hands and prosthetic limbs are beginning 
to redeﬁne the experience and deﬁnition of disablement. As Paralympic 
athletes are beginning to demonstrate, technology (allied to iron will) 
can eradicate the difference between someone with their body intact 
and those with parts missing or broken. What the technology is mak-
ing possible is not just to repair or replace the body but to improve it. 
We will explore this in the third part of this chapter.
There is amazing progress being made in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial eyes 
and ears. Hearing aids are becoming increasingly sophisticated, and 
when combined with a Google Glass–like technology, the possibility of 
totally neutralizing the effects of deafness is almost upon us. Sensory 
augmentation provided by object-sensing canes for the blind and bionic 
eyes sending electronic images straight into the optical cortex might 
eventually eradicate blindness.
These advances, though, will seem archaic compared to the optimi-
zation and repair that will be possible when nanotechnology reaches 
maturity in the healthcare domain. It is easiest to imagine the tech-
nologies being applied here because in a sense they already are, partic-
ularly with the early exploration of gene therapy we have been seeing 
for the past 20 years. Gazing out a little way into the future, we can 
see treatments and products emerging that are not only tuned to our 
own individual genomes but speciﬁcally to the genome of the bacteria 
or DNA of the virus that is the causing the problem. When nanotech 
and genetic technologies merge, interventions would be performed in 
a much less invasive way, and we could change the way we cure dis-
eases utterly.

216  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
Futurists gazing at healthcare describe a “medicine factory,” a pill-
sized capsule containing a miniaturized camera and other sensing 
apparatus designed to analyze gut ﬂora for imbalances that could lead 
to diseases. Imagine that you swallow one of these factories (Figure 
8-3), which then sits quietly in your intestine, monitoring the growth 
of different bacterial colonies. When something harmful is detected, 
this information is transmitted wirelessly to your doctor, who would 
instruct the medicine factory to start manufacturing the appropriate 
genetic treatment delivered through a “deactivated” virus vector. Over 
time this process could actually be automated and take out the pres-
ence of a human being altogether so that the factory goes about its 
business curing you of disease with little fuss. These sophisticated new 
treatment protocols would make a modern gastroscopic exam look pos-
itively medieval.
Figure 8-3. A pill-sized capsule containing sensing apparatus designed to ﬁnd 
imbalances that could lead to diseases
The Extended Human
The subject of the extended human would not be complete without 
looking at our ongoing work to develop thinking machines. Although 
we have so far explored the physical and visual side of body mod-
iﬁcation, it is equally important to understand how we are going to 
enhance human cognition and sensing. There is a fantastic joke on 

 8. EMBEDDABLES: THE NEXT EVOLUTION OF WEARABLE TECH   |  217
the webcomic XKCD, which states, “Every time Wikipedia has a server 
outage my apparent IQ drops by 30 points.” We are in a very real way 
already augmenting our minds with computational power, it’s just that 
there is no direct connection into the brain, and we still need to use rel-
atively crude interface tools to make use of the enhancement.
Of course, calling these relatively crude is only partially serious; they 
are in fact fabulously sophisticated compared to the way we have histor-
ically interfaced with machines. From the abacus and the Pascal add-
ing machine, through to the nineteenth century Jacquard loom, and 
even the extraordinary Colossus and the punch card computers of the 
1950s, during our ﬁrst few millennia of machine cognition we were 
not able to make machines that were anything like us. To use these 
machines we had to become like them. We had to think like them and 
talk to them in their language. They were immobile, monolithic, mute 
devices, which demanded our sacriﬁce at the twin altars of engineering 
and math. Without deep knowledge, they were impenetrable and use-
less lumps of wood, metal, and plastic. What happened next (in a truly 
“ahead of its time” invention) was the ﬁrst idea that began the slow 
shift in emphasis to a more human-centric way of interfacing with the 
machine.
THE MOTHER OF ALL DEMOS
Something in the zeitgeist demanded that the 60s would see a human-
istic vision appearing in the rapidly expanding sphere of computer engi-
neering. Right on cue, in 1968 an event occurred that would forever 
change the way we interacted with computers. In one epochal presen-
tation, Douglas Englebert demonstrated a mouse, hypertext, and video 
conferencing for the ﬁrst time to an astonished audience. This demon-
stration wasn’t just remarkable because of the raft of totally transfor-
mational technologies that had emerged seemingly fully formed in a 
single instant, but the fact that they all pointed to a relationship with 
the machine that was now loaded in favor of the human. Anyone could 
use this technology; it was a true liberation of the secrets that had been 
locked up with the Engineer High Priests.
As is typical, for a long time after this game-changing moment, noth-
ing much happened, except, that is, iteration after iteration of the same 
metaphors shown on that day in 1968, each a further reﬁnement or 
regression, depending on the quality of design. 

218  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
The next truly systemic change really came about 30 years later in the 
1990s with the ﬁrst experiments in virtual reality, touchscreens, and 
voice control. Again, a long period of reﬁnement followed, and those 
technologies are now commonplace and are deﬁning new forms of 
human-computer interaction, with the emphasis very ﬁrmly on the 
human.
So, when put in a timeline, it is clear that we have dramatically shifted 
the meeting point of man and machine, as depicted in Figure 8-4. It is 
now almost entirely weighted toward the human languages of symbols, 
words, and gestures. Nevertheless, that last inch seems to be a vast 
chasm that is very hard to breach. Think about all those interpretation 
errors that Siri makes (after all it is in some ways no smarter than an 
80s text-based adventure), all those frustrating attempts to navigate vir-
tual spaces and grab virtual objects, the clumsy approximation of body 
mapping of the Kinect, and the obvious ﬂaws of the Leap Motion (try-
ing to use it for applications in a desktop interface is inconsistent and 
very frustrating).
Figure 8-4. The meeting point of man and machine has dramatically shifted 
over time.
On top of that we have the amusingly titled gorilla-arm syndrome that 
plagues all gesture controlled systems; simply put, it is just too uncom-
fortable to hold your arm in the air for extended periods. It looks cool 
when Tom Cruise is ﬂicking through swathes of digitized criminal 

 8. EMBEDDABLES: THE NEXT EVOLUTION OF WEARABLE TECH   |  219
records in the movie Minority Report, but it probably isn’t as much fun 
using a gesture system to work on an Excel spreadsheet for ﬁve hours. 
Fret not! Help might be around the corner, from perhaps an unex-
pected direction—algorithms. 
A PREDICTIVE WORLD, A WORLD OF SENSORS
We are yet to devise interfaces that can effortlessly give us what we 
want and need. We still must learn some kind of rules and deal with an 
interpretation layer that is never wholly natural.
Some early attempts at predictive interactions exist: the Japanese vend-
ing machine that recognizes the age and sex of the user and presents 
choices based on demographic breakdown, and the brilliant but scary 
ability of McDonald’s to predict what you’re going to order based on the 
car you drive with 80 percent accuracy. The latter was necessary so the 
fast-food chain could reduce the “unacceptable” 30-second wait while 
your drive-in order was prepared.
The sensor world that makes these kinds of predictive systems pos-
sible will only become richer and more precise. Big data will inform 
on-demand services, providing maximum efﬁciency and total custom-
ization. It will be a convincing illusion of perfect adaptation to need 
(Figure 8-5).
Figure 8-5. A convincing illusion of perfect adaptation to need

220  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
EMBEDDED TECH BRINGS A NEW LANGUAGE OF INTERACTION
The new language will be ultrasubtle and totally intuitive, building 
not on crude body movements but on subtle expressions and micro-
gestures. This is akin to the computer mouse and the screen. Apple’s 
Macintosh interface would never have worked if you needed to move 
the mouse the same distance as it moved on the screen. It would have 
been annoying and deeply un-ergonomic. This is the same for the ges-
tural interface. Why swipe your arm when you can just rub your ﬁn-
gers together. What could be more natural than staring at something to 
select it or nodding to approve something? This is the world that will be 
possible when we have hundreds of tiny sensors mapping every move-
ment, outside and within our bodies. For privacy, you’ll be able to use 
imperceptible movements, or even hidden ones such as ﬂicking your 
tongue across your teeth.
Figure 8-6 presents an interesting scenario for you to ponder: you see 
someone at a party you like; his social proﬁle is immediately projected 
onto your retina—great, a 92 percent match. By staring at him for two 
seconds, you trigger a pairing protocol. He knows you want to pair, 
because you are now glowing slightly red in his retina screen. Then, 
you slide your tongue over your left incisor and press gently. This 
makes his left incisor tingle slightly. He responds by touching it. The 
pairing protocol is completed.
Figure 8-6. A new language of interaction

 8. EMBEDDABLES: THE NEXT EVOLUTION OF WEARABLE TECH   |  221
What is nice about these microgestures and expressions is that they 
are totally intuitive. Who doesn’t stare at someone a second too long 
when they fancy them, and licking your lips is a spontaneously ﬂirta-
tious gesture. The possible interactions are almost limitless and move 
us closer and closer to a natural human-computer interface. At this 
point, the really intriguing thing is that the interface has virtually dis-
appeared; the screens are gone, and the input devices are dispersed 
around the body.
Is this scenario really that outlandish? Let’s look at the technologies 
being developed currently that might make it possible.
Immersive displays
Samsung and other technology companies are currently working on 
contact lens screens; these are experimental right now and suffer the 
problem of how they are powered. The answer to that might be very 
close at hand, though, as other research is being conducted into using 
the body’s energy (both kinetic and heat) to power embedded devices.
Skin-top computer
The skin-top computer would use some kind of distributed circuitry on 
and in the body that can map movement and capture all kind of body 
data such as blood ﬂow, temperature, sweating, hormone levels, and so 
on. The ﬁrst tattoo-like printed circuits are already available; it might 
not be too long before a Skin-Top Arduino community emerges.5, 6, 7
Thought control
Finally, there are the developments happening in thought control. We 
have already seen early experiments in creating visual maps of the 
thoughts of dreaming people, and though this is probably some dis-
tance from enabling telepathy it is certainly intriguing. Crude mind 
control of computers has been around for some time and in a rather 
alarming experiment conducted in 2013, one scientist could make a 
subject move his arm to push a button just by thinking about it. Both 
participants had nothing more than an electrode cap on and some 
5 Paintable circuits on the skin, developed by Bare Conductive, UK.
6 “Epidermal Electronics” Paste Peelable Circuitry On Your Skin, Just Like A Temporary 
Tattoo, Popular Science Magazine, Nov 2011.
7 Stamp-On Circuits Could Put Your Phone On Your Finger, FastCo Design, Nov 2013.

222  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
clever code connecting them. Apparently, the subject could resist if 
he wanted, which provides some reassurance that we won’t soon all 
become remote-controlled zombies.
WHAT WILL IT BE LIKE TO LIVE IN THE EMBEDDED WORLD?
Technology often outpaces our ability to understand and accept it, espe-
cially if you are over a certain age threshold. Eventually, though, we 
normalize everything; carrying a computer in your purse that is more 
powerful by a magnitude than those that ran twentieth century corpo-
rations and launched man into space is no big deal, we just use it to play 
Candy Crush mainly anyway. But, it would have seemed inconceivable 
to previous generations.
However, we can assume with some assurance that embeddable tech-
nology will have a more profound effect on us than we can imagine. A 
famous experiment, the Libet test, attempted to measure how quickly 
the conscious mind can send a simple somatic control (for example, 
press the red button). The extraordinary discovery was that the con-
scious mind triggers after the order is sent to the ﬁnger to push the 
button by a few microseconds. What does this mean? Essentially an 
unconscious part of the mind is deciding to push the button and the 
conscious mind is just agreeing with it. Imagine if we have systems 
operated in this way running around us in all scenarios. We would 
constantly have this disconcerting feeling that we were not operating 
under free will, but that some unknown force was driving us. There 
actually is: our genes, as Richard Dawkins points out.
So, how can we devise systems that don’t force us down into the uncanny 
valley (which you can read about in more detail in Chapter 6). We need 
to make magical systems, where sensors, immersive displays, learning 
systems, and mind and gesture controls harmonize to give us exactly 
what we always wanted.
Consider one ﬁnal scenario, presented in Figure 8-7 and Figure 8-8: 
you are sitting at home drinking coffee from your embedded-connected 
Nespresso service. The sensor in your tongue captures the response 
of your taste buds and the little nanobot that has made its home in 
your veins monitors the release of endorphins into your bloodstream. 
The data gathered are sent to the Nespresso factory, which analyses the 
readings and discovers that the ﬂavor and caffeine level are not creating 
an optimal response in your body. Later that day you are standing at a 

 8. EMBEDDABLES: THE NEXT EVOLUTION OF WEARABLE TECH   |  223
bus stop; the Nespresso factory has custom-made a coffee that is per-
fectly suited to your tastes. It sends the aroma proﬁle to an interactive 
poster next to you, which releases the delicious smell and tells you that 
the new ﬂavor is available for delivery to your home, and that you will 
get an introductory 15 percent discount if you purchase it right away.
Now, that’s not creepy in the slightest, is it?
Figure 8-7. The sensor in your tongue captures the response of your taste buds
Figure 8-8. The factory has custom-made a coﬀee that is perfectly suited to 
your tastes

224  |   DESIGNING FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
Just Science Fiction, Right?
If the emerging technology curve approaches anything like the kind of 
acceleration predicted by such futurists as Kurzweil, Watson, and Kelly, 
the issues discussed in this chapter will become central to designing 
new digital services over the next few years. As designers and technol-
ogists we must ensure that we are prepared for the next wave or we 
might ﬁnd ourselves left behind. The revolution is only just beginning.
Key Questions to Consider
1. What kind of learning systems will be needed to take complexity 
and strangeness away from the users of these services?
2. What kind of services that predict and even meet our needs with-
out us having to intervene will be the ones that resonate and ﬁnd 
an audience?
3. How will embeddables be designed so that they blend invisibly 
with the body? How will we avoid looking like the Borg in Star Trek, 
or becoming socially inept when we begin putting technology onto 
the surface and inside our bodies?
4. What is the timeline for the embeddable revolution, and what do 
tech companies need to do to prepare for this future?
5. What are the new types of control mechanisms and interaction 
metaphors that we are collectively going to have to consider for 
these types of intangible interfaces? 
6. What skills will designers need to learn as we move away from 
a visual craft to one that takes into account the other senses, the 
body, and the mind?

James Kalbach
Mapping 
Experiences
A COMPLETE GUIDE TO CREATING VALUE THROUGH JOURNEYS, BLUEPRINTS & DIAGRAMS

In the preface, I urged you to empathize with the people 
you serve. The advice is clear: view your offering from the 
outside-in rather than the inside-out. 
But it’s important to first develop empathy before conceiving 
new solutions. Distinguish gaining empathy from applying 
empathy, a point Indi Young makes in her book Practical Em­
pathy (Rosenfeld Media, 2015). She writes: 
You can’t apply empathy until you’ve developed it by 
listening deeply to a person...People try to act empa­
thetic—to take someone’s perspective, to walk in his 
shoes—without first taking time to develop empathy. 
I’ve experienced this trap in the past. At a prior company I 
worked for, for example, a small team spent two months 
behind closed doors developing a new concept that helped 
people plan events. They had virtually no contact with poten­
tial customers.
To anyone who had already gained empathy for the target 
users it was clear this solution had serious flaws. It didn’t 
address actual user needs, and it didn‘t match their mental 
model. Despite the team’s passion, the concept was doomed 
from the outset. They would have better spent their time 
developing empathy first. 
R APID TECHNIQUE
Note that I am not advocating big, upfront research. Ideally, 
empathy building is a regular ongoing activity. But ground-
ing yourself in reality first saves time and reduces risk later. 
It need not take long, and visualization tends to make the 
process go quicker. 
The process of mapping helps teams acquire develop common 
understanding of a person’s experience. For this reason, this 
book has focused on current state visualizations—diagrams 
of the world as it exists today. After gaining empathy, then 
envision a future as you think it should be. 
One approach to represent the intended experience is to 
create future state maps of the experience—separate, full-
fledged illustrations akin to those described throughout 
this book. However, this is time consuming and is often not 
needed. 
CHAPTER 8
Envisioning Future Experiences

FIGURE 8-1. Mapping the current state to the future state shows 
the relationship between the two.
Instead, it’s typically possible to include future experiences 
within the current state map, for example at the bottom of a 
diagram (see Figure 8-1). This highlights the transition needed 
to move from the present to the future. Both cause and cure 
are captured in one place. 
But also, it’s more efficient to use complementary techniques 
to illustrate the future state creates greater impact. This 
chapter deals with some of these techniques, including story­
boards, scenarios, storylines, and design maps, as well as user 
story mapping. By the end of the chapter you should have a 
good idea of how to visualize future experiences with comple­
mentary techniques.
Storyboards
Storyboards come from filmmaking. The process organizes a 
series of illustrated panels to represent the flow from scene to 
scene. A storyboard allows creators to experiment with differ­
ent sequences of action. 
The technique is also used in product and service design. Each 
step in the experience is given a panel with a rough descrip­
tion of what should happen at that moment. Storyboarding is 
a way to quickly flesh out concepts before building a proto­
type.
As a modeling tool, storyboarding helps you put personas in 
action, taking various constraints and context into account. If 
an alignment diagram is a map of the landscape, storyboards 
are specific routes through that landscape.
Storyboards let you focus on the emotional highs and lows of 
a specific experience. They also allow you to focus on extreme 
cases. For instance, you can create a storyboard for a novice 
user of a system and compare it to what a power user might 
experience in another storyboard.
More than that, storyboards allow you to test ideas and 
“debug” them conceptually. They serve as the first iteration of 
an idea and allow teams to think about the service in terms of 
how the experience unfolds over time. This saves an enor­
mous amount of time and pain later.
Storyboards are also collaborative documents that anyone can 
contribute to. Their informal nature invites contributions from 
others, fostering teamwork and collective decision making. 
Storyboards    195

First, I sketched a rough sequence of interactions using a 
drawing app on my iPad (see Figure 8-3). As a team, we 
iterated on this sequence several times. Then, we enlisted the 
help of Deb Aoki, a professional comic artist and graphic facil­
itator, to make the panels into a more presentable storyboard 
(see Figure 8-4). 
The touchpoints and interactions are clearly depicted in this 
storyboard. But there is also a focus on the human experi­
ence: the initial problem is described, and the emotions of the 
resolution are represented. The storyboard helped form the 
idea and socialize the concept with others in the organization.
They become part of the common language of the team and 
function as a shared reference. 
Figure 8-2 shows an example of a simple storyboard created 
in a workshop by UX designer Erik Hanson. It was used to 
demonstrate the essence of a new idea, which evolved and 
changed over the course of the ensuing discussion.
More formal storyboards take time. For instance, I helped 
create a storyboard of the intended experience on a recent 
project. The concept allowed people to take a picture of a 
technical problem and request help from a network of experts 
and friends. 
FIGURE 8-2. A simple storyboard can be very effective, like this one 
created by UX designer Erik Hanson.
FIGURE 8-3. A draft storyboard shows an intended experience.
196   
Chapter 8: Envisioning Future Experiences

FIGURE 8-4. A revised version of the storyboard in Figure 8-3, created by expert illustrator Deb Aoki.
Storyboards    197

Comic strips are like storyboards and used to communicate 
a vision. Figure 8-5 shows an example from Kevin Cheng’s 
book See What I Mean (Rosenfeld Media, 2012). Obvious­
ly Cheng is an expert illustrator. But don’t be daunted: he 
breaks down the technique into its basic components to 
show that anyone can get started creating comic strips at 
some level. 
Overall, storyboards are a type of visual storytelling. They 
depict the steps in an interaction and foster a shared under­
standing of a vision. You don’t need to be an expert illustra­
tor to create storyboards: sketching basic shapes and stick 
figures is all that’s required to get started. Have an expert 
create a final version, if needed. 
Scenarios
Scenarios are detailed descriptions of an intended expe­
rience from the individual’s perspective. They go hand-
in-hand with storyboards, but are text-based rather than 
illustrated. Since no drawing is involved, the barrier to create 
them is even lower than with storyboards.
Consider this example of a scenario from the beginning of the 
landmark article “The Semantic Web” by Tim Berners-Lee, 
inventor of the World Wide Web, and his colleagues. These 
are the opening lines of his landmark article that set the stage 
for a broader, more technical discussion later on in the text: 
The entertainment system was belting out the Beatles’ 
“We Can Work It Out” when the phone rang. When 
Pete answered, his phone turned the sound down by 
FIGURE 8-5. Comics are an effective way to envision future ideas, like this one 
by illustrator Kevin Cheng from his book See What I Mean.
198   
Chapter 8: Envisioning Future Experiences

couple of his less important appointments. He checked 
what they were—not a problem. The other was some­
thing about the insurance company’s list failing to 
include this provider under physical therapists: “Service 
type and insurance plan status securely verified by 
other means,” the agent reassured him. 
The words not in italics come from the original source of this 
scenario and indicate touchpoints with the Semantic Web. 
This example has many qualities of a well-written scenario. 
It’s easy to understand, it’s enjoyable to read, it describes an 
experience rather than technology, and it offers a clear vision.
Scenarios describe the ideal user experience. They give perso­
nas a voice and set them in motion. And as with storyboards, 
scenarios allow you to focus on edge cases. They let you 
explore specific experiences, including extreme situations. 
R APID TECHNIQUE
Scenarios also help validate an idea. For instance, I once 
participated in an ideation workshop where we spent hours 
writing up our favorite ideas as scenarios. It was very telling: 
some of the most attractive ideas were difficult to describe 
in terms of the user experience. Based on these scenarios, 
we were better able to prioritize our ideas.
Rarely can you go from a rough idea on a sticky note directly 
to implementation. Steps are needed in between to expand 
on the features of a concept. Scenario writing is a quick way 
to involve everyone on the team and represent an intended 
experience in detail for evaluation and feedback.
Storylines
sending a message to all the other local devices that 
had a volume control. His sister, Lucy, was on the line 
from the doctor’s office: “Mom needs to see a spe­
cialist and then has to have a series of physical therapy 
sessions. Biweekly or something. I’m going to have 
my agent set up the appointments.” Pete immediately 
agreed to share the chauffeuring. 
At the doctor’s office, Lucy instructed her Semantic 
Web agent through her handheld Web browser. The 
agent promptly retrieved information about Mom’s 
prescribed treatment from the doctor’s agent, looked 
up several lists of providers, and checked for the ones 
in-plan for Mom’s insurance within a 20-mile radius 
of her home and with a rating of excellent or very 
good on trusted rating services. It then began trying 
to find a match between available appointment times 
(supplied by the agents of individual providers through 
their websites) and Pete’s and Lucy’s busy schedules. 
In a few minutes the agent presented them with a plan. 
Pete didn’t like it—University Hospital was all the way 
across town from Mom’s place, and he’d be driving 
back in the middle of rush hour. He set his own agent 
to redo the search with stricter preferences about lo­
cation and time. Lucy’s agent, having complete trust in 
Pete’s agent in the context of the present task, auto­
matically assisted by supplying access certificates and 
shortcuts to the data it had already sorted through. 
Almost instantly the new plan was presented: a much 
closer clinic and earlier times—but there were two 
warning notes. First, Pete would have to reschedule a 
Scenarios    199

•	 Rising action: A good story builds over time. Intensity and 
action increase as the story unfolds. 
•	 Crisis: The story culminates at the point of maximum fric­
tion. It’s the point of no return.
•	 Climax/resolution: The climax is the most exciting part 
of the story and the point at which the audience realizes 
that all might be well again. This is when the problem 
that was surfaced at the inciting incident is resolved. 
•	 Falling action: But wait, there’s more. After the climax, 
the story comes back down in action and begins to end.
•	 End: This is the very end of the narrative. Typically, there is 
a return back to the original state. 
The point of storylines is not storytelling, but rather building 
products and services as if you are crafting a story. In other 
words, apply the narrative arc to the design process itself. To 
do this, Lichaw recommends first mapping out an ideal jour­
ney against the narrative. Then design your product or service 
based on that flow. 
Figure 8-7 shows an example of using a narrative arc to plan 
the content of a digital service. The intent is to make the 
user’s journey into a dramatic, engaging story. The result is a 
strategy for content and features that meet audience needs in 
an engaging way. 
Applying narrative arcs in design workshops is straightfor­
ward. Together with Lis Hubert, Lichaw describes the process 
in their article “Storymapping: A MacGyver Approach to 
Content Strategy” (UX Matters, 2014). 
Storytelling is not only a means of communicating a vision, it 
helps make sense of complex problems. According to digital 
product strategist Donna Lichaw, author of Storylines (Rosen­
feld Media, 2015), you can use the principles of storytelling to 
guide the design of products and services. 
To do this, Lichaw relies on a structure common to most all 
stories, called the narrative arc (Figure 8-6). 
This structure is not new. It can be traced all the way back to 
Aristotle. It is a timeless form used to tell stories over thou­
sands of years and across cultures. 
The elements of the narrative arc are: 
•	 Exposition: Good stories establish the context and intro­
duce the characters and situation at the beginning. 
•	 Inciting incident: This is the point where something goes 
wrong or there is some change to the situation. 
FIGURE 8-6. The archetypal narrative arc shows the rise in action before 
the resolution.
200   
Chapter 8: Envisioning Future Experiences

FIGURE 8-7. An example of a narrative arc and envisioned content from a workshop shows the rise of action and resolution.
Scenarios    201

•	 Questions: Yellow notes capture questions a team has 
about the experience. They highlight their gaps in knowl­
edge and assumptions about the proposed experience. 
•	 Ideas: Pink notes are used to capture ideas how to pro­
vide a better service. 
Figure 8-8 shows an example of a design map for a fictitious 
app. The steps, in blue, form the basis of the chronology 
across the top of the map. Comments, questions, and ideas 
appear below each step, forming an interlocking grid of sticky 
notes. 
Interestingly, Adlin and Carr recommended using design maps 
asynchronously. The idea is to place a map in a common 
office area and invite colleagues to contribute to it individual­
ly. Over the course of days or weeks, team members can add 
questions and ideas as they come to light. With this, the map 
grows organically over time. 
Otherwise, design maps can be used in workshops to envision 
a future experience. For instance, I once used design maps 
in an alignment workshop with three breakout groups. First, 
each group created an ideal flow for one of three experiences 
we were targeting. They also added comments to describe 
the steps in greater detail. 
Then, I rotated the groups so that they were now working 
with another group’s design map. They read the steps and 
comments on the new design map and posed questions 
about each step on a different color sticky notes. 
Finally, I rotated the groups once more. After we read all of 
the steps, comments, and questions of the preceding groups, 
1.	 Hold a workshop with a broad set of stakeholders
2.	 Draw the user’s journey as a narrative arc on a 
whiteboard
3.	 Map individual pieces of content users would need at 
each stage 
4.	 Below that, record existing content
5.	 Identify gaps and weaknesses in the existing content
6.	 Prioritize and plan a broader content strategy
Following these steps results in a content strategy with focus 
and meaning. It aligns teams to a common purpose and yields 
more engaging services in general.
Design Maps
Design maps are simple diagrams of an ideal experience 
co-created by a team. The technique is described by Tamara 
Adlin and Holly Jamesen Carr in Chapter 10 of the book The 
Persona Lifecycle. 
Creating a design map is a simple practice that requires only 
sticky notes and a whiteboard. The result is a map of an ideal 
experience. There are four basic elements in the map, each 
with a different color note:
•	 Steps: Blue notes denote the steps a given persona takes 
in a process.  
•	 Comments: Green notes provide more details about each 
action, including thoughts, feelings, and pain points. 
202   
Chapter 8: Envisioning Future Experiences

the task was to brainstorm new ideas at the bottom of the 
map. We also sketched the best ones as wireframes. In total, 
each group engaged with all three diagrams and got to build 
on their colleague’s thoughts. 
Figure 8-9 shows part of one whiteboard used for this exer­
cise. Note that the color coding of sticky notes varied from 
what Adlin and Carr set out. Instead, we used yellow notes 
for steps, blue for comments, pink for questions, and green 
for ideas. But the process for creating the design map was the 
same.
User Story Mapping
FIGURE 8-8. An example of a design map, modeled after the technique outlined in The Persona Lifecycle.
FIGURE 8-9. A section of a design map created in a workshop shows the 
various types of information on different-colored sticky notes.
User Story Mapping    203

Putting It All Together: Which Techniques Are Needed When?
This book is about possibilities. Throughout, I’ve highlighted 
many tools for mapping experiences from different perspectives. 
The point is that mapping an experience is not a singular activi­
ty, and there are many ways to go about it.
But with possibilities comes choice. Which diagram should be 
used in which situation? How do you select the appropriate 
model? I believe there are three types of models needed:
1.	 Models of individuals: who are you designing for? Personas, 
proto-personas, and consumer insight maps stand as models of 
the individual. 
2.	 Models of context and goals: maps of experiences seek to 
describe the broader circumstances in which they occur. 
What are the jobs to be done? What are their feelings and 
motivations?
3.	 Models of future experiences: finally, create models for the 
future state so the organization can see where it’s heading. 
What do solutions look like? How can we represent them for 
evaluation?
The range of models covered in this book is shown in Figure 
8-10. At a minimum, you’d select one from each group. More are 
possible, of course, but be careful of model proliferation. The goal 
of creating visualizations is to clarify human experiences to your 
audience. Too many different models may only confuse them.
There are different approaches to the process, depending on 
your situation. Alternatives for a quick, informal set of diagrams 
might look like the following options:
•	 Proto-personas > Experience map > Storyboards
•	 Proto-personas > Design map 
Figure 8-10. A sequence of techniques discussed in this book can be categorized into three groups: diagrams about individuals, context an goals, and 
future state diagrams. 
204   
Chapter 8: Envisioning Future Experiences

As a <type of user>, I want 
<some goal> so that <some 
reason>
While utilizing user stories 
makes development more 
manageable, it can also cause 
teams to lose the big picture 
of what they are building. Focusing on individual features 
gives a team tunnel vision, losing the overall picture of what is 
being built.
To avoid the Mr. Potato Head effect in software development, 
Agile coach and expert Jeff Patton came up with a technique 
called user story mapping. He advises development teams to 
not assume everyone has the same view of the final product. 
In his book User Story Mapping (O’Reilly, 2014), Patton de­
scribes this phenomenon and how to overcome it:
If I have an idea in my head and I describe it in writ­
ing, when you read that document, you might quite 
possibly imagine something different…However, if we 
get together and talk, you can tell me what you think 
and I can ask questions. The talking goes better if we 
can externalize our thinking by drawing pictures or or­
ganizing our ideas using index cards or sticky notes. If 
we give each other time to explain our thoughts with 
words and pictures, we build shared understanding. 
Don’t assume that everyone has the same mental model of 
the outcome. More importantly, visualizations go a long way 
toward building a shared understanding (see Figure 8-11).
My childhood neighbor had a Mr. Potato Head toy. If you’re 
not familiar with this toy, it’s a featureless plastic head to 
which you add various facial features. The resulting combina­
tions can be humorous, e.g., Groucho Marx glasses with big 
red lips. 
Producers of software typically want to avoid creating prod­
ucts that look like Mr. Potato Head. But without a common 
vision of what you are building, it’s possible to unknowingly 
combine elements that don’t go well together. 
Agile development—the leading approach for software 
development—strives to break the product down into small 
chunks, called user stories. These are short descriptions of a 
feature told from the user’s perspective. User stories typically 
have a common format:
A more formal process might include these diagrams:
•	 Personas > mental model diagram > scenarios and 
storyboards > value proposition canvas
•	 Consumer insight maps > service blueprint > 
storylines > business model canvas 
While utilizing user stories 
makes development 
more manageable, it 
can also cause teams to 
lose the big picture of 
what they are building.
User Story Mapping    205

Keep in mind the intent of mapping: to tell the overall story of 
individuals and their interactions with an organization, both 
past and future, to help the organization make sense of their 
playing field. 
206   
Chapter 8: Envisioning Future Experiences

ble, with different ways to approach creating a map. The main 
elements that most user story maps include are as follows: 
•	 User types: A brief description of the different roles the 
system is designed for. These are typically listed at the top 
or on the side (not shown in Figure 8-12).
•	 Backbone: This is a sequence of user activities listed 
across the top of the diagram. Frequently a more granu­
lar description of user tasks that form a flow across the 
phases accompanies them. These are listed horizontally 
just below the phases of the backbone. 
•	 User stories: The body of the map contains stories needed 
to achieve the desired outcomes. These are typically prior­
itized and separated into releases.
The backbone is similar to the chronology in an experience 
map. A user story map, however, tends to lack much of the 
detail and context of an experience map, such as thoughts 
and feelings. Instead, it focuses on software product develop­
ment.
The process to user story mapping requires team participation 
from the very beginning. Follow these steps to involve every­
one in the map’s creation:
•	 Frame the idea: As a team, discuss why you are building 
the product. Identify and record the benefits and prob­
lems it solves. Also decide on who you are building the 
product for. Write your responses down at the top of the 
map. 
A strength of user story maps is that they are simple to 
comprehend. Figure 8-12 shows an example created by Steve 
Rogalsky, an expert agile coach with the company Protegra. 
You can see the alignment of user activities (in orange and 
blue sticky notes) to planned features (in yellow). 
User story mapping has its roots in task modeling as pio­
neered by Larry and Lucy Constantine.* The technique is flexi­
*	See, for example, Larry Constantine, «Essential Modeling: Use Cases for 
User Interfaces,” ACM Interactions (Apr 1995). As well as other writings by 
Constantine and his wife, Lucy.
FIGURE 8-11. Don’t assume everyone has the same picture of the solution 
in their minds.
User Story Mapping    207

FIGURE 8-12. Story maps align development tasks with the intended user experience.
208   
Chapter 8: Envisioning Future Experiences

•	 Create a release strategy: Break the user stories into dif­
ferent releases, starting with the minimum that’s neces­
sary to reach the desired outcome.
•	 Build, measure, learn: As development progresses, track 
the team’s learning against the user story map. Keep it in 
a visible place and refer back to it often. 
Typically, the exercise is done offline, utilizing sticky notes and 
a whiteboard. For instance, Figure 8-13 shows an example 
created in a team workshop. However, it’s also possible to 
map stories visually online using software such as LucidCharts 
or MURAL (http://mur.al).
A user story map illustrates how user stories relate to one an­
other in an overarching model. This allows teams to grasp the 
entirety of the system. More importantly, they align planning 
and development with actual user experiences. Ultimately, 
it’s about a shared understanding of software a team intends 
to build to guide decisions, improve efficiency, and result in 
better outcomes. 
FIGURE 8-13. This example of a user story map created by a team in a 
face-to-face workshop reveals prioritization of efforts into releases. 
•	 Map the big picture: Illustrate the flow of the solution 
chronologically, including details about specific actions. 
If possible, include the pains and joys users have today to 
inform your development decisions. 
•	 Explore: Use the map to facilitate conversations about 
desired outcomes and the intended experience. Describe 
the features to support users and record them as stories 
on the map. Sketch solutions as needed, and go back and 
interview customers as well.  
User Story Mapping    209

Customer Journey Mapping Game
By Christophe Tallec 
Working with multiple stakeholders is a challenge. They may 
have a different vision of the world driven by their individual 
goals and perspectives, whether coming from engineering, 
business, or public policy backgrounds.
We Design Services (WDS), a leading service innovation firm, 
developed the customer journey mapping game to facilitate 
communication in such complex environments. The game uses 
the customer journey as a catalyst for team interaction. 
While several configurations of the game are possible, a typical 
process has the following steps:
1.	 Prepare the game: Before the game session, create a blank 
journey worksheet with swim lanes for relevant touchpoint and 
information types. Then furnish a set of cards representing pos­
sible touchpoints. These will vary depending on the domain and 
situation involved. 
2.	 Select personas: Start the game by having the participants 
choose a persona. Ask, “Whose journey are you going to 
map?”
3.	 Set goals: Define a goal for this persona. What is the overall 
need and what are they trying to get done?
4.	 Add touchpoints: Then, for the selected persona, place the 
touchpoints in the order they might experience them. Do this 
step as a team. 
5.	 Reflect: Find patterns in the experience across the different 
touchpoints. Where are there gaps and problems? Where are 
the emotional highs and lows? Where are there opportunities 
for the organization?
6.	 Repeat: Select a different persona or change the goals, and 
repeat the process. How do the journeys differ? What are com­
mon patterns across them? How would extreme users experi­
ence the touchpoints? 
We piloted this technique for a major French city that wanted 
to gather stakeholders for a co-creation exercise. The goal was 
to reinvent urban transportation. 
This project was a challenge because of the widely different 
perspectives of the different people around the table (Figure 
8-14). The participants came from car manufacturing com­
panies, large commercial firms, public transit companies, and 
labor unions, as well as users of the system. 
Introducing this new methodology allowed us to develop a 
common language shared by everyone and dominated by no 
one. This language helped identify shared value between the 
different stakeholders. 
210   
Chapter 8: Envisioning Future Experiences

FIGURE 8-14. Playing the journey mapping game engages everyone in the workshop.
User Story Mapping    211

This initial workshop confirmed that mapping the user journey 
as a group is an efficient way to visualize common touchpoints, 
interests, and ways to create value. It proved to be eye-opening 
for participants. 
In this case, participants reported an increased sense of team 
alignment and cross-functional collaboration, in general, after 
our workshops. Unfortunately, it is rarely used by local govern­
ments looking to re-energize their local ecosystem. 
FIGURE 8-15. An example of a customer journey game board and elements.
212   
Chapter 8: Envisioning Future Experiences

John Pruitt and Tamara Adlin, The Persona Lifecycle: Keep­
ing People in Mind Throughout Product Design (Morgan 
Kaufmann, 2006)
This is one of the few full-length books on personas 
that is often cited as the key reference source on the 
topic. At nearly 700 pages it is thorough and compre­
hensive. Chapter 8 discusses design maps in detail.
Further Reading
Donna Lichaw, Storylines (Rosenfeld Media, forthcoming)
Donna regularly writes and teaches about storylines. 
This is a complete volume on the techniques she’s de­
veloped over the years. You can find more information 
online, including a pair of articles on UXMatters.com. 
Also see the book’s page on the Rosenfeld Media 
website for updates and additional information: http://
rosenfeldmedia.com/books/storylines/.
Jeff Patton, User Story Mapping (O’Reilly, 2013)
Patton pioneered the technique of user story maps 
and details the approach in this book. It is well written 
and gets to key points quickly. Latter chapters include 
details on validation through lean processes. 
The underlying problem is siloed thinking. The journey mapping 
game breaks down those departmental barriers and allows 
companies to think holistically and collaboratively. 
We tested our approach with other companies and have invari­
ably found that aligning disparate points of view allows them 
to uncover new business opportunities. 
The customer journey mapping game was originally developed 
by Christophe Tallec and Paul Kahn. Figure 8-15 shows an 
example of what a completed game round looks like. 
Tallec and Kahn also created an online version of the journey 
game. You can access this template online at: http://prezi.
com/1qu6lq4qucsm/customer-journey-mapping-game-trans­
port/.
About the Contributor
Christophe Tallec is the founder of We Design Services (WDS), a 
leading service innovation agency in France, advising organiza­
tions such as Airbus Group, SNCF, The National French Post Office 
Groupe La Poste, Qatar Foundation, World Bank, and other indus­
tries. WDS is committed to delivering cutting-edge experiences. 
Further Reading    213

Figure 8-9: Image of design map by Jim Kalbach
Figure 8-11: Illustration from Jeff Patton’s book User Story Mapping (O’Reilly, 
2014)
Figure 8-12: User story map created by Steve Rogalsky of Protegra (http://www.
protegra.com), used with permission
Figure 8-13: Image of user story map by Steve Rogalsky, used with permission
Figure 8-14: Image of workshop participants playing the journey game, by Chris­
tophe Tallec, used with permission
Figure 8-15: Photo of an example journey game board by Christophe Tallec taken 
from www.servicedesigntools.com, used with permission
Diagram and Image Credits
Figure 8-2: Storyboard sketched by Erik Hanson, used with permission
 Figure 8-3: Draft storyboard created by Jim Kalbach
Figure 8-4: Storyboard created by Deb Aoki (http://www.debaoki.com/), used 
with permission
Figure 8-5: Comic created by Kevin Cheng from his book See What I Mean 
(Rosenfeld Media), used with permission
Figure 8-6: Narrative arch diagram created by Donna Lichaw, used with permis­
sion
Figure 8-7: Photo of storyline exercise by Donna Lichaw, used with permission
Figure 8-8: Example design map created by Jim Kalbach
214   
Chapter 8: Envisioning Future Experiences

Tom Greever
 Articulating 
Design 
Decisions
COMMUNICATE WITH STAKEHOLDERS, KEEP YOUR 
SANITY, AND DELIVER THE BEST USER EXPERIENCE

229
[ 13 ]
Designing for Vision
An artist is not paid for his labor but for his vision.
JAMES MCNEILL WHISTLER
Before we close out the book, I want to emphasize how important 
design is to organizational and product development. Most of us con­
sider ourselves designers of the things that our company produces: web 
designers, interface designers, or product designers. But in our roles, 
we shape the vision and perception of the entire organization with our 
work. We are more than just designers of things; we are designers of the 
business. In a very real way, we are business designers. I am amazed at 
the power we designers have to shape the organization, and yet how few 
designers actually realize or use this power to its fullest extent. The fact 
is, design has the power to change the future, to influence people, and 
to benefit you and your career. Our fate is in our own hands when we 
understand that we can inspire people with our creativity. Imagining 
the future can earn your team praise, get the attention of stakeholders, 
and give you a shot at actually making something meaningful.
We need to recognize that we have the power to imagine the future, 
the ability to create something that didn’t exist before, and the ideas 
to inspire the entire organization. We can use these tools for good, for 
the betterment of the product, and the satisfaction of our own work. 
Learning to talk about our designs extends beyond the conference 
room; it begins with purposeful habits of practicing creativity and stay­
ing inspired. Few other jobs have the same ability to create excitement 
around something that doesn’t exist, and so for this final chapter, I’d 
like to go on a journey of discovering just how powerful it can be when 
we design for vision.

230  |   ARTICULATING DESIGN DECISIONS
Recognizing Our Power
You have more power than you realize. Designers have the skills and 
ability to cast a vision for a preferred future—a future that doesn’t exist 
yet and won’t exist without our help. Our role should not be to just iter­
ate and moderately improve an interface, but to create an awareness of 
incredible new possibilities. We have the power to influence the future 
with expressions of our ideas that make the future seem real, attain­
able, and exciting.
You see, most people can’t do what we do. They don’t think visually, 
and, even if they did, they lack the skills to put pen to paper and sketch 
out something that looks like what’s in their head. This makes us spe­
cial; we have unique skills that most other people around us don’t. We 
can choose to use them in a way that will benefit our organization and 
our own careers.
Our value as designers is not just locked up in the day-to-day mechan­
ics of pumping out new wireframes, theming an app, or brainstorming 
ideas. Sure, those things are valuable and that’s probably the main rea­
son why we have a job, but it’s not the only way (or the most important 
way) that we are valuable. We create more value when we help other 
people see the future; when we take ideas born out of a simple conver­
sation and provide the context or skin it needs to feel real.
This power is the reason we keep photos and video of special moments: 
because the visual representation of those moments suspends our 
memories of those events. We are transported into those moments 
again and again when we look at them. Naturally, we want to share 
those moments with other people so that they too can experience what 
we did. We post on social media and relive them over and over. Those 
images, those visuals, are as much a part of the experience to us as the 
experience itself.
IMAGES MAKE THE UNREAL REAL
When you build a house, you start with an empty plot of land and it’s 
difficult to visualize how you will live there, but after you see the draw­
ings of what it will look like, you grow excited and anxious. When you 
see your baby on an ultrasound for the first time, tears well up inside 
you because it hits home that this is really happening. Things that exist 
only in our mind become something completely different when they’re 
expressed visually.

 13. Designing for Vision   |  231
We can make these images
A friend wants to start a new business, but the website you create for 
her is what will really make it feel like a legitimate enterprise. Your 
boss jotted down some ideas at lunch, but you can take those ideas to 
the next level. In the middle of the night, you had a crazy idea and you 
can flesh it out to show to other people. We have what it takes to create 
the images that make the unreal real. Most people can’t do that.
Right or wrong, sometimes the visual of a product alone sets our expec­
tations about it: making promises about functionality, telling us how 
we’ll be better with the product in our lives, and asking us to try it. 
Attractive visual design has become the hallmark of good products. 
In fact, we might be influenced more by the way a thing looks than 
the way it actually works. That’s how much power design has. When 
we see something that’s well designed, we might think the product 
itself is great before we’ve even tried it. The point is that our designs 
have the effect of making people believe in what we’ve created, even if 
it only exists on paper. That gives us a lot of power when it comes to 
our designs. We can use this power for good, to move our teams and 
projects forward into a preferred future, and to create a new reality that 
didn’t exist before.
The reason this is important to communicating to stakeholders about 
design is because we have the power to inspire people with our work. 
Expressing a vision for what the future could look like to stakeholders 
gives us the opportunity to earn their trust, demonstrate commitment, 
and get them genuinely excited about what we’re doing. It’s a huge 
deposit in the bank account of trust. Often, these inspirational designs 
will help our team move forward because our stakeholders will be on 
board with the vision. They’ll see just how excited we are to work on 
this project and they’ll want to help us accomplish this vision. With a 
vision of a preferred future, it’s easier to get support, funding, research, 
and any other resource you might need to accomplish your vision. Your 
stakeholders will be saying, “This is awesome. What do you need to 
make this happen?” It puts you in a position of making the future hap­
pen rather than waiting around for someone else to tell you what it is.

232  |   ARTICULATING DESIGN DECISIONS
Here are just some of the reasons how designing for vision can improve 
our careers:
It gives us a creative outlet.
Designing for vision provides an environment for us to express 
something that we might not otherwise have the opportunity to 
express.
It creates a conversation with other people.
Our designs get them dreaming about where we’re going, what’s 
possible, and what’s ideal without any of the usual constraints.
It brings people together.
Individuals are no longer stuck obsessing over one little thing; the 
entire team can get a sense for where we could or should be headed.
It builds credibility.
People see you as a thinker, a visionary, as someone who is inter­
ested in providing long-term value, not just value for the immedi­
ate need.
It lives beyond us.
These designs can be so exciting that they get passed around to 
other people in the organization. Long after we’re gone, they still 
might be hanging onto that vision of the future.
And so, for these reasons, our ability to create visuals that communi­
cate beyond words has the power to bring people into a world that didn’t 
exist before. We can show them what the future is like before the future 
has even been created. A picture is as close as you can get to being in 
this new future without actually being there. People can become really 
excited when they see what it will look like. This is what it’s like design­
ing for vision.
Practicing Creativity
Designing for vision requires that we are purposeful about practicing 
creativity on a regular basis. You’ve got to step away from your project 
and dream a little bit now and then, even if the idea never sees the light 
of day. Sometimes, the prospect of making one…more…control…seems 
mundane and boring. If you’re bored of your day-to-day job, this is a 
way to make it exciting and fresh.

 13. Designing for Vision   |  233
FIND INSPIRATION
One of the missing ingredients for learning to design for vision is a 
lack of inspiration. Some people might consider pursuing inspiration 
a waste of time compared to the act of simply getting things done. But 
when the goal is to create something completely new that didn’t exist 
before, it’s almost impossible to do that well without an external, aspi­
rational, creative stimulus that models how we might approach our 
own endeavors.
The easiest and most practical thing you can do is to simply look at 
other people’s products. Find designs that you like, discover how they 
might be applied in your context. Download and use as many apps as 
possible. Collect a repository of favorite websites that you can reference 
when the time comes, browse through pattern libraries, try new open 
source tools, read case studies, go to a conference, read a book—there 
are almost too many resources to help you find and create inspiration 
that you have no excuse, other than the practice and habit of making 
it happen.
SEE UX EVERYWHERE
There are models everywhere—including those outside the world of 
tech—that can influence your thinking and passion for designing digi­
tal products. We tend to see the world through our lens of UX and may 
comment on the usefulness of everyday objects as a matter of pride. 
Turn those powerful observational skills into an opportunity to find 
patterns in the real world that will inform your designs in the digital 
realm. Ask yourself this: how does the design of this thing apply to my 
current project? Is there something it does well that I can use? Start 
seeing everyday objects as opportunities for learning and inspiration 
in your own work.
USE A DIFFERENT CANVAS
An alternative way to get the most out of your creative mind is to stimu­
late it in a different way. Pursue a different artistic endeavor; try some­
thing completely different from your usual design-a-thing day job. Find 
something that allows you to create, express yourself, and sink into a 
mode of creating so that the worry of delivering melts away. Without 
hard expectations about what you create, you’ll be free to think more 
clearly and enjoy the process. This could be cooking, landscaping and 
gardening, painting, photography, or any other creative hobby that inter­
ests you and will spur you to greater comfort with your creative self.

234  |   ARTICULATING DESIGN DECISIONS
You might even do something out of your comfort zone, something 
that you’re not at all interested in or are not particularly skilled at. Being 
uncomfortable has the fortunate side effect of causing us to see things 
in a different light, to approach problems in a different way. When we 
have no bearings on how to behave or what to do, we have no choice but 
to be creative and make it up as we go along.
For me personally, I am restoring a classic car as an act of deliber­
ate creativity. For several years now, I have been working on a 1969 
Triumph GT6+, a small British sports car. Prior to starting this proj­
ect, I had very little mechanical knowledge. In fact, on the day the car 
arrived at my house, a neighbor stopped by, pointed to the distributor 
on the engine block and said, “Wow! You don’t see those anymore.” I 
had no idea what that part was, so I just laughed uncomfortably and 
replied, “Yep, you sure don’t!” But since that time, I’ve completely dis­
mantled the entire vehicle, cleaned and painted each part, and am now 
meticulously putting it all back together.
In the process, I’ve learned a lot of about engines, but I’ve also learned 
a lot about design. I’m inspired by the engineers who created these cars 
before there were computers. I’m amazed at the ingenuity of working 
within such limitations and I’m baffled that humanity figured out how 
to make a car in the first place! But building a car has given me a way to 
step away from my desk, to pursue something creative that is 100 per­
cent outside of my comfort zone. I rely on other people for advice and 
tools. I am constantly reading and learning about these old cars. It’s a 
slow process, but one that has freed my mind and given it new places 
to go, be inspired, and enabled me to return to work, armed with fresh 
ideas.
The takeaway here is to find something that can add to your fulfillment 
of designing interfaces and push you to greater limits of creativity.

 13. Designing for Vision   |  235

Before (top) and after (bottom) photos of the frame and engine from my GT6. 
I didn’t know much about cars before starting this project, but the process has 
given me a creative pursuit away from the screens and digital interfaces of my 
daily life.
IDEATE AND ITERATE
Ideation and iteration are both important to ensure that we’re practic­
ing creativity. Generating new ideas should be one of your primary 
outputs. Iterating on those ideas, then, gives us a chance to refine 
and mature them. These approaches are important when working on 
visionary vaporware that has no current basis in reality. Thinking of a 
single new idea and expressing it in a mockup isn’t too difficult, but it’s 
far more difficult to come up with five completely different or derivative 
ideas. That’s what we need to do regularly: learn to generate as many 
ideas as possible and iterate to make as many different versions as pos­
sible. Set a goal for yourself to create at least five completely different 
designs. Don’t reuse elements; create new ones. Begin with a blank 
canvas each time. Then, approach the same problem with a different 

236  |   ARTICULATING DESIGN DECISIONS
use-case. Go about creating each one by setting the previous design 
aside. The more ideas and versions you have, the better. The exact 
quantity you produce or the fidelity of these ideas isn’t important. The 
goal is to make it a habit of thinking differently about our projects and 
forcing our brains to learn (and relearn) how to design.
Making It Happen
Practically speaking, designing for vision is creating visuals that 
express your vision of a preferred future. You design mockups of your 
product, website, or app, but instead of being constrained by all the lim­
itations you know you have (engineering, marketing, support), you cre­
ate what you believe to be the best possible product and illustrate that 
with some form of interactive prototype or static mockup. You can then 
show or present these designs to your team or executives to inspire 
them to want to achieve the same goals. The purpose is to create a 
conversation that results in the organization chasing after something 
that is bigger than the current vision (perhaps even impossible), but is 
inspiring and motivating.
However, frozen in the day-to-day maintenance of our jobs, we often 
overlook just how influential our ideas can be. It’s hard to think about 
vision and the future when there are so many other things to do.
Documentation needs to be written. The mockups need to be updated. 
And I have to get ready for a meeting this afternoon. How could I possi­
bly take the time to design for something that doesn’t even exist? That 
isn’t even part of my project?
It can be hard to see the value of creating something that’s not on every­
one’s radar. No one is expecting you to do this. No one is explicitly 
paying you to create visionary, inspirational stuff (usually). It’s sort of 
above and beyond your normal activities and so it can be a challenge to 
find the time to create things just for the purpose of inspiring others. 
But the long-term benefits of being purposeful about this direction are 
well worth it.
We have to be purposeful about making the time and space to do this 
every so often, whatever is the most efficient for you while not interfer­
ing with your regular work day. The following sections offer some tips 
for setting aside the time you need to design for vision.

 13. Designing for Vision   |  237
FIND A DIFFERENT ROUTINE
One of the most important things you can do is to find a completely dif­
ferent time and space to go dream about the future. You want to break 
from your usual routine so that your brain isn’t even in the same mode 
that it usually is when you’re pumping out UI controls on a daily basis. 
Finding that routine is about looking for a different time, space, activity, 
and materials that will help you to relax, free your mind, and get down 
to the business of creating things.
Time
You might want to limit yourself to a certain block of time each week 
to be sure that it doesn’t interfere with your work. It can be easy to get 
carried away and spend all your time making stuff that doesn’t pay the 
bills. So set aside a specific window of time that you think will be help­
ful. A former boss of mine let me spend every Friday on these kinds of 
endeavors, but you might be even more limited than that. Set aside one 
or two hours each week. One hour is more than enough time to mock 
up an idea if you remove the usual constraints. It’s just enough time to 
get your thoughts flowing, but not enough to disrupt your daily work.
If that still seems like too much, set aside 15 minutes every day. Just 15 
minutes. It’s not enough time to get any serious designs made, which 
is why it can be so effective. You’re forced to come up with ideas and 
solutions quickly because there isn’t enough time to think deeply about 
any one concept. The focus is more on ideation. Set a timer and begin 
sketching your ideas. Jot them down before the timer goes off. Each 
day you’ll have these small snippets. Which ones do you go back to? 
Which ones seem to have the most potential? At the end of a few weeks 
or months, you’ll have some really great concepts that you can further 
refine into expressive mockups.
Space
The space where you work is also really important and affects how 
you work. Our brains work themselves into routines (and ruts!) based 
largely on our physical location. We condition ourselves to work when 
certain factors are present, many of them being physical: the chair, 
the window, the position of your desk, even your position in relation­
ship to other people. Part of your challenge might be to find a different 
physical space where you can go. If you want to create something dif­
ferent, you’ll need to go somewhere different. A new space can inspire 

238  |   ARTICULATING DESIGN DECISIONS
thoughts and ideas that you wouldn’t normally have. New spaces have 
new sounds, new visuals, and unexpected stimulations all around you 
that contribute to your sense of creativity.
I personally find it difficult to get work done if I’m not at my desk, but 
because I occasionally travel, I’ve taken to listening to music almost 
constantly while I design. As a result, I usually can’t get any serious 
design work done unless I’m listening to music piped through head­
phones. I’ve learned that this is the way I work now. So if I want to do 
something out of my normal routine, I have to go somewhere other 
than my office: a different room in my house, a local bookstore, or a 
park. The exact location doesn’t matter as much as the change of rou­
tine. If you expect to create something that isn’t routine, you must 
change your current routine. Go find a new, perhaps unexpected, place 
to let your brain percolate thoughts and come up with better ideas. 
You’ll need to learn what works for you, but the process of searching for 
new, interesting places to create will yield better discipline and a differ­
ent way of designing.
Activity
Sometimes, the best way to come up with better ideas and create bet­
ter designs is to actually not do any designing at all. That is, change 
your activity to give your brain an opportunity to relax and wander. Do 
something that would wholly prevent you from even accessing a com­
puter or any of your usual tools. For example, rather than sit with your 
laptop at a coffee shop, go for a walk in the woods, hike in the moun­
tains, do yoga, pull weeds in the garden, go jogging, sit on the beach, 
watch the sunrise—do something that will allow your mind to be still, 
listening and thinking to what the future could be.
When I get stuck trying to figure out how something should work, I go 
run. Fresh air, no screens, my brain is free, and my mind wanders. I 
usually don’t even pay attention to what I’m thinking. I’m not explicitly 
trying to solve problems, but it’s during these moments of thinking of 
nothing that the solution presents itself without me even trying. Not 
always, but often. And even if I come back to my desk without having 
come up with the best idea ever, I am usually better prepared to tackle 
my work again.

 13. Designing for Vision   |  239
Your brain’s ability to solve problems while doing a different activity is 
a common yet remarkable phenomenon. Remember that great idea you 
had in the shower? Or that thing you fixed while sitting in traffic? It 
turns out that we all have better ideas when we’re relaxed: doing a sim­
ple task and letting our minds wander.1 Anything that you can do that 
is relaxing and pleasurable will allow your brain to also relax and come 
up with ideas or solve problems you never thought possible.
You won’t be able to actually create something tangible from a change 
of activity like this, but it will force yourself to be unencumbered and 
think freely about how to solve some of the difficult problems you face. 
When you’re out in the woods, you don’t have your computer. You’re 
forced to just think about all the hard problems. When you return, write 
down you thoughts, sketch out your ideas. Make a record of what you 
learned in the hopes that it can turn into something worth communi­
cating to others on your team. A change of activity yields a change of 
ideas.
Materials
Lastly, I recommend changing up the kinds of materials and tools you 
use to force you into new habits and new ways of approaching your 
work. The simplest method is to bring along a pad of paper and a pen­
cil, even if you’re not the type to draw or sketch. Often we design based 
on what we already know we can do with our tools. Our ideas are lim­
ited to the tools we have in front of us. When something is a little more 
time-consuming to express with existing tools, we become stuck, waste 
time, or avoid that idea altogether. Changing the materials you use is 
a great way to discover new approaches because you’re not limited by 
your typical toolset.
Once I was designing a UI that needed some specific icons, but I was 
tired of reusing similar icons over and over. I had developed a habit of 
just searching common icon libraries and grabbing something I liked. 
I needed to find something with a more unique personality, so I went 
outside with sidewalk chalk and drew my icons on the driveway. I then 
took photos of each of them, imported and traced them, and placed 
them in the project. There was nothing artistically innovative about 
1	  Widrich, Leo. “Why We Have Our Best Ideas in the Shower: The Science of Creativity,” 
February 28, 2013. http://bit.ly/1JfExHs

240  |   ARTICULATING DESIGN DECISIONS
the resulting icons, but I accomplished my goal of creating something 
unique that communicated the style and tone of my project. Changing 
materials gave me more opportunities to create a better vision.
I would also highly recommend removing Internet access from the equa­
tion when you’re trying to find new ideas. It’s too easy to search and 
copy other ideas. Although there’s nothing wrong with that, in terms of 
generating new ideas for your own product (taking someone else’s idea 
and expressing it in your own context), I personally find it more helpful 
when I’m untethered from the online world and forced to use my own 
brain capacity for all of my thinking. It’s about reducing my dependence 
on screens or tools for finding solutions to problems. I have access to too 
much information. Often, my access to infinite amounts of knowledge 
hinders my own ability to truly be creative and solve problems with good, 
old-fashioned thought. When I intentionally put myself in situations in 
which I can’t access those screens, I have no choice: I’m all on my own.
So, set aside your computer, phone, and tablet for the time being. Grab 
some paper and a pencil and start scribbling down things that will help you 
create the next version of your product. Write words, draw boxes, and gener­
ate ideas that can contribute to your vision of what the future can look like.
For one project, I designed a set of icons using sidewalk chalk, took photos, 
and then traced them on the computer. The result was something that was 
truly unique and refreshing to work on.

 13. Designing for Vision   |  241
Another time, I tried designing icons in the snow. This didn’t yield a real icon 
set for a project but it was an excellent exercise in expressing an idea with a 
very limited toolset.
Making Stuff Up
When it comes down to it, designing for vision is really just about mak­
ing stuff up. There is no magic, except in your design’s ability to inspire 
people. Other than that, it’s just a collection of visionary vaporware that 
has no basis in anything real. You are just making things up, express­
ing them in a tangible way, and then using imagery to create an excite­
ment and urgency about the future.
If we take that a step further, I’d suggest it’s as important to create 
a fake product with your designs and mockups as it is to create the 
version 2.0 of your current project. You probably have a pretty good 
idea about what version 2.0 is going to be like, but what are the prod­
ucts, opportunities, or niches that no one is even thinking about? What 
would the 4.0 version look like? We are too encumbered by the limits of 
our bosses and developers. What would you design if you had unlim­
ited resources? What’s the right thing to build? Is your current product 
even the thing you should be working on? We need to be designing 
more 4.0 versions of our products and 1.0 versions of things that don’t 
even exist yet.

242  |   ARTICULATING DESIGN DECISIONS
It’s a good practice to create a product that doesn’t exist yet. Look for 
opportunities within your organization and express them as best as 
you can. Don’t wait for someone else to come along and pitch the next 
big thing. Take ownership of your skills, create something from noth­
ing, and give people a reason to get excited.
Don’t limit yourself.
Forget all the business requirements, legacy ideas, or engineering 
questions. Just create something that makes sense to you.
Start from scratch.
Don’t reuse anything from an existing project or copy and paste 
from a template. Design this thing from the ground up, with only 
raw materials.
Don’t obsess over the details.
It doesn’t have to be perfect; the purpose is more about communi­
cating a concept than it is about what’s realistic and final.
Make lots of different versions.
The more different ways you can approach the problem, the better. 
When you think you’ve finished, try it again. It’s a good habit to 
force yourself to make just one more iteration.
This extends, too, to new designers who are looking to build their port­
folios. Often, entry-level designers have nothing to show for their skill 
and are looking for opportunities just to gain experience. This is a great 
opportunity to find something that you think needs to exist, and make 
it happen. You don’t need an internship or a school project to help you 
create something; just go create it and build the case for it yourself. 
Make up a business, design an app for a new product, or imagine what 
interfaces will be like in the future. Don’t wait for other people to give 
you something to do; go create something for yourself and demonstrate 
your skill.

 13. Designing for Vision   |  243
When I worked in the electronic-payment services industry, I had an 
idea for a new kind of loyalty card that our company could use and 
resell as a value-added service. It had nothing to do with my job. It was 
just an idea. But I spent some time (not a lot of time) creating mockups 
and designs that demonstrated what this new service might be like. I 
shared my ideas with my boss, who then sent it to the CEO and a few 
other executives. During my tenure, that idea never saw the light of day 
and I have no idea if it was ever even pursued as a product. However, it 
did create a conversation around our current thinking on loyalty cards, 
established my name with the CEO, and circulated a document that 
other people would later tell me they appreciated.
More recently, one of my retail clients had mentioned the need for 
their customers to easily reorder items that they had ordered in the 
past. During one of my purposeful creative pursuits, I created some 
designs for a standalone app aimed at power-users specifically for this 
purpose. I made some mockups and a simple demo showing how this 
system would work and shared it with the stakeholders on the project. 
Unknown to me, another team at the company was already working 
on something very similar. Although my own expression of that idea 
didn’t cause them to stop what they were doing, it did create a “great 
minds think alike” conversation during which our combined efforts 
were validated. I gave them something tangible and sharable that they 
could use to influence the thinking on their own initiative. It may not 
have been completely original, but it did demonstrate that I was willing 
to think beyond their immediate needs and contribute long-term value. 
My role was more than delivering the day-to-day designs they expected. 
I also contributed ideas and designs to another project that was outside 
my current scope. It gave me another platform on which to communi­
cate with them about design.

244  |   ARTICULATING DESIGN DECISIONS
I created a very basic prototype of a reordering app to express a vision for this 
opportunity. Then, I recorded a two-minute screen-capture video presentation 
of the idea. Even though my client was already working on a similar concept, it 
created a conversation that added value to the relationship.
You see, even when our ideas fall flat or aren’t entirely useful, they still 
create value for us as far as learning to communicate about design and 
build the kind of momentum we need to be successful. When we make 
things up, we show that we’re thinking, we’re invested in the success of 
the organization, and we’re smart enough to communicate our ideas to 
people in a way that’s compelling. This sort of commitment is invalu­
able to organizations.
Taking Your Ideas to the Right People
Relationships are everything. Who you know will greatly influence the 
opportunities that are available to you. Working with and communicat­
ing with people will determine how likely they are to help you and con­
nect you with those opportunities. It’s one thing to have great ideas and 
to even be able to express them in meaningful ways, but it’s another 

 13. Designing for Vision   |  245
thing entirely to have an audience of people who are there to support, 
encourage, and help you on your journey. Even if you’re capturing that 
vision of a preferred future, it’s not going to help you if there aren’t peo­
ple with whom you can share that vision.
The good news is that our skill in design can help us establish a con­
nection with the people that make decisions. Like I’ve said before, 
everyone wants a designer on their team. Everyone needs something 
designed. You need to find opportunities to get in with the right people 
who have the power to make your vision a reality. You can take advan­
tage of your success in articulating design decisions to influence these 
decision-makers.
This isn’t about selfishly pursuing one-way relationships. It’s about 
finding the opportunities to create your own success with people who 
can (and want to) support you. Usually, this is your boss: your direct 
report. Often, it’s a peer or other colleague who recognizes your talent 
and makes a personal connection with you. Sometimes, it’s an execu­
tive who periodically needs your help, which gives you access to them 
on a regular basis. Be on the lookout for people who have influence, 
build into those relationships, share your ideas with passion, and allow 
them to help you.
How can you do that? The best opportunities to build these connec­
tions are when someone needs a “favor” from you. When your boss 
asks you for help putting together a presentation, do it. If there’s a crit­
ical bug that needs to be addressed, be the kind of person who sees the 
urgency and pitches in without complaining. When the product owner 
comes to the team with a last-minute missing requirement, step up and 
support her by making it happen. The more often you can help other 
people, the more likely you are to get help when you need it. These 
kinds of situations are major deposits in the bank account of trust. The 
way to get what you want is to help other people get what they want.
In these relationships, keep your ideas, designs, and vision handy. 
Eventually, you’ll have an opportunity to share your ideas with some­
one who can make your vision a reality. They’ll be surprised, delighted, 
and impressed that you can create that level of vision and communicate 
it so tangibly. Having an audience of people who can help you execute 
your ideas is a necessary part of designing for vision.

246  |   ARTICULATING DESIGN DECISIONS
More Than Pixels
The things we create convey a message to our audience. These pictures 
possess a quality that gives them a voice and breathes life into what is 
otherwise just a collection of pixels. Our brains perceive them as having 
more qualities than they actually have: intelligence, purpose, even a soul. 
That’s because our designs reflect who we are. They are a mirror of our 
own existence, a reflection of our ability to create and to be the created. 
As much as we try to design toward the personas of our users or the 
brand of the organization, our work is still a reflection of us: our style, 
tone, and personal touch is everywhere. Just as we are drawn to people 
who are like us, so too we design interfaces that reflect our own shape 
and personality. This is perhaps why it’s so difficult to talk about design: 
because we are so intimately knit up in all that we create that we cannot 
stand back far enough to see what it really is. It’s difficult to know if what 
we’re reflecting in our designs is what we ever intended in the first place.
Our skill at creating an experience for users that is both delightful and 
accomplishes business goals is something that few people can do. And 
even though we do our best to evaluate it, measure it, and improve it, 
I’m not sure we can ever have a complete picture of what we’ve created. 
No matter how much information we have, our ability to understand 
and talk about our designs is limited to our own unique perspective as 
the designer. When you hear your own voice on a recording, it sounds 
strange, “That’s not what I sound like, is it?” When you see a photo of 
yourself, you might think, “That’s not how I really look from that angle, 
is it?” Likewise, when we watch our designs operate in the world with 
a life of their own, we might react, “That’s not how I really meant for 
it to be used, is it?” We can’t always see ourselves (and our designs) for 
who we really are.
In this book, I’ve written a lot about how we should communicate to 
our stakeholders. The whole thrust of this content is to convey how crit­
ical it is to be able to explain yourself to someone who might not under­
stand UX design. You cannot and will not be able to really succeed as 
a designer unless you learn to talk to people in a way that makes sense 
to them because your designs do not speak for themselves. But more than 
that, product design is bigger than any one person’s skill at communi­
cation. Our ability to create incredible user experiences is influenced 
by the constantly changing world around us: other people are involved, 
external factors are beyond our control, and our life and relationships 
make us who we are. 

 13. Designing for Vision   |  247
Design is volatile and changing, but being a better communicator is 
something that we can always have. Our designs may get discarded, 
but we can still talk about them and learn from them. That website will 
eventually shut down, but we understand the problem that it solved at 
the time. We may take another job, but we still carry these skills with 
us. No matter where life and work takes us, we can always rest in the 
knowledge that in any situation, in any role, and with all people, we are 
prepared to bring our ideas to life through the power of articulating 
design decisions.

