DESIGN, PLAN AND FIT A 
KITCHEN 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Fitting a kitchen requires a great deal of skill, and is most 
suited to the more advanced DIYer. There are a wide range 
of skills involved, and you will need to have knowledge in 
the following trades; Carpentry, Plumbing, Electrical and 
Tiling. 
  
 
 
There are many safety factors involved in fitting a kitchen: 
always check for electrical cables and water pipes, using a 
pipe and power detector before drilling in to floors or walls. 
 
When using power tools always use an RCD protection 
device, making certain that all power tool leads are in good 
condition. Always wear safety equipment. 
  
 
 
To fit a new kitchen you will need to be an advanced DIYer, 
as there are many different skills involved, however the 
results will be very rewarding, not to mention the amount of 
money you'll save by fitting it yourself. 
 
2  - Planning and Design 
Getting started 
 
Carefully measure up your kitchen in centimetres making a 
precise scaled plan  
 
 
 
Measure in a clockwise direction, starting from the door, and 
note which direction the doors open. 
 
 
 
Be careful to check the following:  
• 
Take the ceiling height at several points. 
 
 
• 
Ensure the kitchen is square by measuring 
diagonally (or compare opposing walls). 
 
 
• 
Carefully mark the location of existing power points, 
plumbing, gas supply, air vents and any permanent 
features such as windows, sills, radiators and 
boilers. 
 
 
• 
Always check dimensions, if in doubt measure it 

again. 
 
 
• 
Note the space required for your kitchen appliances.
 
 
• 
Finally check what the walls are made of to ensure 
that you buy the correct fixings for your unit. 
 
 
 
Planning your kitchen 
 
It's important to design a kitchen that revolves around your 
needs. Creating a triangle between your cooker, sink and 
fridge will make a better working environment. This will 
ensure that your workspace is never cramped, allowing you 
to move freely between appliances. 
 
 
 
The layout you choose will depend on the size and shape of 
your room - and the position of windows and doors. 
Plumbing and electrical points can usually be moved, so do 
not let these restrict your design. 
 
 
 
Most kitchens fall into four basic designs, a single line of 
units, a double line (galley), and an L-shaped or U-shaped 
kitchen. 
 
 
 
By combining cabinets imaginatively to these designs it is 
easy to totally transform your kitchen to suit your lifestyle. 
 
 
 
Working out the detail 
 
Using the dimensions of the cabinets you wish to purchase, 
sketch your chosen units to scale. Alternatively, cutting out 
the shape of the cabinets to scale allows you to move 
individual units around your kitchen plan and work out the 
best layout. 
 
 
 
Hints & Tips 
 
 
 
DO  
• 
Try to position your sink by a window, so you have 
a view. 
 

 
• 
Position electrical sockets a minimum distance of 
150mm above worktops. 
 
 
• 
Position extractors or cupboards a minimum 
distance of 750mm above hobs. 
 
 
• 
Use heat or fireproof cable on cookers or hobs. 
 
 
• 
Locate dishwashers and washing machines close to 
sink to minimise plumbing work. 
 
 
• 
Ensure that wall and floor units are of similar 
widths-so the doors line up. 
 
 
• 
Keep tall units at the end of the worktop runs, to 
maximise the working area. 
 
 
• 
Place your hob or free-standing cooker in position 
this minimises the distance needed to carry hot 
pans across the walkways in the kitchen. 
 
 
• 
Allow at least 300mm of clear space each side of the
hob to allow for protruding pan handles. 
 
 
• 
Position extractor fans on (or close to) outside walls.
 
 
• 
Allow adequate space around free-standing 
appliances for easy access, (refer to manufacturers 
fitting instructions). 
 
 
 
DON'T  
• 
Locate a cooker or hob beneath a window where 
curtains could catch fire - or where it is dangerous 
to reach over to the window. 
 

 
• 
Plan a wall unit above a hob without an extractor 
fan. 
 
 
• 
Plan a hob next to a tall unit, corner wall or at the 
end of a run. 
 
 
• 
Plan appliances in a corner. 
 
 
• 
Put an inset sink near worktop joints. 
 
 
• 
Position a sink or cooker near or next to opening 
doors. 
 
 
• 
Box in boilers or other gas appliances as these 
require air flow to operate properly and safely. 
 
 
• 
Put a cooker hob under or near electrical sockets. 
 
 
• 
Position cookers next to fridges or freezers. 
 
 
• 
Block up existing air vents if there are gas 
appliances in the kitchen. 
 
 
 
Everything you need to Take Away today 
 
Once you have decided on your units and worktops don't 
forget the other exciting accessories that can add those 
finishing touches - such as plinths, pelmets, cornices, 
handles, decorative legs and wirework. 
 
 
 
Consult a plumber if in doubt about the positioning of a sink 
or dishwasher as it is not always possible to reposition them 
- you will need to take into account the positions for waste 
pipes and drains. It is also important to consult a Corgi 
registered fitter about air vents and an electrician about 
electrical work. 
 
 

 
Useful phone numbers: 
 
Corgi - 01256 372200 
 
Institute of Plumbing - 01708 472791 
 
Institute of Electrical Engineers - 020 7240 1871 
 
3  - Removing your old kitchen 
You should only start to dismantle your old kitchen when 
you have purchased your new Take Away kitchen and 
appliances - just in case you can't get everything you want. 
 
 
 
Getting ready  
 
First of all clear everything out of your kitchen. Be sure to 
empty all the cupboards and clear all worktops. Turn off the 
kitchen electricity and water supply - then disconnect all 
lines to the sink and drains.  
 
Next, disconnect any appliances. You may want to use 
another room as a temporary kitchen - an electric kettle and 
microwave are particularly useful while your kitchen is out of 
use.  
 
 
 
Safety tips  
 
Remember, it is law that gas appliances should only be 
disconnected or connected by someone with CORGI 
Registration. Take care when working with electricity. If in 
doubt call in a qualified electrician.  
 
 
 
Removing old cabinets  
 
First remove all the drawers and doors from the cabinets. 
Next remove worktops by looking underneath to locate the 
attachments to the base cabinets.  
 
Wear safety gloves and goggles when removing the cabinets 
- two people will be required to remove the wall cabinets.  
 
 
 
Remove any screws and fasteners and ease the worktop off. 
If it has been glued down, you may need to use a crow bar 
to pull the worktop off - remember to protect the wall by 
putting a piece of waste wood between the wall and the 
crowbar. 
 
 
 
Now you simply have to unscrew the cabinets, detach and 
clear the kitchen.  
 
 
 

Making good  
 
This is a good time to make any repairs to the walls, or even 
apply a first coat of paint. Re-flooring, boxing in pipes or 
getting any professional help such as an electrician or 
plumber should also be considered at this stage.  
 
4  - Installing your new kitchen 
Starting in the corner where you plan to begin your 
installation, use your spirit level to ascertain if the floor is 
level. If not, mark the highest point of the floor on the wall 
(1). 
 
 
 
 
From this mark, measure up 870mm for the height of your 
Take Away base cabinets (includes 150mm to allow for 
plinths or legs). Then make a level line for the top of the 
base cabinets - mark level lines for the top and bottom of 
the wall cabinets at the right height for you.  
 
 
Double check your level lines to make sure they are straight 
and level. This will ensure that your cabinets are straight, 
even if your walls are not.  
 
5  - Cabinet assembly 
Although the units are easy to put together, do read the 
assembly instructions before you start work as you'll be 
more familiar with the task in hand.  
 
 
 
In the unlikely event that you ever get stuck, call the B&Q 
helpline on 01769 575500 from 8.30am - 5.30pm Monday to 
Friday. 
 
 
 
Hints & Tips  
• 
Clear a large area to assemble and store new 
cabinets. 
• 
Do not attempt to lift or carry boxes alone. 
• 
Open one box at a time and assemble each cabinet 
before moving on to the next. 
• 
Avoid scratching surfaces by assembling on a carpet 

or on an empty cardboard box. 
• 
Match each assembled cabinet to the corresponding 
door by sticking on masking tape and then 
numbering.  
 
6  - Installing base and wall cabinets 
Installing wall cabinets  
 
Work methodically, starting with a 
corner cabinet and working out in 
both directions. Make sure 
someone is there to assist you 
and steady the cabinets while 
you check levels and fixings (2). 
 
 
 
 
Hints & Tips  
• 
Make sure the unit is pulled out from the corner to 
match your layout plans and template lines. 
• 
On plasterboard walls, use cavity wall fixings to attach 
cabinets if the fixing positions do not coincide with wall 
studs. 
• 
Check adjoining cabinets are level and straight before 
moving on to the next cabinet.  
 
 
 
 
Fix the bracket to the wall (3), 
hang the cabinet and then a
the screws that affix to the 
bracket to ensure it's level (4) 
and as close to the wall as is 
possible. Your spirit level is 
essential! 
djust 
 
 

 
 
Installing base cabinets  
 
Begin in the same corner as you did when fitting your wall 
cabinets. Make sure the cabinet matches your plan - and is 
correctly positioned according to the wall cabinet.  
 
 
 
 
Once again, you need to make 
sure that the first cabinet is le
(5), even if your floor isn't - 
follow the marking lines.  
vel 
 
 
Leave the doors and shelves until last, as it is easier to adjust 
an empty unit!  
 
 
Before affixing the cabinet to the wall, rotate the legs to adjust 
the height (6), making sure the units are level. Once the height 
matches the marking line or other units and is level then use 
the appropriate fittings to secure cabinet to the wall.  
 
 

 
Hints & tips  
• 
Do not screw cabinets tight to wall until levels of 
adjoining cabinets are checked. 
• 
Drill holes for pipes before installing the sink cabinet.  
 
7  - Installing worktops 
If the kitchen is fitted with three worktops i.e. one at the 
end and the other two running at right angles to it, you will 
need to install the end one first. 
 
 
 
Measure the distance from the wall to the edge of the 
cabinets and cut the worktop to the required length, allowing
for any defects in the walls or awkward angles. If in doubt 
cut a template of any odd shapes.  
 
 
 
When all the worktops are cut, fit the joining strips to the 
worktops using silicone sealant to seal the ends and edges of
the worktops. Position the worktops on the base units and 
check that they all fit. 
 
 
 
Fix the worktops down using suitably sized woodscrews and 
check the joints to make certain they are level and square. 
 
 
 
You will need to cut out areas for hobs and sinks etc. before 
finally fixing the worktop. 
 
 
 
Worktops can also be jointed with mitre joints and 
connecting bolts. However this is best carried out by a 
carpenter as it requires special tools and a high level of skill. 

 
8  - Installing an inset sink and taps 
The tools you require and the amount of plumbing needed 
will vary depending on the type of sink and taps you have 
chosen. 
 
 
Start by carefully measuring up, marking out the sink outline
- a template is usually provided with the sink. Remember 
you're not measuring out to the full width/length of the sink 
as a lip around it will hold it in place. Once marked out, 
carefully cut out with a jigsaw.  
 
 
With the sink on its face, seal around the rim. Fit the 
securing clips to the sink - this ensures the sink is firmly 
attached to the worktop. Now is the time to fit your taps, 
following the instructions you receive in the packaging. 
 
 
 
 
Mixer tap tips  
• 
Look to see whether the hot pipe is on the left as 
you look at the sink (7). 
• 
When undoing the cap nuts of each connector and 
you've slipped the nut and olive onto each pipe, use 
a spring-clip clothes-peg below each pipe to stop 
them slipping off. 
• 
Read and fully understand the instructions before 
you start.  
 

