Designing for 
Product Strategy
A Curated Collection of Chapters 
from the O’Reilly Design Library
Peter Merholz & Kristin Skinner
Org Design for 
Design Orgs
BUILDING AND MANAGING IN-HOUSE TEAMS
Early Release
RAW & UNEDITED
 Designing
with Data
IMPROVING USER EXPERIENCE  
WITH LARGE SCALE USER TESTING
Rochelle King & 
 Elizabeth F. Churchill
Early Release
RAW & UNEDITED
Jaime Levy
Foreword by Jason Calacanis
UX Strategy
HOW TO DEVISE INNOVATIVE DIGITAL PRODUCTS  
THAT PEOPLE WANT
THE LEAN SERIES
Jolt Award 
Winner
FREE 
DOWNLOAD

Designing for Product Strategy 
A Curated Collection of Chapters from the O'Reilly Design Library 
 
How do you create a truly unique digital product that has potential to disrupt the 
market? Or one that serves as a much better alternative to current solutions? This 
collection of chapters from several published and forthcoming books in the 
O’Reilly Design Library focuses on a project’s critical early phase, when you and 
your team are defining a product strategy for delivering real value to users and 
stakeholders alike. 
 
With excerpts from books on lean methodology and UX strategy, this free Design 
sampler explains several methods for creating a cohesive plan based on deep 
understanding of your customers and business model. You’ll also get advice for 
building in-house digital/experience design teams. Discover how the O’Reilly 
Design Library delivers knowledge and advice you need to expand your skillset 
and stay current with best practices in UX design. 
 
This sampler includes excerpts from these books: 
 
 

 
UX Strategy 
Available here 
Chapter 2. The Four Tenets of UX Strategy 
 
Lean Analytics 
Available here 
Chapter 5. Analytics Frameworks 
Chapter 7. What Business Are You In? 
 
Running Lean, 2nd Edition 
Available here 
Chapter 10. Get Ready to Measure 
 
Lean UX, 1st Edition 
Available here 
Chapter 3. Vision, Framing, and Outcomes 
 
Designing with Data 
Available here 
Chapter 2. Business Matters 
 
Org Design for Design Orgs 
Available here 
Chapter 2. Realizing the Potential of Design 
 
 

Jaime Levy
Foreword by Jason Calacanis
UX Strategy
HOW TO DEVISE INNOVATIVE DIGITAL PRODUCTS 
THAT PEOPLE WANT

11
[ 2 ]
The Four Tenets of UX Strategy
“In war, let your great object be victory, not lengthy campaigns.”
—SUN TZU, ART OF WAR*
A stellar UX strategy is a means to achieving disruption in 
the marketplace through mental-model innovation. And to keep me 
from forgetting this, I have the sticker shown in Figure 2-1 on my lap-
top lid.
FIGURE 2-1
The sticker on my laptop lid
*	   Sun Tzu, Art of War. first published by Lionel Giles in 1910.

12  |   UX STRATEGY
Because what’s the point in spending time and energy crafting a digital 
product that isn’t unique? Or, at the very least, is a much better alterna-
tive to current solutions found in the online marketplace?
To achieve that disruption, we need a framework in which to connect 
all the dots that will build a cohesive UX strategy. In this chapter, I’m 
going to break down the most important tenets that you need to under-
stand in order to successfully implement the tools and techniques in 
this book. Think of it as a primer to get you and your team thinking 
like a UX strategist.
How I Discovered My UX Strategy Framework
In the digital world, strategy usually begins in the discovery phase. This 
is when teams dig deep into research to reveal key information about 
the product they want to build. I’ve always liked to think of the discov-
ery phase as similar to the pretrial discovery process used by attorneys 
in the United States. To avoid a “trial by ambush,” lawyers can request 
to see the evidence of the opposing counsel in order to prepare suffi-
cient counter-evidence. In this way, the attorneys try to avoid surprises, 
and you, as a product maker, should also want to strategically do just 
that.
My first chance to practice UX strategy occurred in 2007. At the time, 
I was the UX lead at Schematic (now Possible) for the website redesign 
of Oprah.com. Along with the other team leads, I flew into Chicago to 
kick off our discovery phase.
Before that moment, my 15 years of professional experience focused 
on interface design and integrating new technologies (such as Flash) 
into interfaces to create “cutting-edge” products. Often, I was handed 
a massive requirements document that listed hundreds of “essential” 
features. Or, I was given a flimsy project brief with pretty comps that 
stated what the final product should accomplish. From there, I made 
a site or application map that catered to a specific set of user scenar-
ios that enabled those interactions. Based on these documents, I could 
only infer whether my creation solved the problem or not because it 
was typically too late at that point to challenge the rationale behind the 
product vision. I was just supposed to design it on time and on budget.

 2. The Four Tenets of UX Strategy   |  13
But in 2007, it was so fascinating to watch our UX director, Mark Sloan, 
get a dozen contentious stakeholders—no, Oprah wasn’t there—on the 
same page. Mark used consensus-building techniques such as affin-
ity maps, dot voting, and forced ranking† to help us understand all the 
different parts—content and critical functionality—that would make 
up the system we had to digitize. This discovery opportunity helped us 
(the stakeholders and product team) in examining our goals to make 
a better platform for the millions of devoted Oprah fans in the world.
One week later, after all the workshops, the product team and I pre-
sented the discovery brief defining the product vision. The brief con-
tained typical deliverables such as user personas, concept map analy-
ses, and a recommended feature list. Because the stakeholders were 
anxious to get started, they immediately approved it. Our digital team 
was off and running on the implementation phase, which took over six 
months of emotionally fueled hand-offs. There were hundreds of pages 
of wireframes and functional specifications traded between stakehold-
ers, designers, and developers.
But the discovery brief was never referenced again. The personas and 
proposed solution were never validated by existing customers. The 
stakeholders went back to fighting for whatever prime real estate they 
could grab for their particular business units. Yet, there was something 
good that came out of that discovery phase for me: I was a UX designer 
who finally got a taste of what a UX strategy could potentially be. I was 
ruined. I couldn’t imagine just being a wireframe monkey anymore.
A full year later, the redesigned site launched. I never looked at it 
because I had moved onto to another interactive agency (HUGE) with 
other high-profile clients. In my new position, I was able to focus my 
energy more directly on the discovery phase of projects in which user 
research and business strategy were given more weight. I also had a 
seat at the table to help shape the UX strategy and decide how a product 
vision should be implemented. I no longer had to feel fraudulent for 
spending so many waking hours building products for which I lacked a 
deep understanding of the customer segment and the business model.
†	  Gray, David, Sunni Brown, Jamews Macanufo. Gamestorming: A Playbook for Innovators, 
Rulebreakers, and Changemakers. O’Reilly, 2010.

14  |   UX STRATEGY
Today, I run my own practice that specializes in UX strategy, and since 
my first discovery phase, I’ve learned a lot about how to make it an itera-
tive, lightweight, and empirical process of intense collaboration among 
stakeholders, designers, developers, and so on. Because when every-
one shares a product vision, you and your team really have a chance at 
changing the rules of the game for your product, company, and future 
customers.
However, I do want to acknowledge that my methodology is my version 
of UX strategy and might be different from other strategists’. That’s 
precisely why I included Chapter 10, which contains profiles of peo-
ple I respect who have been practicing UX strategy and design as well. 
However, you’ll also see that we align on a lot of things. That’s what 
happens when a new discipline or methodology arises: people will find 
their own approach, but even within those differences, there are con-
nective tissues that bind them together to make UX strategy identifi-
able and unique.
So, with all that said, cue the drum roll to introduce my UX strategy 
framework, as presented in Figure 2-2.
FIGURE 2-2
The four tenets of UX strategy represented as plates at the dinner table

 2. The Four Tenets of UX Strategy   |  15
My formula is this: UX Strategy = Business Strategy + Value Innovation 
+ Validated User Research + Killer UX Design.
These are the four tenets that make up my framework. I have seen 
them in play every day since my first discovery phase. It’s not enough 
to understand your marketplace if you don’t talk directly to your cus-
tomers. It’s not enough to validate that your product works if you’re not 
creating something unique. Good enough just isn’t good enough, and 
just identifying these tenets won’t be enough to get your team flying. 
You’ll need to understand how they interact and affect one another. 
Then, the real trick will be to keep all four of these tenet “plates” spin-
ning in the air while you move through the techniques and tools in the 
subsequent chapters.
Lessons Learned
•	 The discovery phase is where UX strategy begins. UX strategy is 
based on four tenets: business strategy, value innovation, vali-
dated user research, and killer UX design.
•	 The output of the discovery phase should be based on empirical 
data, such as getting direct input from target users before going 
straight from an idea to wireframes and development.
•	 How a team executes a discovery phase can be the deciding 
factor between how a product will ultimately deliver real value 
through a killer UX and create real value for the stakeholders. 
Tenet 1: Business Strategy
Business strategy is the top-line vision of the company. It is why the 
company exists. It ensures the long-term growth and sustainability of 
the organization. It is the basis for the core competencies and offerings, 
which are the products. In this book, I will use the term “products” to 
refer to both digital products and digital services.
The business strategy is what gives product makers the direction to 
grow in the marketplace while beating the competition. The business 
strategy identifies the company’s guiding principles for how it will 
position itself and still achieve its objectives. For this to happen, the 

16  |   UX STRATEGY
business must continually identify and utilize a competitive advan-
tage. A competitive advantage is essential to the company’s long-term 
existence.
In his classic book, Competitive Advantage,‡ Michael E. Porter lays out 
the two most common ways to achieve a competitive advantage: cost 
leadership and differentiation.
The advantage behind cost leadership comes from offering the lowest 
price for products in a particular industry. Whether it is the cheapest 
car, television, or hamburger, this was the traditional way that compa-
nies achieved dominance in the marketplace. After all, allowing the 
private sector to compete without government regulation is what free 
market economy is all about! I mean, look at the rampant success of 
stores such as Walmart and Target. They can offer consumers the best 
prices and widest selection of merchandise. But what happens when 
prices hit rock bottom? Then, the battle needs to be about what makes 
the product better.
This brings us to Porter’s second type of competitive advantage: dif-
ferentiation. Because we are product inventors planning to build dis-
ruptive technologies, this is where our actual power lies. With dif-
ferentiation, the advantage is based on a new or unique product or a 
unique aspect of the product for which customers will pay a premium 
because of its perceived value. As consumers, we choose one product 
over another based on the things we personally value, ranging from the 
product’s usefulness to how much pleasure we derive from it. That per-
ceived value is what transforms a simple little café and cup o’ joe into 
the crazy success story of Seattle-based Starbucks. There’s a reason why 
people pay $5 for a cafe latté—it’s the experience that’s also wrapped 
into the product. It starts the moment a customer steps into the store 
and ends when that person tosses his cup and sleeve into the trash.
Today, a UX differentiation is the digital-product game changer. 
Differentiated user experiences have completely revolutionized the 
way we communicate with the world. Consider what the world was 
like before microblogging. When it was released in 2006, Twitter con-
founded users with its 140-character limit. But the limit turned out 
to be a valuable perk, especially with respect to updates. Today, users 
‡	  Porter, Michael. Competitive Advantage. New York: The Free Press, 1985.

 2. The Four Tenets of UX Strategy   |  17
don’t check traditional news outlets for instant updates; they instead 
check Twitter. When Hurricane Sandy pounded the East Coast in 2012, 
the power went out, but more than 20 million Tweets occurred among 
users, residents in the storm, and media and government outlets.§ I 
know I spent some time on Twitter, tweeting to friends in New York 
about the hurricane updates I saw on TV from my home on the West 
Coast.
Another tool that has distinguished itself from the competition with a 
UX differentiation is the map app Waze. It combines social traffic with 
GPS navigation, thereby allowing users to find the quickest route of 
the moment to their destination. By merely driving around with Waze 
open, users passively contribute traffic and other road data to the net-
work. Users also can take a more active role by sharing road reports 
on accidents, police traps, or any other hazards along the way, helping 
to give other users in the area a heads-up about what surprises might 
ahead of them. In June of 2013, Waze (an Israeli startup) was acquired 
by Google for $1.1 billion. Now, Waze still offers its distinct UX to its 
users, but its data is also channeled into Google Maps.¶ Clearly, Google 
recognized the competitive advantage of UX collaboration and chose 
to adopt Waze for what it could add to its product rather than compete 
against it.
A UX competitive advantage is important to understand in this brave 
new world of technology. Traditionally, the purpose of a competitive 
advantage was to make a product that was self-sufficient through a rev-
enue stream. A revenue stream is how the company gets paid. And 
when a customer pays more for the product than what it costs to make, 
value is created for the stakeholders. To many people, this is the heart 
of a product’s business model. Today, though, a UX differentiation 
doesn’t necessarily mean big bucks when your product hits the market. 
Instead, the goal of many entrepreneurs is mass adoption. Products 
such as Facebook didn’t kick the collective asses of competitors like 
MySpace or Friendster’s because it was a cheaper alternative. Facebook 
won the field because, a) it offered a differentiated UX that was per-
ceived by users as more valuable, and b) everyone adopted it. From that 
§	  http://www.journalism.org/2012/11/06/hurricane-sandy-and-twitter/
¶	  “New features ahead: Google Maps and Waze apps better than ever.” Google Maps Blog, 
August 20, 2013, http://tinyurl.com/lx9sq8c.

18  |   UX STRATEGY
point, Facebook innovated a new kind of business model that relied 
on monetizing its user data for selling targeted advertising.** In 2013, 
Waze did a similar thing when Google bought it. Waze made a lot of 
money by selling access to its devoted users, and Google will make a 
lot of money because so many users continue to use both the Waze and 
Google Maps apps. The two companies essentially turned their users 
into customers because they were able to monetize them, and because 
of this, from here on out, I am going to use the terms “user” and “cus-
tomer” interchangeably.
Still, a good business model doesn’t just define the revenue stream of a 
product. Nor does it just rely on a ridiculous number of users adopting 
it. This is something often lost on young tech entrepreneurs. Because 
they grew up in a world in which products like Facebook became sol-
vent and conquered the world without an obvious business model, they 
don’t realize what an uphill battle they have ahead of them to acquire 
users. They also forget that the megasuccessful digital products that 
continue to define our everyday lives didn’t just stumble onto their 
business models. These game-changing companies experimented, 
tested, and failed before they hit on and innovated the right one. And 
if, like me, you worked on the Web when the dot-com bubble burst in 
the 1990s, you have firsthand experience of all of the risks involved in 
creating products without proven business models. When the invest-
ment money runs out, and there isn’t any more coming in, life is bleak.
The process of business-model construction is foundational to a busi-
ness strategy. As Steve Blank writes, a business model describes the 
“flow between key components of the company.”†† This quote comes 
from Blank’s Customer Development manifesto, in which he chal-
lenges product founders to stop writing static business plans. Instead, 
he encourages them to adopt a flexible business model that requires all 
of the key components to be validated using empirical, customer-facing 
discovery methods. To get a sense of these key components, let’s take a 
look at a tool called the Business Model Canvas.
**	 Kirkpatrick, David. The Facebook Effect: The Inside Story of the Company That Is Connecting 
the World. Simon & Schuster, 2011.
††	 Blank, Steve and Bob Dorf. The Startup Owner’s Manual. Wiley, 2012.

 2. The Four Tenets of UX Strategy   |  19
In their seminal book Business Model Generation,‡‡ authors Alexander 
Osterwalder and Yves Pigneur deconstruct each of the nine essential 
building blocks of a business model so that visionaries can system-
atically think through the logic of how the company will eventually 
make money. Blank also refers to this tool in his own work on busi-
ness-model creation. What’s relevant to us in this book is how many 
of these components align with the UX strategy for a digital product. 
They are as follows (see also Figure 2-3):
Customer segments
Who are the customers? What are their behaviors? What are their 
needs and goals?
Value propositions
What value (either qualitative or quantitative) do we promise to 
deliver?
Channels
How will we reach our customer segment? Is it online or offline?
Customer relationships
How are we going to acquire and retain our customers?
Revenue streams
How does the business earn revenue from the value proposition? 
Are the customers going to pay for it? Or are there other options?
Key resources
What unique strategic assets must the business have to make the 
product work? Is it content, capital, or patents? Is this something 
we must develop?
Key activities
What uniquely strategic things does the business do to deliver its 
proposition? Are we optimizing an outdated business process? Are 
we creating a platform to bring customers together to transact?
Key partnerships
What partnerships and suppliers do we need in order to deliver our 
value proposition?
‡‡	 Oswerwalder, Alexander and Yves Pigneur. Business Model Generation. Wiley, 2010.

20  |   UX STRATEGY
Cost structure
What are the major costs that will be incurred to make our busi-
ness model work? Are we trying to cut costs by throwing out the 
thrills? Are there fixed costs that won’t go away?
FIGURE 2-3
Business Model Canvas showing the nine essential building blocks of a 
business model
By using the canvas, product makers collect all their hypotheses about 
their product into one place. They then revise it as they move through 
the discovery phase, and it’s something you’ll see as we develop all the 
techniques in this book. For this tenet, however, it is another place in 
which we can see how business strategy and UX strategy really inter-
sect. So many of the concerns of the Business Model Canvas—cus-
tomer segments, value propositions, revenue streams, and customer 
acquisition and retention—are elements that are essential to creating a 
product’s user experience, which as you’ve learned, is key to our com-
petitive advantage.
When you don’t see these connections, you can potentially end up in 
the same position as our software engineer in Chapter 1. His business 
model relied on an affluent customer segment to provide the company’s 

 2. The Four Tenets of UX Strategy   |  21
revenue stream, but he had not correctly identified that segment before 
he built his product. If he had not come in contact with that user during 
my team’s customer discovery, he might have pushed ahead with a 
lengthy and expensive campaign to blitz media and online advertising 
outlets. This, as my team’s UX strategy proved, would have been very 
problematic because the campaigns wouldn’t have reached out to the 
user segment actually interested in the value proposition.
This leads us to how the Business Model Canvas also calls out the 
importance of collaboration among stakeholders and team members in 
the discovery phase. Categories such as key resources and partnerships 
aren’t something that a digital product manager or UX designer should 
think up in a vacuum. Rather, these categories are where the stakehold-
ers can offer a wealth of information and leads. Other categories, such 
as key activities, customer segments, and value propositions, will more 
likely rely on the guidance of the digital team to lead the stakeholders to 
the best product. But the digital product team must also recognize that 
these same categories need input from actual users before a hypothe-
sis can be changed to a fact, which is what our UX strategy research 
demonstrated to the software engineer.
We need to recognize that building a business strategy isn’t about for-
mulating and executing a perfect plan. Instead, it’s about being able to 
research what’s out there, analyze the opportunities, run structured 
experiments, fail, learn, and iterate until we devise something of value 
that people truly want. Also, as the product scales and the market 
evolves, the business strategy must be nimble. For a new product, a 
strategy probably revolves around just getting enough product/market 
fit to raise financing, or grabbing enough market share so that its cus-
tomer base is the competitive advantage. But, for a more mature com-
pany, the strategy is about building out the company’s core value prop-
osition while trying to keep the company’s infrastructure and internal 
processes in place. It is in this way that what might have been the busi-
ness model or competitive advantage in the early life cycle of the prod-
uct might not be the same in later phases. Nevertheless, in chasing this 
moving target, companies must continue to experiment with varied 
offerings so that they can scale, remain competitive, and continue to 
offer value to users in an ever-changing marketplace.

22  |   UX STRATEGY
Tenet 2: Value Innovation
As digital product inventors, we must be hyperaware of all the chang-
ing digital market dynamics. We must understand how and why people 
use their digital devices and what defines a successful and a failed UX. 
This is because a user’s first contact with the interface generally deter-
mines success or failure. It provides the user with their first impression 
of your value innovation, and it is value innovation that disrupts or cre-
ates new mental models for people. We definitely want to do that.
Before we dig into value innovation, let’s discuss the word “value.” 
The word is used everywhere. It’s found in almost all traditional and 
contemporary business books since the 1970s. In Management: Tasks, 
Responsibilities, Practices,§§ Peter Drucker discusses how customer val-
ues shift over time. He gives an example of how a teenage girl will buy 
a shoe for its fashion, but when she becomes a working mother, she 
will probably buy a shoe for its comfort and price. In 1984, Michael 
Lanning first coined the term “value proposition” to explain how a firm 
proposes to deliver a valuable customer experience. For a business to 
generate wealth, it needs to offer a superior product to that of its com-
petitors but at a manufacturing cost below what customers pay for it. 
That same year, Michael Porter defined the term “value chain” as the 
chain of activities that a firm operating in a specific industry performs 
in order to deliver a valuable product. Figure 2-4 illustrates a traditional 
value chain for a physical product manufacturer.
FIGURE 2-4
The value chain
That is the business process that Toyota uses to make vehicles and that 
Apple uses to make computers and devices. During each of the activ-
ities in this value chain of events, opportunities exist for firms to out-
perform their competitors. But, all those terms apply to physical prod-
ucts. By contrast, virtual products allow for a value chain to have faster 
repeat loops and in some cases for the activities to happen in parallel. 
§§	  Drucker, Peter. Management: Tasks, Responsibilities, Practices. HarperBusiness, 1973.

 2. The Four Tenets of UX Strategy   |  23
This is part of why traditional business-strategy principles do not per-
fectly map to digital product strategy. When producing digital prod-
ucts, we must continuously research, redesign, and remarket to keep 
up with the rapidly evolving online marketplace, customer values, and 
value chains that are required to keep our products in production.
This brings us to another challenge of designing digital products: the 
software, apps, and other things that users find on the Internet and use 
every day. As mentioned, a product needs to be valuable to customers 
to entice them use it. It also needs to be valuable to the business so that 
the business can sustain itself. However, the Internet is full of digital 
products for which the users don’t have to pay for the privilege of using 
them. If a business model is supposed to help a company achieve sus-
tainability, how can you do that when the online marketplace is over-
run with free products?
Value innovation is the key. In the book Blue Ocean Strategy,¶¶ authors 
W. Chan Kim and Renée Mauborgne describe value innovation as “the 
simultaneous pursuit of differentiation and low cost, creating a leap 
in value for both buyers and the company.” What this means is that 
value innovation occurs when companies align newness with utility 
and price (see Figure 2-5). Companies pursue both differentiation and 
cost leadership to create high-value and low-cost products for the cus-
tomers and stakeholders. Consider how Waze found a sustainable busi-
ness model—sharing its crowd-sourced data made it lucrative to other 
companies such as Google. Yet, to get the data, it had to provide a new 
kind of value to customers for mass adoption, and that value was based 
entirely on taking advantage of a disruptive innovation through the UX 
and business model.
¶¶ Kim, W. Chan and Renée Mauborgne. Blue Ocean Strategy. Harvard Business School 
Press, 2005.

24  |   UX STRATEGY
Disruptive innovation is a term that was coined by Clayton M. 
Christensen in the mid-1990s. In his book The Innovator’s Dilemma, 
he analyzed the value chain of high-tech companies and drew a dis-
tinction between those just doing sustaining innovation versus disrup-
tive innovation. A sustaining innovation he described as any innova-
tion that enables industry leaders to do something better for their exist-
ing customers.*** A disruptive innovation is a product that a compa-
ny’s best customer potentially can’t use and therefore has substantially 
lower profit margins than the business might be willing to support. 
However, this is where disruptive innovation can blindside established 
competitors. Christensen says that disruptive innovation usually is 
“a process by which a product or service takes root initially in simple 
applications at the bottom of a market and then relentlessly moves up 
market, eventually displacing established competitors.”†††
Innovative means doing something that is new, original, and important 
enough to shake up a market, and this leads us right back to the book 
Blue Ocean Strategy. In the book, the authors discuss their studies of 
150 strategic moves spanning more than a 100 years and 30 industries. 
They explain how the companies behind the Ford Model T, Cirque du 
Soleil, and the iPod won because of how they entered blue-ocean mar-
kets instead of red-ocean markets. The sea of other competitors with 
similar products is known as a red ocean. Red oceans are full of sharks 
that compete for the same customer by offering lower prices and even-
tually turning a product into a commodity. In contrast, a blue ocean is 
uncontested territory; it is free for the taking.
*** http://www.strategy-business.com/article/14501?pg=all
††† http://www.claytonchristensen.com/key-concepts/#sthash.47B9F4IW.dpuf
FIGURE 2-5
Value Innovation = The 
simultaneous pursuit 
of differentiation and 
low cost

 2. The Four Tenets of UX Strategy   |  25
In the corporate world, the impulse to compete by destroying your 
rivals is rooted in military strategy. In war, the fight typically plays out 
over a specific terrain. The battle gets bloody when one side wants what 
the other side has—whether it be oil, land, shelf space, or eyeballs. In 
a blue ocean, the opportunity is not constrained by traditional bound-
aries. It’s about breaking a few rules that aren’t quite rules yet or even 
inventing your own game that creates an uncontested new marketplace 
and space for users to roam.
When we transpose Blue Ocean Strategy to the world of digital prod-
ucts, we must admit that there are bigger opportunities in unknown 
market spaces. A perfect example of a company that took advantage of a 
blue-ocean market is Airbnb. Airbnb is a “community marketplace” for 
people to list, discover, and book sublets of practically anything from a 
tree house in Los Angeles to a castle in France. What’s amazing about 
this is that its value proposition has completely disrupted the travel and 
housing industry (see Figure 2-6).‡‡‡ Its value proposition is so addic-
tive that as soon as customers try it, it’s hard to go back to the old way 
of booking a place to stay or subletting a property.
FIGURE 2-6
Airbnb in the news
Airbnb achieves this value innovation by coupling a killer UX design 
with a tantalizing value proposition. And, as I mentioned earlier, true 
value innovation occurs when the UX and business model intersect. In 
this case, they intersected in a blue ocean because of how Airbnb broke 
and reinvented some rules.
‡‡‡ “NY official: Airbnb stay illegal; host fined $2,400.” C|Net, May 20, 2013. http://tinyurl.
com/k7oyx3j.

26  |   UX STRATEGY
For example, Craig’s List was a primary means for users to sublet before 
Airbnb, but it was a generally creepy endeavor. There were no user pro-
files. There was no way to verify anything about the host or guest in the 
transaction. Yet, that was the norm! Airbnb enabled a free-market sub-
economy in which quality and trust were given high value in the UX, 
much like in Amazon, Yelp, and eBay. Airbnb’s entire UX was built 
around the idea of ensuring that each guest and host was a good cus-
tomer. It required its users to change their mental models. Formerly 
unwritten social etiquette now had to come into play if users were to 
host strangers or stay in a stranger’s home and for both parties to feel 
good about it.
For instance, I just came back from a weekend in San Francisco with 
my family. Instead of booking a hotel that would have cost us upward of 
$1,200 (two rooms for two nights at a 3.5 star hotel), we used Airbnb and 
spent half of that. For us, though, it wasn’t just about saving money. It 
was about being in a gorgeous and spacious two-bedroom home closer 
to the locals and their foodie restaurants. The six percent§§§ commis-
sion fee we paid to Airbnb was negligible. Interestingly, the corporate 
lawyer who owned this San Francisco home was off in Paris with her 
family. She was also staying at an Airbnb, which could have been paid 
for using some of the revenue ($550-plus) from her transaction with 
us. Everybody won! Except, of course, the hotels that lost our business. 
Airbnb’s business strategy is that they cater to both sides of their two-
sided market—the people who list their homes and those who book 
places to stay. They offer incredible value through feature sets like easy 
calendaring tools, map integration for browsing, and, most crucially, a 
seamless transactional system that had not been previously offered by 
other competitiors like VRBO, Homeaway, or Craig’s List. Ultimately 
Airbnb offered a more usable platform that minimized the risk of deal-
ing with scary people coupled with fair-market value pricing. All of this 
added up to serious disruption through value innovation for all custom-
ers and stakeholders in the online and offline experience. That’s why it 
is winning so decisively.
§§§	 The service fee that guests pay on AirBnb varies from 6 to 18 percent, based on the 
subtotal.

 2. The Four Tenets of UX Strategy   |  27
There are many other products causing widespread disruption to the 
status quo through their combined value innovation of cost leadership 
and differentiation in blue-ocean marketplaces. And through their 
UX strategies, they are ultimately making people’s lives easier, bring-
ing together customers in new ways and smashing mental models. 
Companies such as Airbnb, Kickstarter, and Eventbrite have completely 
upended how people rent homes, fund business ventures, and organize 
events, respectively. In fact, Eventbrite is how I tested my hypothesis 
that there were people out there with a thirst for knowledge about UX 
strategy. Using its interface, I quickly set up a 60-seat lecture at the 
price of $40 per person, and sold it out. If I didn’t have Eventbrite to 
experiment with as a promotional platform, there might have been no 
book for Jaime Levy. Thank you Eventbrite for enabling the one value 
innovation that other platforms like Meetup failed to offer: the ability 
to host paid ticketed events.
Tenet 3: Validated User Research
Not realizing a product’s value is one of the primary reasons why that 
product will fail. Stakeholders are dreamers in that they assume what 
is valuable to their customers instead of verifying it. Much like Kevin 
Costner in the movie Field of Dreams, these entrepreneurs believe that 
if they build it, they [the users] will come. But the truth is that any 
product is a risk. Remember our software engineer at the beginning of 
this book? His assumptions about what his customers wanted turned 
out to be wrong. His heart was in the right place. His idea was timely, 
different, very innovative, and even had a unique and sustainable busi-
ness model. Nonetheless, the users didn’t come. And when my team 
eventually went out and asked his target users, we discovered that they 
wouldn’t pay for the product as it was being positioned.
User research is how you verify that you’re on the right track with your 
value proposition. There are lots of ways to do it—ethnographic field 
studies, contextual inquiries, focus groups, diaries and journals, card 
sorting, eye-tracking, personas, and more. I don’t want to talk about 
any of these traditional methods. Instead, I want to talk about Lean 
Startup.

28  |   UX STRATEGY
It’s weird to admit, but before 2011 when Eric Ries’ Lean Startup¶¶¶ 
(which you must read) went critical mass, founders didn’t make it 
their mission to confront customers “early and often.” The empiri-
cal, fast-moving, and transparent nature of Lean Startup riffed on 
ideas from Steve Blank’s customer development methodology**** and 
the highly theoretical Design Thinking approach. Sure, organizations 
had UX designers around to do “user-centric” design (as opposed to 
engineer-centric), but Lean Startup made conducting validated user 
research a make-or-break aspect of moving forward on a product. Lean 
Startup forced user research to become measurable.
This leads us to our third tenet—validated user research. “Validation” 
is the secret sauce of the Lean Startup business approach. Validation 
is the process of confirming that a specific customer segment finds 
value in your product. Without validation, you are simply assuming that 
customers will find use for your product. Validated user research goes 
beyond just observing and establishing empathy for potential users. 
It is a process based on a reality-check that focuses on direct feedback 
from interaction with users. It helps your team to determine if the 
vision of your product is a dream or a potential nightmare.
Eric Ries popularized the term Minimum Viable Product (MVP). It 
simply means learning if potential customers want your product by 
building just the core features of your value proposition. This is far dif-
ferent from traditional product development in which building a proto-
type was often a simulation to show potential investors the future prod-
uct. By getting customer buy-in on your value proposition early, you are 
de-risking your product. And if users don’t like what they see, we need 
to either “pivot” to a different customer segment or pivot to a different 
problem that our value proposition can address. 
Iterations like the MVP require your team to conduct research and gain 
validation before developing a solution. It helps verify that your team is 
targeting the right customer (something our startup in Chapter 1 failed 
to do) and not just a general persona. When you’ve validated a spe-
cific pain point that needs addressing, you can continue to add features 
and then test those features using the same research methods. This is 
¶¶¶ Ries, Eric. Lean Startup. HarperBusiness, 2011.
**** Blank, Steve. The Four Steps to the Epiphany. K&S Ranch Press, 2005.

 2. The Four Tenets of UX Strategy   |  29
known as the Lean Startup feedback loop of build-measure-learn. Use 
your research to validate your decisions and ensure that the product 
vision is aligned with the end user’s needs. 
Validated user research is a collaborative process that should involve 
as many members of the product team as possible. Collaboration will 
actually help organically build consensus on the value proposition and 
any pivots that follow. Now, this might sound naïve, given that we are all 
working in different environments with a range of folks with dynamic 
personalities who are in various positions of power. In an enterprise 
environment, there are typically many stakeholders who each have a 
say on the product requirements based on their personal agenda or 
preference. When I work for agencies, the product requirements are 
typically locked in stone during a requirements-gathering phase that 
I’m not involved in. For me to suggest doing validated user research or 
creating an MVP to test during the design phase is blasphemy because 
it’s counterintuitive to the agency model. The last thing an account 
executive wants to hear from his UX resources are ways to cut the proj-
ect fee down for his client.
If you happen to find yourself in this familiar position, that’s the exact 
moment that you need to become intrapreneurial. Intrapreneurship is 
the act of behaving like an entrepreneur while working within a large 
organization. You need to decide to take the fate of the product into 
your own hands through assertive risk-taking and innovation. Stand 
up and ask for the extra week or two to conduct validated user research. 
If you get a “no” or are too afraid to ask, it’s time to start working off-
hours. The worst thing that can happen is that you will discover some-
thing about yourself and/or start looking for ways to improve your own 
work process.
The bottom line is that confronting your target customers is nonnego-
tiable. We must learn as quickly as possible if the idea we are working on 
is stupid and worthless. We need to have an open mind to experiment 
and to fail. That’s right, we are betting. And the odds are against us. 
In the end, though, this approach is more cost-effective and efficient.

30  |   UX STRATEGY
Tenet 4: Killer UX Design
In Lean Entrepreneur†††† Patrick Vlaskovits and Brant Cooper advo-
cate, “If you are doing best practices, you are not innovating.” This is a 
provocative statement, because established interaction design patterns 
help make consistent user experiences. Then again, there is no harm in 
breaking a rule or two through experimentation to make a killer user 
experience.
The “user experience” (UX) is how a human feels when using the inter-
face of a digital product while attempting to accomplish a task or goal. 
Yes, we can say a door handle is an interface and go off the nondigital 
highway into the world of 100 percent physical products. But in prac-
tice, the term “user experience” refers to whether a person has a good 
or bad time trying to utilize a digital product.
Traditionally (if I dare use that word for a discipline barely two decades 
old), UX design is associated with deliverables for development and 
design execution—site maps, wireframes, process/task flows, and 
functional specifications. Recruiters for enterprises and agencies 
identify UX design with the job titles that create these deliverables, 
including interaction designer, information architect, and UX design-
ers. These definitions are used by large enterprises and agencies and 
are pretty much how UX design is currently practiced. Yet, what ulti-
mately happens in this “traditional” system is that the UX designer and 
therefore the UX design are often more focused on the issues of user 
engagement and design rather than customer development and busi-
ness-model generation.
The common problem that many product makers don’t realize is how 
much their UX decisions are tied to customer acquisition. Just think 
about any transactional website or even a simple sign-up process. The 
UX design should be very concerned with barriers to entry, which can 
prevent validated leads who have previously engaged with the product 
from converting to customers. We’ll talk more about this in Chapter 9. 
Interfaces and user flows should be geared toward the desired response 
of the user. It’s all about engagement.
†††† Vlaskovits, Patrick and Brant Cooper. Lean Entrepreneur. Wiley, 2013.

 2. The Four Tenets of UX Strategy   |  31
This is what distinguishes a novice UX designer from a killer UX 
designer. Killer UX designers know now to guide the value innovation 
of a product in the following ways:
•	 They work collaboratively with stakeholders and teammates at the 
idea’s inception. Then, the UX designer can be involved in design-
ing structured experiments for validation. These experiments 
need to be focused on how successful the value proposition can 
be communicated to the customer from the moment the customer 
opens the landing page. Using measurable results, design deci-
sions can be made based on real evidence rather than hunches.
•	 They help determine the key moments and features that are abso-
lutely critical to your product. Chapter 6 focuses on tactics for help-
ing you discover value innovations, concentrating on the primary 
utility of the product. We explore techniques such as storyboard-
ing that will weave key experiences together in simple and elegant 
ways. We look at ways to poach and cherry-pick features from both 
competitors and noncompetitors so that we can put them together 
in new ways.
•	 They learn everything about the existing market space to identify 
UX opportunities that can be exploited. This allows your team 
to find ways to create a leap in value by offering something that 
makes peoples lives more efficient. 
•	 They talk directly to potential users or existing power users of the 
product to discover and validate its primary utility with respect to 
the problem that must be solved.
•	 They weave the UX through all touch points—online and offline—
enabling an experience that is frictionless. This is especially rele-
vant in products such as Airbnb and Uber in which the transaction 
begins on the Internet, is fulfilled in the real world, but then loops 
the user back to the interface to write reviews.
You can’t merely “design think” your way to a killer UX design. It’s 
only when the UX is informed by and affects the other three tenets that 
mental models are broken. Disruption erupts!
Over the course of the book, I will discuss several case studies of prod-
ucts that have killer user experiences. These are UX designs that didn’t 
just “happen” through good luck or “genius design.” They’re killer 
through the manifestation of the tenets. It’s only with practice and 

32  |   UX STRATEGY
mindfulness that we will come to understand the product as a sum of 
both its tangible and intangible parts. The examples include the follow-
ing companies.
Airbnb
The listing service that is disrupting the travel industry (Figure 
2-7).
FIGURE 2-7
Airbnb’s killer UX
Uber
The ridesharing application that is disrupting the taxi-service 
industry (Figure 2-8).

 2. The Four Tenets of UX Strategy   |  33
FIGURE 2-8
Uber’s killer UX
Waze 
The map application that is disrupting how people get from Point 
A to Point B in their cars (Figure 2-9).
FIGURE 2-9
Waze’s killer UX

34  |   UX STRATEGY
Tinder 
The dating app that is threatening former dating-site disruptors 
such as OkCupid and Eharmony (Figure 2-10).
FIGURE 2-10
Tinder’s killer UX
These products all got to where they are not by execution of a static 
business plan or a two-week UX discovery phase, but through experi-
ments, failure, and iterations over months and sometimes years. It was 
the insights born out of structured strategic meanderings that blos-
somed into awe-inspiring product interfaces. It’s how the founders 
and teams behind-the-scenes took risks while assembling the building 
blocks of their products’ business models. They fine-tuned their value 
innovation and acquired fervent customers, which led to a competitive 
advantage such that they now swim in a blue ocean.

 2. The Four Tenets of UX Strategy   |  35
Top 10 Not-UX Strategies!
1.	 A killer idea for a new product!
2.	 A laundry list of features!
3.	 A thoroughly researched game plan for which all possible sce-
narios have been considered and is ready for implementation. No 
need for customer feedback because you are 100 percent certain 
you have nailed it!
4.	 A creative permutation of trending buzzwords that were just 
used by another startup that raised financing (for instance, peer-
to-peer sharing economies).
5.	 A generic set of motivational statements (such as Go Team 
Challenge Conquer).
6.	 An arrogant statement from some expert—“Our product sprung 
from the genius of Professor I.M. Awesome, the visionary of 
Social Lean Disruption.”
7.	 A hypothesis that has nonvalidated risky assumptions—“Well, all 
women do like pink.”
8.	 A grandiose vision that doesn’t align with its core values that 
your company has no capability of delivering (for instance, a pat-
ent-pending, new-method-of-discovery dream).
9.	 A vague affirmation that sounds like a good Hallmark card—“You, 
too, can achieve Social Lean Disruption.”
10.	 The North Star.
Recap
UX strategy is a way of thinking. It’s not a means of formulating and 
executing a perfect plan; rather, it’s about being able to research what’s 
out there, analyze the opportunities, run structured experiments, fail, 
learn, and iterate until you devise something of value that people truly 
want. While devising a UX strategy, you will need to take risks and 
accept failure. You’ll learn how to fail smartly by doing small-struc-
tured experiments to validate that your strategy is moving your team in 
the right direction.


	
45
C H A P T E R  5 
Analytics Frameworks
Over the years we’ve seen a number of frameworks emerge that help us 
understand startups and the changes they undergo as they grow, find their 
markets, and help startups acquire customers and revenue. Each framework 
offers a different perspective on the startup lifecycle, and each suggests a 
set of metrics and areas on which to focus.
After comparing and contrasting a number of these frameworks, we’ve 
created our own way to think about startups, and in particular the metrics 
that you use to measure your progress. We’ll use this new framework 
throughout the book—but first, let’s take a look at some of the existing 
frameworks and how they fit into Lean Analytics.
Dave McClure’s Pirate Metrics
Pirate Metrics—a term coined by venture capitalist Dave McClure—gets 
its name from the acronym for five distinct elements of building a successful 
business. McClure categorizes the metrics a startup needs to watch into 
acquisition, activation, retention, revenue, and referral—AARRR.* 
Figure 5-1 shows our interpretation of his model, describing the five steps 
through which users, customers, or visitors must progress in order for your 
company to extract all the value from them. Value comes not only from a 
*	
 http://www.slideshare.net/dmc500hats/startup-metrics-for-pirates-long-version

46	
PART TWO: FINDING THE RIGHT METRIC FOR RIGHT NOW
transaction (revenue) but also from their role as marketers (referral) and 
content creators (retention).
Figure 5-1. Even pirates need metrics, says Dave 
McClure
These five elements don’t necessarily follow a strict order—users may refer 
others before they spend money, for example, or may return several times 
before signing up—but the list is a good framework for thinking about how 
a business needs to grow (see Table 5-1). 
Element
Function
Relevant metrics
Acquisition
Generate attention through 
a variety of means, both or-
ganic and inorganic
Traffic, mentions, cost per 
click, search results, cost of 
acquisition, open rate
Activation
Turn the resulting drive-by 
visitors into users who are 
somehow enrolled
Enrollments, signups, com-
pleted onboarding process, 
used the service at least once, 
subscriptions
Retention
Convince users to come back 
repeatedly, exhibiting sticky 
behavior
Engagement, time since last 
visit, daily and monthly active 
use, churns
Revenue
Business outcomes (which 
vary by your business model: 
purchases, ad clicks, content 
creation, subscriptions, etc.)
Customer lifetime value, con-
version rate, shopping cart 
size, click-through revenue
Referral
Viral and word-of-mouth 
invitations to other potential 
users
Invites sent, viral coefficient, 
viral cycle time
Table 5-1. Pirate Metrics and what you should track

Chapter 5 : Analytics Frameworks 	
47
Eric Ries’s Engines of Growth
In Lean Startup, Eric Ries talks about three engines that drive the growth of 
a startup. Each of these has associated key performance indicators (KPIs).
Sticky Engine
The sticky engine focuses on getting users to return, and to keep using your 
product. It’s akin to Dave McClure’s retention phase. If your users aren’t 
sticky, churn will be high, and you won’t have engagement. Engagement is 
one of the best predictors of success: Facebook’s early user counts weren’t 
huge, but the company could get nearly all students in a university to use 
the product, and to keep coming back, within a few months of launch. 
Facebook’s stickiness was off the charts.
The fundamental KPI for stickiness is customer retention. Churn rates and 
usage frequency are other important metrics to track. Long-term stickiness 
often comes from the value users create for themselves as they use the 
service. It’s hard for people to leave Gmail or Evernote, because, well, that’s 
where they store all their stuff. Similarly, if a player deletes his account 
from a massively multiplayer online game (MMO), he loses all his status 
and in-game items, which he’s worked hard to earn.
Stickiness isn’t only about retention, it’s also about frequency, which is why 
you also need to track metrics like time since last visit. If you have methods 
of driving return visits such as email notifications or updates, then email 
open rates and click-through rates matter, too.
Virality Engine
Virality is all about getting the word out. Virality is attractive because it 
compounds—if every user adds another 1.5 users, your user base will grow 
infinitely until you’ve saturated all users.*
The key metric for this engine is the viral coefficient—the number of new 
users that each user brings on. Because this is compounding (the users they 
bring, in turn, bring their own users), the metric measures how many users 
are brought in with each viral cycle. Growth comes from a viral coefficient 
of greater than one, but you also have to factor in churn and loss. The 
bigger the coefficient, the faster you grow.
*	
It’s never really this simple; churn, competitors, and other factors mean it’s not really infinite, 
of course.

48	
PART TWO: FINDING THE RIGHT METRIC FOR RIGHT NOW
Measuring viral coefficient isn’t enough. You also need to measure the 
actions that make up the cycle. For example, when you join most social 
networks, you’re asked to connect to your email account to find contacts, 
then you’re given the option to invite them. They receive emails, which 
they might act upon. Those distinct stages all contribute to virality, so 
measuring actions is how you tweak the viral engine—by changing the 
message, simplifying the signup process, and so on.
There are other factors at play with virality as well, including the speed 
with which a user invites another (known as the viral cycle time) and the 
type of virality. We’ll dive into these later in the book.
Paid Engine
The third engine of growth is payment. It’s usually premature to turn this 
engine on before you know that your product is sticky and viral. Meteor 
Entertainment’s Hawken is a multiplayer game that’s free to play, but it 
makes money from in-game upgrades. Meteor is focusing on usage within 
a beta group first (stickiness), then working on virality (inviting your 
friends to play), and finally payment (players buying upgrades to become 
competitive or enhance the in-game experience).
Getting paid is, in some ways, the ultimate metric for identifying a 
sustainable business model. If you make more money from customers 
than it costs you to acquire them—and you do so consistently—you’re 
sustainable. You don’t need money from external investors, and you’re 
growing shareholder equity every day.
But getting paid, on its own, isn’t an engine of growth. It’s just a way to put 
money in the bank. Revenue helps growth only when you funnel some of 
the money generated from revenue back into acquisition. Then you have a 
machine that you can tune to grow the business over time.
The two knobs on this machine are customer lifetime value (CLV) and 
customer acquisition cost (CAC). Making more money from customers 
than you spend acquiring them is good, but the equation for success isn’t 
that simple. You still need to worry about cash flow and growth rate, which 
are driven by how long it takes a customer to pay off. One way to measure 
this is time to customer breakeven—that is, how much time it will take to 
recoup the acquisition cost of a customer.
Ash Maurya’s Lean Canvas
We looked at the Lean Canvas in Chapter 3, when we talked about deciding 
what problem you should solve. See the sidebar “How to Use a Lean 
Canvas” for some tips on putting it into practice.

Chapter 5 : Analytics Frameworks 	
49
How to Use a Lean Canvas
Unlike a traditional business plan, you should use and update the Lean 
Canvas continuously. It’s a “living, breathing” plan, not a hypothetical 
tome of nonsense that you throw out the minute you start actually work-
ing on your startup. Once you’ve filled out the Lean Canvas (or most of 
it), you start running experiments to validate or invalidate what you’ve 
hypothesized.
In its simplest form, think of each box as a “pass/fail”: if your experiments 
fail, you don’t go to the next box; rather, you keep experimenting until 
you hit a wall completely or get to the next step. The only exception is 
the “Key metrics” box, which is meant to keep a record of the most im-
portant metrics you’re tracking. You don’t run experiments on this box, 
but it’s important to fill it out anyway because it’s definitely open to de-
bate and discussion.
Each of the boxes in Ash’s canvas has relevant metrics you need to track, 
as outlined in Table 5-2 (the canvas actually has a box for metrics, which 
should get updated each time you focus on something different in the 
canvas). These metrics either tie your one-page business model to reality 
by confirming each box, or they send you back to the drawing board. The 
individual metrics may change depending on your type of business, but the 
guidelines are valuable just the same. We’ll share more details later in the 
book on the key metrics that matter based on your type of business, as well 
as benchmarks you can aim for.
Lean Canvas box
Some relevant metrics
Problem
Respondents who have this need, respondents who 
are aware of having the need
Solution
Respondents who try the MVP, engagement, churn, 
most-used/least-used features, people willing to pay
Unique value 
proposition
Feedback scores, independent ratings, sentiment anal-
ysis, customer-worded descriptions, surveys, search, 
and competitive analysis
Customer  
segments
How easy it is to find groups of prospects, unique key-
word segments, targeted funnel traffic from a particu-
lar source
Channels
Leads and customers per channel, viral coefficient and 
cycle, net promoter score, open rate, affiliate margins, 
click-through rate, PageRank, message reach

50	
PART TWO: FINDING THE RIGHT METRIC FOR RIGHT NOW
Lean Canvas box
Some relevant metrics
Unfair advantage
Respondents’ understanding of the UVP (Unique Value 
Proposition), patents, brand equity, barriers to entry, 
number of new entrants, exclusivity of relationships
Revenue streams
Lifetime customer value, average revenue per user, 
conversion rate, shopping cart size, click-through rate
Cost structure
Fixed costs, cost of customer acquisition, cost of servic-
ing the nth customer, support costs, keyword costs
Table 5-2. Lean Canvas and relevant metrics
Sean Ellis’s Startup Growth Pyramid
Sean Ellis is a well-known entrepreneur and marketer. He coined the term 
growth hacker and has been heavily involved with a number of meteoric-
growth startups, including Dropbox, Xobni, LogMeIn (IPO), and Uproar 
(IPO). His Startup Growth Pyramid, shown in Figure 5-2, focuses on what 
to do after you’ve achieved product/market fit.
Figure 5-2. Like building, real pyramid, startup growth 
is back-breaking labor
The question this poses a of course, is how do you know if you’ve achieved 
product/market fit? Sean devised a simple survey that you can send customers 
(available at survey.io) to determine if you’re ready for accelerated growth. 
The most important question in the survey is “How would you feel if you 
could no longer use this product or service?” In Sean’s experience, if 40% 
of people (or more) say they’d be very disappointed to lose the service, 
you’ve found a fit, and now it’s time to scale.

Chapter 5 : Analytics Frameworks 	
51
The Long Funnel
In the early days of the Web, transactional websites had relatively simple 
conversion funnels. Visitors came to the home page, navigated to the 
product they wanted, entered payment information, and confirmed their 
order.
No more. Today’s funnel extends well beyond the front door of a website, 
across myriad social networks, sharing platforms, affiliates, and price-
comparison sites. Both offline and online factors influence a single purchase. 
Customers may make several tentative visits prior to a conversion.
We call this the Long Funnel. It’s a way of understanding how you first 
come to someone’s attention, and the journey she takes from that initial 
awareness through to a goal you want her to complete (such as making a 
purchase, creating content, or sharing a message). Often, measuring a long 
funnel involves injecting some kind of tracking into the initial signal, so 
you can follow the user as she winds up on your site, which many analytics 
packages can now report. Figure 5-3 shows the Social Visitors Flow report 
in Google Analytics, for example.
Figure 5-3. Where your paying customers waste most of 
their time before they buy from you
What’s more, overlapping traffic sources can show how much a particular 
platform influenced conversions, as shown in Figure 5-4.

52	
PART TWO: FINDING THE RIGHT METRIC FOR RIGHT NOW
Figure 5-4. Sometimes it takes a lot of peer pressure to 
acquire a customer
We tracked our own long funnel during the process of launching the Lean 
Analytics Book website.* We didn’t have a hard “goal” such as a purchase, 
but we did have a number of things we wanted visitors to do: sign up for 
our mailing list, click on the book cover, and take a survey. By creating 
custom URLs for our proponents to share, we injected a signal into the 
start of the Long Funnel, and were able to see how our message spread.
We learned, for example, that author and speaker Julien Smith’s followers 
were less likely to fill out the survey than Eric Ries’s and Avinash Kaushik’s 
followers, unless they were returning visitors, in which case they were more 
likely to do so. This kind of insight can help us choose the right kind of 
proponent for future promotional efforts.
*	
 http://leananalyticsbook.com/behind-the-scenes-of-a-book-launch/

Chapter 5 : Analytics Frameworks 	
53
The Lean Analytics Stages and Gates
Having reviewed these frameworks, we needed a model that identified 
the distinct stages a startup usually goes through, and what the “gating” 
metrics should be that indicate it’s time to move to the next stage. The five 
stages we identified are Empathy, Stickiness, Virality, Revenue, and Scale. 
We believe most startups go through these stages, and in order to move 
from one to the next they need to achieve certain goals with respect to the 
metrics they’re tracking. 
Figure 5-5 shows the stages and gates of Lean Analytics, and how this 
model lines up with the other frameworks. A good portion of the book is 
structured by our stages, so it’s important to understand how this works.
Figure 5-5. Frameworks, frameworks everywhere

54	
PART TWO: FINDING THE RIGHT METRIC FOR RIGHT NOW
Ultimately, there are a number of good frameworks that help you think 
about your business.
• Some, like Pirate Metrics and the Long Funnel, focus on the act of 
acquiring and converting customers.
• Others, like the Engines of Growth and the Startup Growth Pyramid, 
offer strategies for knowing when or how to grow.
• Some, like the Lean Canvas, help you map out the components of your 
business model so you can evaluate them independent of one another.
We’re proposing a new model called the Lean Analytics Stages, which 
draws from the best of these models and puts an emphasis on metrics. It 
identifies five distinct stages startups go through as they grow.
While we believe the Lean Analytics Stages represent a fairly simple 
framework for understanding your startup’s progress, we recognize that 
it can still look overwhelming. And even with our framework, you’ll still 
use the other frameworks as well, so there’s a lot to digest. That’s why you 
should put all of this aside (for now!) and focus on the One Metric That 
Matters, which we’ll cover in the next chapter.

	
63
C H A P T E R  7
What Business Are You In?
How you get and make money drives what metrics you should care about. 
In the long term, the riskiest part of a business is often directly tied to how 
it makes money.
Many startups can build a product and solve technical issues, some can 
attract the right (and occasionally large) audiences, but few make money. 
Even giants like Twitter and Facebook have struggled with extracting 
money from their throngs of users. 
There’s no more iconic symbol of a startup than the lemonade stand, and 
with good reason—it’s a simple, entrepreneurial, low-risk way to learn how 
businesses operate. And like a lemonade stand, while it might be reasonable 
and strategic to delay monetization—giving away lemonade for a while to 
build a clientele—you have to be planning your business model early on.
If we asked you to describe the business model of a lemonade stand, you’d 
probably say that it’s about selling lemonade for more than it costs to make 
it. Pressed for more detail, you might say that costs include:
• Variable costs of materials (lemons, sugar, cups, water)
• One-time costs of marketing (stand, signage, cooler, bribing a younger 
sibling to stand in the street)
• Hourly costs of staffing (which, let’s face it, are pretty negligible when 
you’re a kid)
You might also say that revenue is a function of the price you charge, and 
the number of cups sold.

64	
PART TWO: FINDING THE RIGHT METRIC FOR RIGHT NOW
Now let’s suppose that you’re asked to identify the risky parts of the 
business. They include the variability of citrus futures, the weather, the 
foot traffic in your neighborhood, and so on.
One thing we’ve noticed about almost all successful founders we’ve met is 
their ability to work at both a very detailed, and a very abstracted, level 
within their business. They can worry about the layout of a page or the 
wording of an email subject one day, and consider the impact of one-time 
versus monthly recurring sales the next. That’s partly because they’re 
not only trying to run a business, they’re also trying to discover the best 
business model.
To decide which metrics you should track, you need to be able to describe 
your business model in no more complex a manner than a lemonade stand’s. 
You need to step back, ignore all the details, and just think about the really 
big components.
When you reduce things to their basic building blocks in this way, you 
come up with only a few fundamental business models on the Web. 
Interestingly, all of them share some common themes. First, their aim is to 
grow (in fact, Paul Graham says that a focus on growth is the one defining 
attribute of a startup).* And second, that growth is achieved by one of Eric 
Ries’s fundamental Engines of Growth: an increase in stickiness, virality, 
or revenue.
Each business model needs to maximize the thrust from these three engines 
in order to flourish. Sergio Zyman, Coca-Cola’s CMO, said marketing is 
about selling more stuff to more people more often for more money more 
efficiently.†
Business growth comes from improving one of these five “knobs”:
• More stuff means adding products or services, preferably those you 
know your customers want so you don’t waste time building things 
they won’t use or buy. For intrapreneurs, this means applying Lean 
methods to new product development, rather than starting an entirely 
new company.
• More people means adding users, ideally through virality or word of 
mouth, but also through paid advertising. The best way to add users 
is when it’s an integral part of product use—such as Dropbox, Skype, 
or a project management tool that invites outside users outsiders—
*	
http://paulgraham.com/growth.html
†	 http://www.zibs.com/zyman.shtml

Chapter 7: What Business Are You In? 	
65
since this happens automatically and implies an endorsement from the 
inviting user.
• More often means stickiness (so people come back), reduced churn (so 
they don’t leave), and repeated use (so they use it more frequently). 
Early on, stickiness tends to be a key knob on which to focus, because 
until your core early adopters find your product superb, it’s unlikely 
you can achieve good viral marketing.
• More money means upselling and maximizing the price users will pay, 
or the revenue from ad clicks, or the amount of content they create, or 
the number of in-game purchases they make. 
• More efficiently means reducing the cost of delivering and supporting 
your service, but also lowering the cost of customer acquisition by 
doing less paid advertising and more word of mouth.
About Those People
Business models are about getting people to do what you want in return for 
something. But not all people are equal. The plain truth is that not every 
user is good for you.
• Some are good—but only in the long term. Evernote’s freemium model 
works partly because users eventually sign up for paying accounts, but 
it can take them two years to do so.
• Some provide, at best, free marketing, and while they may never become 
paying users, they may amplify your message or invite someone who 
will pay.
• Some are downright bad—they distract you, consume resources, spam 
your site, or muddy your analytics.
When you get a wave of visibility, few of the resulting visitors will actually 
engage with your product. Many are just driving by. As Vinicius Vacanti, co-
founder and CEO of Yipit, recalls in a blog post inspired by his company’s 
2010 launch:*
Was that our big launch? Why didn’t more people sign up? Why 
didn’t people complete the sign-up flow? Why weren’t people coming 
back? Now that people covered our startup, how are we supposed 
to get more press? Why aren’t our users pushing their actions to 
Facebook and Twitter? We got some users to invite their friends but 
why aren’t their friends accepting the invite?
*	
http://viniciusvacanti.com/2012/11/19/the-depressing-day-after-you-get-techcrunched/

66	
PART TWO: FINDING THE RIGHT METRIC FOR RIGHT NOW
The key here is analytics. You need to segment real, valuable users from 
drive-by, curious, or detrimental ones. Then you need to make changes that 
maximize the real users and weed out the bad ones. That may be as blunt as 
demanding a credit card up front—a sure way to reject curious users who 
don’t have any intention of committing or paying. Or it may be a subtler 
approach, such as not trying to reactivate disengaged users once they’ve 
been gone for a while.
If you’re a developer of a game that users play once, or an e-commerce site 
stocking rarely purchased items, that’s fine—just get your money up front. 
If you’re a SaaS provider with low incremental costs for additional users, 
freemium may work, as long as you clearly separate engaged from casual 
users. If you expect buyers to purchase from you often, you need to make 
them feel loved. You get the picture.
Segmenting real users from casual ones also depends on how much effort 
your users have to put into using the application. Some products collect 
information passively: Fitbit logs walking steps; Siri notices when you’ve 
arrived somewhere; Writethatname analyzes your inbox for new contacts. 
Users don’t have to do much, so it can be hard to tell if they’ve “checked 
out.” It’s easier to find disengaged users if they have to actively use the 
product.
Consider the aforementioned Fitbit, a tiny life-logging device that measures 
steps, from which it calculates calories burned, miles walked, stairs 
climbed, and overall activity.
Fitbit users can simply record their steps with a device in their pocket, they 
can use it to sync data to the company’s hosted application, they can visit the 
portal to see their statistics and share them with friends, they can manually 
enter sleep and food data to augment what’s collected passively, and they 
can buy the premium Fitbit offering to help them reach their health goals.
Each of these use models represents a different tier of engagement, and 
Fitbit could segment users across these five segments. And it should: it’s 
perfectly acceptable for a Fitbit user to only use the clip-on device to record 
the number of steps taken per day, without ever uploading that information, 
but as a result the company won’t be able to monetize that user beyond 
the initial purchase (through on-site ads, premium subscriptions, or selling 
aggregate user data, for example). The value of that user is significantly 
lower. Predicting revenues accurately relies on an understanding of how its 
different user segments employ the product.
As a startup, you have a wide range of payment and incentive models from 
which to choose: freemium, free trial, pay up-front, discount, ad-funded, 
and so on. Your choice needs to match the kind of segmentation you’re 
doing, the time it takes for a user to become a paying customer, how easy it 

Chapter 7: What Business Are You In? 	
67
is to use your service, and how costly an additional drive-by user is to the 
business.
Not all customers are good. Don’t fall victim to customer counting. Instead, 
optimize for good customers and segment your activities based on the kinds 
of customer those activities attract.
The Business Model Flipbook
A product is more than the thing you buy. It’s the mix of service, branding, 
fame, street cred, support, packaging, and myriad other factors you pay 
for. When you purchase an iPhone, you’re also getting a tiny piece of Steve 
Jobs’s persona.
In the same way, a business model is a combination of things. It’s what you 
sell, how you deliver it, how you acquire customers, and how you make 
money from them.
Many people blur these dimensions of a business model. We’re guilty of it, 
too. Freemium isn’t a business model—it’s a marketing tactic. SaaS isn’t a 
business model—it’s a way of delivering software. The ads on a media site 
aren’t a business model—they’re a way of collecting revenue.
Later in the book we’re going to outline six sample businesses. But before 
we do that, we want to talk about how we came up with them. Think of 
one of the flipbooks you had as a kid—the kind where you could combine 
different body parts on each page to make different characters.
You can build business models this way, but instead of heads, torsos, and 
feet, you have several aspects of a business: the acquisition channel, selling 
tactic, revenue source, product type, and delivery model.
• The acquisition channel is how people find out about you.
• The selling tactic is how you convince visitors to become users or 
users to become customers. Generally, you either ask for money or 
you provide some kind of scarcity or exclusivity—such as a time limit, 
a capacity limit, the removal of ads, additional functionality, or the 
desire to keep things to themselves—to convince them to act.
• The revenue source is simply how you make money. Money can come 
from your customers directly (through a payment) or indirectly (through 
advertising, referrals, analysis of their behavior, content creation, and 
so on). It can include transactions, subscriptions, consumption-based 
billing charges, ad revenue, resale of data, donations, and much more.
• The product type is what value your business offers in return for the 
revenue.

68	
PART TWO: FINDING THE RIGHT METRIC FOR RIGHT NOW
• The delivery model is how you get your product to the customer.
Figure 7-1 shows these five aspects, with a variety of models and examples 
for each one. Remember that this is only a set of examples—most businesses 
will rely on several acquisition channels, or experiment with different 
revenue models, or try various sales tactics.
Figure 7-1. Just like the flipbooks you had as a kid, with 
more words
Lots to Choose From
There is an abundance of “pages” you can put into the flipbook. The team 
at Startup Compass, a startup dedicated to helping companies make better 
business decisions with data, identifies 12 revenue models: advertising, 
consulting, data, lead generation, licensing fee, listing fee, ownership/
hardware, rental, sponsorship, subscription, transaction fee, and virtual 
goods. Venture capitalist Fred Wilson has a document listing a vast number 

Chapter 7: What Business Are You In? 	
69
of web and mobile revenue models, many of which are variants on six basic 
ones we’ll list later in the book.*
Startup Compass also suggests some “fundamental” financial models that 
combine several pages from the flipbook: search, gaming, social network, 
new media, marketplace, video, commerce, rental, subscription, audio, 
lead generation, hardware, and payments.
You can use these “pages” to create a back-of-the-napkin business model. For 
example, Figure 7-2 shows a sample business model flipbook for Dropbox.
Figure 7-2. Turning the flipbook pages to Dropbox
There’s another advantage of stating business models in a flipbook structure 
like this: it encourages lateral thinking. Each turn of a “page” is a pivot: 
what would it mean to offer Dropbox as a physical delivery? Or to charge 
up front for it? Or to rely on paid advertising?
Six Business Models
In the coming chapters, we’re going to look at six business models. Each 
model is a blend of these aspects, and we’ve tried to mix them up enough 
to give you a taste of some common examples. But just like a kid’s flipbook, 
there’s a huge variety: from the aforementioned list, there are over 6,000 
permutations, and our list of aspects isn’t by any means exhaustive.
*	
 https://hackpad.com/Ch2paBpUyIU#Web-and-Mobile-Revenue-Models

70	
PART TWO: FINDING THE RIGHT METRIC FOR RIGHT NOW
As if that weren’t confusing enough, you can employ several at once: 
Amazon is a transactional, physical-delivery, SEM (search engine 
marketing), simple-purchase retailer, but it’s also running sub-businesses 
such as user-generated content in the form of product reviews. So unlike 
those relatively simple children’s books, your business can quite easily be a 
many-headed monster.
In the face of this complexity, we’ve decided to keep our six business 
models simple. We’ll talk about several aspects of those businesses, and the 
metrics that matter most to companies of each sort. Think of it as opening 
the business model flipbook to a particular “page”—one in which you see 
elements of your own business.
• If you’re running an e-commerce business where you sell things to 
customers, turn to Chapter 8.
• If you’re delivering SaaS to users, turn to Chapter 9.
• If you’re building a mobile application and using in-app purchases to 
generate revenue, head to Chapter 10.
• If you’re creating content and making money from advertising, you’ll 
find details on media sites in Chapter 11.
• If your primary focus is getting your users to generate content on your 
platform the way Twitter, Facebook, or reddit do, turn to Chapter 12.
• If you’re building a two-sided marketplace where buyers and sellers can 
come together, check out Chapter 13.
Most businesses fall into one of these categories. Some won’t, but they 
have close parallels in the real world. A restaurant is transactional, like 
e-commerce; an accounting business offers a recurring service, like a SaaS 
company, and so on. Hopefully, you’ll find a model that’s close enough 
for you to learn important lessons about analytics and apply them to your 
business, as we review the stages of growth in Chapter 14 and beyond.
EXERCISE  |  Pick Your Business Model
In the following chapters we go through six sample business models. 
Find yours and write it down, then list all the metrics we define in that 
business model and see how well that aligns with what you’re tracking. 
For the metrics that you’re tracking, put down the values as they stand 
today, if you haven’t already. If your business overlaps on a couple of 
models (which isn’t uncommon), then grab metrics from each of those 
models and include them in this exercise.

Eric Ries, Series Editor 
THE LEAN STARTUP SERIES
Ash Maurya
RUNNING
LEAN
Iterate from Plan A to a Plan That Works
2nd Edition

	
121
You need not only the ability to visualize your customer lifecycle, but also 
the ability to measure it. 
The Need for Actionable Metrics
Even though the terrain before product/market fit is riddled with qualita-
tive learning, you still need actionable metrics to be able to visualize and 
measure your customer lifecycle. 
The objective before product/market fit is not as much about optimizing for 
conversion and all about quickly identifying and troubleshooting hot spots 
in your customer lifecycle.
Up until now, you have made a number of product decisions based on what 
customers have told you. It’s time to start measuring what they do.
What Is an Actionable Metric?
An actionable metric is one that ties specific and repeatable actions to 
observed results.
The opposite of actionable metrics are vanity metrics (like web hits or the 
number of downloads), which only serve to document the current state of 
the product but offer no insight (by themselves) into how you got there or 
what to do next.
A warning flag that indicates you might have a vanity metric on your hands 
is when the numbers don’t go anywhere but up and to the right every month.
C h a p t e r  1 0
Get Ready to Measure

122	
Chapter 10
Put another way, things like web hits or downloads are elements of sub-
funnels that make up the larger macro metric that matters, such as acquisi-
tion and activation.
It’s not what you measure, but how.
Understanding the difference between a vanity metric and a macro metric 
is the first step. In order to make your metrics actionable, you have to addi-
tionally make them accessible (through simple reports) and auditable (by 
being able to go behind the numbers). 
The three A’s of metrics are: Actionable, Accessible, and Auditable. 
—Eric Ries
I’ll go into some detail regarding how you do that in the next few sections, 
and then I’ll outline the steps for building a conversion dashboard.
Metrics Are People First
Eric Ries popularized the meme of “metrics are people too” for the purpose 
of making your metrics auditable, but I don’t believe it goes far enough.
While I am a big proponent of building a metrics-driven culture, there is a 
lot more to building a great product than numbers. For starters, you have 
to be able to go to the people behind the numbers.
The ideal conversion dashboard is part analytics and part customer rela-
tionship management.
Here’s why:
Metrics can’t explain themselves.
When you first launch a product or new feature, lots of things can 
and do go wrong. Metrics can help you identify where things are 
going wrong, but they can’t tell you why. You need to talk to people 
for that.
Don’t expect your users to come to you.
When users first use your product, they aren’t yet invested in your 
solution. They usually start out interested, but they are skeptical 
and their motivation decays quickly when things go wrong. In other 
words, you can’t expect users to promptly send in a bug report or 
pick up the phone and call you when they need help. They might do 
this, but it’s more likely that they’ll simply abandon your product and 
leave. The burden of quickly identifying problems and reaching out to 
your users is yours.

 Get Ready to Measure 	
123
Not all metrics are equal.
You’ve been very selective about who you’ve interviewed up until now. 
Once you launch, you won’t be able to control who uses your product. 
In addition to your target early adopters, you might be visited by bots, 
curious onlookers, and maybe even other undiscovered target custom-
ers. When you just look at numbers, you get an averaging effect that 
can be greatly skewed if you don’t yet have a lot of traffic (or the right 
traffic). You need a way to segment your metrics into different buckets.
Simple Funnel Reports Aren’t Enough
The funnel report is a powerful analysis tool. It’s simple to understand and 
lends itself well to visually depicting a conversion dashboard. But most 
third-party implementations of funnel reports are better suited at tracking 
micro-level funnels, like landing page conversions, than macro-level funnels, 
like your customer lifecycle.
Micro-level funnels are characterized by short lifecycle events typically 
measured in minutes, while macro-level funnels are characterized by long 
lifecycle events typically measured in days or months.
Simple funnel reports work by letting you specify a reporting period over 
which the number of key event occurrences are counted and visualized. 
This approach doesn’t work when the intervals between events fall outside 
the reporting period.
To illustrate these problems, let’s consider an example for a downloadable 
product that uses a 14-day trial.
Figure 10-1 shows an example of what a typical funnel report might look 
like.
Conversion Funnel for June
420 (70%)
ACQUISITION
375 (89%)
ACTIVATION
38 (10%)
REVENUE
Figure 10-1.  Typical funnel report

124	
Chapter 10
In Figure 10-1, the “acquisition” and “activation” events are short lifecycle 
events, while the “revenue” event is a long lifecycle event.
This poses the following issues:
Inaccurate conversion rates
The numbers reported for the revenue event most likely include pur-
chases made in May and exclude purchases made in July, which skews 
the overall conversion rates.
Dealing with traffic fluctuations
This skewing of numbers is further exacerbated by any fluctuations in 
traffic. If signups go down in July, your conversion rates will appear 
to be better when they may not be.
Measuring progress (or not)
Another problem with this sort of reporting is that your product is 
also constantly changing. It is hard, if not outright impossible, to tie 
back observed results (good or bad) to actions you took in the past, 
such as launching a new feature.
Segmenting funnels
Over time, you will probably run a split test or need to segment your 
funnel to isolate one group of customers from another. You can’t do 
this with a simple funnel report.
Say Hello to the Cohort
So, while funnels are a great visualization tool, funnels alone are not 
enough. The answer is to couple funnels with cohorts.
Cohort analysis is very popular in medicine, where it is used to study the 
long-term effects of drugs and vaccines:
A cohort is a group of people who share a common characteristic or 
experience within a defined period (e.g., are born, are exposed to a 
drug or a vaccine). Thus a group of people who were born on a day 
or in a particular period, say 1948, form a birth cohort. The com-
parison group may be the general population from which the cohort 
is drawn, or it may be another cohort of persons thought to have 
had little or no exposure to the substance under investigation, but 
otherwise similar. Alternatively, subgroups within the cohort may be 
compared with each other.1
1	 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cohort_study

 Get Ready to Measure 	
125
We can apply the same concept of the cohort or group to users and track 
their lifecycle over time. For our purposes, a cohort is any property that can 
be attributed to a user. The most common cohort used is “join date,” but 
as we’ll see, this could just as easily be the user’s “plan type,” “operating 
system,” “gender,” or something else.
Let’s see how cohort reports overcome the shortcomings with simple funnel 
reports.
The weekly cohort report (by join date) shown in Figure 10-3 was gener-
ated using the same data used in the simple funnel report earlier (which I 
show again in Figure 10-2 for comparison).
Conversion Funnel for June
420 (70%)
ACQUISITION
375 (89%)
ACTIVATION
38 (10%)
REVENUE
Figure 10-2.  Simple funnel report
Conversion Funnel for June
 June 8 Weekly Cohort
 June 1 Weekly Cohort
 June 15 Weekly Cohort
 June 22 Weekly Cohort
90 (70%)
ACQUISITION
78 (87%)
ACTIVATION
15 (19%)
REVENUE
100 (71%)
ACQUISITION
85 (85%)
ACTIVATION
16 (19%)
REVENUE
110 (70%)
ACQUISITION
100 (91%)
ACTIVATION
20 (20%)
REVENUE
120 (69%)
ACQUISITION
112 (93%)
ACTIVATION
25 (22%)
REVENUE
Figure 10-3.  Weekly cohort (by join date)
You’ll notice immediately that while the acquisition and activation con-
version numbers are close enough, the revenue conversion rates are very 
different.
Dealing with traffic fluctuations
Since all the events are tied back to the users that generated them, 
cohort reports handle fluctuations in traffic correctly.

126	
Chapter 10
Measuring progress (or not)
More important, though, the weekly cohort report visibly highlights 
significant changes in the metrics, which can then be tied back to spe-
cific activities done in a particular week.
Segmenting funnels
Since cohort reports are inherently built around grouping users, they 
can be used to segment your funnels longitudinally around any prop-
erty you track.
How to Build Your Conversion Dashboard
There are lots of third-party analytics products on the market. I have cut 
my teeth on Google Analytics, KISSmetrics, and Mixpanel. Each tool has 
its strengths and weaknesses, but unfortunately I haven’t found a single 
analytics solution (yet) that addresses all the needs I outlined earlier.2
Rather than getting bogged down on the specifics of each tool, I cover 
how I built my conversion dashboard from a functional perspective in the 
Appendix.
2	 USERcycle is my attempt at solving this problem.


	
17
If it disagrees with experiment, it’s wrong.
Dr. Richard Feynman
Traditionally, UX design projects are framed by requirements and deliver-
ables; teams are given requirements and expected to produce deliverables. 
Lean UX radically shifts the way we frame our work. Our goal is not to 
create a deliverable, it’s to change something in the world—to create an 
outcome. We start with assumptions instead of requirements. We create 
and test hypotheses. We measure to see whether we’ve achieved our desired 
outcomes. 
This chapter covers the main tool of outcome-focused work: the hypothesis 
statement. The hypothesis statement is the starting point for a project. It 
states a clear vision for the work and shifts the conversation between team 
members and their managers from outputs (e.g., “we will create a single 
sign-on feature”) to outcomes (e.g., “we want to increase the number of 
new sign-ups to our service”).
The hypothesis statement is a way of expressing assumptions in testable 
form. It is composed of the following elements:
Assumptions
A high-level declaration of what we believe to be true.
C h a p t e r  3 
Vision, Framing, and Outcomes

18	
Chapter 3 
Hypotheses
More granular descriptions of our assumptions that target specific 
areas of our product or workflow for experimentation.
Outcomes
The signal we seek from the market to help us validate or invali-
date our hypotheses. These are often quantitative but can also be 
qualitative. 
Personas
Models of the people for whom we believe we are solving a problem.
Features
The product changes or improvements we believe will drive the out-
comes we seek.
Let’s take a look at each one of these elements in further detail.
Assumptions
The first step in the Lean UX process is to declare your assumptions. Every 
project starts with assumptions, but usually we don’t explicitly acknowl-
edge this fact. Instead, we try to ignore assumptions, or worse, treat them 
as facts. 
Declaring your assumptions allows your team to create a common starting 
point. By doing this as a team, you give every team member—designer and 
nondesigner alike—the opportunity to voice his or her opinion on how best 
to solve the problem. Going through an assumptions declaration exercise 
gets everyone’s ideas out on the whiteboard. It reveals the team’s divergence 
of opinions and also exposes a broad set of possible solutions.
Declaring assumptions is the first step in the Lean UX process; see Figure 3-1.
Figure 3-1.  The Lean UX process, step 1

 Vision, Framing, and Outcomes 	
19
Method: Declaring Assumptions
Who
Declaring assumptions is a group exercise. Gather your team, making sure 
that all disciplines are represented, including any subject matter experts 
that could have vital knowledge about your project. For example, if you’re 
handling a frequent customer complaint, it might be beneficial to include 
a customer service representative from your call center. Call center reps 
speak to more customers than anyone else in the organization, and will 
likely have insight the rest of the team won’t. 
Preparation
Give the team advance notice of the problem they will be taking on to give 
everyone a chance to prepare any material they need, or do any related 
research, before you begin. Important things to prepare in advance include:
1.	Analytics reports that show how the current product is being used
2.	Usability reports that illustrate why customers are taking certain 
actions in your product
3.	Information about past attempts to fix this issue and their successes 
and failures
4.	Analysis from the business stakeholder as to how solving this problem 
will affect the company’s performance
5.	Competitive analyses that show how competitors are tackling the same 
issues
Method: Problem Statement
The team needs to have a starting point for the exercise. I’ve found it help-
ful to start with a problem statement. (See the template for this statement 
later in this section.) The problem statement gives your team a clear focus 
for their work. It also defines any important constraints. You need con-
straints for group work. They provide the guardrails that keep the team 
grounded and aligned.

20	
Chapter 3 
Problem statement template
Problem statements are made up of three elements: 
1.	The current goals of the product or system
2.	The problem the business stakeholder wants addressed (i.e., where the 
goals aren’t being met)
3.	An explicit request for improvement that doesn’t dictate a specific 
solution
Template
[Our service/product] was designed to achieve [these goals]. We 
have observed that the product/service isn’t meeting [these goals], 
which is causing [this adverse effect] to our business. How might we 
improve [service/product] so that our customers are more successful 
based on [these measurable criteria]?
For example, here is a problem statement we used to begin a project at  
TheLadders, an online recruiting firm where I worked. (You’ll see many 
more examples from TheLadders throughout this book.) 
Our service offers a conduit between job seekers and employers try-
ing to hire them. Through our service, employers can reach out to 
job seekers in our ecosystem with employment opportunities. We 
have observed that one critical factor affecting customer satisfaction 
is how frequently job seekers respond to employer messages. Cur-
rently, job seekers are replying to these communications at a very 
low rate. How might we improve the efficacy of our communication 
products, thus making employers more successful in their jobs and 
job seekers more satisfied with our service?
Problem statements are filled with assumptions. The team’s job is to dissect 
the problem statement into its core assumptions. You can do that by using 
the following business assumptions worksheet. Note that some teams—
especially teams starting from scratch—may not have a clear problem state-
ment. That’s okay. You can still try out the worksheet. You’ll just have to 
expect that it may take longer to reach consensus on some of the questions. 

 Vision, Framing, and Outcomes 	
21
Business Assumptions Worksheet
I like to use this worksheet (created by my partner Giff Constable) to facilitate the 
assumptions discussion. There are many ways to complete this worksheet. You can 
answer the questions as a team, simply discussing each answer. Or you can run a 
structured brainstorm/affinity mapping exercise for each question. However you do 
it, remember that it’s important to give everyone a chance to contribute. Also, don’t 
worry if you get to the end of the worksheet without clear agreement on all of the 
answers. The goal is to collect statements that reflect what you and your team think 
might be true. If you have strong disagreement on a point, capture the different 
perspectives.
Assumptions Worksheet
You may discover that some of these questions don’t apply to your project. That’s 
okay—you can adapt the questions to your situation as you see fit. If it’s early in the 
life of your product, you’ll probably spend more time on the business assumptions. 
If you’ve got a mature product, you’ll probably focus your energies on the user as-
sumptions. The point is to cast a broad net and look for assumptions in all dimen-
sions of your project.
When you’ve completed the worksheet, you will have a list of assumption state-
ments. Your next step is to prioritize these assumptions. 
Business Assumptions
1.	 I believe my customers have a 
need to _______ .
2.	 These needs can be solved with 
_______ .
3.	 My initial customers are (or will be) 
_______ .
4.	 The #1 value a customer wants to 
get out of my service is _______ .
5.	 The customer can also get these 
additional benefits _______ .
6.	 I will acquire the majority of my 
customers through _______ .
7.	 I will make money by _______ .
8.	 My primary competition in the 
market will be _______ .
9.	 We will beat them due to _______ .
10.	 My biggest product risk is _______ .
11.	 We will solve this through _______ .
12.	 What other assumptions do we have 
that, if proven false, will cause our 
business/project to fail? _______ .
User Assumptions
1.	 Who is the user? 
2.	 Where does our product fit in his 
work or life?
3.	 What problems does our product 
solve?
4.	 When and how is our product 
used?
5.	 What features are important?
6.	 How should our product look and 
behave?

22	
Chapter 3 
Prioritizing assumptions
The reason we declare assumptions at the start of our work is so that we 
can identify project risks. Once you have a list of assumptions, you need to 
figure out which ones are the riskiest so that you can work on them first. 
Lean UX is an exercise in ruthless prioritization. Understanding that you 
can’t test every assumption, how do you decide which one to test first? I like 
to create a chart like the one in Figure 3-2, and use it to map out the list of 
assumptions. 
The goal is to prioritize a set of assumptions to test based on their level 
of risk (i.e., how bad would it be if we were wrong about this?) and how 
much understanding we have of the issue. The higher the risk and the more 
unknowns involved, the higher the priority to test those assumptions. 
This doesn’t mean that assumptions that don’t make the first cut are gone 
forever. Keep a backlog of the other assumptions you’ve identified so you 
can come back to them and test them if and when it makes sense to do so.
Figure 3-2.  Prioritization matrix
Hypotheses
With your prioritized list of assumptions in hand, you’re ready to move to 
the next step: testing your assumptions. To do that, transform each assump-
tion statement into a format that is easier to test: a hypothesis statement. 
Generally, hypothesis statements use the format:
We believe [this statement is true].
We will know we’re [right/wrong] when we see the following feed-
back from the market:

 Vision, Framing, and Outcomes 	
23
[qualitative feedback] and/or [quantitative feedback] and/or [key 
performance indicator change].
You can see that this format has two parts. A statement of what you believe 
to be true, and a statement of the market feedback you’re looking for to 
confirm that you’re right. 
Expressing your assumptions this way turns out to be a really powerful 
technique. It takes much of the subjective and political conversation out of 
the decision-making process and instead orients the team toward feedback 
from the market. It also orients the team toward users and customers.
Subhypotheses: Breaking the Hypothesis Down 
into Smaller Parts
Sometimes—if not most of the time—you will discover that your hypoth-
esis is too big to test with one test. It will contain too many moving parts, 
too many subhypotheses. When this happens, I find it helpful to break the 
hypothesis down into smaller and more specific parts. Though there are 
many ways to do this, for product work I have found that this format is 
very helpful:
We believe that 
[doing this/building this feature/creating this experience]
for [these people/personas]
will achieve [this outcome].
We will know this is true when we see
[this market feedback, quantitative measure, or qualitative insight].
The first field is completed with the feature or improvement you’re consid-
ering making to your product. The second field describes exactly which of 
your target customers will benefit from this feature. The last field speaks 
to the benefit those customers will get from that feature. The final state-
ment ties it all together. This is the statement that determines whether your 
hypothesis was true. What market feedback will you look for to indicate 
that your idea is correct? This feedback could be a quantitatively measured 
usage of a feature, an increase in a business metric, or a qualitative assess-
ment of some sort. 

24	
Chapter 3 
It’s not all numbers! It’s worth noting that there’s been a lot of backlash in the design 
world against measurement-driven design. The argument is that by reducing every 
design decision to factors that can be measured, we take the delight and soul out 
of our products. I actually agree with this perspective, which is why I think it’s so im-
portant to include qualitative feedback in your success criteria. Are people delight-
ed by a design? Do they recommend your product to their friends? Do they tweet 
about it? When you look for success metrics, remember that it’s not all numbers.
Let’s take a look at an example of how this works by going back to the 
problem statement we looked at earlier from TheLadders:
Our service offers a conduit between job seekers and employers try-
ing to hire them. Through our service, employers can reach out to 
job seekers in our ecosystem with employment opportunities. We 
have observed that one critical factor affecting customer satisfaction 
is how frequently job seekers respond to employer messages. Cur-
rently, job seekers are replying to these communications at a very 
low rate. How can we improve the efficacy of our communication 
products, thus making employers more successful in their jobs and 
job seekers more satisfied with our service?
One assumption we make in this problem statement is that recruiters will 
use a new channel (TheLadders) to engage with candidates. This is not a 
proven fact and needs to be tested. How would we write the hypothesis for 
that statement? Let’s take our template and fill it out:
We believe that 
creating an efficient communication system within TheLadders’ 
product experience
for recruiters and employers
will achieve a higher rate of contact success and an increase in prod-
uct satisfaction.
We will know this is true when we see an increase in the number of 
replies from job seekers to recruiter contacts and an increase in the 
number of messages initiated by recruiters in our system.

 Vision, Framing, and Outcomes 	
25
The Importance of Benchmarks
Remember, none of your metrics will be meaningful if you don’t have a benchmark 
in place prior to writing your hypotheses. That benchmark—the current state of the 
metrics you’re using to determine your idea’s success—needs to be captured ahead 
of time to ensure that the team knows what it’s targeting.
Completing Your Hypothesis Statements
To create your hypothesis statements, start assembling the building blocks. 
Put together a list of outcomes you are trying to create, a definition of the 
personas you are trying to service, and a set of the features you believe 
might work in this situation. Once you’ve got all of this raw material, you 
can put them all together into a set of statements. Let’s take a closer look 
at each of these elements. 
Outcomes
When you’re creating hypotheses to test, you want to try to be very specific 
regarding the outcomes you are trying to achieve. I discussed earlier how 
Lean UX teams focus less on output (the documents, the drawings, even the 
products and features that we create) and more on the outcomes that these 
outputs create: can we make it easier for people to log into our site? Can we 
encourage more people to sign up? Can we encourage greater collaboration 
among system users?
Together with your team, look at the problem you are trying to solve. You 
probably have a few high-level outcomes you are hoping to achieve (e.g., 
increasing signups, increasing usage, etc.). Consider how you can break 
down these high-level outcomes into smaller parts. What behaviors will 
predict greater usage: more visitors to the site? Greater click-through on 
email marketing? Increasing number of items in the shopping cart? Some-
times it’s helpful to run a team brainstorm to create a list of individual 
outcomes that, taken together, you believe will predict the larger outcome 
you seek.
Figure 3-3 shows an example from Giff Constable, in which an executive 
leadership team brainstormed and then voted on which key performance 
indicators (KPIs) the company should pursue next. After consolidating to 
the list shown in the photo, each executive was given four M&Ms. As long 
as they managed not to eat their votes, these executives were able to vote 
(with candy) for each metric they felt was most important. Ties were bro-
ken by the CEO.

26	
Chapter 3 
Figure 3-3.  KPI prioritization with candy
Personas
Designers often create models called personas to represent the users of their 
systems. If your team already has a well-defined set of personas, the only 
thing you need to consider at this point is which ones you will be using in 
your hypothesis statements. If you don’t yet have personas, this section 
explains how to create personas for the Lean UX process.
Proto-Personas
Designers have long been advocates for the end user. Lean UX is no differ-
ent. As we make assumptions about our business and the outcomes we’d like 
to achieve, we still need to keep the user front and center in our thinking. 
Most of us learned to think about personas as a tool to represent what we 
learned in our research. It was often the case that we created personas as 
the output of lengthy, expensive research studies. The problem with perso-
nas that are created this way is the assumption that this is the only way to 
create personas, as well as the tendency to regard personas created through 
this process as untouchable because of all of the work that went into cre-
ating them.
In Lean UX, we change the order of operations in the persona process. 
When creating personas in this approach, we start with assumptions 
and then do research to validate our assumptions. Instead of spending 
months in the field interviewing people, we spend a few hours creating 

 Vision, Framing, and Outcomes 	
27
proto-personas. Proto-personas are our best guess as to who is using (or 
will use) our product and why. We sketch them on paper with the entire 
team contributing—we want to capture everyone’s assumptions. Then, as 
we learn from our ongoing research, we quickly find out how accurate our 
initial guesses are, and how we’ll need to adjust our target audience (and 
persona)—and thus our design.
Using Proto-Personas
A team we were working with in New York was building an app that improved the 
Community-Supported Agriculture (CSA) experience for New York City residents. 
CSA is a program that allows city residents to pool their money and purchase an 
entire season’s worth of produce from a local farmer. The farmer then delivers his 
crops, weekly, to the members of the CSA. Many subscribers to the CSA are men and 
women in their late twenties and early thirties who need to juggle a busy work life, 
an active social life, and a desire to participate in the CSA.
The team assumed that most CSA consumers were women who liked to cook. They 
spent about an hour creating a persona named Susan. But when they went out into 
the field to do research, they quickly learned that the overwhelming majority of 
cooks, and hence the potential users of their app, were young men. They returned 
to the office and revised their persona to create Timothy (Figure 3-4).
Figure 3-4.  Proto-persona example
Timothy proved to be a far more accurate target user. The team didn’t waste 
any more time refining ideas for the wrong audience. They were now focused 
on an audience that, while still not perfect, was far more correct than their initial  
assumptions. 

28	
Chapter 3 
Persona Format
We like to sketch proto-personas on paper using a hand-drawn quadrant, 
as in Figures 3-5 and 3-6 (start by folding a sheet of paper into four boxes). 
The top-left quadrant holds a rough sketch of the persona and his or her 
name and role. The top-right box holds basic demographic information. 
Try to focus on demographic information that predicts a specific type of 
behavior. For example, there may be cases in which the persona’s age is 
totally irrelevant yet their access to a specific device, such as an iPhone, will 
completely change the way they interact with your product.
Figure 3-5.  Blank persona template
The bottom half of the proto-persona is where we put the meat of the infor-
mation. The bottom-left quadrant contains the user’s needs and frustration 
with the current product or situation, the specific pain points your product 
is trying to solve, and/or the opportunity you’re trying to address. The 
bottom-right quadrant contains potential solutions for those needs. You’ll 
use the bottom-right quadrant to capture feature and solution ideas. 

 Vision, Framing, and Outcomes 	
29
Figure 3-6.  Completed persona template
Persona Creation Process
As with the other elements of the hypothesis statement, we like to start 
the persona creation process with a brainstorm. Team members offer up 
their opinions on who the project should be targeting and how that would 
affect each potential user’s use of the product. Once the brainstorming is 
complete, the team should narrow down the ideas to an initial set of three 
or four personas they believe are most likely to be the target audience. 
Try to differentiate the personas around needs and roles rather than by 
demographic.

30	
Chapter 3 
Features
Once you have a list of outcomes in mind and have focused in on a group 
of users, it’s time to start thinking about what tactics, features, products, 
and services you can put in place to achieve those desired outcomes. Typi-
cally, everyone on the team has a strong opinion at this stage—after all, 
features are the most concrete things we work with, so it’s often easiest for 
us to express our ideas in terms of features. Too often, though, our design 
process starts when someone has a feature idea, and we end up working 
backward to try to justify the feature. In Lean UX, features exist to serve 
the needs of the business, the customer, and the user.
Feature Brainstorming Process
Employing the same techniques described earlier, we like to create feature 
lists by brainstorming them as a team. We’re looking for features we think 
will drive customer behavior in the desired direction. Have each team mem-
ber write each idea, using a thick marker, on a sticky note. When time is 
up, ask everyone to post their notes to the wall and have the group arrange 
them into themes.
Assembling Your Subhypotheses
With all of your raw material created, you’re ready to organize this material 
into a set of testable hypotheses. We like to create a table like the one in 
Figure 3-7 and then complete it by using the material we’ve brainstormed.
As you write your hypotheses, consider which persona(s) you’re serving 
with your proposed solutions. It’s not unusual to find solutions that serve 
more than one persona at a time. It’s also not unusual to create a hypothesis 
in which one feature drives more than one outcome. When you see that 
happening, split the hypothesis into two parts—you want each statement to 
refer to only one outcome. The important thing to remember in this whole 
process is to keep your ideas specific enough so that you can create mean-
ingful tests to see if each of your ideas hold water.
Figure 3-7.  Hypothesis creation table

 Vision, Framing, and Outcomes 	
31
When your list of hypotheses is complete, you’re ready (finally!) to move 
on to the next step: design. If you’ve done the process to this point with 
your whole team (and I strongly recommend that you do), you’ll be in great 
position to move forward together. This process is a very effective way to 
create a shared understanding and shared mission across your whole team.
Conclusion
In this chapter, we discussed how we can reframe our work in terms of 
outcomes, which is is a vitally important Lean UX technique: framing our 
work with outcomes frees us (and our teams) to search for the best solu-
tions to the problem at hand. We also looked at the process of declaring 
outcomes. In order to achieve these, we start with the project’s problem 
statements and then acknowledge our assumptions, then transform these 
assumptions into hypotheses. We also showed how to write hypothesis 
statements that capture intended features, audience, and goals, and that are 
specific enough to be tested. You’ll end up with statements that will serve as 
the roadmap for the next step of the Lean UX process: collaborative design.
In the next chapter, we define collaborative design and how it differs from 
traditional product design. We’ll discuss specific tools and techniques that 
empower teams to design together and demonstrate how designing together 
is the beginning of the hypothesis validation process.


O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
6/15/2015 
Chapter 2 
Business Matters 
Introduction 
Smart data practices are key when it comes to having a strategic impact in any business.  
If you have a great user experience, then you have the foundation of a great business. 
User centered design and activity data analytics are both focused on working out whether 
your idea of a successful, rewarding and repeat-worthy experience aligns with the views 
of your intended or current customer base. In a monopoly environment, a business can 
offer unsatisfying service and still seem apparently successful. Thankfully, today’s 
competitive landscape means the company that provides a better service will win.   
Data capture, management and analysis is the best way to bridge between design, user 
experience and business relevance. A data aware approach to design is a good foundation 
for cross-functional collaboration within your business, whether large, medium or small.  
It’s also an excellent way to have impact upon and create alignment between design and 
business goals, focusing on the critical part of any business: providing the best possible 
service to your customers and clients, understanding their goals and concerns, and 
addressing their frustrations. A user centered design practice centralizes empathy and 
customer understanding, and as such, is best positioned to also work to define and design 
the right measures that accurately reflect the customer experience.  
Being user focused and data aware means you and the people you work with should also 
be actively contributing to the creation of meaningful business goals that are focused on 
the greatest asset of any business: users, clients and customers.  
Our bottom line: don’t just design the user experience, sketch out what data you will need 
that will help you test your design. Design the data capture, analysis and questions as part 
of your design process. Be clear about the data that will best help you measure and 
articulate the effect of your design on your customers and then through that to the 
business.  
In this chapter we will give you one take, based on our experiences of how data in 
combination with design can impact business.    
 
1 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
6/15/2015 
Thinking about your business  
As you can imagine, the kind of business you’re in will influence how you measure the 
health of your business. Business “health” is an extremely complex concept, that includes 
myriad different measures, that roll up into a “bottom line” that defines whether the 
business is viable or not. Such measures include engineering analytics (service delivery 
and robustness metrics), business analytics (which in the end is about balancing profit 
and loss), markets and competitiveness, and so on. Ultimately though, whether you are 
focused on one audience or many, the dynamic quality of the market today means our 
focus, what customers – “users” – do, is key.  
We kick off this chapter by first asking you to take a step back and to reflect on the 
fundamentals of your business. We ask three questions in this section:   
1) What kind of business are you?   
2) What is your revenue model?  
3) How mature is your business? 
Your answers to these questions will determine the kind of data that you will want to 
collect. 
What kind of business are you in? 
The data you collect, the measures you define and the metrics you track will, to some 
extent, depend on the industry or space that you operate within. Though not a 
comprehensive list of business types, the following are some of the most common.  
• 
Transactional – Companies are on selling goods to customers or creating a 
marketplace. Well-known examples are Amazon, eBay and Zappos.com. 
• 
User Generated Content (UGC) – User generated content sites often, but not 
always, use social networks for content distribution.  UGC sites rely on their 
users to create content that is stored, disseminated, annotated and mined by the 
service.  That content might take many different forms whether it’s video, blogs, 
audio files, images, commentary, and so on.  The best known examples here are 
Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, Vimeo, Instagram and Flickr.  
• 
Media Sites – Companies that provide access to curated media, such as news, 
music and video. Examples here are Hulu, Spotify and the NY Times.com.   
• 
Software as a Service (SAAS) – Companies that provide a service or software 
for their customers, hosted by the company. Examples here include 
Salesforce.com, Intuit, Squarespace and Zendesk. 
Once you have decided what kind of business you are in, looking at what competitors and 
others in your industry value will also provide you with important clues as to what might 
be of greatest value and thus what to focus on. 
What is your revenue model? 
The next question to ask yourself is about your revenue model.  What is the primary 
source of revenue for your business? Some of the most common models are: 
• 
Production  - the primary source of revenue comes from selling goods.  
 
2 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
6/15/2015 
 
3 
• 
Subscription – your company collects a recurring fee for services or access to 
content and tools.  Factors to consider here are how often does the subscription 
renew? Within the subscription model, some companies will use a Freemium 
pricing model where the service is free, but customers might pay for premium or 
proprietary features or functionality.  
• 
Advertising – the primary source of income will be from advertising revenue.  
Advertisers might be charged for the number of times that their ads are seen or 
based on the number of times that their ad is clicked.  You might also get 
revenue from advertisers that are looking to get exposure through sponsorship. 
• 
Pay as you go – customers will pay for access to a service or content on a one 
off basis, as needed.  
How mature is your business? 
In addition to being thoughtful about the kind of business you are in, you’ll also want to 
take into consideration the stage of growth your business is in.  The maturity (or 
immaturity) of your business and your customer base will have a critical role in the way 
you apply a data aware framework. Here are some of the key considerations at various 
phases1: 
• 
Young businesses – in the earliest stages of a business, you’ll be most 
concerned with establishing a presence and acquiring customers.  You’ll be 
focused on ensuring that you have a viable business so market fit might also be a 
consideration at this stage. A solid foundation between your product and the 
market is essential before scaling a business, and the best way to test this fit is to 
do carefully designed user testing of your product to go alongside more 
traditional marketing analytics.  
• 
Mid stage businesses – after establishing that you have enough demand from 
customers for your product or service and that you are somewhat stable enough 
to keep these customers, your focus in this stage may switch from growth and 
acquiring customers to optimizing the relationship between your revenue and 
expenses.  In order to do this, you will need to find out what aspects of your 
product or service offering is returning robust and reliable results, and if there 
are opportunities for growth. 
• 
Mature businesses  - if your business is at a fairly mature state then it’s likely 
that you are more concerned with retention of your customers, protecting them 
and not losing ground to new competitors. In order to do this, you will need to 
find out which aspects of your product are not working as well as which are and 
ask yourself, where am I losing potential or actual customers. 
With all three of the areas we outline above, you will find that placing yourself into any 
of those groups is not clear cut. Some UGC businesses might also have a transactional 
component to them. You might be a new business, but that doesn’t mean that you 
shouldn’t care about retaining the customers you have.   
                                                           
1 https://hbr.org/1983/05/the-five-stages-of-small-business-growth 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
6/15/2015 
Business influences on data, measures and metrics 
Naturally, the kind of business you’re in has a huge impact on what metrics and data it 
makes sense for you to collect, manage and report. The considerations of the businesses 
are very different across different industries, but there may be overlap. Customer/user 
engagement, for example, is something that all businesses care about.  
A basic engagement measure is the Active User (AU). The idea is to capture how many 
people use your product or service on a daily or monthly basis. Business reports often 
include summaries of Daily Active Users (DAU) and Monthly Active Users (MAU), 
potentially across many categories if the nature of the business is complex. Of course, 
defining “active” can get complicated. It can vary dramatically from company to 
company, and can change within a company over time. For example, to Wikipedia, an 
active user may be someone who contributed to more than one article. According to the 
Wall Street Journal, Twitter considers a user active if they log in once a month. For a 
social platform, an active visitor is someone who has come back to the platform at least 
once within 30 days. For an ecommerce platform, a metric like active browsing 2 days 
out of 7 may be the metric the business considers successful. For a news media outlet, 
active engagement with stories once a day may be sufficient.  
Drilling deeper we can define “engagement” metrics that address and measure a broader 
spectrum of user activities. The amount of a user profile that is filled out could be one 
such measure. Engagement for a social network may mean number of contacts, numbers 
of connections or communications made with those contacts, time spent on site, volume 
of content posted, produced and/or consumed and so on. For an ecommerce site, 
engagement means transactions (purchases, sales, returns, refunds and so on). For a 
business with an online presence where revenue is drawn from advertising, clicks (which 
are a proxy for interest piqued) and conversions (transactions that include purchase for 
example) may be the best metric of success.  
The definition and characterization of “active” for business health and longevity is a 
prime example of a metric that needs user centered design thinking, and design expertise 
in the creation of measures that will deliver meaningful results and therefore a 
meaningful and business relevant set of metrics.  
Business types: positive and negative measurements 
Let’s take a more structured look at the kinds of things that different businesses will 
measure.  This is not meant to be a comprehensive list, but rather a structure that you 
might use to consider what measurements are key for your business.  In this structure, 
we’re looking at positive and negative measurements. Positive measurements are the 
factors that the businesses are looking to see trend upward and have positive impact on 
the business. Negative measurements are correlated to negative impact on the business 
and are things that businesses would look to reduce. 
Table 2-1 
Type of business 
Example Positive 
Measurements 
Example Negative 
Measurements 
Transactional 
• Number of products viewed 
• Conversions (emails given, 
• Bounce rate (number of 
visitors who come to your 
 
4 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
6/15/2015 
shopping 
cart 
purchases, 
etc.) 
site but leave without doing 
anything further) 
• Failed purchases (note that 
failures might happen for a 
number of reasons – on the 
customer side (like a failed 
credit card) or on your side 
(like poor usability or an 
error)) 
User 
Generated 
Content  
• Viral growth 
• Content submissions 
• New visitors 
• Attrition 
• Spam/Bad content 
 
Media Sites 
• Time engaged with content 
• Virality of content 
• Number of ads seen (in an 
ad supported model) 
• Abandonment 
• Disengagement 
Software 
as 
a  
Service (SAAS) 
• Retention 
• Productivity 
• Performance 
• Churn 
• Support calls 
• Refunds 
Businesses overlap in various respects. To more closely illustrate how one might use the 
framework above, let’s focus on businesses that centers on user generated content. UGC 
product metrics are primarily driven by audience and behavior.  Audience numbers are 
relatively pervasive across different UGC sites, whereas behavioral metrics tend to be 
unique to the business being built.  For example, many UGC sites have a SaaS-like 
component–that is, an area where users complete tasks such as writing and publishing a 
story, uploading an image, posting a video, and so on. However, the SaaS component of 
these sites merely supports the discussion and spread of content.  Users creating content 
for other users is what sets these sites apart from a SaaS only business.  
A business that is focused on user generated content aims to increase the number of 
content submissions from their users. The primary question is “How can we get our users 
to submit more content?”  As a designer, you’ll be trying to solve this business 
imperative through design, including understanding the trade-offs such as how increasing 
the number of content submissions may result in a decrease in quality and a poorer user 
experience. As a designer, you’ll therefore need to craft a solution that encourages people 
to submit more content while keeping the content at an acceptable level of quality and 
ensuring content relevance. Being able to articulate and ultimately measure how your 
design work directly impacts the unique goals of your business is one of the key benefits 
of taking a data aware approach to design.   
 
 
5 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
6/15/2015 
 
6 
Business types: critical moments 
Depending on your business, there are also differences in what is and what is not critical 
to measure and monitor. It is useful to think about whether your product or service is 
critical for your primary target user group’s activities. An emergency helpline for 
example need to be always available; it is critical that the helpline does not have “down 
time”. A discretionary use, social sharing platform may be able to afford a small amount 
of down-time, without the results being critically negative for the users. However you're 
your business is a transaction-based marketplace, where personal allegiance is exceeded 
by customer satisfaction with an efficient transaction, the longer you have downtime, the 
more likely your audience will go elsewhere. The point here is that, what is critical to 
your business is where your resources will be allocated, and where your most fine 
grained and nuanced data gathering may need to be.  
Take for example, the differences between what mattered to businesses and services like 
Twitter and Gmail in their early days. As we all know, critical for most businesses is “up 
time”, that is making sure your services are available – a key part of the engineering 
analytics we mentioned above. The worst thing that can happen is when the services go 
down, that is are not available. We have all clicked through to a URL to see an error, and 
it is jarring.  
When Flickr, the photo sharing site goes down, a playful image is shown with the 
message “Flickr is having a massage.”, intended to let users know someone is working on 
the problem and the site will be available again soon. The message is personal and 
personable. In the early days of Twitter, the platform went down very, very often.  The 
root cause came down to scale – too many people trying to use the product at once.  The 
underlying technology couldn’t support it, which lead to many users getting error 
messages.  The error message was a picture created by Yiying Lu, later dubbed the “Fail 
Whale” (see figure 2-1) by twitter user @qrush (Nick Quaranto)2. Biz Stone, the co-
founder of Twitter told an NPR interviewer that their idea was to convey “that it’s a big 
job but we’re all working together to do it." It was intentionally fun, but not “so jokey”. 
                                                           
2 https://twitter.com/qrush/status/822613478 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
6/15/2015 
 
7 
 
Figure 2-1 The whale… 
 
As a result, when Twitter used to go down, many people seemed to be delighted.  Shouts 
of glee would hit walls on Facebook when Twitter went down.  Business Insider, The 
Next Web, BBC News, Times Magazine and Read Write Web are all examples of 
publications that have called the Fail Whale “Iconic” at least once.3  In short, people love 
the fail whale, so much so that it has been the inspiration for jewelry4., 
 
 
Figure 2-2 – Tweets from when Twitter was down. 
 
 
Figure 2-3 Tweets from when Gmail is down. 
By contrast, when a service like Gmail goes down, even in the early days, it caused 
anxiety. This is because they’re two fundamentally different kinds of business.  Although 
it is now a central source of news and therefore more critical, Twitter started as a 
recreational, user generated content business.  People’s livelihood generally does not 
depend on a UGC or social networking service especially for those in early stages, so 
downtime is more easily tolerated.   
                                                           
3 https://www.google.ca/search?q=fail+whale+iconic&oq=fail+whale+iconic 
4 https://www.etsy.com/ca/listing/60239227/hoist-fail-whale-necklace 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
6/15/2015 
SaaS products like gmail are products people rely on.  When it goes down, it means 
someone can’t do something that they’ve generally paid (or are getting paid) to do.   
The moral here isn’t that it’s more fun to work at Twitter than at gmail. The moral is that 
SaaS companies care about things like performance and user experience.  Social 
networks care about completely different things, like sharing, return visits, or reducing 
spam content.   
Metrics for different business stages 
Drilling a little deeper into the stage where you are in your business, one of the most 
common frameworks for growth is looking at the “customer funnel” through what have 
been called “AARRRC” metrics. These letters stand for Acquisition, Activation, 
Retention, Referral, Revenue and Conversion. In detail:.   
• 
Acquisition – How well is your business doing at acquiring new users? If your 
business is relatively new, then you might be most focused on building up this 
part of your customer funnel – acquiring new users to your service or product.  
o 
Examples of typical acquisition metrics include – number of new 
users/day or week, number of sign-ups, etc.  
• 
Activation -  How do you know if the user you just acquired is really going to 
stick around?  What do you measure to gain confidence that they are going to 
actively use your product or service on an ongoing basis?   
o 
When measuring activation, a good way to approach it is to think of the 
key value that you want to make sure your customers get exposure to in 
their first usage of your product or service.  Usually this gives you a 
great way to measure activation: Is it sharing something to another 
person?  Is it registering more of their friends?  Is it playing a song or 
watching a video?  Is it uploading something to your service?   
• 
Retention - How do you understand if your users will be coming back to you on 
a regular basis and that you are creating a sustainable business?  Retention is 
fundamentally about continuing to build your user base, retaining your 
customers. There’s no sustainable way to grow your customer base if you have a 
leaky bucket and therefore retention is very often a key metric for many 
companies.   
o 
Typical retention metrics might look at how many new users remain 
active 2 weeks after first using your service/product or 1 month after 
using your service/product.  You may want to tie the timing of your 
retention numbers directly to the length of your trial period. 
• 
Referral – this looks at how many people are referring your product or service 
to others.  It’s a good predictor of growth and typical metrics looked at here 
might be shares, viral coefficient or NPS (net promoter score). 
• 
Revenue – this is the fairly obvious measurement of how much revenue your 
product or service is generating.  In as much as most businesses aspire to 
eventually be self-sustainable, revenue is a key metric to track. You might look 
at revenue growth over different periods of time. 
• 
Conversion - This is most relevant for businesses that have a free trial or a 
freemium model and it refers to converting your customers from a free customer 
to a paying one.  With conversion metrics, you may want to consider what time 
period you’d like your customers to convert in - do you want them to convert as 
 
8 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
6/15/2015 
fast as possible or is it ok if they are a free customer for a long time before 
deciding to pay?   
 
Depending on the kind of business you’re in and the maturity of your company, some of 
these stages in the customer funnel will have different levels of importance for you.  
Good data-driven decision making isn’t even possible at certain stages in the 
development of a company. Early-stage companies have, in most cases, far more pressing 
issues than split testing the color of a button.  They may also not have access to good, 
robust and reliable data at scale.  They may also be designing their metrics as they go or 
want to take leaps of creative inspiration that go counter to what the data say.  In some 
cases, the data may also be focused around a local minima because the company simply 
hasn’t been around long enough, or tried enough divergent variations to find their ‘sweet 
spot’ yet.  
For example, if you are part of a start up that just launched you are most likely focused 
on getting new users and establishing your customer base.  In this situation you would 
focus on acquisition and activation.  The data that you collect and the kinds of 
experiences that you create will most likely be around trying to find insight into how you 
can improve this early part of the customer funnel.   
If you’re part of a company that has been around for a long time and has a substantial 
user base you’re probably thinking about how you can retain the customers that you’ve 
worked so hard to get. You’ll want to collect information about the retention and 
conversion sections of the customer experience as well and you’ll want to understand 
what is working or not working for your customers.  By understanding what data you’re 
using to monitor the health of your business you’ll be able to align your design thinking 
to the very same problem space and metrics that you’re using to judge your business on. 
 
 
Having a solid understanding of the different metrics that you can influence at the 
different stages of the customer funnel can also give you a perspective on the longer term 
consequences of your design.  As an example - let’s say that you are trying to optimize 
your sign up flow.   Right now, you ask customers to fill in their password twice to 
confirm that they’ve entered it correctly.  However, you believe that every extra step (no 
matter how seemingly small) causes friction for your user that you want to eliminate - so 
you devise a design that doesn’t have the field to repeat the password collection.  You 
might find that this actually works, and you are getting more users to complete the flow 
so the metric of  # of users who sign up increases.  However, if you think about the full 
customer funnel, you might start to find that the users who didn't have to enter their 
password were more likely to call customer support to retrieve their password or that they 
didn’t come back because they couldn’t remember it and didn’t bother to return.  In this 
situation, you may have successfully increased one part of the funnel, but without 
considering the full set of metrics that are relevant to your business you may choose 
metrics that satisfy a local goal but harm the overall business goal.  This is why it’s key 
to plan ahead and make sure that you understand how the suite of metrics related to you 
business relate to each other and potentially interact.   
 
9 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
6/15/2015 
Other relevant business metrics 
There are other business metrics that are really important to track when driving a holistic, 
user centered data aware design framework.  Two worth highlighting are: 
• 
Net Promoter Score (NPS), which we mentioned in brief above 
• 
Customer Lifetime Value (CLV) 
 
Net promoter score – the net promoter score or NPS has become a fairly common way 
for companies to measure satisfaction and the general sentiment that their customers 
have.  It’s based on the question, “How likely are you to recommend this service/product 
to a friend or colleague.” This is measured on a 10 point scale.  The score is calculated by 
taking the number of promoters of a brand or company (those who rate it 9 or 10) and 
subtracting the percentage of people who are detractors (those who rate it 0-6).  
Customer Lifetime Value – the customer lifetime value helps you to measure the 
amount of profit that your company will derive from a customer.  CLV is a metric that 
many companies will optimize for by ensuring that they are attracting and retaining the 
customers that will provide the most value for them in the long term. 
As businesses today develop ecosystems, it’s going to be increasingly important that you 
think about all the inputs from various devices, locations and experiences that contribute 
to the full picture of how your business is doing and what is important to that business.  
Collecting data from a single source (whether it be a platform or a market) will not give 
you an accurate impression of the health of your business and you might find yourself 
optimizing for the wrong things.  The emergence of the internet of things and new cross-
device and platform experiences means that we will be generating new sources and new 
forms of measure and metrics that should all be taken into account when considering the 
input to your designs.   
Focused metrics 
It is important to be clear about what are, for your business, key metrics that you and your 
cross functional partners can focus on driving. As we’ve pointed out in this chapter, being 
aware and recognizing all the variables around the type of metrics you may care about 
from a business point of view can help. But it’s easy to get caught up in a long list of 
everything that you could possibly measure and care about  - so make sure that you have 
carefully selected the metrics that you think are most representative of what you need to 
focus on for your business to be successful and that you are not picking too many.  Be 
disciplined about identifying what you need to improve.  Everyone has a limited amount 
of time and resources, so you will want to keep the team focused on driving the metrics 
that really matter and not getting caught up in moving things that aren’t key or won’t 
impact your business.   
These metrics should be fairly stable; resist changing them month over month.  
• 
You should ALWAYS be monitoring and measuring your company key metrics.  
Tracking these metrics on everything you do will help to keep you thinking 
about the larger picture so that you don’t fall into the trap of over optimizing for 
one piece of the puzzle rather than the whole thing. 
 
10 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
6/15/2015 
• 
Ask yourself: Are you selecting metrics that get you to focus on the right things?  
The metrics that you pick to focus on will affect your behavior and the kind of 
solutions you design.  If you focus on click through of a button, you will make 
designs that only focus on the button.  If you focus on improving the retention 
metric, you will think of designs that improve the overall user experience.   
• 
Some companies have tried the exercise of having “one key metric” – the 
bottom line metric that if that was the one thing to be measured it would reflect 
the business health. Think about what would be your businesses’ one metric and 
how you might design your experiences to impact that metric.  
Why spend so much time on metrics? 
There are three key reasons why we think metrics matter.   
1. Alignment 
2. Focus 
3. Consistency (for future learning) 
Ensuring that you and anyone else you work with are all in agreement about which 
metrics matter most for your business will keep you aligned.   There are many times (not 
just in a data aware environment) where teams can get distracted or waste time because 
they don’t realize that they are solving different problems.  By having a clearly defined 
and objective measurement of success like a specific set of metrics - it can help to ensure 
that you and your partners are aligned and have the same goal.  You have agreement that 
you are trying to impact the same thing in your business.   
Having commonly defined metrics can also help to ensure that you stay focused.  It’s 
very easy to think of additional things that you want to change about your customer 
experience.  You start to layer in feature after feature and improvement after 
improvement, without being disciplined about making sure that those improvements tie 
back clearly to your original goal. 
Finally, by having clear metrics you also allow for consistency over time.  Hopefully, you 
aren’t changing the metrics for success all the time.  Occasionally these metrics will 
change, but ideally, that’s the exception and not the rule.  This way, if you are working 
on a series of explorations and you have a consistent set of metrics that you’re using to 
measure them against, then you actually get to understand what kind of impact (delta) 
you can expect to get from certain kinds of design changes.  You can compare results 
from one design to another.  Metrics should provide you with a solid framework for 
ideation.  By knowing what metrics you want to affect, you should be focusing on the 
kinds of ideas that will actually have impact on the things you measure and consider to be 
important.  By having all of your design explorations evaluated by the SAME metrics 
you can compare their impact against each other and have a good baseline so that all of 
your ideas are being judged on a level playing field. 
Summary/Key Takeaways 
Understanding your business and the maturity of your company (early stage, growing or 
established) are critical factors in determining the measures and the metrics that will best 
reflect how your designs are impacting your business goals.  
 
11 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
6/15/2015 
Common metrics and measures help to align and focus your work, and ultimately they 
should tie directly back to the user experience.  It is important to think carefully about the 
customer journey with your product(s) for different user groups. What is the customer 
experience that you’re trying to drive and how does that relate to some of the business 
metrics that your company cares about?  
You want to make sure that everyone in your team agrees ahead of time on how you are 
measuring the success or failure of your design.  It’s important to iron out any differences 
at the beginning of your project and to continue to build alignment at every step of the 
process.  That means aligning on the key metrics at the company and business level.   
• 
To do this you’ll talk to key stakeholders, CEOs and other people who craft the 
product vision.  It’s best if you actually do this together so that you have 
complete buy in and understanding of what the key metrics are at all levels of 
your organization.  If you were to share the metrics you think are most important 
back to the CEO will he or she agree that those metrics are an accurate way to 
measure their vision?   
• 
It’s also good to build alignment with not just the top people in your 
organization, but also the people who are building the actual product.  If they 
buy into the way you are measuring success then they will make better tradeoffs 
and push for the right decisions as the product gets built.   Once you’ve built 
alignment on the key metrics – it’s not likely you’ll need to do this again unless 
your business model shifts. 
Finally and critically, you should always try to put yourself in a situation where a good 
customer experience will be reflected in good metrics. When you start to find that you are 
creating bad designs in order to move your metrics you should question the metrics you 
need to stop and assess what it is that you are doing wrong.  As a designer, you are 
advocating for the customer experience first and foremost, a successful business should 
be giving its customers a great experience. 
Questions to ask yourself 
• 
What kind of business is your company in? 
o 
What are the positive and negative metrics that matter most to your 
business? 
• 
What stage of maturity is your business at?  
o 
Are you starting up (i.e. acquiring new users?) or are you a more 
established business and care about retaining existing users? Or is it 
some  combination of those two? 
• 
What does success look like and how are you measuring it? 
• 
Who is the audience you hope to affect?  
o 
What do you know about them as a demographic?  Their habits? 
• 
What are you trying to accomplish? What is your goal and what does success 
look like?   
o 
What is the customer behavior that you want to encourage? 
o 
Are you trying to directly increase a metric that is important to your 
business (e.g. getting more people to sign up, getting your customers to 
return more often to your product?) 
o 
What will you do to encourage the user behavior that you are seeking?   
 
12 

O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
 
6/15/2015 
 
13 
• 
How are you measuring success?  
o 
Which metrics are you going to look at to understand if the impact you 
hope to make through design is the right one or will have a big enough 
impact? 
o 
How or will you measure or factor in user sentiment?  Will you use 
surveys, focus groups, and interviews? 
• 
How do the various measures and metrics relate to each other?  
o 
How are you ensuring that a positive result in a specific arena (e.g., 
password setting) does not have down-stream negative consequences 
on the business? 
o 
How do your behavioral and usage measures relate to the attitudinal 
measures reflected in your customer satisfaction surveys, NPS surveys 
and user verbatims? 
• 
If you had just one metric to measure the health of your business, what would it 
be? 
All of the above questions are implicated by the business you’re in and the way you 
approach gathering data on your design and your experience will have clear impact on 
your business. In Chapter 4, we’ll revisit a number of these questions as we begin to offer 
some more specific and practical advice about how you apply a data aware framework to 
design. 
 


Chapter 2 
Realizing the Potential of Design 
 
Companies are investing in design in order to manage the software-driven complexity of their 
businesses. There’s a sense that design makes things ‘better,’ by making them more attractive, 
more desirable, and easier to use. However, many, and probably most, of the people 
responsible for bringing design into their organizations have only a rudimentary understanding 
of what it can deliver. They perceive design primarily as aesthetics, styling, and appearances.  
 
We ended the last chapter with a Steve Jobs quote about design, so let’s begin this one with 
perhaps his most famous statement on the matter: 
“Most people make the mistake of thinking design is what it looks like. People 
think it’s this veneer – that the designers are handed this box and told, ‘Make it 
look good!’ That’s not what we think design is. It’s not just what it looks like and 
feels like. Design is how it works.”1 
 
Jobs’ definition is inspiring, but hard to make actionable. For our purposes, we prefer the 
definition from noted user experience expert Jared Spool, who wrote, “Design is the rendering of 
intent.” He continues, “The designer imagines an outcome and puts forth activities to make that 
outcome real.”2 This might seem vague or abstract, but that’s purposeful – it points out that 
‘design’ is happening all the time, in a variety of contexts, whether or not we think of it as that. 
For a company to better deliver on its own intentions, it benefits from incorporating mindful 
design throughout its activities.  
 
Rob Brunner, founder of product design consultancy Ammunition (best known for their work on 
Beats by Dre), gave a presentation at the 2016 O’Reilly Design Conference titled “Design is a 
process, not an event,”3 where he shared what he saw in the evolution of design. He points out 
that until recently, design was seen as a step in a chain (Figure 2-1): 
 
 
Figure 2-1. How product development and delivery has been typically handled. 
 
What is becoming clear, is that design is not a standalone event, but a process that works best 
when infused throughout a product development lifecycle (Figure 2-2). 
 
 
Figure 2-2. Design plays a role throughout product development and delivery. 
                                                 
1 “The Guts of a New Machine”, The New York Times, November 30, 2003, 
http://www.nytimes.com/2003/11/30/magazine/30IPOD.html 
2 http://www.uie.com/articles/design_rendering_intent/ 
3 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hx8NjT09Phc 

All Design is Service Design 
As every company becomes a services firm, it follows that the opportunity for design is to make 
every part of that service experience more intentional. An emerging discipline called service 
design reframes how organizations utilize design. Historically, design has been focused on the 
creation of things, whether in service of marketing (advertising, branding, packaging) or product 
(industrial design, software design). Service design applies many of the same practices, but 
pulls back from this emphasis on artifacts, instead assuming a broader view in an effort to 
understand the relationships between people (customers, front-line employees, management, 
partners) and the activities they take part in. Artifacts are no longer considered on their own, but 
as tools in a larger service ecosystem.   
 
At the heart of service design is the customer journey. Mapping these journeys begin before the 
customer even knows about a company, traces their interactions with the company across 
different touchpoints, and ends when that customer moves on from the relationship. This 
mapping provides an alternate perspective on service delivery from how organizations are 
typically structured. It reveals that a customer interacts with marketing, sales, product, and 
support in a manner that’s impeded by departmental silos. It also highlights how certain 
touchpoints get overloaded with poorly aligned interactions. For example, a company might use 
email: 
● to deliver marketing and promotions 
● to extend certain product experiences (daily updates, results of saved searches, etc.) 
● for technical or customer support communications  
 
If not coordinated well, the customer is overrun by email, and may choose to simply ignore that 
channel altogether, thus inhibiting the organization’s ability to successfully interact.  
 
This has implications for organizational structure. For example, many companies have separate 
marketing and product design teams. However, to a customer, marketing and product are 
simply points along the same journey, often delivered in the same media – web browser, mobile 
app, and email – and would benefit from coherence in the team that designs them. Such 
coherence should be total, and a journey mindset shows how design can support things that it 
typically is not involved with, such as sales and customer support. 
 
This book is not a how-to on service design. For that, we recommend This is Service Design 
Doing by Stickdorn and Schneider, and Service Design: From Insight to Implementation by 
Polaine, Løvlie, and Reason. Our point is to recognize that design shouldn’t be limited to 
marketing and product efforts, but instead infused throughout the entire service. Wherever the 
customer and your organization interact, that touchpoint will be improved by design’s 
intentionality, and this has implications on the shape of the design team.  

The Double Diamond 
To frame design’s ability to contribute broadly, we use the Double Diamond (figure 2-3), a 
diagrammatic model of product definition and delivery.4  
  
Figure 2-3. The Double Diamond model of product definition and delivery. 
 
It’s a bit of a simplification, and shouldn’t be construed as a strict process. Still, it’s serves to 
depict how designers best approach and solve problems. The first diamond, Definition, 
addresses the steps needed to articulate a strategy and develop a plan for your offering. The 
second diamond, Execution, is about implementing that plan.  
Too often, project teams settle for linear thinking, where the team leader’s first idea is taken as 
the solution, and teams just march toward its implementation. The genius of the diamond shape 
is that it shows, for both definition and execution, that the team first engage in divergent thinking 
that broadens the possibility space, before turning a corner and practicing the convergent 
thinking that narrows in on a specific solution. 
Design Defines 
In most organizations, designers are not engaged until the second diamond, when strategic and 
planning decisions have already been made, and their role is to execute on a set of 
requirements or a creative brief. While service design encourages a broader role throughout the 
entire customer experience, it may still remain quite superficial and execution oriented. If 
                                                 
4 The UK Design Council came up with the Double Diamond after studying how designers 
actually work (http://www.designcouncil.org.uk/news-opinion/design-process-what-double-diamond). 
We’ve modified it to be more specific to technical product and service organizations. 

organizations are going to embrace all that design has to offer, this must involve influencing 
product and even corporate strategy. 
 
Since at least the advent of Taylorism, the predominant mode of business strategy has been 
analytical. Reduce processes and practices to their elemental components, and squeeze the 
most out of them. Even product marketing, which should be rooted in creativity and user 
experience, instead relies on practices such as market segmentation and sizing, surveys to 
assess consumer sentiment and satisfaction, and product requirements that focus on Cost of 
Goods Sold (COGS) and the Four P’s (Product, Price, Promotion, and Place). 
 
This stereotypically “left-brained” approach has served business well for quite a while, but has 
run aground of the connected services economy. Services are predicated on relationships with 
and between people, a combinatorial messiness that goes unaddressed by these analytical 
means. What’s called for are more ‘right-brained’ approaches that are holistic, instead of 
analytical, that are generative, instead of reductive, and that are empathetic. It happens that 
these are qualities found in designers and design teams, and businesses are realizing that 
bringing design into the definition conversation (the first diamond) provides better balance in 
their thinking. 
Design makes strategy concrete 
When strategy focuses on optimization, directives can be written as a set of metrics, such as 
improving conversion rates or increasing engagement. When it’s about delivering products to 
market segments, directives are a list of a features and the audiences they serve. But when it’s 
about creating new offerings in an uncertain market context, such reductive approaches fall 
short. If you remain in the abstraction of spreadsheet formulas or bullet-pointed requirements on 
PowerPoint decks, four issues arise: 
1. Tradeoffs or conflicts are not apparent, and so a chosen strategy might actually be 
unworkable;   
2. Each stakeholder has their own, unstated understanding of what that strategy means, 
and their misalignment is not evident until the building process, which is late for them to 
resolve the conflict 
3. What’s being developed doesn’t accord with the vision stakeholders had in their heads; 
4. Internal teams are not motivated by abstractions, and may deliver tepid work that 
satisfies the requirements, but goes no further. 
 
Bringing the design activities of user research, sketching, ideation, and rapid prototyping into 
strategy work ensures these issues won’t arise5. Low-fidelity sketches quickly make apparent 
shortcomings in an incoherent or incomplete strategy. Even if the strategy is solid, by making it 
concrete, you ensure that all stakeholders have a shared understanding of the implications of 
that strategy. If there are issues with the strategy, they get addressed in this early stage, when 
iteration is cheap, and not during development, when making changes can be quite costly. And 
                                                 
5 This is often referred to as “design thinking.” We feel it is simply “design.” 

by embodying the strategy in a clear vision, project teams have a compelling, motivating goal to 
attain, a “north star” that encourages them to deliver better than they’ve ever delivered before.  
 
But design shouldn’t be limited to just embodying a strategy established by the business. 
Design practices should actively contribute to and shape the strategy. Because sketching and 
ideation are relatively inexpensive, design employs divergent thinking to explore a range of 
options, feeling them out, or even putting them in front of customers to gauge acceptance. In 
this way, design makes apparent solutions that had not yet even been considered, and does so 
in a way that can garner meaningful external feedback. 
 
Even with all these obvious benefits, many organizations resist making strategy concrete. By 
remaining in abstraction as long as possible, hard decisions do not have to be made. Trade-offs 
do not have to be realized, and everyone can believe that their pet idea will see it through. 
When design contributes to strategy, it challenges this mindset, and forces stakeholders to 
commit.  
Customer-centered planning 
In between the two diamonds exists the project plan. The plan typically contains two parts: 1) a 
vision for where the product is ultimately headed (informed by the strategy work), and 2) a 
series of steps to realize that vision, sometimes called a roadmap or backlog. 
 
It might seem like a small thing, but how that plan is shaped can be crucial for the offering’s 
overall success. These plans are typically organized by importance to the business and effort. 
Features are scored across these two criteria, and then ranked. And then the teams plow 
through the list. 
 
The shortcoming of this approach is illustrated in this diagram (Figure 2-4) drawn by agile coach 
Henrik Kniberg6: 
                                                 
6 Henrik explains the diagram in detail here: http://blog.crisp.se/2016/01/25/henrikkniberg/making-sense-
of-mvp 

 
Figure 2-4. Henrik Kniberg’s drawing of a preferred product development approach. 
 
When releasing products or services in an iterative and accretive fashion, it’s important to keep 
in mind the customer’s experience every step of the way. So, even though the first row gets to 
the ultimate release faster, it does so by sacrificing user happiness at each earlier release. This 
means, in practicality, users won’t stick around for that ultimate release. They will have moved 
on to other options.  
 
The second row takes longer, but makes sure that at every stage, there’s a holistic experience. 
The initial experience might not be what the customer wants, but as the organization learns 
through successive releases, they deliver more happiness sooner. Also, through that learning, 
the organization can correct course, and realize a different ultimate delivery that serves their 
customers even better than their original vision. Design’s role in this process is to bring that 
empathetic perspective that understands what customers will find desirable, and in so doing 
influence the roadmap to reflect that.  
The bulk of design is execution 
We’ve dwelled on strategic and planning matters because these are not widely understood, and 
are essential for design to deliver to its fullest extent. That said, the bulk of an organization’s 
design effort (80-90%) will be within that second diamond of execution. A shortcoming of the 
Double Diamond diagram is that it suggests that for every act of definition, there is an act of 
execution. In fact, after the creation of a plan, execution occurs iteratively, knocking down 
elements of the roadmap with each pass (Figure 2-5).  

 
Figure 2-5. Definition occurs once in a while, and execution occurs iteratively against the established plan. 
 
The specific design practices shift when going from definition to execution. When informing 
strategy, design is more generalized, drawing on user research, sketching, and prototyping. A 
sketch might represent a software interface, a piece of marketing collateral, or a physical object. 
The shift to execution brings with it a focus on specific design disciplines. Designing for 
software, designing for marketing and communications, and designing for physical products are 
quite distinct practices, and require specialists well-versed in those media.  
Bringing Design In-House 
The history of business and design is typically one of clients and design firms. Bell Laboratories 
and Henry Dreyfuss, IBM with Paul Rand and the Eames Studio, Apple and Frogdesign. Design 
was an outsourced specialty, needed in a tightly defined fashion, usually for logos and products. 
 
At the rise of the Web, most companies handled the need for design through external vendors. 
They didn’t have capabilities in-house, and weren’t sure it was worth that kind of investment. 20 
years in, it’s clear that we are in a new normal. The shift to networked software and multi-
touchpoint services has created a fundamentally chaotic and unpredictable environment that 
requires continuous delivery.7  
 
Design can no longer be a specification that is handed off, built, and never seen again.  It needs 
to be embedded within the strategy and development processes, and its practitioners must be 
deeply familiar with the company’s mission, vision, and practices. To make this work with an 
outsourced partner is possible, but very expensive, and raises concerns about an external firm’s 
                                                 
7 For a remarkable explanation of the dynamics of this shift, read Jeff Sussna’s Designing Delivery.  

alignment with the company’s values and ideals. It’s simply more straightforward to build in-
house design competencies that are organizationally and operationally conjoined with functions 
such as marketing, engineering, and support.   
The Three-Legged Stool 
This continuous delivery requires changes within product teams. Historically, authority in 
product development lived with the product manager, the representative of the business, who 
took in an understanding of market needs, articulated a set of requirements, and gave that to 
teams to build. For software products, the technology became too complex to locate all 
decisions in a single product manager – delivering quality work meant that people with technical 
depth also be given authority. This lead to teams with joint product and engineering leadership. 
As we enter a world or connected software and services, the primacy of relationships and need 
for quality user experience cannot be addressed only through technical and business expertise. 
Designers should no longer be handed briefs and requirements, but instead ought to be part of 
the conversation earlier to make sure that their empathetic perspective is represented. The 
reality of contemporary product and service delivery is a messy one, and requires the productive 
tension between business, technology, and design. Think of them as the three legs that the 
offering rests upon.8 (Figure 2-6) If any leg is deficient, what is delivered will be wobbly. 
 
 
Figure 2-6. The three-legged stool of product and service development and delivery. 
The Expanded Role of Design 
Pulling all this together, we arrive at an expanded role for design. For decades, the typical 
operating mode for design was to receive a brief or requirements from ‘the business’, and 
execute on that.  
 
The rise of software lead to more complex products, and a subsequent realization that many 
requirements didn’t make sense when taking an empathetic design perspective into account. 
Designers created the discipline of user experience to compensate for this shortcoming, 
developing a set of methods (user research, usability testing, personas, workflows, wireframes) 
and fostering a user-centered mindset that helped manage this complexity and make it 
understandable to people.   
 
It then became clear that these practices are useful not just in the execution of a product, but 
can meaningfully contribute to its definition, and designers found themselves part of the 
strategic conversations about what should be built. Design had earned its long-sought-after 
“seat at the table.” 
 
                                                 
8 This three-legged stool is inspired by the one found in Donald Norman’s book The Invisible Computer. 
His is similar, but meaningfully different.  

And from that vantage point, it has become clear that the frontier for design is to play a role not 
only in every stage of development from idea to final offering, but to be woven into every aspect 
of the service from marketing to product to support. The challenge is that most organizations are 
structured and run in a way that inhibits this potential. In subsequent chapters, we’ll show how 
to establish, organize, and evolve a design team that can realize this expanded mandate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
======== 
Sidebar: Design and “User Experience” 
It is common, when discussing design as we have, to also refer to “user experience.” In fact, 
many would call the kind of software design we’re discussing “user experience design.“ We 
have two reasons we’re avoiding this specific association between design and user experience.  
 
The first reason is that when you try to find or articulate a definition of “user experience design,” 
things get muddier, not clearer. Most of the time, people “user experience design” to mean  
“interaction design with some information architecture”, and focus on the creation of workflows 
and wireframes. Some of the time, though, UX design is expected to include user research and 
strategy, and other times it’s associated with visual interface design. Throughout this book, we 
avoid “user experience design” in favor of referring to specific disciplines.  
 
The second reason is that by automatically lumping design with user experience, it gives short 
shrift to all the other disciplines that contribute to the user experience. A user’s experience is the 
emergent outcome of numerous contributions, including design, but also engineering (technical 
performance has a huge impact on user experience), marketing (how expectations are 
managed affect the user experience), and customer care (a bad experience can become a good 
one if handled well). If a single team is labeled as the primary keeper of the user experience, 
that absolves other departments from concerning themselves with it. User experience must be 
everyone’s responsibility.   
========== 
 

