
DESIGNING ADULT
SERVICES


DESIGNING ADULT
SERVICES
Strategies for Better Serving
Your Community
ANN ROBERTS

Copyright © 2018 by Ann Roberts
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording,
or otherwise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission
in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Roberts, Ann, 1958– author.
Title: Designing adult services : strategies for better serving your community / Ann Roberts.
Description: Santa Barbara, California : Libraries Unlimited, an imprint of ABC-CLIO, LLC,
[2018] | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2017031516 (print) | LCCN 2017049116 (ebook) | ISBN
9781440852558 (ebook) | ISBN 9781440852541 (paperback : acid-free paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Adult services in public libraries—United States. | Libraries
and older people—United States. | Adult services librarians—United States. | Libraries
and community—United States.
Classiﬁcation: LCC Z711.92.A32 (ebook) | LCC Z711.92.A32 R63 2018 (print) |
DDC 027.62/20973—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017031516
ISBN: 978–1–4408–5254–1 (paperback)
978–1–4408–5255–8 (ebook)
22 21 20 19 18
1 2 3 4 5
This book is also available as an eBook.
Libraries Unlimited
An Imprint of ABC-CLIO, LLC
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
www.abc-clio.com
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

Contents
Acknowledgments
ix
Introduction
xi
1 Planning for Library Services to Adults
1
Know Thy Community
1
Survey Thyself: Customer Satisfaction and Evaluating
Services
3
Know Thyself and Thy Staff: Competencies in
Serving Adults
6
Improve Thyself: Professional Development for
Adult Services Librarians
8
2 Waiting in the Wings: Age Group 19–24
11
Millennials: “Adultolescents” or Emerging Adults?
11
Library Services for the Emerging Adult
15
Collection Development and Programs
19
More Detailed Programming Ideas
23
3 Taking Center Stage: Age Group 25–30
29
Library Usage
29
Library Services for This Age Group
30
Collection Development and Programs
34
More Detailed Programming Ideas
39
4 Settling Down: Age Group 30–40
43
Library Services for This Age Group
44

Collection Development and Programs
45
Library Services for Children
49
Family Literacy
50
Other Kinds of Literacy
58
More Detailed Programming Ideas
60
5 Midlife Crisis (or Not): Age Group 40–55
63
Stuck in the Middle
63
Libraries Caring for the Caregivers
66
Collection Development and Programs
68
More Detailed Programming Ideas
73
6 An End in Sight (or Not): Age Group 55–65
77
Library Services for the Soon-to-Be Retired
78
Collection Development and Programs
80
More Detailed Programming Ideas
88
7 Now I Can Finally Relax (or Not): Age Group 65–75
91
Jumping into Retirement or Not?
91
Library Services to Active Seniors
92
Library Collections and Programs
94
Programming for Lifelong Learning
95
Opportunities for Service
97
Creating a Space for Seniors
99
More Detailed Programming Ideas
100
8 Reﬂecting upon Life’s Journey: Age Group 75 and Beyond
103
Library Services to Older Adults
104
Outreach to Institutions and In-Home Library Services
104
Assistive Technology and Computer Enhancements
107
Collection Development and Programs
109
Journaling and Oral History Projects
110
Local History Displays and Programming
114
More Detailed Programming Ideas
116
9 Library Service to All
121
Service to Immigrant Populations
121
Programming for Immigrant Populations
129
Library Services to the Incarcerated
131
Library Services to People with Disabilities
132
vi
Contents

Mental Health Issues in Libraries
137
More Detailed Programming Ideas
140
10 Conclusion
143
Taking on Life’s Challenges
143
Serving the Entire Community
144
Appendix A
Customer Satisfaction Surveys
145
Appendix B
Competency Index for the Library Field,
Adult Services
155
Appendix C
Adult Volunteer Application
163
Appendix D
Volunteer Policy
167
Appendix E
Library-by-Mail Homebound Application Form
169
Appendix F
Reasonable Accommodation Request Form
173
Index
175
Contents
vii


Acknowledgments
I
would like to thank the following individuals, libraries, and library
and educational agencies for input and contributions to this work:
Kim Flores, Naphtali Faris, and Michael Anderson, Mid-Continent
Public Library, Missouri
Penny Peck, California
Steve Carr, Arlington Public Library, Virginia
Michele Cordero, U. S. Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce, Virginia
John Paul Myrick, Cross County Library, Arkansas
Linda Hofschire, Colorado State Library, Colorado
John Taube, Allegany County Library, Maryland
Cyndi Lessner, Maryland State Department of Education, Early
Childhood Development, Maryland
Jennie Garner, North Liberty Community Library, Iowa
Laurie Orton, San Juan Island Library, Washington
WebJunction, Washington
Urban Libraries Council, District of Columbia
I would also like to thank my dear friend and editor, Blanche Woolls,
and my loving husband, Richard Smith, for their encouragement and as-
sistance throughout my library career, and in this and previous publica-
tions.


Introduction
ADULT LIBRARY USERS: THEY CAN BE A TOUGH CROWD
If we live long enough, we are adults for much of our lifespan. Childhood
and youth go by in a ﬂash, and while they are probably the most impor-
tant stages in our development and are certainly worthy of all the focus
libraries typically give them, they are not the only stages in our develop-
ment in life. We continue to grow and learn and have different informa-
tional needs in all stages of life. According to the Center for Disease
Control, the average life expectancy in the United States is 78.8 years
(http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/life-expectancy.htm), and if we consider
that in most states in the United States, adulthood begins at age 18, there
is a good 60 years in which libraries can and should be serving adults of
all ages. And during that 60-year time span, we continue to change and
grow almost as much as we did in our youth, if not physically, then cer-
tainly intellectually, spiritually, and emotionally. Frequently, changes in
life are brought about by life’s situations, situations in which we have to
learn and adapt to new jobs, new surroundings, new people, new ill-
nesses, having children—the list can go on and on. I have chosen to use
a generational approach in this book for following reasons:
1. It makes good sense.
2. It makes the job of serving adults in libraries a little easier, breaking
ideas for services and programs down into more manageable
increments.
3. It triggers fresh ideas and approaches to providing programs and
services.

The stages in life that I have used in this book are loosely based on psy-
chologist Daniel Levinson’s theory of adult development (http://study
.com/academy/lesson/theories-of-adult-development-levinson-vaillant
-neugarten.html). While I understand that many, many people’s lives will
not fall neatly into the life’s experiences and stages outlined either by
Dr. Levinson in his research or myself in this book, I have based my
ideas of library services to adults on what is often happening in the life
stages of the majority, beginning with the current youngest generation
of adults—the millennials and ending with library services to seniors,
the baby boomers. I will address library services to special populations
in an additional chapter, but I also count upon the reader to take the
suggestions offered in this book and “run with them.” Programming
ideas for one demographic can easily be tweaked for another. By
thinking about what is happening in life’s stages, as well as researching
local demographics, planning programming and services seems a little
less intimidating. Thinking about what each generation has most in
common provides a place to begin.
Since the Young Adult Library Services Association (YALSA) of the
American Library Association deﬁnes young adults as ages 12–18, this
book will focus on those “adults” ages 19 and much older. There is a
great deal of living and learning to be done after the age of 18, but it is
around that time that libraries often lose touch with users who had been
faithful attendants of story hour as children and avid fans of library pro-
grams as teens. Sometimes it just seems like adults in libraries are a tough
crowd.
“But why should that be?” you might wonder.
Because adults are usually very busy people, they have less time for
library visits or sometimes even for reading. They are studying, taking
classes, working, caring for children, helping out older parents, taking
care of homes, planning and nurturing careers and investments and retire-
ment funds, and gasp! There are simply not enough hours in a day for all
of these activities.
“So, how can libraries serve this crazy busy portion of the popula-
tion?” you might ask.
“By making their lives better, and maybe even just a little easier,”
would be the correct response.
“And why the generational approach?” you might be wondering. If
you have lived long enough, you will easily recognize that as we age, we
become very different people along the way. I can assure you, I am noth-
ing like I was in my 20s, much to the relief of many people who were
genuinely concerned about my well-being. And it does happen almost
xii
Introduction

by decade. Things just change. Our bodies change, our minds change, our
life’s circumstances change, and we have different information needs.
Libraries can serve adults of all ages in many ways, by offering conven-
ience in access to good information, technology, lifelong learning, and an
intellectually stimulating outing for children, their parents, and grandpar-
ents. There is something to be found for every age group at the library. I
have, by no means, come up with an exhaustive list of programs and serv-
ices for each age group but rather hope to inspire the library community
to take a generational approach to library service when planning for pro-
grams and services. Tailoring library programs to varying age groups not
only better serves the public but also makes the job of the librarian easier,
once we recognize those varying information needs at various stages in
life. Programs and suggested ideas for collection development in each
chapter can obviously be used for other age groups, but I offer them as
suggestions for speciﬁc age groups, according to life’s stages. Each chap-
ter in the book will offer simple programming ideas, with more detailed
programs described at the end of Chapters 2–9, or those chapters devoted
to serving speciﬁc demographics.
Libraries can offer a sanctuary for a quiet breather, a place to connect
with communities or be directed to the right place to ﬁnd the help we need
at various stressful junctures in life. Libraries can provide all of this and
so much more, if we put our minds and our hearts into it. So, go out
and give those busy, diverse, information seeking adults the break the
need today!
Introduction
xiii


CHAPTER 1
Planning for Library Services to Adults
A
s with any library service, library services to adults require planning
and monitoring for successes and failures. Determining the type of
programming and services that your particular community responds well
to and knowing the demographics of your local population are important
components of successful library service. In one smaller city library in a
relatively rural area where I planned programs for adults, I was surprised
to ﬁnd that the seniors in the region really loved poetry and would attend
poetry programs, particularly those in which they could share their own
original poetry. It was the senior version of the poetry slam before poetry
slams were “a thing”! Music and original musical compositions were also
very popular in this region. Figuring out what works and what does not
work in your local community is as much a part of the job as learning
library collections and getting a feel for how to work with coworkers
and volunteers in the workplace.
KNOW THY COMMUNITY
Looking at local demographics can go a long way toward helping you
with planning for adult services. If your community is heavily populated
with seniors, you know that you should devote more resources to pro-
gramming and services to older adults. If your community is largely made
up of young professionals, you can easily focus programs and services on
this demographic. This type of assessment will assist you in marketing
toward speciﬁc demographics, as different marketing techniques often
will reach different user groups.
Using U.S. Census Bureau tools like American FactFinder and
American Community Survey will glean general demographic

information, such as population age and number of households by num-
ber of occupants. This type of information can be obtained by zip code,
which offers a clearer picture of inhabitants in the library’s vicinity.
Another way to segment the adult population in your service area is by
using ESRI Tapestry (http://www.esri.com/data/tapestry). This product
allows you to search by zip code and see the demographics of the residents
of a speciﬁc zip code area. This product is also helpful in determining the
number of people of any particular demographic segment in your service
area. While this is a product from a vendor, as opposed to free statistics
from the Census Bureau, it might be worth the investment.
Another great resource is your own library statistics. Take a look at
those statistics. What are the most popular services you offer in the form
of web-based services? What is “hot” in library circulation? What could
you improve? Your library’s circulation system can provide a snapshot
of library users, depending upon the types of statistics your library gath-
ers and stores, and you may ﬁnd information on the usage of various
age groups, zip code service areas, and so on. Reports drawing on circula-
tion data may reveal trends as well as the types of materials that circulate
most. Taking a look at reports generated by the Integrated Library
System (ILS) can give you a better idea of what is and is not currently cir-
culating and information about library users, helping you determine
where to put more of your precious and limited resources. Upticks in spe-
ciﬁc subject area searches and checkouts can also provide inspiration for
new programming ideas.
Also consider the other agencies within your library’s service area, such as
senior centers, arts organizations, and social services agencies, as potential
partners, as sources of information, and as indicators of the demographics
of people living in your area. Are there a number of senior centers and other
service organizations for seniors in the area? Are there more hot spots for
younger adults? Is there a community arts center? All of these agencies can
serve as resources and partners for library projects and programs. This type
of information can lead to expanding library services or provide another
outlet for marketing current library services as well as indicators of demo-
graphics and potential need for library services to these demographics. If
there is a local agency serving immigrant populations, for example, the
library should deﬁnitely have a presence there, whether in the form of out-
reach and visits or through welcoming ﬂyers available to the agency. If there
are senior centers in the area, you should consider doing some outreach
there, if you have not already done so. Learning about local agencies and
working with them can be a boon to the library in the form of generating
new users and new community supporters.
2
Designing Adult Services

SURVEY THYSELF: CUSTOMER SATISFACTION
AND EVALUATING SERVICES
Surveying library users should really be an ongoing endeavor. Every
time you offer a program, gauge the success with a follow-up evalu-
ation. Ask for recommendations for future programs. Debrief with pre-
senters after a program to gauge their feeling for audience interest and
participation. Have an online library survey, which library users can
access any time or do an annual customer satisfaction survey, market-
ing the link to the online survey in newsletters and other publications.
Many libraries and museums provide preloaded iPads to gather feed-
back as customers are leaving their venue or program. For time-
strapped tech-savvy users, this method can provide a higher completion
rate than sending paper home with customers. For the technologically
challenged, if nothing else, provide paper copies and a place to deposit
them. Listen to complaints; listen to suggestions. Have physical and
digital suggestion boxes, prominently displayed, and actually check
them from time to time.
Community or “town hall”–style meetings are a great way to really get
to know what the local citizenry would like from the library. There are
always people who will show up and tell you what is on their minds.
More revealing too can be the absence of a certain demographic. If you
ﬁnd that younger people do not show up to a program or event at the
library, host a similar event in a favorite hot spot out in the community.
Mingle among the people and eventually you will get to know your com-
munity and your users, and you’ll be inspired to come up with new ways
to reach new users.
When evaluating library programs, be sure to ask questions about
what the participants found useful or meaningful in the program and
what they would like to see in future programs. Follow up with library
staff about the success or failure of programs, too. Evaluations allow
us to determine how well a program is working and have the evidence
in hand to support its continuation or the evidence to implement
change. Evaluations are much easier to create from the desired out-
comes for every program, by ensuring the outcomes match with what
the program is intended to present. Additionally, attendance records,
connectivity to other programs and library materials’ potential, and
patron feedback should be included with all evaluations.
For convenience, sample general library surveys of varying lengths,
courtesy of Library Research Service of the Colorado State Library, can
be found in Appendix A.
Planning for Library Services to Adults
3

Goals with Gusto
When planning for library services to adults, create goals that are broad
enough to deﬁne the overall picture of intent, including goals for profes-
sional accomplishment. Make sure that goals are clear and concise yet
broad enough to allow for accomplishing them. Can they be updated
from year to year by way of “raising the bar”? Are they ﬂexible enough
to meet changes in technology and trends and changing community and
library-wide values?
An example of a comprehensive goal for adult services would be
“Enhance local knowledge of e-government resources,” through a year-
long series of programs, emphasis emphasizing resources, and staff
awareness. Some action-based objectives in accomplishing this goal
would be as follows:
• Assemble a team to focus on web resources and sharing information
with other staff through presentations and compilations of
resources.
• Work with tech personnel to create an e-government resources page
with links to various e-government resources on the library website.
• Provide a monthly program, blog posts, or newsletter articles high-
lighting different areas of e-government.
• Promote e-government resources via library marketing outlets.
• Create a list of easily measurable outcomes for the goal that will
later serve as evaluative measures, such as the following:
1.
(number of) people will attend a program on
e-government resources in the next year.
2. Word of mouth and marketing will create an increase in the number
of program participants as the year progresses.
3. Hits on the e-government resources page will increase over the
course of the year.
4. At least one of the programs will receive media attention.
5. At least two of the programs will receive requests for more informa-
tion about a given topic.
Evaluating the Success of Speciﬁc Programs
Speciﬁc programs need to have customized evaluations, based upon
already established goals and expected outcomes and using quantitative
as well as qualitative measures. So, for example, if you are having a pro-
gram on changing careers in mid-life, the goal for the program might be,
4
Designing Adult Services

“Attendees will ﬁnd out more about successfully changing careers in mid-
life.” The expected outcomes for this program might be as follows:
1. Circulation of books on career change will be up.
2. Attendees will seek assistance with online career resources refer-
enced in the presentation.
3. The majority of attendees will report that they learned something
useful from the presentation.
4. The majority of attendees will report a positive reaction to the
program.
5. The guest speaker will report positive feedback about the
experience.
6. Patron attendance will be higher than previous programs through
marketing and word of mouth.
Evaluative Survey Questions
Evaluative questions for your survey can be devised from your expected
outcomes. For example:
1. After attending this program, do you anticipate seeking out library
materials on the subject of career changes in midlife?
2. After attending this program, will you use online career resources
suggested in the presentation?
3. Did you learn something useful about career changes in midlife
during this program?
4. What was your favorite part of the program and will you attend
similar programs in the future?
5. Will you tell friends about this program or invite friends to future,
similar library programs?
By having clearly stated outcomes for programs, it is easy enough to
create informative and evaluative follow-up surveys to determine the suc-
cess, or failure, of a program.
Evaluating Technology Services
The Edge Initiative is a suite of tools that assists libraries in planning for
technology services and identifying areas that need improvement. The
Edge Toolkit provides libraries an overview of current public services
and community engagement as they relate to the public’s use of
Planning for Library Services to Adults
5

technology in the library. Led by the Urban Libraries Council, the Edge
Initiative was funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
With 11 benchmarks, the Edge Initiative launched nationally in 2014.
Edge allows libraries to assess the use of public access technology, identify
speciﬁc ways to strengthen or enhance public access technologies, and
determine ways to engage community leaders about the library’s role in
serving the technology needs of local communities. These benchmarks
address the types and depth of technology training libraries offer, staff
technology competencies, needs assessment, and engagement of commu-
nity leaders in planning for technology usage and growth.
Benchmark 4.2, “The library gathers feedback from the community
about its public technology needs,” suggests that libraries should
gather feedback from the community about technology needs through
the following:
• An analysis of the social and economic conditions of the community
is conducted as part of information gathering for strategic planning
and decision making.
• Questions about community technology are included in a library-
sponsored needs assessment survey.
• Community technology–related questions are included in a local
government survey.
• The library holds advertised forums on the community’s technology
needs.
• The library conducts a community needs assessment for technology
resources in languages other than English.
• The library conducts a community needs assessment for technology
resources for people with disabilities.
Understanding community technology needs, while possibly exposing
some inadequacies in library technology services, can only serve to
improve services in the future and make planning and working with local
government ofﬁcials easier.
To learn more about the Edge Initiative and a variety of benchmarks
that will assist you in serving diverse library communities, visit http://
www.libraryedge.org/about-edge.
KNOW THYSELF AND THY STAFF: COMPETENCIES
IN SERVING ADULTS
Just like librarians who serve children and young adults need special com-
petencies or knowledge, so does the librarian who serves adults. As a
6
Designing Adult Services

former adult services consultant for a state library, I worked with the imple-
mentation of WebJunction in Missouri, an online resource for librarians.
WebJunction lists 12 competencies for adult services librarians in the
“Competency Index for the Library Field 2014.” This document is a compi-
lation of a number of competencies deﬁned by other library organizations,
including the American Library Association, numerous state technology
competencies, and the Special Library Association’s Competencies for
Information Professionals in the 21st Century. This listing of competencies
encompasses library services to adults and older adults as well as children,
young adults, and so on. These 12 competencies for adult services librari-
ans, promoting good library service to adults in the areas of outreach, pro-
gramming, readers’ advisory, and reference, are as follows:
• Design and implement library services to engage and meet the needs
of the community
• Design and implement outreach services for the library community
to increase use of library services and to reach underserved
populations
• Use online tools and communities to engage with and provide serv-
ices to users
• Design, implement, and sponsor library programs that provide
opportunities for information, entertainment, and lifelong learning
• Design and implement library services to meet the needs and inter-
ests of older adults in the community
• Develop a wide variety of services to meet the needs and interests of
older adults and of their families and caregivers, as members of the
Sandwich Generation
• Design, implement, and sponsor library programs for older adults
that provide information, entertainment, and opportunities for life-
long learning
• Assist users with choosing popular and recreational reading, view-
ing, and listening choices
• Develop strategies and sources to stay well informed as a readers’
advisor
• Demonstrate ability to meet information-seeking needs of users
• Develop and maintain a collection of reference resources to meet
community needs
• Facilitate library users’ requests for information
This compilation of competencies is a good starting point for determin-
ing if you or your staff need to “bone up” in the knowledge and skills
Planning for Library Services to Adults
7

needed to serve library users in any of these demographics and offer addi-
tional guidance as to the types of services and programs you should be
offering your adult library users. The complete competencies for library
services to adults, including further criteria for achieving each of the com-
petencies listed here, can be found in Appendix B. The entire publication
for all areas of library service can be found at WebJunction.org (https://
www.webjunction.org/documents/webjunction/Competency_Index_for_
the_Library_Field.html).
IMPROVE THYSELF: PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
FOR ADULT SERVICES LIBRARIANS
Many states offer or require public library certiﬁcation, which involves
taking a number of online or on-site continuing education (CE) courses
for credit and maintaining CE credits after certiﬁcation, and consequently
offer tremendous CE opportunities to support this requirement. Other
states simply offer continuing education for the sake of professional
development and improving library skills in an ever-changing work envi-
ronment. Some state libraries also offer certiﬁcates of completion to resi-
dents outside the home state, when completing online courses. The
Idaho Commission for Libraries, which requires library certiﬁcation
for those without library science degrees, has two complete online
courses, Alternative Basic Library Education (ABLE) and Supplemental
Alternative Basic Library Education (SABLE), and offers certiﬁcates
of completion for distance users (http://libraries.idaho.gov/Continuing
Education). These courses can be particularly useful for paraprofessional
staff, as the basis for library service that they did not attain by completing
a library science degree.
Having worked in continuing education for library workers, I was con-
stantly looking for professional development outlets and collaborating
with public library staff to create new CE opportunities. We provided
webinars, single or half-day seminars, and an annual multiday training
event for library workers around the state of Missouri, all geared toward
working with adults in libraries. One of the most convenient tools that I
worked with was WebJunction.
WebJunction is a great resource for professional development and con-
tinuing education. WebJunction offers library-speciﬁc courses and webi-
nar archives free to all library workers and volunteers, made possible by
the support of OCLC, the Gates Foundation, and the Institute of
Museum and Library Services. WebJunction offers self-paced courses in
a number of subject areas that would beneﬁt the adult services librarian,
8
Designing Adult Services

including collection development, public services, technical services, cus-
tomer service, programming and advocacy, and outreach. The archived
webinars feature librarians from all walks, independent trainers, and con-
sultants in presentations in any number of subjects. Archived webinars can
be accessed at any time, and free monthly webinars are compiled by the
Wyoming State Library and posted on WebJunction each month. The free
webinar listing can be found at http://www.webjunction.org/ﬁnd-training/
free-events.html. These archived webinars provide a rich resource for
brief refreshers on any number of subjects. You can also sign up for full
self-paced WebJunction courses at http://learn.webjunction.org/.
If the free professional development opportunities are not “making the
grade” for you, there are any number of fee-based services out there, such
as Library Juice Academy, Infopeople, and Click University. The impor-
tant thing is to continue to grow and improve in ways that beneﬁt your
library users.
CONCLUSION
Knowing your community, knowing your staff, understanding your
users’ technology needs, and knowing your own strengths and weak-
nesses make for a better opportunity to grow and expand, both as library
professionals and with your library services and programs. Do a little
investigation into your local demographics, set aside some time for pro-
fessional growth for yourself and your staff each month, and see what
happens!
Planning for Library Services to Adults
9


CHAPTER 2
Waiting in the Wings: Age Group 19–24
W
hen we think of library services to adults, a fairly large swath of the
population falls into that category and encompasses a wide demo-
graphic. We are talking about a whole bunch of people here, all with vary-
ing interests and information needs at various stages in their lives. When
taking the broad view of library services to adults, creating good programs
and helpful services might seem like a daunting challenge, but as with most
library services, taking small steps to improve on current service or incre-
mentally implementing new services can be a means to success.
Although libraries have been serving adults for centuries, it was not
until the mid-twentieth century when the American Library Association
(ALA) created the Adult Services Division of ALA. At this time, the
organization decided to create a separate division, recognizing that adults
in libraries might have different information needs than children and
teens, and therefore guidelines for library services to adults were estab-
lished in order to provide better service for them. And library services to
adults not only encompass a wide demographic but a wide range of serv-
ices as well: Programming, reference, circulation services, services to spe-
cial populations, and outreach can all fall into this very broad category.
In this chapter, we will focus on those emerging adults who are “wait-
ing in the wings”—the 19–24-year-olds who are planning on or are work-
ing toward careers or hoping to move up in their chosen ﬁeld, as they gain
experience in the classroom or the workplace.
MILLENNIALS: “ADULTOLESCENTS” OR EMERGING ADULTS?
In June 2015, the U.S. Census Bureau issued a press release proclaiming
that Millennials had become the largest demographic in the United

States. The millennial wave of people born between 1982 and
2000 marks an increase in ethnic diversity, as pointed out in the
Census Bureau’s news release, with 44.2 percent of millennials being
of a minority race or ethnic group (http://www.census.gov/newsroom/
press-releases/2015/cb15-113.html). Millennials, like other genera-
tions, have a number of common characteristics. They are more politi-
cally liberal, less likely to be religious, and do not have the kind of
work/life delineations of previous generations, which in some respects
is a good thing, and in others, not so much. Millennials are also more
likely to still be living at home after the economic downturn of 2008
than the same demographic during the Great Depression, even though
the job market and economy have made a recovery, for the time being
(http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2015/07/29/more-millennials-living
-with-family-despite-improved-job-market/).
In “The Millennial Generation, ‘Keep Calm and Carry On,’ ” Neil
Howe notes that during the millennials’ childhood years, late baby boom-
ers and early Generation Xers, now having families of their own, brought
“family” to the forefront, raising awareness of child abuse and child
safety issues, and manufactured child-friendly and safer minivans to haul
their little ones from one after-school event to another. Politicians and
Madison Avenue began deﬁning all sorts of adult issues in terms of their
effects on their children, and marketing directly to kids became the norm.
“But what about the children?”—some audience members were bound to
ask on daytime TV talk shows, no matter the subject of the day! Howe
suggests that “given all this adult attention, it’s no wonder that this rising
generation has developed a sense of specialness, to themselves, to their
parents, and to the wider community” (http://www.forbes.com/sites/
neilhowe/2014/09/04/the-millennial-generation-keep-calm-and-carry-on
-part-6-of-7/).
So, given the amount of attention that they saw growing up, millennials
have tremendous expectations for their careers, their ideas, and how
things should work. Baby boomers and millennials do not always see
eye to eye, but with millennials now outnumbering baby boomers, their
attitudes toward everything-technology, work, consumerism, marriage
and sex, and so on will obviously inﬂuence the way we work, play, study,
and live. They already do. A more relaxed attitude can be found in work-
places from the t-shirt- and jeans-clad hipsters of Silicon Valley to the
everyday practice of checking e-mail and social media before getting
down to work now commonplace in so many professional settings
(http://communitytable.parade.com/274485/paultaylor/boomers-and
-millennials-bridging-the-generation-gap/).
12
Designing Adult Services

Although they are the generation that has stayed at home the longest,
millennials are willing to be mobile for career-related reasons and con-
sequently ﬁnd themselves in new communities looking for the type of
assistance a library can provide. According to “Reason for Moving:
2012 to 2013,” published by the U.S. Census Bureau, the 25–29-year-
old demographic is the group most often moving for career and work,
landing a good job, and setting the stage for the next phase in life,
focused more on family and achievement (https://www.census.gov/
prod/2014pubs/p20-574.pdf).
Adultolescenthood
The ﬁrst instance of the term “adultolescent” that I could locate in my
research was in an article published in 2002 in Newsweek magazine, titled
“Bringing up Adultolescents” by Peg Tyre (http://www.newsweek.com/
bringing-adultolescents-141705). It is an interesting term and one that
caught my eye while reading another article about millennials. So, while
the rise in the number of twentysomethings still living at home increased
after the economic downturn of 2008, it seems that the issue has been recog-
nized prior to that time. Jeffrey Arnett, a psychology professor at Clark
University in Worcester, Massachusetts, proposes that people in their 20s
(the chronological age of most millennials right now) are at a separate stage
in life’s development, a stage he calls the “emerging adult”—young people
who are not yet ready to take on the responsibilities normally relegated to
the adult. He also proposes that this transition from dependent child at
home to adult is currently happening at a slower pace. His theory is that
the cultural and economic changes that have led to a need for more educa-
tion in our information-based society, as well as fewer entry-level jobs,
and a greater societal acceptance of premarital sex and cohabitation has cre-
ated a greater state of “limbo” for young people in the late twentieth and
the twenty-ﬁrst centuries.
According to a recent article in the Washington Post, younger
millennials—those born in the 1990s—are more than twice as likely to
be sexually inactive in their early twenties as older millennials or even
the previous generation (https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/
social-issues/there-isnt-really-anything-magical-about-it-why-more
-millennials-are-putting-off-sex/2016/08/02/e7b73d6e-37f4-11e6-8f7c
-d4c723a2becb_story.html). The article cites issues over sexual consent,
career ambitions, lack of personal contact, and the use of online dating
services, which focus on physical appearance as well as the prevalence
Waiting in the Wings: Age Group 19–24
13

of online pornography as contributing factors to the blasé attitudes toward
mating found in these younger millennials. So, with younger men and
women focusing more on career and education and less on starting
families, we have a demographic of younger people delaying entry into
what was traditionally the adult world of marriage and family (http://
www.nytimes.com/2010/08/22/magazine/22Adulthood-t.html?pagewanted
=all&_r=0).
If emerging adults or millennials have speciﬁc psychological and emo-
tional needs at this point in their development, it must follow that they
have different information needs as well, generally relating to career
preparation and higher education. Public libraries, by tweaking their cur-
rent collections, including electronic resources, and offering speciﬁc pro-
grams, can keep some of those once-enthusiastic members of the teen
advisory board as library supporters for years to come.
Attitudes toward Libraries
According to Kathryn Zickuhr, Lee Rainie, and Kristen Purcell, in an
article posted by the Pew Internet and American Life Project, younger
Americans ages 16–29 serve up a mixed bag of habits and preferences
when it comes to reading, libraries, and technology. While almost all
younger people are online and make use of online resources, they are
also more likely than older patrons to use the libraries’ computer and
Internet connections. They are also likely to say that they have read at
least one book in print in the past year (2012), more so than adults ages
30 and older, perhaps the result of being enrolled in college or trade
school. Younger Americans are just as likely as older adults to visit
the library, borrow print materials, and browse the shelves, and the
majority of younger adults say it is “very important” for libraries to
have librarians for assistance in the library and materials for check
out. Few think that libraries should automate library services or do
away with printed materials.
That being said, younger people are still more likely to use the
library’s computers or the library’s online research resources, such as
online databases. Sixty percent of younger patrons say they go to the
library to study, sit, and read, or watch or listen to media as compared
to 45 percent of older patrons, and everyone agrees that libraries
should provide more comfortable spaces for reading, working, and
relaxing (http://libraries.pewinternet.org/2013/06/25/younger-americans
-library-services/).
14
Designing Adult Services

LIBRARY SERVICES FOR THE EMERGING ADULT
In many areas, libraries are partnered with state employment agencies,
sometimes in the same building or nearby. This kind of partnership
provides “one stop shopping” for job seekers, ﬁnding assistance with
resume preparation, practice tests, and the opportunity to register for
or search with state employment agencies. In the state of Missouri,
where I served as adult services consultant for the Missouri State
Library, we partnered with the Division of Workforce Development to
educate library workers about the types of services provided by one-
stop career centers. In many instances, local libraries were already
working with career centers, particularly in rural areas. Developing
job skills and career-development remain at the top of the list for many
millennials and point to the need for job skills and career services in
libraries.
The Hartford, Connecticut, Public Library, in partnership with
CTWorks, lists the following workforce development services on its
website:
Core services:
• Internet access
• Job leads
• Online job application assistance
• Resume creation and revision
• Professional resume critique
• Career counseling
• Information on job fairs and recruitments
• Career services information session
• Impact interviewing workshop
• Online job training and testing with Metrix Learning Online
• Career planning with Career Edge
• Interactive courses, video-based simulations, and assessments
• Test preparation resources
• Company information resources
• Books, DVDs, and online resources about job searching, resumes,
careers, and interviewing
• Links to helpful websites
• Lists of local temp agencies
• Referrals to job training, education, community agencies, and inten-
sive services
Waiting in the Wings: Age Group 19–24
15

Special services:
• Ex-Offender Employment and Retention Program
Related services also at the library:
• Computer classes
• English language classes
• Immigration and citizenship assistance
• General Equivalency Diploma (GED) preparation resources
• Online High School Diploma program
• Math tutoring and materials
For more information about this collaboration between the Hartford
Public Library and CTWorks, visit http://www.hplct.org/library
-services/job-career.
In most cases, online databases are also available to library card hold-
ers outside the library. These databases offer everything from GED prepa-
ration, resume building, and interview preparation skills. Partnering with
local career centers and promoting online tools are a couple of the many
ways libraries can help prepare those emerging adults who are waiting
in the wings to take their place in the spotlight.
A Second Chance
How about this wonderful collaboration? Chattanooga (Tennessee)
Public Library (CPL), in partnership with Gale/Cengage Learning, offered
library patrons the opportunity to earn an accredited high school diploma
and credentialed career certiﬁcate online. This collaboration with Career
Online High School (COHS) served as a unique pilot program allowing
adult learners to ﬁnish high school online while also receiving additional
career training.
CPL awarded full scholarships to qualiﬁed adult learners who com-
pleted an online self-assessment, prerequisite course, and on-site inter-
view. The scholarship provided enrolled students with an academic
coach as well as access to board certiﬁed instructors to provide support
throughout the course. While this type of collaboration could beneﬁt
adults beyond the age range of emerging adult, it is often this demo-
graphic that looks back at missed opportunities to obtain a high school
diploma when trying to enter the job market. Some students were able
to complete the course in as little as four to six months by transferring
16
Designing Adult Services

previously earned high school credits. These students were provided 24/7
access to the online learning platform, which makes it easier to get a
degree if work or family schedules are conﬂicting. A high school diploma
can only improve the chances of landing a better job, and a collaboration
such as this puts the local library in the unique position to fulﬁll a mission
of lifelong learning to a demographic in need (http://chattlibrary.org/
content/library-resources-spotlight-librarys-ged-prep-options). To learn
more about Gale/Cengage COHS, visit http://www.careeronlinehs.gale
.com.
Joint-Use Libraries
While the bulk of library usage for most college students will happen in
the academic library, public libraries can also continue to play an impor-
tant role in the academic life of the average college student or student in
career training. In fact, public and academic libraries have “joined forces”
in many areas, creating joint-use libraries. The San Jose Public Library in
California, which is a collaboration between the San Jose Public Library
and San Jose State University, is such an example. According to the
Mission Statement published in the original agreement, December 17,
1998, “The purpose of the Joint Library is to provide both the
University community and the residents of the City with a high quality
library dedicated to providing excellent service to all of its users and pro-
viding access to an extensive collection of library materials” (http://www
.sjlibrary.org/ﬁles_king/documents/operating_agreement.pdf).
There are many other examples of joint-use libraries, including partner-
ships with community college libraries and even public school libraries in
rural areas. Sometimes the local school library is the only library in a rural
area, and school libraries can provide a great service to the general public.
In urban areas, joint use libraries, such as the San Jose Public Library,
joint-use libraries can provide access to materials not always found in a
public library, beneﬁting both the general public and the student body
as well as general reading material, programming, and access to online
resources. By pooling resources, a higher standard of service and library
collections can be achieved in some cases.
In my own experience as a reference librarian in a town with two uni-
versities nearby, I constantly helped students who came to the public
library for assistance, as the academic libraries were either short-staffed
or simply not as pleasant or the staff as helpful as the staff in our little
public library. Frequently, students of higher education can have access
to online databases and other materials in general areas of study at a
Waiting in the Wings: Age Group 19–24
17

public library, comparable to that which they would ﬁnd in the academic
library. While public libraries cannot provide all of the collections an aca-
demic library might, the public library can offer a supportive and helpful
environment in which college students and those in career training can
seek assistance or make use of online databases, which might just be the
edge that some students need.
An Enhanced Library Catalog, Digital Services, Blogs, and Tweets
I remember back when dinosaurs roamed the earth, my husband very
proudly showed me how he “Telnetted” to a library catalog and located
a book for me.
“See? There it is!” he crowed, sitting at a computer monitor, which
resembled the head of a giant alien, resting on our kitchen table.
“So what’s it about?” I asked, causing his face to fall to his chest. My
information need was much greater than he had anticipated.
Having a library catalog with book reviews, including the capacity to
allow patrons to review books, is a great way to appeal to younger peo-
ple. Born at a time when social networking online was becoming “the
thing,” younger adults are accustomed to being able to contribute to dis-
cussions, and ﬁnding a book review in the library catalog prevents them
from having to look one up in another place. Allowing patrons to provide
their own book reviews incorporates an element of social networking into
something that every library has online. Book reviews, right where you
want them, is a good thing for any age group!
Library blogs are also a great way to get information out to patrons,
even allowing them to comment and share in blog posts. Blogs can pro-
vide useful information about library services, books, or upcoming pro-
grams, above and beyond the standard description of what can be
found in a particular database or a calendar of events. Blogs can also be
a way to continue the educational experience provided by a program or
presentation, offer book and ﬁlm reviews, and so much more.
Tumblr and Twitter
Many libraries use Tumblr and Twitter for keeping in touch with library
users. Tumblr can best be described as a social networking site and a blog,
frequently described as a “microblog” as one is more likely to ﬁnd images
and short snippets of information on Tumblr, as opposed to the more tra-
ditional, journal-style blogging. Tumblr has over 217 million separate
blogs with 420 million users and has been in use since 2007.
18
Designing Adult Services

Tumblr allows a person to create a web page that is a collection of
things they like and want to share, such as images, music clips, and text,
and also reblog from other Tumblr feeds. This is very appealing for youn-
ger adults trying to connect with other people with similar interests.
Twitter is a free social networking microblog service that allows regis-
tered members to broadcast posts of 140 characters or less, referred to
as “tweets.” Twitter members can tweet themselves and follow other
users’ tweets on multiple platforms and devices. The act of adding a meta
tag, referred to as a hashtag, written as #keyword, can create conversa-
tion threads or connect users to a general topic such as #yourlibrary.
Tweets are permanent and are searchable on the Twitter website.
Tweeting brief reminders about upcoming events, new books, or other
library acquisitions, or simple reminders about library closings, and so
on would be a simple way to use Twitter.
Digital Services
Digital services, which every generation will use but are a must for youn-
ger library users, include online access to the following:
• Digital magazines (Zinio)
• Downloadable audiobooks
• e-Books
• Movies (IndieFlix, Overdrive)
• Music (Freegal)
• Hoopla
Access to digital services such as hoopla provides free movies, television
series, music, audio, and e-books to library users through their library
card. Just be sure that while users are browsing through online offerings,
they also see notice of some interesting in-house or partnership programs
or classes that also suit their needs and interests.
COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT AND PROGRAMS
Reading: Genre Fiction
While young millennials might get more of their information from on-
line sources, apparently they are still fans of reading old-fashioned
print books. Having a library that includes an ample collection of read-
ing materials for this age group, as well as interesting programming, is
key to drawing them in. At a time when reading textbooks and manuals
Waiting in the Wings: Age Group 19–24
19

takes up a great deal of time, a little reading for pleasure can restore a
sense of adventure, play, peace, or simple escapism for the budding
adult reader.
The burgeoning world of genre ﬁction offers up many new choices
for readers today. Genres that at one time only appealed to a small
niche of readers have exploded into big markets with big followings.
Some of these newer genres that appeal to younger adults include the
following:
• Steampunk: A subgenre of science ﬁction set in Victorian times or a
futuristic time when steam is once again the main source of machine
power.
• Urban ﬁction: Used for works set in urban America often dealing
with drugs, violence, and sex, involving African American or
Latino characters. The genre is also known as Street Fiction,
Gangsta Lit, Ghetto Lit, or Hip-Hop Fiction.
• Chick lit: Addresses issues of modern womanhood, generally not
considered a subcategory of the romance genre, as the subject matter
focuses on relationships and issues not necessarily related to
romantic life.
• Graphic novels: Stories, usually science ﬁction or fantasy, told
mainly through illustrations in comic strip format; not so much a
genre as a format.
• Paranormal romance: Romance stories between paranormal entities
such as vampires, ghosts, elves, fairies, and so on.
• Queer ﬁction: Focuses on issues of the LGBT community, includ-
ing romance, sexual relationships, prejudice, family relationships,
and so on.
• NA (New adult): Featuring protagonists in their late teens and early
20s, with more sexually explicit content than young adult ﬁction—
think Losing It by Cora Carmack.
There are a number of online tools that can assist in identifying books
in speciﬁc genres, such as Goodreads; the Reading List, published annu-
ally by the Collection Development and Evaluation section of the
Reference and User Services Association of ALA, which highlights out-
standing genre ﬁction and includes read-alikes (http://www.ala.org/rusa/
sections/codes); Genreﬂuent (www.genreﬂuent.com); and subscription
services like NoveList, by EBSCO. Online genre browsing or searching,
as well as searching by the “appeal” or feel of the book, are both terriﬁc
ways to identify books that appeal to a particular age group. ALA’s
20
Designing Adult Services

Booklist and Booklist online are subscription services offering book
reviews for all genres. Book awards lists are also great tools for ﬁnding
books in a speciﬁc genre, such as the Edgar Award for mysteries, the
Street Literature award for urban ﬁction, and the Hugo and Galileo
awards for science ﬁction.
Acing the Test
Testing seems to come up pretty often for this demographic, whether it
is for a college course, identifying career aptitude, obtaining a license or
certiﬁcate, or job readiness. Test preparation is big, and whether it is
done online with practice tests or through study of a printed source,
making sure that twentysomethings are aware of the resources avail-
able at the library is vital. Texts for test preparation are still a high-
circulation item, and the choices in test preparation textbooks are
many. Examples of test preparation texts for emerging adults would
include the following:
• ASVAB (Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery): Preparation
for military testing
• Civil Service exams: Postal service, government clerical, accounting,
and so on
• Praxis: National teacher examinations
• GED preparation
• GRE, LSAT, SAT, MAT: Graduate school entrance exams
Acing the Test Electronically
Electronic resources are at everyone’s ﬁngertips all the time, and far too
many people think that if they found it online, it must be a good source.
It is up to librarians and other educators to dispel this myth and offer
credible resources to our users. Emerging adults, engaged in study and
preparation for work and career, need access to reliable, credible elec-
tronic resources and libraries, more than any other institution, serve this
up every day. While students can Google to their heart’s content, who
knows if what they are ﬁnding is accurate and reliable information?
Studying and practicing for a test using reliable and up-to-date sources
provided by a trusted institution like the local public library is a service
that any emerging adult can and should use. By providing remote access
to electronic resources to anyone with a library card and an electronic
device, libraries make the study life of their users so much easier.
Waiting in the Wings: Age Group 19–24
21

Access to these resources can vary widely, based upon an institution’s
budget, but here are a few to be aware of:
• Learning Express Library: Includes prep and testing for many occu-
pations, such as health, civil service, cosmetology, emergency medi-
cal services, ﬁreﬁghting, law enforcement, nursing, teaching, and
grad school preparation.
• Gale Courses: Instructor-led courses available online in the areas of
accounting, business, health care, language, law, writing, and
publishing.
• Occupational Outlook online: U.S. Department of Labor’s guide to
careers, describing the training and education needed, job prospects,
job descriptions, working conditions, and average salary.
• Safari Books online: Resume writing and building, interview
techniques.
Programming Ideas: Millennial Approved
Twentysomethings still need a place to hang out with friends, and if they
do not want the local bar scene, a coffee shop is usually the answer. On
Reddit.com, a social media and social news aggregate website, self-
described as “the front page of the Internet,” I found a wish list of sorts
for libraries, posted by people in their 20s:
• Providing a space for a coffee shop and then having an outside
company (a small, local business, or a chain) set up shop in the
space
• Being open Friday/Saturday nights for those who do not necessarily
want to go out partying every weekend
• Have comfortable reading spots with good lighting, perhaps facing a
window or ﬁreplace (maybe a fake one) in the winter
• Used book sales
• Talks/concerts/events: Anything from classical music to local author
talks, to local farmers or gardeners giving a talk/demonstration on
backyard gardening
• A meeting place
• Art exhibits
• Anything with free food
• Having a liquor license (and good insurance) for special events
• Being able to check out more expensive board games like Settlers of
Catan, Ticket To Ride, Cards against Humanity, Dungeons and
22
Designing Adult Services

Dragons, Exploding Kittens and Mystery Express, and board game
tournaments for these types of games
• Discussion groups for current events and books or books versus “the
movie”
The Big Brother, Big Sister Inﬂuence
Younger children look up to their older siblings, aunts and uncles, sports
ﬁgures, and celebrities, and we all play a role in how we inﬂuence the
young. The old adage “It takes a village to raise a child” is most evident
in library culture and practices. New adults are in the perfect position to
instill the love of libraries and lifelong learning into youngsters over
which they have inﬂuence. Recent high school graduates, looking for col-
lege or career opportunities, can help educate middle school and high
school–age kids about the process of applying for college and choosing
the right school. Learning about these steps in life from an older relative
or cool older friend might have more impact than the local school
counselor.
In
addition
to
providing
multigenerational
programming
for parents, grandparents, and children, consider taking it a step
further, with Big Brother, Big Sister programming. While kids expect
to get special attention from parents and grandparents, a big brother,
sister, or friend offering to read with a child or take a child to a
program at the library could have great results. An example program
follows in the More Detailed Programming Ideas section of this
chapter.
At this stage in the game of life, as in most other stages, people need
something to draw them into the library and, most importantly, to be
made aware of events and services the library is offering (https://www
.reddit.com/r/Libraries/comments/2go4v3/what_brings_20_and_30_year
_old_patrons_to_the/).
MORE DETAILED PROGRAMMING IDEAS
Program: Big Board Games at the Library
In the past decade, the popularity of board games has grown exponen-
tially, going far beyond the board games of my youth, such as
Monopoly and Life. These board games vary in complexity, style,
mechanics, visual interest, and a host of other ways. In addition to the
popularity of online gaming, actual board games are making a big
comeback.
Waiting in the Wings: Age Group 19–24
23

Learning goals:
• Enjoy more expensive and challenging board games with like-
minded individuals
• Learn new skills from games
• Learn about additional library resources, such as books, e-books,
online videos, and movie collections related to the games
Steps to take:
(Using these tips from WebJunction, “Board in the Library, Part One,
An Introduction to Designer Board Games,” by John Pappas,
December 30, 2013, http://www.webjunction.org/news/webjunction/
board-in-the-library-part-six.html)
• Keep game nights relatively small; four participants per three games
seem ideal.
• Promote and communicate on library blog, Meetup, and the
library’s Facebook page. Ask interested parties to share freely.
• Teach one game per event, but do not take on the role of player.
• Allow those familiar with games already to take a leading role as
well.
• Try to learn about skill level and interest in certain games
beforehand.
• Prepare to host additional nights if interest level exceeds the maxi-
mum recommended number of participants.
• Consider having separate nights for more difﬁcult games and sim-
pler games so that gamers may “graduate” in skill levels.
• Have three games of varying themes, rules, and mechanics, on sepa-
rate tables in a room away from the public areas.
• Have enough seating for all players.
• Consider inviting “watchers” who want to learn, without being
intrusive.
• Try to have additional moderators, if you do not feel up to moderat-
ing three games at once.
There are so many new board games from which to choose. Popular
Mechanics (PM) offers a quick look at the best new games of 2017. I
am sure if you ask local gamers, you will ﬁnd out which might work best
for your local community. Here are some of the best new games from PM
online:
24
Designing Adult Services

Grand Austria Hotel allows up to four players to take charge of turn-of-
the-century Viennese cafes and hotels, using management and staff skills
such as marketing to customers, ﬁlling their food and drink orders, and
assigning rooms. Points are made by balancing six goals at once, and at
the beginning of each round, a random toss of dice affects players’ options.
Quadropolis might be a game for the less outgoing players. With few
player interactions, it can feel a bit like solitaire; but every library has its
share of introverts! In Quadropolis, up to four players build a custom
metropolis from scratch, by sending out a team of four architects, gather-
ing plans for various buildings in four rounds, and then constructing
them in a four-by-four city map grid. Points are awarded by how and
where buildings are constructed.
Scythe is a steampunk-themed reimagining of 1920s Europe, which
calls for ﬁve players at a hexagonal game board. While it is not a
combat-centric game, Scythe might require players to complete a quest
to steal food and money from the locals, build a mine to connect territo-
ries, and plan a raid into a Soviet territory to do battle with coal-
powered machinery in order to steal their iron.
Coffee House Concert Series
A “grown up,” casual vibe would be good for the Coffee House Concert
Series. Most towns, no matter how large or small, have some local musi-
cians or musicians somewhere within a 50 mile radius who would be
interested in sharing their talent. A series of free musical events, set up
with table and chairs “coffee house style,” might be fun for those who
do not want to party all the time. Offer a variety of musicians, reﬂecting
different musical styles, and allow for Q&A.
Learning goals:
• Learn about different musical genres
• Learn about library music resources
• Learn about local musicians
Steps to take:
• Have a budget-using local talent, which should not mean “free” tal-
ent, and at least offer an honorarium for each group or performer.
• Find a variety of musical acts or musicians from different genres.
Entertainment can be “infotainment” as well, so learning about a
new genre should be a learning goal.
Waiting in the Wings: Age Group 19–24
25

• Make sure you have a private venue. Set up tables and chairs; try to
have some spotlighting on the performers. Keep the rest of the room
dark. Give it some real atmosphere.
• Have free, self-serve coffee.
• Keep the performances relatively short, 45–50 minutes, and allow
for some audience Q&A, if the musicians are willing. This will give
the audience a chance to know more about the musicians as well as
their musical styles.
• Check with local universities or colleges for student performers, who
might work for less and who might relate best to younger audiences.
• Advertise through social networking, Facebook, Meetup, and the
library’s website.
Do not forget to make the performers know how grateful you are, not
only through monetary reward but also through promoting their work at
the library. They will be more likely to do a second show when you need it.
Engaging New Adults with New or Aspiring Readers
Engaging big brothers or sisters with their younger siblings in a story
hour or other program could offer many beneﬁts, for participants and
libraries alike. Involving those newly graduated teen advisory board
members in storytelling activities could be a means of keeping them
enthused about the library as they start to slip away.
Learning goals:
• Learn from those that they look up to, other than parents and
grandparents
• Become aware that learning is a lifelong process
• Learn new stories and improve reading skills
• See that reading is cool
Steps to take:
• Start with former teens who were involved with library programs or
on a teen advisory board.
• Look into any nearby library science programs where students
would be interested in participating.
• Keep these emerging adults involved by presenting a storytelling
program as a win-win for the children who are learning to read
and the presenters.
26
Designing Adult Services

• Offer up a special program for siblings, cousins, or other relatives, if
there is interest.
CONCLUSION
Our current societal demand for higher education and consequent
delayed entry into the workforce, marriage, and starting a family has cre-
ated a new generation of library users, that of the emerging adult, or the
portion of the population caught between high school and adult respon-
sibilities. While this millennial generation has a tendency to drift away
from some library services, they still have speciﬁc information needs,
based mainly in career preparation, and they need a little downtime,
too. It is the mission of every local public library to serve its entire com-
munity, which includes those digital natives who might be viewed as not
needing what the library has to offer. By providing services and program-
ming that will help ﬁll the information need, and even some of the social
needs, of this demographic, libraries can remain viable resources for
emerging adults. The local library can be there for them in this important
transition from “teen advisory board member” to perhaps “adult services
board member.”
Waiting in the Wings: Age Group 19–24
27


CHAPTER 3
Taking Center Stage: Age Group 25–30
T
he older group of millennials, ages 25–30, are people who are truly
ready to “take center stage,” to step out into the spotlight of the
job market or the work place and, hopefully, shine. We all know that it
sometimes takes several entrances from stage right to ﬁnally take the spot-
light, but many of us try for the ﬁrst time at this point in life. We have just
ﬁnished up with an undergrad or graduate degree program or have been
working at our craft for a few years, and we have gotten kind of good
at it, so we are ready to strut our stuff! And while we are at it, we might
be strutting our stuff in other ways, through dating, looking for potential
partners, looking to score our dream house, and beginning to think about
“nesting” and starting families of our own. The local library has played
an important role in our lives thus far; what does it have to offer now?
LIBRARY USAGE
According to “Younger Americans’ Library Habits and Expectations” by
Kathryn Zickuhr, Lee Rainie, and Kristen Purcell (http://libraries
.pewinternet.org/2013/06/25/younger-americans-library-services/), like
their younger twentysomething counterparts, these older millennials are
still more likely to report having used library resources in the past year
than older adults, including online and print resources. They have visited
a library’s website and are just as likely to have visited a library as older
adults. They value free resources such as free databases, free access to
computers and the Internet, books for borrowing, quiet spaces, programs
and classes, and job or career resources. This demographic also wants
more comfortable spaces in libraries, a broader selection of e-books, sep-
arate spaces for different services, apps-based access to library services,

and more online services. Being users of technology and aware of online
resources in general also makes younger adults more aware of online
resources and other services offered up by their local public library. If a
person is looking at the library’s website, they will ﬁnd out much more
about other services and programs going on at the library!
LIBRARY SERVICES FOR THIS AGE GROUP
People in the throes of trying to start a career, ﬁnd a partner, buy a house,
or just relocate for work can ﬁnd themselves in quite a bit of upheaval,
and a quiet place to have a conversation with like-minded individuals,
discuss a book, or read a magazine article sure would be nice. A little help
for the budding entrepreneur or direction for the newly graduated MBA
would be nice, too. And while we are at it, let us throw in some programs
that would beat the bar scene and provide a more intellectual framework
for meeting new people or even potential partners.
Engaging Young Entrepreneurs
Some of us tear out of college with a ton of “book learning” and no practi-
cal ideas about where to start on our given path and I speak from experi-
ence. If starting your own business or inventing the next great gadget is
the dream, then some practical guidance might be in order. Librarians are
in the unique position to harness reliable information and offer it up in the
form of collections or programming. If having a business and entrepreneur
library is out of the question for your particular situation, get in touch with
local business owners, business organizations, and experts in the ﬁeld and
see if you can get something going in the way of networking or mentoring
at the library. Try partnering with local organizations for mentoring and
local volunteers to assist with classes, such as the following:
• SCORE: An organization offering free mentoring that connects
small business owners and entrepreneurs with volunteer business
mentors. The SCORE website offers search capability by zip code
to locate local SCORE volunteers. Arrange for a SCORE volunteer
to visit the library to either provide advice or simply an overview
of what the organization can do. https://www.score.org/mentors
• Partner with local business support organizations such as the local
Chamber of Commerce, and host monthly after-work “happy
hours” for networking opportunities, ﬁnding potential customers,
and making new connections.
30
Designing Adult Services

• Offer classes that will beneﬁt budding entrepreneurs. Classroom
instruction will provide not only the means of learning a new search-
ing skill or software but also an opportunity to meet like-minded
people with similar business goals and interests.
• Invite a local lawyer to discuss the steps to obtain a U.S. patent or
trademark, or put together your own program using information
from www.uspto.gov.
• Allow crafters to pitch their products to store owners from the
community.
Business and Entrepreneurship Libraries
Kansas City Public Library opened the H&R Block Business and Career
Center (KCPLBCC) as a dedicated service center for patrons doing
research in the areas of business, entrepreneurship, and career and profes-
sional development. While every library does not have the stafﬁng or
space for a separate business library, here are a number of resources that
KCPLBCC provides access to:
• A collection of business books, including FORTUNE’s top 75 busi-
ness books
• Research databases including A to Z databases: 2.3 million job list-
ings, 30 million business proﬁles, 1.1 million healthcare profes-
sionals, a database that is ideal for sales leads, mailing lists, market
research, employment opportunities, ﬁnding friends, and relatives,
and much more.
• ABI/INFORM Complete includes thousands of full-text journals,
dissertations, business and economic periodicals, and country and
industry reports. This database provides an excellent picture of com-
pany and business trends worldwide.
• Hoover’s Company Proﬁles: Find up-to-date content covering more
than 40,000 public and nonpublic companies, 600 industries, and
225,000 key executives. Access in-depth industry analyses, informa-
tion on a company’s location, summary ﬁnancials, top competitors,
top ofﬁcers, and more.
• Demographics Now: Produce comprehensive business and residen-
tial lists as well as detailed demographic reports. Assess business
viability; perform market and site location analysis; create sales
leads and marketing mailing lists; ﬁnd potential sponsors and
donors to grow a nonproﬁt; prepare a small business plan; and
much more.
Taking Center Stage: Age Group 25–30
31

• Business Plan Pro is a software program that is useful for outlining
business plans.
• Online job searches.
• WinWay Résumé Deluxe on the Center’s computers.
Job Now: guides you through the necessary tasks to get a job, including
acing the interview, building a resume, and personality and career
assessments.
• Learning Express offers practice tests for standardized tests, such as
the General Equivalency Diploma (GED) and Law School Admission
Test (LSAT), civil service exams, the U.S. citizenship test, and occupa-
tional licenses, including practice tests for nurses and paramedics.
• Grant research and writing.
• Access to online databases such as Standard & Poor’s Net Advantage,
S&P ratings on stocks, bonds, and mutual funds, weekly stock “picks
and pans,” corporate annual reports and other company data, and
Stock Screener to identify the right investments for ﬁnancial planning.
• Print business newspapers and investor newsletters.
• Weekly print publication, Value Line, covers 3,500 stocks and
1,900 mutual funds on a quarterly basis.
• Consultations, computers, and classes.
• Consultation with a business librarian to discuss your business,
career, or ﬁnancial concerns.
• Computers for center patrons, and the library provides free high-
speed wireless Internet access.
The KCPLBCC also offers free classes, such as résumé creation,
Internet and software basics, and job search strategies. Here is a recent list
of class offerings:
• Microsoft Word Basics
• Computer Class—Computer Basics
• Getting Started with E-Books!
• High School Equivalency Classes (GED)
• Computer Class—Internet Basics
• Computer Basics
• Banking Basics
By trying to incorporate and market at least some of the business refer-
ence materials or services listed here into your current collection and
32
Designing Adult Services

services, you can market to budding entrepreneurs or established busi-
nesses and create new library users.
Fostering Innovation Development
Television shows and infomercials have recently made the notion of
everyday people inventing and patenting products more prevalent than
ever before. While corporations have an edge when it comes to research
and applying for patents, individuals still come up with innovative ideas,
and almost 20,000 patents to individuals were granted in the United
States alone in 2014. While everything a person needs to apply for a pat-
ent can be found on the U.S. Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce (USPTO)
website, some people will still want a book to guide them through the
process. Check the Collection Development and Programs section further
in this chapter for books on the patent process.
For those determined to “patent it yourself,” the USPTO’s Ofﬁce of
Innovation Development has a number of good resources for aspiring
inventors on its website at http://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/
inventors-entrepreneurs-resources.
Some of the topics you will ﬁnd there include Patent Process Overview,
contact information for the Inventors Assistance Center, information
about Pro Bono assistance, information for those truly trying to DIY a
patent application, and an inventors’ assistance directory by state.
New business owners or budding entrepreneurs starting a business to
sell a product or offer a service might want to trademark their particular
brand. A trademark allows consumers to distinguish different products
and services and encourages trademark owners to provide good quality
service and value. Trademarks can be quite valuable, especially well-
known trademarks, and trademarking a company logo or slogan can be
a good ﬁrst step toward establishing a small or new business.
For more information about patents and trademarks or to do a patent
or trademark search, visit www.uspto.gov and look for books on
obtaining patents and trademarks in the following section. Again, if you
cannot afford a complete business library to provide all of these services
or access to all of the databases and collections, focus on a couple of
classes that you could offer and then market heavily to your library
users, particularly those fresh-out-of-college or trade school folk!
Assisting Millennials as Caregivers
According to a recent article in the Washington Post, millennials also
have an increasing responsibility in caring for parents and grandparents.
Taking Center Stage: Age Group 25–30
33

While the typical caregiver is still a woman in her 50s caring for her aging
mother, an estimated 9.5 million millennials now provide this kind of
help to ailing parents or elderly grandparents. In “A Shift in
Responsibility” (October 26, 2015),Tara Bahrampour suggests that
because of smaller families, the need for older women in the family to
work full-time, the trend for millennials to live at home, and the millenni-
als’ more egalitarian ideas of sharing work with women, the younger
caregiver is just as likely to be a younger male as female. The millennial
caregiver is about 27 years old, lives with or within 20 minutes of those
whom they care for, and works 35 hours a week. Millennials are also
more likely to be closer to their parents and relate to them more as friends
than the baby boomers did with their own parents, enforcing a sense of
responsibility for their well-being as well as a willingness to help out.
Because millennials are so good at resource ﬁnding and sharing, it is
important to make them aware of all of the health literacy resources the
library has to offer as well as the online resources that might make their
jobs as caregivers easier and more enjoyable. Millennial caregivers can
beneﬁt from the use of e-books and online databases in their roles as care-
givers as well as enjoy and share streaming video, music, and online mag-
azines with their charges. Library programs that bridge the generations
are also a welcome addition to current library programs. For additional
information on resources for caregivers, see Chapter 5.
COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT AND PROGRAMS
Given the millennials’ need for structure, team spirit, caregiving, and
“maker” tendencies, it seems like DIY books should be somewhere near
the top of your list when it comes to developing appealing collections
for this demographic. There are tons of “maker” and “life hacks” books
on the market now ranging in subject from creating wearable electronics
to refurbishing furniture to simple hacks for housekeeping. Even though
household tips books have been around for many decades (remember
Hints from Heloise?), choosing titles with current buzz words will attract
the younger generation, and there are sure to be current, legitimate new
household hacks in the newer books.
Books for Hackers, Makers, and Caregivers
See what you already have in the collection that could be displayed and
marketed, such as books on crafting, cooking, and making car and home
repairs. In addition to books about crafting, because that list could go on
34
Designing Adult Services

forever, look for books about the “maker movement” and “life hacks”
as well, to add to the collection. Three-dimensional (3D) printing is also
a hot topic in the maker movement and in libraries in general, as many
libraries now offer 3D printing as a service. For these millennials who
are ready to step out into center stage of career, work, and life as adults,
consider adding even more to your nonﬁction collection. These makers/
creators want to know how to do things—all sorts of things. So start
with a few books about “making” and “life hacks”; add some business
and entrepreneurship materials; and ﬁnish with some books on patent
and trademarking, just to round out the picture for this maker
generation.
• The Big Book of Maker Skills (Popular Science): Tools and
Techniques for Building Great Tech Projects by Chris Hackett
• Zero to Maker: Learn (Just Enough) to Make (Just About) Anything
by David Lang
• Make: The Maker’s Manual: A Practical Guide to the New
Industrial Revolution by Paolo Aliverti and Andrea Maietta
• 3D Printing by Cameron Coward
• Make: Electronics: Learning through Discovery (Make: Technology
on Your Time) by Charles Platt
• The Successful Caregiver’s Guide by Rick Lauber
• Juggling Life, Work, and Caregiving by Amy Goyer
• A Promise Kept Inspirational Guide for Family Caregivers by Bonita
Bandaries
• Art of Tinkering by Karen Wilkinson and Mike Petrich
• Patent It Yourself: Your Step-by-Step Guide to Filing at the U.S.
Patent Ofﬁce by David Pressman and Thomas J. Tuytschaevers
• Invent It, Sell It, Bank It! Make Your Million-Dollar Idea into a
Reality by Lori Greiner
• Nolo’s Patents for Beginners: Quick and Legal by David Pressman
and Richard Stim
• Patent Pending in 24 Hours by Richard Stim
• How to Fly a Horse: The Secret History of Creation, Invention, and
Discovery by Kevin Ashton
• The Eureka Factor: Aha Moments, Creative Insight, and the Brain
by John Kounios and Mark Beeman
• Simple Rules: How to Thrive in a Complex World by Donald Sull
and Kathleen M. Eisenhardt
• Trademark: Legal Care for Your Business & Product Name by
Stephen Elias and Richard Stim
Taking Center Stage: Age Group 25–30
35

• How to Register Your Federal Trademark by Jacob Tingen
• Patent, Copyright and Trademark: An Intellectual Property Desk
Reference by Richard Stim
Highlight craft and DIY magazines, both electronic and print, currently
in the collection and consider subscribing to new maker magazines like
Electronics Maker and Make, either electronically or in print.
Programming to Engage and More
According to “Training the Millennial Generation: Implications for
Organizational Climate” (E-Journal of Organizational Learning &
Leadership 12, no. 1 (Spring 2014): pp. 47–60), some common character-
istics of the millennial generation are as follows:
• Ability to multitask and technologically savvy
• Desire for structure
• Achievement focused
• Team oriented
When I questioned an actual millennial about the types of programs
that would bring him to the public library, his answer was basically “pro-
grams with real content” or “classes.” A fairly recent college graduate, he
misses the structure and in-depth information he was able to ﬁnd in the
classroom, which demonstrates the “desire for structure” characteristic
listed earlier. He mentioned the need for life skills not taught in the class-
room, such as negotiating the purchase of a home or saving and investing.
In addition to substantive programs, he misses hanging out with his bud-
dies and holding serious, stimulating conversations about current affairs
and life in general—the kind that college students like to have over a beer
or a cup of coffee. Based on this actual encounter with an actual millen-
nial and my own reading, here are a few programming ideas that might
attract this demographic.
Hot Topics Discussion Group
Sometimes people who have been in school for a couple of decades miss
the kind of deep conversations and discussions they used to have with
their fellow scholars about, well, anything. So, why not set up a discus-
sion group for new college graduates? You can either allow the group to
choose its own topics of discussion or have a set schedule of discussions
already dreamed up to get the ball rolling. The sessions could range from
36
Designing Adult Services

current or historical events to philosophical discussions and should
ideally take place over steaming cups of coffee or a cold beer, just like
“back in the day.” Try meeting with younger groups outside the library
at a local bar or coffee shop for this type of discussion, all the while pro-
moting other library services or programs within the library. Providing a
program that is comfortable, familiar, and intellectually stimulating for
new graduates will make them feel welcome and at home.
Act Like an Adult!
This series of programs should focus on all those “adult” and very neces-
sary skills that we never learned in school, like:
• Real estate—tips and tricks for buying your ﬁrst home (there is much
to know)
• Landlord rights/tenant rights
• Finances—making the most of savings and investing
• Food-menu planning and basic cooking skills
• Cleaning and organizing—for everything from the ofﬁce to the
pantry
• Time management—simple steps to freeing up more time for play
• Home improvement—learn how to do simple home repairs (this
could be an entire series in itself)
• Purchasing power—getting the best deals all the time
• Take charge of your health now, reap beneﬁts later—give users a
taste of yoga, meditation, or an exercise class
• Budgeting for life expenses
• Home decorating and design
• Car repair workshops
• Wedding planning
Anything 101
Take any of the topics listed earlier and turn them into a single, more in-
depth multiday series, if you can ﬁnd a presenter who is willing to commit
his or her time to the cause. This “101” approach appeals to the newly
graduated, still yearning for a classroom learning situation. As computer
literate as most millennials are, they still might need instruction in speciﬁc
computer software or programs, and they are reputed to be creative and
interested in creative projects. Financial and health literacy has been
widely promoted in the past few years through various organizations.
Taking Center Stage: Age Group 25–30
37

With “Anything 101,” you are only limited by your imagination and ﬁnd-
ing a presenter or instructor for the course. Check with your state library,
foundations, or other agencies devoted to these speciﬁc areas of interest,
for grant opportunities or potential presenters. Tap into local experts
within your community, or even staff members in the library, who are
willing to show off their skills, with the intention of gaining new followers
and customers down the road. Word of mouth is sometimes the best
advertisement for a local expert.
Culinary Literacy and “Foodies”
Now here is yet another form of literacy that I can completely endorse—
culinary literacy!
The Free Library of Philadelphia opened its Culinary Literacy Center in
June 2014, and it is helping to change the way Philadelphians think about
food, nutrition, and literacy. One of the goals of the Culinary Literacy
Center is “to advance literacy in Philadelphia in a unique and innovative
way—with a fork and spoon” (https://libwww.freelibrary.org/culinary/
about.cfm).
The Culinary Literacy Center functions with a commercial-grade
kitchen that serves as a classroom and also as a dining space for the citi-
zens of Philadelphia, providing training through a hands-on lab, teaching
math via measuring, reading, and science skills via cooking.
The center offers over 350 classes a year, teaching cooks of all ages. It
hosts local chefs, cookbook authors, and food truck owners. They offer
programs in butchering, food photography, and an annual conference
for SNAP recipients and organizations that provide meals and other serv-
ices to low-income Philadelphians. How cool is that!
So, even if your library cannot possibly afford to have a kitchen dedi-
cated to culinary literacy, programming for “foodies” would be a big hit
for millennials. Invite local chefs to do a demonstration using portable
stovetop burners and a tabletop convection oven, but check the library’s
insurance policy ﬁrst. Bring in a local wine vendor to discuss wine par-
ings. Have a recipe swap. Invite authors of cookbooks based on regional
or local cuisine. Every locality has some, even if it is just a local women’s
club or church that has published a cookbook. Those ladies (and many
gents) have cooking skills to share. Have a cake-decorating class.
Partner with local health organizations and dieticians to share their
knowledge of nutrition, and ﬁnd an herbalist who can talk about cooking
with herbs. Foods (and beverages) are big with the millennial generation.
Beer has a language all its own now, and ordering an adult beverage has
38
Designing Adult Services

become increasing more complex. Culinary literacy opens up a whole
new avenue of programming opportunities. A millennial focused cooking
program follows under “Detailed Programming Ideas.” Bon appetit!
Just for Fun Programming Ideas
Seventy-three percent of millennials consider themselves to be creative and
deﬁne creativity in a slightly different way than generations past. They tend
to think of creativity as also relating to problem-solving skills and play and
consequently engage in “maker” activities more often as a whole (http://
www.howcoolbrandsstayhot.com/2015/03/17/a-millennial-view-on
-creativity/). Think of the renewed interest in knitting, the ﬂourishing of
Etsy, the interest in craft beers, and craft coffees and farm to table eat-
eries. They are also more adventurous, wanting to see the world and will-
ing to accept some danger in the process, which is, I feel compelled to say,
simply part of youth. All that being said, there are any number of pro-
grams, in addition to your literary speed dating program, that would
appeal to the creative/maker/excitement junkies of this demographic
who might still have some free time on their hands:
• Dedicated maker space to allow for crafting, demonstrating, and
making all sorts of things
• Book and ﬁlm discussions at the local brew pub
• “Maker” projects like silk screening, knitting, woodworking, beer
brewing, and coffee roasting
• Comic book hero trivia night
• Pop culture trivia night
• Travel on the cheap
• Cards/poker night
• Adult spelling bee
• Coloring for grown-ups
MORE DETAILED PROGRAMMING IDEAS
Please Judge a Book by Its Cover
Speed dating based on literary tastes has been around for a few years
now, but maybe you have not had the nerve or felt the need to try it.
Bookstores have hopped on the literary speed dating bandwagon, and
many libraries have experienced success with this type of program includ-
ing San Francisco Public, Fort Collins, Colorado, Chattanooga,
Tennessee, and Omaha Public Library. Speed dating programs are an
Taking Center Stage: Age Group 25–30
39

alternative to meeting strangers online, and what could be better than
dating based on literary tastes?
Learning goals:
• Get to know people with similar literary tastes and romantic
interest.
• Connect with like-minded singles in a safe atmosphere.
• Learn more about genres through talking with others.
• Increase interest in other genres.
• Learn more about other library programs and services.
Steps to take:
• Have individuals register for the event with information, including
age, gender, gender dating preference, and favorite reading genre.
• Set the stage with some smooth jazz or romantic music.
• Set up tables for individual ﬁve minute “dates.”
• Have some snacks and beverages (maybe provided by the culinary
literacy class mentioned earlier).
Also display new ﬁction in every genre, to pique more interest in
reading.
Turn people loose and see if any sparks ﬂy! Hopefully, in this instance,
participants will be able to judge a book (and its owner) by its cover, and
you could end up with a wedding in the stacks!
Keeping Body and Soul Together
This cooking series will focus on simple cooking techniques that many
younger adults might not have learned at home. Use several different pre-
senters, if location and budget allow, or ﬁnd a “hobby chef” in your area.
With the advent of food networks and YouTube, hobby chefs are every-
where these days, some of them trying to turn their hobby into a business
or career. A little promo work at the library might be the boost that they
need.
Learning goals:
• Learn how to cook simple dishes that will ward off starvation.
• Save money on eating out.
• Meet others with similar information needs.
• Learn about relevant library collections.
40
Designing Adult Services

Steps to take:
• Locate local “chefs” through home extension services, local busi-
nesses, or word of mouth.
• Have a budget and offer some sort of honorarium.
• If the library is not equipped with a kitchen, electric burners and skil-
lets can be used.
• Ensure that each demonstration is simple, focusing on staple
dishes.
• Work with local restaurants to supply food for the presentation.
• Limit the number of participants and allow for “tasting portions”
only.
• Think of having a three-part series, which includes two simple
breakfast dishes, packable lunch ideas, and two easy dinner
recipes.
• Check with administration regarding insurance coverage—very
important.
• Have a supply of disposable service ware for tasting purposes.
While a program like this might seem riskier than some, cooking and
food preparation are increasingly popular subjects with the general popu-
lation, and younger library users might need some assistance in this area.
If these budding chefs graduate from basic training, future offerings of
specialty dishes might be in order!
Book Discussions outside the Library
While anyone can hold a book discussion in the library, it takes a
bit of doing to sponsor book discussion groups outside the library
and could draw the interest of the 25–30 age group. Accustomed to
“hanging out” and discussing all kinds of issues during the secondary
education years, millennials might be more likely to have a book dis-
cussion in a quiet corner of a local brewery (beer is big now) or coffee
house, drawing them back into the fold some of those former teen
library users.
Learning goals:
• Engage in ﬁnding new topics of interest through reading.
• Meet others with like interests in similar demographic.
• Expand understanding and knowledge of the chosen book through
discussion.
Taking Center Stage: Age Group 25–30
41

Steps to take:
• Contact local coffee houses or breweries about the proposition.
• Emphasize the community beneﬁt of partnering with the library.
• Choose a time when the venue is not normally crowded.
• Set up some ground rules for participants.
• Try to gauge interest through social media like Facebook and
Meetup.
• Choose two or three titles and allow interested parties to narrow it
down to one.
• Provide copies of books for checkout.
• Come up with discussion questions to “prime the pump.”
• Be prepared to participate, if people become suddenly shy.
Discussion groups do not necessarily have to focus on books but could
extend to topics ranging from current events to climate change. Be pre-
pared to referee if discussions become too heated; bring along a ﬂyer or
talk up something interesting and new at the library.
CONCLUSION
The older millennial generation while still maintaining many of the char-
acteristics of younger emerging adults have different information needs
and often greater responsibilities than their younger counterparts. As they
approach the age of 30, they will most likely have to settle into a work-
place and learn how to play by at least some of the rules. They are also
more likely to also share in the responsibility of caring for an older rela-
tive. This can also be the time in which they might begin to think of set-
tling down with a mate and begin the long climb into independence.
Libraries can assist them with job searching, career and entrepreneurial
desires and needs, and information about and assistance with caregiving
through digital resources and programs. Libraries can also offer a com-
fortable place to try out new ideas, take a class, hold book and hot topic
discussions, and enjoy game nights, allowing them to be “adultolescents”
for just a little bit longer.
42
Designing Adult Services

CHAPTER 4
Settling Down: Age Group 30–40
I
f a person has not already “settled down,” the approach of the big
“3-0” is usually enough to make one think about it long and hard,
anyway. It is no wonder that I ﬁnally got married at the age of 30.
There is something about this decade that says to us, “Hey, time to settle
down. Put those dancing shoes away. Pick your clothes up off the ﬂoor.
Find a better place to live. Get a job. Grow up.” Maybe it is the ﬁrst hint
of crow’s feet around our fragile eye area that makes us realize we have
got to do something-fast!!
While many women are choosing not to have children at all, statistics
show that among women between age 25 and 29, 49.6 percent were
childless in 2014, but for women between age 30 and 34, that number
dropped to 28.9 percent, meaning that among those who do choose to
have children, more women are delaying the birth of their ﬁrst child
(http://time.com/3774620/more-women-not-having-kids/). With this sort
of delay in starting a family, this stage in life can ﬁnd many of us trying
to balance career and young children, already worrying about saving for
the kids’ college fund, making home improvements or looking for a big-
ger place to house the growing family.
The 30s seems to be the decade in which we ﬁnally realize that we have to
be more practical or suffer the consequences later. According to the U.S.
Census Bureau, home ownership almost doubles from the decade of our
20s to the decade of our 30s (https://www.census.gov/housing/hvs/data/
charts/ﬁg07.pdf), proof positive of the “settling down” theme of this stage
in life. Blogs and magazine articles geared toward this slightly more
mature audience seem to revolve around very practical themes upon
which you can focus when looking at programming and collection
development. While career and ﬁnding the “perfect ﬁt” in the workplace

might haunt some of us forever (Stop pointing at me!), usually at some point
in our 30s, we realize we have got to bring home the bacon and oftentimes
extra bacon, if there are other mouths to feed on the horizon. In various
“what to do in your 30s” blogs, some of the main themes are as follows:
• Saving for the future
• Buying a house
• Health care
• Honing skills or professional expertise
• More focus on family and good friends
• Travel
• Self-acceptance
• Partnering and marriage
• Adopting or having children
• Getting a pet
These are all very grown-up themes and almost all of them require
funding, which ultimately leads to holding down a job. As in any stage
of life, libraries offer unique resources in the form of collections, both
print and electronic, informational programs, research assistance, and
online tools to help make some of the challenges of settling down easier.
By building programs and collections around these themes, libraries can
help to smooth the transition from “adultolescent” into real adult.
LIBRARY SERVICES FOR THIS AGE GROUP
Not that other age groups do not enjoy online services (because we know
they do) this age group, the young parent, or the more settled young adult
can really appreciate online services provided by the local library, such as
free online magazines, music, e-books, and video.
In Stepping into the Stream: Bringing Netﬂix-style Video to Libraries,
Stephanie Klose writes that libraries sometimes have as difﬁcult a time
marketing online services as onsite programs and services. The most
popular video services offered by vendors include Midwest Tape’s
hoopla, OverDrive’s streaming service, LibraryIdeas’s Freegal Movies
and Television, and IndieFlix, which is distributed to libraries by
Recorded Books. A quiet Friday evening at home in one’s jammies with
a streaming video can be just the thing after a long hectic work week, or
once the kids have been put to bed.
In addition to the library website, use social networking as a means to
make sure that these online offerings are known to young parents or
44
Designing Adult Services

working young adults. Library users do not always have to come into the
library to reap the beneﬁts of the services we offer (http://reviews
.libraryjournal.com/2014/04/media/video/stepping-into-the-stream
-bringing-netﬂix-style-video-to-libraries/).
COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT AND PROGRAMS
At this stage in the game, even though a person can ﬁnd a video on just
about how to do anything, sometimes it is good to have many “how
tos” in one place. That is the beauty of books. When I worked in archives
for several years, I would pull out the biggest volume I could ﬁnd to show
to school tours. I would always say, “This looks like a crazy idea, doesn’t
it? Why would anyone want to make a book that weights 25 lbs. and
takes up half a 6 foot table?”
“Because it is a convenient way to keep lots of information together in
one place,” I would reply to myself, and that was exactly the function
these books, usually registers of some sort, served. They kept many pages
of records neatly together, in one place.
This is the same concept for books on home and car repair, drugs and
drug interactions, cookbooks, crafting books, childcare books, and so on.
Unless a person knows of reliable resources on the web, it is usually safer
to consult a book about things that are of real importance. Having a strong
collection of “how to” books is a good choice for these newly minted
adults.
Make sure that your library collection includes the following:
• Newer cookbooks, such as The Food Lab: Better Home Cooking
through Science by J. Kenji López-Alt, Fix-It and Forget-It Big
Cookbook: 1400 Best Slow Cooker Recipes! by Phyllis Good, and
some celebrity cooks books, like The Barefoot Contessa Cookbook
by Ina Garten, and Cooking Like a Master Chef: 100 Recipes to
Make the Everyday Extraordinary by Graham Elliot
• Urban homesteading books, such as Urban Homesteading: Heirloom
Skills for Sustainable Living by Rachel Kaplan, The Urban
Homestead: Your Guide to Self-Sufﬁcient Living in the Heart of the
City by Kelly Koyne, and A Chicken in Every Yard: The Urban Farm
Store’s Guide to Chicken Keeping by Robert Litt and Hannah Litt
• Books on keeping a home, such as The Hands-On Home: A
Seasonal Guide to Cooking, Preserving & Natural Homekeeping
by Erica Strauss and The Year of Cozy: 125 Recipes, Crafts, and
Other Homemade Adventures by Adrianna Adarme
Settling Down: Age Group 30–40
45

• Books on easy entertaining such as Food with Friends: The Art of
Simple Gatherings by Leela Cyd, Best Game Day Recipes by Diana
Loera, and Occasional Drinking: The Best Wines and Beers to Pair
with Every Situation That Calls for a Drink by Diane McMartin
• Books on pet care like, such as The Ultimate Encyclopedia of Small
Pets & Pet Care by David Alderton and Total Dog Manual: Meet,
Train and Care for Your New Best by The Editors of Adopt-a-
Pet.com and David Meyer
• Newer books on parenting, like The Rabbit Who Wants to Fall
Asleep: A New Way of Getting Children to Sleep by Carl-Johan
Forssén Ehrlin and Irina Maununen, How to Raise an Adult:
Break Free of the Overparenting Trap and Prepare Your Kid for
Success by Julie Lythcott-Haims, and the What to Expect. . .books
• Pregnancy and baby names
• Books on date night ideas, such as Date Night In: More than 120
Recipes to Nourish Your Relationship by Ashley Rodriguez and
Dating Fun for Couples: 400 creative dating ideas for you to try by
Jensen, PhD, Vern A.
• Books for couples, such as local nature getaways, hiking, beaches,
camping
• Urban adventures within driving distance
• Nearby bed and breakfast, spa getaway and winery guides
Constant “Googling” for bits and pieces on different subjects can
become tiresome. Having a book that allows for a broader and more
deﬁnitive understanding of gardening, or home repair, or any other sub-
ject of choice just makes sense.
Programming with Couples in Mind
I can honestly say that I have not seen much programming presented with
couples in mind in libraries and I thought this was a great idea on the part
of one of my contributors, who kindly helped me come up with some
ideas to bring couples, married or not, with our without children, into
the library:
• Learning couples massage
• Couples only vacation planning
• Romantic getaways, including LGBT friendly hotspots
• Couples cooking class
• He said/she said book club
46
Designing Adult Services

• LGBT couples book club
• Gender-based Communication Skills
• Dance classes
• Date night at the library with wine tasting (with kids in story hour,
optional)
• Gardening, canning, and other “homesteading” skills
• Programs featuring local songwriters/musicians
Many of these programs will require outside help, unless you have a
massage therapist or dance instructor on staff. Often local musicians,
instructors, or craftspeople will donate their time to the library for an
opportunity to show off their skills and talent and build a loyal following.
If budget is a problem, it never hurts to ask. Consider offering licensed
childcare at these programs to encourage couples (or any adults) to attend
by freeing them from the chore and expense of ﬁnding child care services.
Remember that grant opportunities for educational programs are also
readily available. Check with local foundations or your state library for
funding opportunities.
No Kidding?
Since there are sure to be library users or would-be library users in this age
group in your community who have not yet “settled down” or who have
decided not to have children or even forego the conventional marriage
route, it would behoove any smart librarian to have programs and collec-
tions that appeal to this demographic. These are the very people you
might lose as lifelong library users, so do not ignore them! Single parents,
DINKS (Double Income No Kids), and SINKS (Single Income No Kids—I
just made that up) who are settling into careers, buying homes or just test-
ing out being grown-up and on their own can still ﬁnd useful information
and programs through the local library.
Do Not Forget the Fur Babies!
People of all ages have and love their fur babies, but according to Quartz
Media in an article written by Roberto A. Ferdman, “Americans are hav-
ing dogs instead of babies” purports that the drop in the number of youn-
ger women having babies has also resulted in an increase in the number of
younger women owning small dogs (http://qz.com/197416/americans
-are-having-dogs-instead-of-babies/). While this may not be entirely the
cause of the rise in pet ownership, we all know many people who are
Settling Down: Age Group 30–40
47

completely devoted to their fur babies. Whether they are cat people or
dog people or trans-species, pet owners seem to have become increasingly
devoted and vocal about their devotion. Cat ladies are no longer
ashamed. Facebook feeds are ﬁlled with pictures of pooches. Promoting
collections about caring for pets and maybe even offering a program or
two could be a good way to reach out to younger adults who might be set-
tling down with a furry friend as the smallest member of their household.
If the library has access to an outdoor space, have an outdoor event for
dog owners. If you have a good vacuum cleaner with a Hepa ﬁlter, you
might even allow pet owners to bring their bundles of ﬂuff into an
enclosed space for a special event, like a pet fashion show or allow the
knitting club to share knit fashions for pets. Consider sponsoring an event
at a location outside the library, if necessary, just to avoid any complaints
about allergies, but do not ignore the burgeoning devotion to furry
friends!
Pets are increasingly allowed into designated “pet patios” at restau-
rants and I have even seen an ad for a “cat café,” especially for cat owners
and their kitties. There is no denying that Americans love their pets and
seem to be asking for pet acceptance in more and more places. While
you might not be ready to have “Fur Babies at the Library Day,” a cat
or dog themed book club might attract the die-hard pet lovers and turn
them into die-hard library fans. While you are at it, go ahead and get
these two titles for your collection:
Knitting with Dog Hair: Better a Sweater from a Dog You Know and
Love than from a Sheep You’ll Never Meet by Kendall Crolius and
Anne Montgomery
Crafting with Cat Hair: Cute Handicrafts to Make with Your Cat by
Kaori Tsutaya and Amy Hirschman
In addition to the programming suggestions mentioned earlier, you
might also consider the following:
• Having an obedience training expert offer classes
• A pet adoption program
• Making pet fashions and costumes, including knitting for pets or
knitting with pet hair
• DIY pet foods and toys
• Pet Grooming 101
Think about promoting your programs at pet stores, shelters, and dog
parks and be prepared to get these fur baby parents interested in every-
thing the library has to offer them!
48
Designing Adult Services

LIBRARY SERVICES FOR CHILDREN
“What’s this doing here?” you might be thinking. As it turns out educat-
ing the parents of small children about early literacy development is an
important tool in a child’s intellectual development and growth.
Consequently, library services to small children can be very important
to the “settling down” demographic, as this is the time in which young
parents are most likely to bring their children into the library to check
out books and attend programs. As it just so happens, this is a most
important time in a child’s development. There are numerous programs
being implemented in libraries and through nonproﬁt organizations that
offer “ﬁrst books” to infants, or books for daycares where small children
spend their time away from home, particularly in low-income or high-
immigrant population areas.
Statewide Programs for Children
The California State Library has sponsored a statewide initiative since
2006, in the form of Library Services and Technology Act (LSTA) grants
to library jurisdictions around the state to implement family-focused,
early learning programs and services. Early Learning with Families
(ELF) supports the ongoing evolution of library services to young chil-
dren (age up to ﬁve), their families and caregivers.
Through ELF, some California libraries have reorganized collections, cre-
ated welcoming spaces, and offered developmentally appropriate programs
for young children and their families. By partnering with local organizations
that share similar childhood literacy goals, these libraries have been able to
leverage and expand this important work. According to the ELF section of
the California State Library’s website “up until 4th grade, children are essen-
tially learning to read but from 4th grade on they are reading to learn.
Children who don’t read at grade level by the end of 3rd grade are four times
more likely not to graduate from high school than more proﬁcient readers.
According to the 2013 National Assessment of Educational Progress, 47%
of these low performing students come from low-income families.”
What predicts 3rd grade reading levels? The number of words a child
knows by the time he or she is two to three years old! Yet as early as
18 months, low-income children begin to fall behind in vocabulary devel-
opment. They tend to:
• have few, if any, books in the home;
• hear as many as 30 million fewer words than their more afﬂuent
peers by age four; and
Settling Down: Age Group 30–40
49

• by age 5, many recognize only 9 letters of the alphabet compared to
a typical middle-class child who recognizes 22 letters.
This is an astonishingly sad statistic, but by engaging parents to read
with their preschoolers, children can learn more and new words, and con-
sequently become better readers later on. According to the ELF project
web page, “A large and growing body of research provides persuasive
evidence conﬁrming the particular importance of these ﬁrst years in the
development of a child’s brain. During this time, neural connections are
established that provide the foundation for language, reasoning, problem
solving, social skills, behavior and emotional health . . . . Everything a
child sees, touches, tastes, smells or hears helps to shape the brain for
thinking, feeling, moving, and learning. When children have high-
quality early learning experiences they are better prepared to succeed in
school and in life.” How wonderful is that? (http://elf2.library.ca.gov/
why/literacy.html)
Often with young children, mommy and daddy ﬁnd themselves work-
ing and paying another adult to care for preschool-age children while
parents work. Many of the young children brought to storytime at the
library are accompanied by paid caregivers and in some areas, particu-
larly urban areas, the caregivers could be new Americans, lacking the
skills necessary to deliver reading fundamentals to young children.
Programming devoted to caregivers is in many ways just as important as
those provided to the children themselves. Or programs that provide ben-
eﬁts to both the caregiver and the child (family literacy models) can serve
as a tremendous resource to these demographics. See the chapter on out-
reach to special populations for more on this subject, as well as the family
literacy section of this chapter.
FAMILY LITERACY
In “Just Good Practice” (Public Libraries, 2015), Dorothy Stoltz, Paula
Isett, Linda Zang, Liza Trye, and Liz Sundermann describe several suc-
cessful family literacy programs through partnerships of the Maryland
State Department of Education, public libraries, and early literacy groups
in the state of Maryland.
One such program is the Read and Play program, demonstrating to
young parents how to read, sing, and play with a newborn. The Library
Family Café discussion group is focused on learning topics and can be
tailored to a community’s needs. Some libraries use activity play stations,
while others use the Every Child Ready to Read (ECRR) format,
50
Designing Adult Services

discussed in the next section. The Library Family Café model can take
children from infancy to formal education, with parents learning along
the way.
Family Info Center can be found in one or two branches of every
library system, and provides information speciﬁc to early literacy, early
learning, and community partners in these areas. Local early childhood
organizations share their literature through the library, in addition to
the library’s pamphlets and handouts on early learning and literacy.
The article offers up four tenets of engaging families, reminding parents
that they are a child’s ﬁrst teacher, that the public library is a resource for
family learning, that library staff are trained to assist early learning, and
that libraries function best as providers of early learning activities when
they partner with caregivers, and community agencies and organizations,
capitalizing on concerted community efforts.
In The Maryland Early Childhood Family Engagement Framework pub-
lished by the Maryland Family Engagement Coalition, there are seven
common goals listed that all partners in early childhood education, includ-
ing libraries, can embrace to develop good strategies for achieving goals.
As stated in The Framework, “Family engagement practices must be initi-
ated and implemented with clear goals in mind.” These goals are as follows:
Goal 1: Family engagement initiatives should promote family well-
being.
Maryland’s vision for family engagement is a two-generation strategy.
Families are the key to a child’s early development and learning. As such,
a goal of family engagement initiatives must be to support family well-
being. Maryland’s family engagement initiatives and the family engage-
ment practices of early care and education providers should promote the
safety, health, and ﬁnancial security of families so that they can success-
fully parent their young children.
Goal 2: Family engagement initiatives should promote positive parent-
child relationships.
Research clearly documents the link between competent parenting,
strong parent-child bonds, and positive school readiness outcomes.
Given the importance of parent-child relationships, it is imperative that
Maryland’s family engagement initiatives and the practices of early care
and education providers have the goal, beginning with the transition to
parenthood, of supporting parents and families in developing warm rela-
tionships that nurture their child’s learning and development. This begins
with developing warm, nurturing relationships among adults, including
between staff members, and between staff and parents and other adult
family members.
Settling Down: Age Group 30–40
51

Goal 3: Family engagement initiatives should support families as life-
long educators of their children.
Parents and family members are their child’s ﬁrst teachers. Maryland
initiatives and the practices of early care and education providers should
create collaborative relationships with a variety of service entities to sup-
port and empower the family in its role as ﬁrst teacher.
Goal 4: Family engagement initiatives should support the educational
aspirations of parents and families.
Research has documented the link between parental education—par-
ticularly maternal education levels—and positive school readiness out-
comes. When parents and other adults in the family strive to achieve
their educational goals, they become a positive example to their children
regarding the importance of education. Therefore, a goal of Maryland
initiatives and the practices of early care and education providers should
be to support parents and families to advance their own interests through
education, training, and other experiences that support their parenting,
careers, and life goals.
Goal 5: Family engagement initiatives should support families through
the care and education transitions of early childhood.
When a child transitions to a new early care and education provider, or
to the formal education system, the child and family changes setting,
teacher, and learning culture. These transitions are challenging for
parents and families— and often for providers and teachers—to navigate.
Therefore, Maryland initiatives and the practices of early care and educa-
tion providers should support families as they make transitions with their
children to new learning environments.
Goal 6: Family engagement initiatives should connect families to their
peers and to the community.
Personal networks are a key source of support for families with young
children. Learning from one another and sharing common experiences
can inform parents and families about resources, expand parenting strat-
egies, and offer a source of comfort. Maryland initiatives and the family
engagement practices of early care and education providers should sup-
port parents and families to form connections with peers and mentors in
formal or informal social networks that are supportive and that enhance
social well-being and community life.
Goal 7: Family engagement initiatives should support the development
of families as leaders and child advocates.
When parents and families are empowered, they can be a strong
force for positive change in their child’s education and in many other
areas of life. Therefore, Maryland initiatives and the family
52
Designing Adult Services

engagement practices of early care and education providers should
support families to participate in leadership development, decision-
making, program policy development, and community and state
organizing activities to improve children’s development and learning
experiences.
The entire document also includes strategies for early care and educa-
tion providers to meet the goals set forth, such as the following:
Welcome all families—and all family structures, sizes, and
arrangements.
• Initiate relationships with families that are receptive, responsive, and
respectful.
• Include family-friendly spaces with pictures and materials that
afﬁrm, welcome and accept all families.
• Engage in honest dialogue with families about their expectations
and staff/program objectives.
• Hold the child and family in high regard and partner effectively with
all parents.
• Provide opportunities that support parents’ needs to connect with
other parents for reﬂection, information, ideas, and support.
• Support parent-child relationships in a way that values the culture
and language of the family and recognizes how cultural inﬂuences
impact family development.
• Welcome families to observe and participate in their child’s class-
room or home-based activities.
• Support and encourage parents to share tips on everyday learning
practices with staff and other families.
• Make information available that supports adults’ personal growth
and career development.
In implementing programs for early and family literacy, libraries
everywhere can adapt and use these goals and strategies as part of an
implementation plan.
Every Child Ready to Read
Every Child Ready to Read (ECRR) is a parent education program in
public libraries. It began as a “partnership of the Public Library
Association (PLA) and Association for Library Service to Children
(ALSC) to allow public libraries to have an even greater impact on
early literacy through focusing on educating parents and caregivers”
Settling Down: Age Group 30–40
53

(http://www.everychildreadytoread.org/about). By teaching the primary
adults in a child’s life about the importance of early literacy and how to
nurture prereading skills at home, the child has a greater chance of
being successful in reading and school, when formal training begins. This
is the basis of Every Child Ready to Read @ your library. A program that
has been in libraries since 2004, the focus on educating parents and
caregivers is a different approach for many libraries and has proven its
value since its inception. By offering early literacy services to children of
young parents, the library is ultimately providing services to children and
their young parents.
PRIME TIME, Inc.
PRIME TIME is another family literacy program, which brings young
parents and children into the library. Created by the Louisiana
Endowment for the Humanities (LEH) in 1991, the original program,
PRIME TIME Family Reading Time, was an “award-winning reading,
discussion, and storytelling series based on illustrated children’s
books . . . . The program helped low-income, low-literate families bond
around the act of reading and talking about books. It modeled and
encouraged family reading and discussion of humanities topics, and
aided parents and children in selecting books and becoming active
public library users” (http://www.ala.org/programming/primetime/
primetimefamily). In its current incarnation, PRIME TIME, Inc. still
partners with libraries and other service organizations to carry out its
purpose. In 2011, PRIME TIME, Inc. released these statistics in
“Stemming the Tide of Intergenerational Illiteracy: A Ten-Year
Impact Study of PRIME TIME FAMILY READING TIME” (http://
primetimefamily.org/program-impact/#sthash.6kRo6gJJ.dpuf):
• More than 6,900 individuals completed the program
• Family retention rate across programs was 94.2 percent
• Twenty-three percent weekly and 17.2 percent monthly increase in
public library use among participants
• A positive change in attitude toward library use was reported by
78.5 percent participants
• Daily reading frequency as a family was increased by 8.1 percent
• Eighty-ﬁve percent participants reported increase in positive family
interactions, or bonding, improving reading attitudes and behaviors
• A positive change in attitude toward reading was reported by
80.4 percent participants
54
Designing Adult Services

• Increase in discussion participation among the adults was observed
by 77.5 percent
• Eighty-ﬁve percent observed increase in discussion participation
among the children
PRIME TIME also contributes to the continuation of the family read-
ing experience by focusing on children ages 3–10. This program also
leans more heavily on discussion of humanities-related issues found in
the stories, which makes it ideal for families with older children. Read
more of the impact study at http://primetimefamily.org/program-impact/
#sthash.6kRo6gJJ.dpuf.
Paws for Reading
Paws for Reading is a particular program offered in some northeastern
states, sponsored by a number of foundations and businesses, which
allows children who struggle with reading to read to a trained service ani-
mal. From the Paws for Reading website:
PAWS for Reading is a program that allows children to read aloud
to a therapy dog (or cat, or bunny!) in order to improve reading
and communication skills. Children read individually to trained
therapy pets (and their handlers) in schools, libraries, or other set-
tings where they can feel comfortable and conﬁdent—and have
fun! After all, a dog will not correct them or make them feel awk-
ward if they stumble. http://www.pawsforpeople.org/children/
paws-for-reading/
While this particular program may be out of reach for your library,
similar models are offered all around the country. Offering a similar pro-
gram, or an educational program in which parents and children at least
learn about reading to their pets at home, might be an option for you.
1,000 Books before Kindergarten
Another important program for parents with small children is 1,000
Books before Kindergarten. According to an article by Beth Crist, Youth
and Family Services Consultant at the Colorado State Library:
The program is based upon solid evidence from research ﬁndings
that the more children ages 0–5 hear books read to them, the more
Settling Down: Age Group 30–40
55

prepared they will be to learn to read upon reaching kindergarten.
https://www.cde.state.co.us/cdelib/1000booksprogramtoolkit
Libraries administer the program differently, but the general frame-
work is based upon the summer reading program model of encouraging
and rewarding reading with incentives. Parents of children 0–5 sign up
for the program at their public library, although a few elementary schools
in the Midwest offer the program too.
Libraries provide the parents with reading logs to track how many
books they and others read to their children. Some libraries give small
incentives when the families reach certain reading milestones, like 50
books. When the families have reached 1,000 books before the child
reaches kindergarten, they have successfully completed the program.
Besides having children hear 1,000 before kindergarten, program goals
may include
• ensuring kids enter kindergarten ready to read,
• having an opportunity to present parents with information about
early literacy,
• instilling the lifelong love of reading in young children,
• fostering a positive connection to the library for families and
children,
• reinforcing parents’ role as their child’s ﬁrst and best teachers, and
• creating a network of families and children that are committed to lit-
eracy and education.
Cost and Maintenance
The model is really ﬂexible and can be started and maintained with very
little to a lot of funding. An inexpensive program might look like this:
Upon registration, the family receives a simple reading log designed in-
house, a list of recommended books in your collection appropriate for the
child’s age, info for the parents on early literacy, and info about the
library including a library card application and a schedule of storytimes
and other children’s programs.
After reading 25 or 50 books, the family receives a sticker on the read-
ing log, or a bookmark. They may also get to put an item (a paper animal,
star, etc.) with the child’s name on a bulletin board made for the program.
After reading 250 or 500 books, the family receives a free book to keep,
and upon completing the program, the family receives a certiﬁcate and is
invited to attend a once-a-year congratulations party for everyone who
56
Designing Adult Services

has ﬁnished that year; simple refreshments or more substantial fare like
pizza donated by local restaurants are served, and craft time is offered.
With more funding, other items may be included like the following:
Upon registration, the family receives a canvas book bag with reading
log sheets in a binder, an age-appropriate book and toy, info for the
parents on early literacy, and info about the library including a library
card application, a schedule of storytimes and other children’s programs,
and a list of recommended books for the child’s age in your collection.
Other incentives may be offered more frequently and could include free
books, educational toys, music CDs, puppets, puzzles, coloring books,
crayons, and so on. The annual party may include all participants with
special recognition given to the “graduates.”
Parents can track reading either by recording each title or checking a
box/ﬁlling in a shape to indicate one book read (the latter option may
be more beneﬁcial for parents with low literacy or low English literacy).
A few libraries that offer the program allow each title to be entered only
once, even if it is read over and over, but most allow parents to include
the title each time they read it. Parents can include books that their chil-
dren hear in library storytimes, in preschool, from other family mem-
bers, and elsewhere too. If a family has more than one child enrolled
in the program and someone reads the same book to all of them, all
get to count the book.
While it is best for parents to join the program just after their child is
born, most libraries offering the program allow them to begin any time
before their child enters kindergarten.
A good way for parents to think about it is this: if they read only one
book at bedtime every night for three years, they will have read 1095
books! If they read 3 books a day, they will read 1095 books in only
one year! If they begin when their child is ﬁrst born and read just 4 books
per week, they will have read 1040 by the time the child reaches
kindergarten.
Options to enhance the program may be used, such as the following:
• Producing a quarterly newsletter (and/or blog about the program)
for all parents registered to help keep families engaged in the pro-
gram and to allow another opportunity to distribute early literacy.
• Using tips, book lists, your storytime schedule, and fun activities.
• Having a quarterly meeting of all families registered, which serves as
a way to build a community.
• Networking amongst families, as well as another time to impart
early literacy info. Inviting other relevant community organizations
Settling Down: Age Group 30–40
57

can help families learn of other services available to them, and can
help the library build partnerships.
• Partnering with preschools, daycares, schools, nonproﬁts, social ser-
vice agencies, Early Childhood Councils, and other organizations to
cross promote services and offer joint programs.
• Seeking sponsors in local businesses for cash and in-kind contribu-
tions (sponsors can give to the program as a whole or can sponsor
one child or family) as well as seeking funding from nonproﬁts and
foundations.
• Tying the program into your summer reading program.
• Engaging great volunteers to assist with program promotion, main-
taining registrant info, reading to children, and so on.
• Initiating the program with a community baby shower for parents-
to-be and signing them up for the program before their child even
arrives (and this could be an annual event to attract new families to
the program).
Many of these great suggestions from the Colorado State Library can
work with any family literacy program. Design your own program and
make use of any pieces/parts that would work in your community.
OTHER KINDS OF LITERACY
People use libraries for all of their literacy needs and in addition to help-
ing library users improve their information literacy skills, we can offer
programming in any number of areas and improve the literacy levels in
different subject areas.
Financial Literacy
Financial literacy has been a popular topic for programming in libraries
for some time, and the need for ﬁnancial literacy continues, with volatile
ﬁnancial markets at home and abroad occurring on a regular basis. The
Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) awarded a Laura Bush
21st Century Librarian Grant to the New York Public Library (NYPL)
in 2011 for Money Matters, designed to educate librarians about ﬁnan-
cial reference tools, in order to better serve the public. After the initial
training period, in which over 250 library workers participated, much
of the training materials needed to conduct workshops in the area of
ﬁnancial literacy remain on a website, creating an opportunity to beneﬁt
from the body of knowledge and information created by this IMLS
58
Designing Adult Services

funded collaboration. Access to training curriculum in areas like banking,
credit, investing, identity theft, income taxes, and retirement planning can
be found at Money Matter$ Pro (https://sites.google.com/a/nypl.org/
money-matters/home/curriculum).
Financial Literacy Resources Online
Consumer.Gov written in very simple language was developed by the
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and offers the basics of understanding
money, credit, banking, scams, and more (http://www.consumer.gov).
Money as You Grow, created by the President’s Advisory Council on
Financial Capability, is a website highlighting the 20 essential lessons
kids need to learn about money. It divides up the lessons per age group
and includes a downloadable poster (http://www.moneyasyougrow
.org).
Smart Investing @ Your Library, a partnership between the FINRA
Investor
Education
Foundation
and
the
American
Library
Association, not only offers grant opportunities for public libraries to
enhance their ﬁnancial literacy programming but also provides great re-
sources and tools to download and share with patrons (http://
smartinvesting.ala.org/).
Participate in Money Smart Week @ your library, a national initiative
between the ALA and the Federal Reserve Bank (Chicago) to provide
ﬁnancial literacy programming to help members of your community bet-
ter manage their personal ﬁnances (http://www.ala.org/ofﬁces/money
-smart-week).
A 529 College Savings Plan is an education savings plan operated by a
state or educational institution. A 529 plan allows families to set aside
funds for future college costs and allow the savings to grow tax-free,
either through an automatic monthly contribution or an annual gift.
529 plan funds can be used for many of the peripheral educational
expenses such as computers, books, and relevant equipment. Even living
expenses are eligible for funding through a 529 plan as long as the student
is attending college at least half time. A list of 529 College Savings Plans is
listed by state at savingforcollege.com (http://www.savingforcollege.com/
enroll_in_a_529_plan/).
By using these resources, programming ideas, and learning from on-
line tutorials and trainings, you can, in turn, tailor programs to your
own library needs, or simply point library users to valuable resources
online, in order to meet these young and enterprising adults ﬁnancial
information needs.
Settling Down: Age Group 30–40
59

Health Literacy
Parents of young children, caregivers, garden variety hypochondriacs
(Stop pointing at me!), and everyday people of all ages need access to
reliable health information, but sometimes young parents need special
reassurance about their child’s health. Health literacy trainings and
programs are a great option for most demographics, but tailoring some
programs speciﬁcally for parents of young children is a programming
idea that I do not see very often. For several years while working as a
consultant for the Missouri State Library, I worked with the state liai-
son to the National Network of Libraries of Medicine (NNLM) to
bring health literacy training to librarians around the state. Since the
NNLM is a national network, there are most likely trainers in your
state or region who could assist you and your staff with becoming bet-
ter health literacy librarians. The NNLM website lists regional libraries
and liaisons at http://nnlm.gov.
Trainings by the NNLM focus on Federal resources like MedLine and
MedLine Plus, PubMed, the Center for Disease Control, ToxNet, and
Household Products Database. These trusted resources can supply anx-
ious parents and nonparents alike, as well as younger caregivers and the
newly responsible adult with reliable medical information at their ﬁnger-
tips, if they know about them and know how to use them. That is where
you come in, dear librarian.
MORE DETAILED PROGRAMMING IDEAS
Pet Grooming 101
With fur babies sometimes serving as “place holders” until couples decide
to obtain a real baby, either through traditional methods or adoption,
having a program for those lovable four-footed babies can be a win-
win-win for the pets, the library, and the owners. While programs sug-
gested earlier might appeal more to women, knitting pet clothes, fur baby
fashion show, a generic grooming program would be attractive to
anyone.
Learning goals:
• Learn how to better care for pets
• Increase the health and well-being of furry friends through good
hygiene
• Save a bit of money on the groomers
• Learn more about library services and other programs
60
Designing Adult Services

Steps to take:
• Contact local pet-grooming shops and ﬁnd a couple of willing pre-
senters, for dogs and cats
• Allow the groomers to bring their own “models” for this program
• Have a budget and offer at least an honorarium
• Focus on the simplest of grooming techniques, bathing, trimming,
nail clipping, nothing fancy
• Emphasize that the groomers will be reaching new audiences and
hopefully gaining new customers
• Set up can best be determined by the groomers, but a tub for wash-
ing and one for rinsing would probably be needed
• Advertise any other pet related programs
• Bring in some pet-grooming books, and point to any e-books available
As with the cooking demonstration in Chapter 3, programs with pets
can be a little riskier but might well offer a greater reward. Check your
insurance policy, schedule a private space for the program, and advertise
through social media and pet-related local businesses. It is always a good
idea to throw something a little different into the programming mix!
Buying Your First Home
Buying a house is intimidating and costly. Some people never own a home
for these reasons, and others prefer to rent. But the dream of home
ownership is part and parcel of the all-American dream, and younger
people looking to settle down and start a family are frequently in the mar-
ket for home ownership.
Learning goals:
• Weighing the beneﬁts of buying or renting
• What to look for in your investment in a property
• Learn about any government resources for new home owners
• Calculating down payments and other costs in buying
• Shopping for a mortgage
• When and how to negotiate or at least ask your realtor
Steps to take:
• Consider making this program a panel discussion
• Involve realtors from different types of agencies, such as those that
offer minimal assistance to full-service agencies
Settling Down: Age Group 30–40
61

• Involve a local lending agency
• Do some research and provide a segment on online mortgage
application
• Work closely with presenters to ensure that the program does not
become an advertisement for a particular company or agency
• Ask for handouts from presenters in advance for this type of pro-
gram and have “take away” materials available
Libraries serve as trustworthy institutions within a community, and
with some work on your part and the part of the agencies you choose
for this program, you can offer a useful and informative program without
becoming the mouthpiece for a particular realty agency or lending institu-
tion. Buying a home is a huge step for people of any age, but taking this
big step might be the cornerstone of feeling “all grown up now” for many
younger adults.
CONCLUSION
Programs and services that bring young parents with children, young cou-
ples without kids, and young working professionals into the library to
share books, programs, discussions or a game night are a big plus for
those folks who are ﬁnally beginning to settle down. Access to online
magazines, movies, audio, and e-books can provide a relaxing evening
after a stressful week at work, or a fun family night.
Trusted and established in local communities, libraries are poised to
offer services that complement the services offered in daycares and pre-
schools. By engaging with young parents and teaching them how to foster
early literacy habits, libraries help to build greater reading skills for chil-
dren and establish a pattern of life-long learning early on. In addition to
improving on the little ones vocabulary and potential reading skills, you
are working to create a new generation of library users, while keeping in
touch with a generation that often manages to slip away.
62
Designing Adult Services

CHAPTER 5
Midlife Crisis (or Not): Age Group 40–55
I
’m not going to soft-pedal it: This midlife period can be really challeng-
ing, or at least it was for me. By now, most of us are pretty ﬁrmly
entrenched in, if not a particular job, at least a career choice, things start
happening with the body that have never happened before, kids are
becoming more independent and leaving “the nest” around this time,
and some of us get unceremoniously dumped back into the workforce.
Then, there is the whole issue of being caught up in the “Sandwich
Generation” during this time—dealing with older and ailing parents
while trying to raise children of our own. Seriously, it can be rough.
But there really is no such thing as midlife crisis, at least not of the ster-
eotypical “buy a sports car and start having an extramarital affair” vari-
ety, or so some people would like us to think (Drimalla, Hanna. “Midlife
Myths.” Scientiﬁc American Mind 26.2, pp. 58–61, September 10, 2015).
However, midlife brings on a tremendous amount of responsibility and
physical changes, and oftentimes with these types of changes comes addi-
tional stress. So, while the big, full-blown midlife crisis might be a myth, a
series of smaller “challenges” at this time can make a person feel like they
are experiencing a real crisis. Been there, done that. By keeping in contact
with and offering services and programs of interest to those who so dili-
gently brought their kids in for story hour and early literacy programs
just a few years ago, libraries can be a source of help and comfort in a
time of real need.
STUCK IN THE MIDDLE
If you are middle-aged, you might fall into the Sandwich Generation cat-
egory, meaning that you could possibly be caring for an aging parent or

relative while taking care of or assisting your own children or even grand-
children. In a 2013 Pew Internet report, “The Sandwich Generation:
Rising Financial Burdens for Middle-Aged Americans” (http://www
.pewsocialtrends.org/2013/01/30/the-sandwich-generation/), researchers
Kim Parker and Eileen Patten reported that nearly 50 percent of all adults
in their 40s and 50s had a parent over the age of 65 while raising a youn-
ger child or still supporting an older child. Fifteen percent of this age
group were contributing to the ﬁnancial support of both the younger
child and the older parent at the same time. While millennials are increas-
ingly taking up some of burden of caregiving in many instances, the older
female is still the main caregiver at this point in history. This is not a good
time to lose a job or make a risky career change, yet economic factors
such as a downturn in the economy can often lead to this very thing.
In an article for the Wall Street Journal, William Power, a ﬁnancial
reporter, writes about his personal experience in dealing with his elderly
in-laws’ ﬁnancial situation. “The Difﬁcult, Delicate Untangling of our
Parents’ Financial Lives” describes his experience with his wife in unrav-
eling the mysteries of the ﬁnancial lives of a couple who was married for
over 50 years and found themselves physically and mentally unable to
take care of their own ﬁnances. In the article, Power concludes with
how he and his wife are planning for the time when they will no longer
be able to handle their own ﬁnances by having
• a clear, comprehensive list of assets,
• a similar list of debts,
• account passwords and usernames for all online accounts, kept in a
secure location, and
• a trusted family member who knows the location of all of this
information.
Providing a program or link to resources on “Guidance for those
Assisting the Elderly with Finances” could be a great beneﬁt to the
Sandwich Generation (http://www.wsj.com/articles/the-difﬁcult-delicate
-untangling-of-our-parents-ﬁnancial-lives-1459130770).
The Caregiver Generation
The Sandwich Generation is also most often the Caregiver Generation,
and no matter when you were born, every generation goes through a
“Sandwich” period in which middle-aged people can be found caring
for older adults and their own offspring at the same time. Caregiving
64
Designing Adult Services

for aging parents while taking care of children or assisting young adults
can be a time-consuming task, yet many people contribute to the care of
another while holding down full-time or part-time jobs. There are a num-
ber of useful facts about caregiving in the United States to be found in the
executive summary of a study done by the National Alliance for
Caregiving in collaboration with AARP. According to the summary,
titled “Caregiving in the U.S.”:
• The out-of-pocket costs for caregivers average $200–$324 per
month.
• Caregivers report having difﬁculty ﬁnding time for friends or family
(51%), giving up hobbies or other activities (44%), and having less
time for such self-care activities as exercise (26%).
• One third of all caregivers report emotional distress over their
situation.
• More than 44 million unpaid caregivers provide care to someone age
18 and older who is ill or has a disability.
• An estimated 16 percent or 33.9 million Americans provide unpaid
care to adults over 50.
• The typical caregiver is a 46-year-old woman with some college educa-
tion, providing more than 20 hours of care each week to her mother.
• About 73 percent of surveyed caregivers said praying helps them
cope with caregiving stress, 61 percent said that they talk with or
seek advice from friends or relatives, and 44 percent read about
caregiving in books or other materials.
• About 30 percent said they need help keeping the person they care
for safe and 27 percent would like to ﬁnd easy activities to do with
the person they care for.
• Caregivers need assistance with locating materials in their native
language.
• They need more information about the medications their charges
take.
This same report states that 60 percent of all caregivers are female, with
the greatest number of Hispanics (21.0%), followed by African
Americans (20.3%) providing care for someone at home.
More female caregivers felt that they had no choice in deciding to offer
care (42%), usually for ﬁnancial reasons, while only 34 percent of males
felt this way (https://assets.aarp.org/rgcenter/il/us_caregiving_1.pdf).
This kind of caregiving frequently takes its toll on the caregiver’s own
health and well-being and as each Sandwich Generation grows older,
Midlife Crisis (or Not): Age Group 40–55
65

new health concerns of their own crop up. Unfortunately for many, it is
from the 40s onward that health concerns too often become a major focal
point of our lives. Libraries can offer valuable services to those caregivers
through assistance with locating local resources, reliable information
about medication, and informative and inspirational reading and pro-
gramming to make this demanding job easier.
LIBRARIES CARING FOR THE CAREGIVERS
There are a number of ways in which libraries can help with caring for
the caregiver. In addition to the reliable health resources offered by the
National Network of Libraries of Medicine mentioned in Chapter 3,
offering additional resources on caregiving for those folks caught
between a younger and older generation is a must. The U.S.
Department of Health and Senior Service’s National Institute on
Aging offers caregivers print publications such as booklets on the
following:
• Home Safety for People with Alzheimer’s Disease
• Hospitalization
• Safe Use of Medicines
And fact sheets on:
• Bathing
• Caring for Yourself
• Changes in Communications Skills
• Coping with Agitation and Aggression
• Disaster Preparedness
• Driving Safety
• Exercise and Physical Activity
• Hallucinations, Delusions, and Paranoia
• Helping Kids Understand Alzheimer’s Disease, Home Safety
• Long-Distance Caregiving—Getting Started
While many of these issues are related to Alzheimer’s care, another on-
line resource offers more general caregiving information.
The National Caregivers Library at http://www.caregiverslibrary.org/
home.aspx offers links to everything from government agencies to
resources for working caregivers to end-of-life and legal matters. A link
to these online resources on your library’s website could provide instant
66
Designing Adult Services

access to a well-compiled listing of agencies, publications, and tools for
caregivers.
Housing Resources for Older Parents
When caregiving becomes too much of a responsibility, and it can, there
are agencies that can assist caregivers in locating assisted living or other
housing for aging parents. Provide links on the library’s website to the
following:
• Administration for Community Living (www.aoa.gov): The
Administration for Community Living (ACL) is part of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services and is headed by the
administrator, who reports directly to the Secretary of Health and
Human Services (HHS). ACL serves as the federal agency
responsible for providing access to community support and
resources for older adults and people with disabilities.
• Eldercare.gov (www.eldercare.gov): A public service of the
Administration on Aging, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, is a nationwide service that connects older Americans and
their caregivers with information on senior services, including a
searchable database of Area Agencies on Aging, State Units on Aging,
aging information and referral programs, Aging and Disability
Resources Centers, and special purpose information and assistance
resources for legal services, elder abuse prevention, health insurance
counseling, and the Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program.
• U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (www.hud
.gov): U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) offers housing options, including assistance with research
to determine the kind of assistance or living arrangement needed,
health insurance coverage; and affordability. HUD-approved hous-
ing counselors offer further assistance and information about ways
to stay in the home, reverse mortgages for seniors, federal housing
programs for seniors, rural housing loans, apartment locator, units
for the elderly and persons with disabilities and public housing.
• The National Council on Aging (www.ncoa.org): It offers an online
search tool for older adults and caregivers, including assistance with
Medicare, food assistance programs, and paying for medications.
• Department of Veterans Affairs (www.va.gov): It provides
information about beneﬁts, including disability and survivor
beneﬁts.
Midlife Crisis (or Not): Age Group 40–55
67

COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT AND PROGRAMS
“Beef up” your career subject areas with titles that are more speciﬁc to
mid-career adults, or books that speciﬁcally address the issues of starting
over or changing careers midlife, such as the following:
• Midlife Career Change in a 20-Something World: How to Find
Happiness in a Career Transition after 40 by Sarah Guilliot
• The Sequel: How to Change Your Career without Starting Over by
Laurence Shatkin
• Strategize to Win: The New Way to Start Out, Step Up, or Start
Over in Your Career by Carla A. Harris
• Rebounders: How Winners Pivot from Setback to Success by Rick
Newman
• Do What You Are: Discover the Perfect Career by Paul D. Tieger,
Barbara Barron, and Kelly Tieger
Focus more on books that would help a user ﬁnally ﬁnd his or her niche
in life, like the ever-popular and ever-updated What Color Is Your
Parachute? by Richard N. Bolles and The Pathﬁnder: How to Choose
or Change Your Career for a Lifetime of Satisfaction and Success by
Nicholas Lore. It is probably a safe bet that many people changing careers
will want to read and research before taking the plunge into a new career,
so having fresh titles on hand either in print or e-book format will be a
beneﬁt for this demographic.
Two very obvious career choices for those changing careers in midlife are
1. teacher and
2. consultant
I say obvious because having gained the kind of experience that folks in
mid-career have often obtained, making a career out of offering that
expertise that comes with experience to others is a good ﬁt. Preparing
for the Praxis exam can be done through Learning Express Library, as
well as preparation for civil service exams, resume building, and ways to
improve job searching, networking, and interview skills.
Programming for Empty Nesters: Is Our House Getting
Bigger or What?
Some middle-aged folks ﬁnd themselves in a completely different situa-
tion from the Caregivers—these are the Empty Nesters. Now that all of
68
Designing Adult Services

the little nestlings have ﬂown away to college or career, mom and dad are
still doing well enough in a senior living community, and suddenly, the
house seems too big and too empty. Such a big change in the life force
ﬁeld could produce all kinds of results—the need for a new career, a
new hobby, new home decorating, downsizing to smaller place, or the
urge to get out of stale relationships, whether with a partner or a career.
Something has got to change!
You can almost think of the empty nesters as starting over again but
hopefully without the ﬁnancial insecurity and lack of experience of
20 years ago. Empty nesters need something to do, and their interests
have probably changed over the years or at least their approach to the
same interest might be different: the young man who started a garage
band could still be interested in music, just maybe not banging on drums
in the basement any more. The woman who participated in teen summer
reading many years ago could once again have time for an Adult Summer
Reading (ASR) program or adult book club. The crafter, writer, painter,
composer, and DIYer just maybe wants to be able to do some of those
things once again.
Just as story hour was important to the preschooler and the parents of
the preschooler, programming can become increasingly important as kids
leave the nest and parents have a bit more “free time” on their hands.
These newly freed parents might suffer a few pangs of longing for their
children, and an Empty Nest support group meeting in the library could
be just thing they are looking for. Others might choose to pursue new
interests, including a new love life, and some of the kinds of programming
mentioned back in Chapter 2 would be in order, such as the following:
• Real estate—tips and tricks for downsizing
• Finances—making the most of savings and investing
• Time management—simple steps to freeing up more time for play
• Home improvement—learn how to do simple home repairs
• Purchasing power—getting the best deals all the time
• Take charge of your health now, reap beneﬁts later—give users a
taste of yoga, meditation, or an exercise class
• Budgeting for life expenses
• Home decorating and design
• Computer classes
• Crafting
• Gourmet cooking (by now they have mastered everyday cooking)
• Wine tasting
• Speed dating for divorcees (still based on literary tastes)
Midlife Crisis (or Not): Age Group 40–55
69

By modifying a few programming ideas for a slightly different age
group, you can have a handful or a series of programs tailored to the
Empty Nesters among your library users.
Midlife Career Changes
Sometimes in midlife, people decide, “To heck with this! I’m going to do
what I want to do!” According to a 2014 Gallup Poll, about 30 percent
of baby boomers and GenXers are disengaged in their current job posi-
tions (http://www.gallup.com/poll/181289/majority-employees-not
-engaged-despite-gains-2014.aspx), and it is those 30 percent who could
be looking to jump ship at this point in their careers, out of simple bore-
dom or a sense of lack of fulﬁllment or job satisfaction.
On the other hand, middle-aged workers, often the higher paid employ-
ees after having gained knowledge and experience in their ﬁeld, can be the
ﬁrst ones to be unceremoniously dumped when there is an economic down-
turn or company merger. A midlife career change can also feel like a midlife
crisis, unless the career changer has instigated the change of his or her own
will! And a midlife career change is just a bit more serious than your average
job hopping early in one’s career. This type of move takes some soul search-
ing and a feeling of conﬁdence in what one is about to do.
In The Mature Mind: The Positive Power of the Aging Brain, Dr. Gene
D. Cohen suggests that the ﬁrst phase in the aging adult mind is the
reevaluation phase, a time in which we start to wonder how many years
we really have left. Such reevaluation is often the springboard for a new
career, hobby, or a more serious pursuit of a new passion. Offering collec-
tions and programs in these areas will beneﬁt your midlife library users.
There Has to Be Something More to Life!
For some, simply changing jobs would not be enough. The urge to ﬁnally
do what they have always wanted to do could cause these midlife career
jumpers to take the plunge and start a new business. Programming and
classes will be beneﬁcial to this group, as starting a new business requires
knowledge of business markets in speciﬁc areas, and networking. This
type of information is best found in immediate and frequently updated
sources, and not so much in a print resource. Consider hosting programs
that feature like-minded individuals who have already started a new busi-
ness, current business owners, and organizations devoted to local busi-
nesses, like the local area Chamber of Commerce or other economic
development organizations.
70
Designing Adult Services

Key to establishing a new business with sustained growth, particu-
larly for older, career-minded library users, is having the right resources
available and the knowledge to use them effectively. While many very
serious younger entrepreneurs will take on the challenge of starting a
new business, there can be much more at stake for those switching
careers at midlife. The library can offer additional programming and
marketing of resources already in place as well as new offerings in the
area of business resources. A well-trained library staff can assist library
users with ﬁnding industry facts, consumer trends, and other valuable
business information, and provide community connections with pros-
pects and colleagues through monthly networking events and trainings.
Library users looking for consultation about business plans, use of com-
puters and computer software and training with speciﬁc business-
related software, will beneﬁt from classroom and training provided by
knowledgeable library staff.
In order to better serve the business community, aspiring entrepre-
neurs, and job seekers, the library should invest in providing access and
assistance with at least some of the following online and print resources:
• A collection of print and electronic business books, on topics such as
decision making, globalization, project management, negotiation,
and leadership
• EBSCO’s Business Source Complete database
• Business Insights Essentials database
• Morningstar Investment Research Center online
• Small Business Resource Center online
• Online journals
• Business Plan Pro, a software program designed for creating busi-
ness plans
Job seeking and career development
• Gale Vocations and Careers Collection
• Gale Testing and Education Reference Center database
• Cypress Resume Builder
Grant research and writing
• Foundation Center Philanthropy In/Sight
• Foundation Directory Online
• Foundation Grants to Individuals Online
Midlife Crisis (or Not): Age Group 40–55
71

Business and ﬁnancial news
• Online databases such as Standard & Poor’s
• Print business newspapers and investor newsletters
• Weekly print publication Value Line, covering 3,500 stocks and
1,900 mutual funds on a quarterly basis
Services
• Appointments for a personal consultation with a librarian to discuss
resources designed to assist with business, career, or ﬁnancial
concerns
• Free classes, such as résumé creation, Internet and software basics,
and job search strategies, and a monthly networking opportunity,
possibly in partnership with the Chamber of Commerce or local eco-
nomic development organizations
The success of any library program relies heavily upon outreach and
marketing. Without proper marketing, library collections and services,
while excellent resources, often remain underused due to lack of exposure
to the community at large. By marketing services to local businesses and
entrepreneurs, the library will quickly become a recognized and contrib-
uting factor in the business community.
Consider offering the following:
• Monthly after-work “happy hours” for networking opportunities,
ﬁnding potential customers, and making new connections
• Classroom instruction that will provide the means of not only learn-
ing a new searching skill or software but also an opportunity to meet
like-minded people with similar business goals and interests
• User-based skill training software for customers, such as Lynda.com
• Book discussions led by local business leaders on hot topics in the
industry
• A session on federal government contracts
• A session on the Patent and Trademark Repositories of the United
State Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce (USPTO) and their resources
• Introduction to any of the business-related online databases or soft-
ware currently in place; rotate these offerings on a weekly basis
and at varying times to accommodate schedules
• Resume building techniques using online and in-house library
resources
72
Designing Adult Services

• Coordination of business mentorships with members from the
Service Corp of Retired Executives business counselors and inter-
ested individuals
• A discussion on small business loans from local bankers or represen-
tatives of the U.S. Small Business Administration
• A tutorial in LinkedIn for business
• A presentation on how to write a business plan
• An introduction to social media for business
Outreach and Marketing
Promoting the library’s services and programs will require a variety of
outreach and marketing techniques, including
• the attention of local news outlets via ads, press releases, and
articles
• presentations to local service and business support organizations
• mailings to local businesses
• simple word-of-mouth
MORE DETAILED PROGRAMMING IDEAS
Local Business Owners’ Fair
For those people experiencing their own “Is this all there is in life?”
moment, or those who have been unceremoniously dumped out of their
jobs of several years, the midlife crisis is real, folks. If you suddenly notice
an inﬂux of people who should be at work during the day, it is time to
offer some midlife career-changing programs. Realizing that the entrepre-
neurial spirit is still alive and well in many middle-aged people, some pro-
gramming to spark that spirit is in order.
Learning goals:
• Learn about successful local businesses
• Have an opportunity to converse with local business owners
• Learn some keys to success
• Connect with like-minded individuals and network
• Learn about business related library resources
Steps to take:
• Find local business owners who would like to share their success sto-
ries with others
Midlife Crisis (or Not): Age Group 40–55
73

• Have a space large enough to accommodate some displays as well as
seating and presenters
• Take applications for the business fair, as there will probably be
quite a bit of interest
• Have a series of short presentations by different business owners over
the course of the day, allowing attendees to come and go, as desired
• Allow people to toot their own horns
• Allow business owners to set up and leave displays for browsing
• Make sure that presenters know they are sharing the story of how
they began and the “secrets to success”
• Have a display of business related and entrepreneurial book selec-
tions around the library
• Do your own presentation on online and print business resources,
emphasizing the ways in which the library can help
• Provide links to local and federal e-government resources for small
businesses on the library website
• Follow up with the business owners with written thanks and
acknowledgment through the library’s website and newsletters as
this work will be done “pro bono”
In addition to job searching, resume building, and other standard offer-
ings for career building, a successful local business fair could be a fun and
exciting addition to your roster of programs!
Adult Summer Reading Book Club
When I served as Adult Services Consultant for the Missouri State
Library, I hosted ASR workshops all around the state. ASR was just tak-
ing off at that point, and there was quite a bit of enthusiasm for it. Busy
midlifers might enjoy an “excuse” to sit down and read for pleasure once
a day. “Hey, I joined this ASR program, I have to ﬁnish my reading this
week. Laundry will just have to wait!” There are so many wonderful
ASR programming ideas to choose from, and the Collaborative Summer
Library Program (CSLP), a consortium of states working together to pro-
vide high-quality summer reading program materials for children, teens,
and adults, offers up a different theme each year as well as materials for
purchase, and ideas for sharing. The 2017 theme, “build a better world,”
offers up numerous opportunities for programming. Here is one idea:
Learning goals:
• Learn about different cultures and people in a relaxed and engaging
atmosphere
74
Designing Adult Services

• Highlight a few authors from around the world
• Open up opportunities for discussion on the various refugee crises
and the role of other nations in assisting
• Learn about other customs, religions, and traditions
• Find common ground for all people
Steps to take:
• Require online or onsite registration for full participation, such as
drawings for prizes and submitting book suggestions for other readers
• Choose a variety of books in different formats to feature through the
library website and in displays
• Choose three or four books for group discussion in the old-
fashioned onsite book club manner, and allow for postings and dis-
cussion online, where possible
• Use any adult committee members that you might have to come up
with book ideas for discussion
• Try to ﬁnd at least one author that can do a presentation with a global
theme and failing an onsite presentation, try to do something by Skype
• Video presentations can be kept online long after the actual event,
with the presenter’s permission
• Check local calendars for conﬂicts of scheduling for busy adults
• Choose ﬁction to keep things on the lighter side of discussion and
offer carefully balanced political views if venturing into nonﬁction
• Invite members of the community representative of readings to add
richness and authenticity to discussions
• Have a fun “taste of” whatever country or culture that might be on
the list of possibilities, involving community members
• Do a book to movie night for adults and then discuss which is
better (ha!)
• If you track the number of books read, try to get some really good
prizes such as a night at a local B&B or dinner out for your adults,
through donation, if it is not in the library’s budget
Make ASR fun and meaningful for your busy midlifers, and they will
thank you for it. Everybody needs a reading break now and then.
CONCLUSION
Midlife career changers frequently feel the pressure of caring for younger
and older family members, the urge to ﬁnally do “the thing” that they
Midlife Crisis (or Not): Age Group 40–55
75

have always wanted to do, or face the challenge of being dumped back
into the workforce at a time when they least expected it. When offering
a comprehensive and dynamic library service to would-be business own-
ers and midlife career changers, ensuring recognition of the service
through marketing and outreach is a vital part of the equation and should
never be ignored. If they do not know you have it, they cannot use it!
76
Designing Adult Services

CHAPTER 6
An End in Sight (or Not): Age Group 55–65
I
t was bound to come to our attention, sooner or later: “Ack! I’m going
to be retiring in the next ten years or so!” Thinking about retirement
can make us feel really old and creaky, really, really, happy, or some-
where in between. Thinking about retirement either ﬁlls us with fear and
anxiety or causes us to spin off into some quiet little daydream about all
those things we will ﬁnally be able to do. I personally fall into the latter
category. Whatever the case may be, considering retirement does cause
us to face some issues that we might have swept under the carpet for a
couple of decades, such as the following:
1. Am I ﬁnancially able to actually retire?
2. Do I have enough in savings?
3. What should I do about my investments?
4. What about insurance after retirement?
5. Most importantly, which senior discounts kick in before age 65?
While I do not personally have the answer to any of these questions, I
know that I can ﬁnd the answers if I do my research or get in contact with
people who have the expertise that I need. Dealing with such weighty
matters deﬁnitely calls for some expertise and few of us can afford a
$1,000þ-an-hour private consultation with a ﬁnancial planner. At this
age, a person also might seriously consider ﬁnally writing up a will, or
be considering a planned giving option. Practical programs, as well as
“ﬂights of fancy,” are in order as people begin to see light at the end of
the long work tunnel.
In Phase II of the older adult life, as described in The Mature Mind: The
Positive Power of the Aging Brain (Cohen, 2006), Dr. Cohen refers to

“the liberation phase,” the point in life where we begin to think more
about what we might have missed—the big trip we always planned to
take and the social cause we always wanted to stand up for or take part
in—and this type of reﬂection often leads to action. The feeling of “It’s
now or never” begins to creep into our minds when it comes to thinking
about all of the things we might have done.
Coming up with programs and rounding out collections to ﬁll the
ﬁnancial planning gap, spur the imagination, and allow this age group
to continue to follow their dreams into retirement are among the services
libraries can provide.
LIBRARY SERVICES FOR THE SOON-TO-BE RETIRED
As with any other demographic, people looking toward retirement, but
not there yet, generally have different information needs and interests.
Financial planning for retirement is most often ﬁrst and foremost, but
other life’s issues start to bubble to the surface, too. The idea of doing cer-
tain things while we still have the income might be in the minds of some,
like travel, looking into the best places to retire in the United States and
other countries, and thinking about taking a chance on that “thing” you
always thought you should do or be but never found the right time or
place to do it or be it. Consider offering programs and emphasizing or
expanding collections for the soon-to-be-retiree.
The Circle of Life
Many people at this stage in life ﬁnd themselves enjoying time with the
grandkids. Some people ﬁnd themselves raising grandchildren, because
of family tragedy or other reasons. Whatever the case may be, interacting
with younger children at this time can be even more rich and rewarding
than the ﬁrst time around. Many of the same programs and services to
younger parents described in Chapter 4 can be applicable to grandpar-
ents, whether they are the full-time guardians or weekend caregivers.
While one situation might present many more challenges than the other,
libraries can and do offer the types of programs that grandparent and
child can enjoy together, such as story times, crafting, and game nights.
Many grandparents have the unique opportunity to share more quality
time with grandchildren than they might have shared with their own chil-
dren, due to work requirements or the hectic scheduling of caring for multi-
ple children at once. Educating grandparents with some of the same reading
and discussion techniques found in programs like “Every Child Ready to
78
Designing Adult Services

Read” and “Prime Time Family Reading Time” could just be invaluable to
the child’s development, depending on family circumstances, and if nothing
else, aid in bonding between grandparent and grandchild.
Also, just as in Chapter 4, as there are those who might only have fur
babies, or have a combination of children and fur babies, there are older
adults who might even get to enjoy their adult children’s “grandpets.”
I know this, as I have a friend who speaks of keeping the “grandcats.”
While programming with grandpets in mind might be difﬁcult to plan
(for how often might a group of people be called upon to cat sit at one
time?), having a display of relevant books and other materials on caring
for pets for those without pets could be a good idea. Pet sitting, dog walk-
ing, and caring for pets while their owners are away can also be a form of
extra income, so programming around pet sitting and dog walking could
be of interest to several age groups. Responsible adults are called upon to
do all sorts of things in life. Do not limit your imagination when it comes
to book displays, programs, and collection development!
Planning for a New Life: It Is Never Too Soon to Dream
While people in the 55–65-year-old age group do have the responsibility
to be ﬁnancially prepared for their retirement, it is not too early to start
planning for what we will do with all that spare time! In a survey by
American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) of nearly 5,000 work-
ers ages 50 to 64, more than one-third of those polled expect to continue
to work, preferably part-time, after retirement and a full 44 percent of
that group would like to work in a different ﬁeld from their current job
(http://blog.aarp.org/2015/09/08/aarp-survey-todays-retirement-dream
-often-includes-a-job/). I know there are some who say, “What would
I do with myself if I retired?” There are others of us who have one eye
on the nearest exit, with a concrete plan for what we will do when we
ﬁnally do not have to get up, shower, and face rush hour trafﬁc. This
is the fun kind of retirement planning!
Treating this type of “exploratory” retirement planning somewhat like
planning for a second career might be one way to approach it for those clue-
less about what they might like to do, with a focus on interests and compat-
ibility in certain areas. We all know someone who has made their living in
one ﬁeld, while keeping an avid interest in and connection to another ﬁeld,
and those who dabble in many things in their spare time. For example, I
have made my living working in libraries and archives, but I originally stud-
ied music as an undergraduate and graduate student and would love to be
able to teach voice when I have the supplemental income and freedom that
An End in Sight (or Not): Age Group 55–65
79

retirement will one day bring. Being able to ﬁnally devote full attention to
an avocation could be a lovely thing indeed.
COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT AND PROGRAMS
For this type of programming and collection development, give your
library users an opportunity to delve into their personal interests and hob-
bies in depth through collections and offer programming that relates to
career aptitude and personality type. Who knows? The lifetime hobby
could end up being a second career or lucrative part-time job in retire-
ment, fostered by a little self-curiosity, some planning, and research.
Look to add or emphasize existing resources on self-employment,
career-related personality and aptitude, and skills transfer.
One obvious choice for nonﬁction reading at this stage is retirement
planning. Try to include titles that address the various aspects of planning
for retirement, not just ﬁnancial planning, including plans for continued
work in retirement or being free to pursue old or new dreams and goals.
• The New Rules of Retirement: Strategies for a Secure Future by
Robert C. Carlson
• The 5 Years before You Retire: Retirement Planning When You
Need It the Most by Emily Guy Birken
• How to Retire Happy: The 12 Most Important Decisions You Must
Make before You Retire, Fourth Edition, by Stan Hinden
• Retire Inspired: It’s Not an Age, It’s a Financial Number by Chris
Hogan
• Too Young to Retire: 101 Ways to Start the Rest of Your Life by
Marika Stone
• Portfolio Life: The New Path to Work, Purpose, and Passion after
50 by David D. Corbett
• Make Your Own Living Trust by Denis Clifford, Attorney
• Your Estate Matters: Gifts, Estates, Wills, Trusts, Taxes and Other
Estate Planning Issues by Patti S. Spencer
• Pet Sitting: End Money Worries Business Book: Pet Sitters Secrets to
Starting, Financing, Marketing and Making Massive Money by
Brian Mahoney
• How to Build a Pet Sitting and Boarding Business (Special Edition):
The Only Book You Need to Launch, Grow & Succeed by T. K.
Johnson
More mature readers still like to read for entertainment and will no
doubt continue to read in their favorite genres, but reading to learn
80
Designing Adult Services

something new is also an attractive proposition. Be sure to include new
biographies and books on current events in your collection for older
readers.
The Not-So-Golden Parachute
• Since statistics show that many of the average working types (like
me) do not have enough in savings or in a pension plan, and the
“Golden Parachute” fails to open for most of us, we might be look-
ing for a different kind (or color) of retirement parachute.
According to a 2016 Gallup Poll report, “Three in 10 U.S.
Workers Foresee Working Past Retirement Age” by Lydia Saad,
31 percent of workers plan to work beyond the age of 67. Also
found in this report:
• A quarter of seniors are currently working beyond retirement age.
• 23 percent expect to retire before the age of 62.
• And the largest percentage, 38 percent, will retire somewhere
between the ages of 62 and 67. (http://www.gallup.com/poll/
191477/three-workers-foresee-working-past-retirement-age.aspx)
Programming based on the What Color Is Your Parachute? series or
something similar can assist career changers or retirement planners in
honing in on what they might be ideally suited to do, if they have not
found their niche yet. Having some additional income during retirement
could be a necessity for many of us. Again, try to make use of online
career aptitude or personality quizzes to assist library users in ﬁnding
their niche and then further their quest for what to do next by highlight-
ing print and electronic resources found in the library and online.
Career aptitude tools can be found at by searching the following:
• The AARP Foundation’s Work and Jobs Site online
• AARP Back to Work 50þ online
• The Career Interest Game, University of Missouri online
• Meyers-Briggs personality tests online
Getting the Financial Ducks in a Row
The U.S. Department of Labor (USDOL) shares these statistics in Top 10
Ways to Prepare for Retirement:
• Fewer than half of Americans have calculated how much they need
to save for retirement
An End in Sight (or Not): Age Group 55–65
81

• In 2012, 30 percent of private industry workers with access to a
deﬁned contribution plan (such as a 401(k) plan) did not participate
• The average American spends 20 years in retirement
The National Institute on Retirement Security (NIRS) in a 2013 report
also paints a pretty grim picture about retirement savings:
The average working household has virtually no retirement savings.
When all households are included—not just households with retire-
ment accounts—the median retirement account balance is $3,000
for all working-age households and $12,000 for near-retirement
households. Two-thirds of working households age 55–64 with at
least one earner have retirement savings less than one times their
annual income, which is far below what they will need to maintain
their standard of living in retirement. (http://www.nirsonline.org/
storage/nirs/documents/Retirement%20Savings%20Crisis/
retirementsavingscrisis_ﬁnal.pdf)
The USDOL offers a number of pamphlets, fact sheets, and even an
interactive worksheet that allows one to calculate monthly income and
expenses in retirement (http://askebsa.dol.gov/retirementcalculator/ui/
general.aspx). Another retirement calculator can be found on the Social
Security Administration’s website. These calculators are a particularly
useful tool, and while it is a little scary to actually see what your
monthly retirement beneﬁt will be, the calculator provides an honest
assessment, which will allow a person to play “catch up” with
retirement savings in those ﬁnal years before retiring. NIRS also offers a
Pension Education Toolkit, which addresses cost of living adjustments,
with a Cost of Living Adjustment calculator, and state-by-state facts and
ﬁgures, including the types of retirement beneﬁts offered by state govern-
ments and teacher retirement systems. While librarians are not ﬁnancial
advisors, we can become familiar enough with online tools and resources
to offer an overview of the same to our library users. Preparing your own
programs or ﬁnding local ﬁnancial advisors to provide programming can
be a great beneﬁt to current and would-be library users at this stage in life.
Programs with Saving Money in Mind
Plan programs using overarching umbrella themes for several months or a
year. Having umbrella themes was a good tool for program planning.
Choosing an umbrella theme for an entire year allows a program planner
82
Designing Adult Services

to focus on more speciﬁc goals and create better outcomes, rather than
looking at programming as a grab bag of ideas. One of those themes that
you might use for this user group is ﬁnancial planning or ways in which to
save money. Here are a couple of suggestions for money saving programs.
Living off the Grid—Eco-Living
A program on living “off grid” or eco-living could be a good choice for
the current wave of soon-to-be retirees. After all, the pre and newly
retired at this time are children of the 1960s and 1970s, a time when
young people in America really became interested in the environment, in
eco-farming and the effects of pesticides and pollutants on the food we
eats. Many of those same young people grew up to be the green grocers
and eco-farmers as adults, and they may not have been able to accomplish
all of their eco-minded goals in life. Living off grid is not only good for the
environment, but good for the wallet, once the initial costs of going off
grid have been expended. In the course of a program about eco-friendly
living, participants could
1. ﬁnd out about the basic living off the grid concepts,
2. discover how to start living off the grid the ideal way (solar power,
etc.), and
3. learn realistic ways to reduce reliance on the grid.
Consider the following as guests for the presentation:
• A live-off-the-grid guru with tips on how to save money through
innovative living, perhaps even be a local architect who is involved
in Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED)
• Local organic urban farmer or representative from a community
supported agriculture (CSA), local county extension personnel who
could discuss growing and canning vegetables, or raising chickens
• Solar power installer who can demonstrate and answer questions
about the up-front costs of solar power, and the ﬁnancial and envi-
ronmental beneﬁts in the long term
The perfect timing for this type of program is mid-to-late April,
coinciding with Earth Day, each April 22.
As with all programs, be sure to tie into library resources, such as the
most energy efﬁcient appliances to be found in Consumer Reports, or
books and digital resources available, such as the following:
An End in Sight (or Not): Age Group 55–65
83

• Living Off the Grid: Off-Grid Living and Starting a Homestead
from Scratch—Amazing DIY Projects for Self Sufﬁcient Living! by
Isaac Green
• DIY Projects for the Self-Sufﬁcient Homeowner: 25 Ways to Build a
Self-Reliant Lifestyle by Betsy Matheson
• The Moneyless Man: A Year of Freeconomic Living by Mark Boyle
• Thriving during Challenging Times: The Energy, Food, and
Financial Independence Handbook by Cam Mather
• Off on Our Own: Living Off-Grid in Comfortable Independence by
Ted Carns
Second Careers
As one of those who look forward to doing what I had always hoped to do
in life, it was always difﬁcult to understand those who would wring their
hands and say, “I just don’t know what I will do when I retire.” In the years
preceding retirement, many people will start to look forward to the day
when they can ﬁnally paint, or teach music, write the great American novel,
or even take up a second career in the business world. Offering a program
that will assist those anticipating a second career after retirement is a great
idea. Learning goals for such a program would be as follows:
1. Learn how to create an up to date résumé (especially digital)
2. Discover local resources for ﬁnding jobs (job services, state agencies)
3. Learn how to use technology based networking platforms to ﬁnd
jobs (Monster, Indeed, LinkedIn)
4. Create a resume based on volunteer or avocational activities
5. Learn to market skills that might have been “dormant” for some
time through a life coach or career counselor
Potential guests:
• A local job service ofﬁce representative, career counselor, or life coach
• An HR or hiring ofﬁcer to talk about what they look for in potential
new hires
• Student volunteers to help with digital resume creation
Suggested Books for the Library Collection
The Encore Career Handbook: How to Make a Living and a
Difference in the Second Half of Life by Marci Alboher
84
Designing Adult Services

Second-Act Careers: 50þ Ways to Profit from Your Passions during
Semi-Retirement by Nancy Collamer
Too Young to Retire: 101 Ways to Start the Rest of Your Life by
Marika Stone
Portfolio Life: The New Path to Work, Purpose, and Passion after 50
by David D. Corbett
Unique Adult Career Guide 2017 Edition: Offering Career Advice
and Listing 100 Different Careers by Dawn Lucan
Selling Online: A Second “Job”
In addition to those who might be thinking of taking on a new job in
retirement, or ﬁnally getting to do what they have always wanted to do,
there are entrepreneurial spirits out there who make a living or supple-
ment their income through online sales. The Internet is the biggest
marketplace of all, and if a person is willing to put in the work, the
rewards can be worth it.
Such a program would consist of presenters who are knowledgeable
about websites such as eBay, where a person can buy anything from a
car to ramen noodles, Etsy, which is devoted to arts and crafts, and
Craigslist, which allows users to advertise and “shop locally” for just
about anything, from real estate to companionship. A panel consisting
of collectors, antiquers, and bargain shoppers would also be useful in
rounding out this program. Knowing how to “buy low” and “sell high”
is a skill that many lack. Tie into the library’s collections with some
books, such as the following:
My eBay for Seniors by Michael Miller
The Everything Guide to Selling Arts & Crafts Online: How to Sell on
Etsy, eBay, Your Storefront, and Everywhere Else Online by Kim
Solga
Start a Business: How to Work from Home Making Money Selling on
eBay by T. Whitmore
The Complete Idiot’s Guide to Making Money with Craigslist by Skip
Press
eBay Photos That Sell: Taking Great Product Shots for eBay and
Beyond by Dan Gookin and Robert Birnbach
The Handmade Marketplace: How to Sell Your Crafts Locally,
Globally, and On-Line by Kari Chapin
An End in Sight (or Not): Age Group 55–65
85

How to Make Money Using Etsy: A Guide to the Online Marketplace
for Crafts and Handmade Products by Timothy Adam
Living the Dream: Is It Now or Never?
While some seniors are able to afford travel in retirement, many of us ﬁg-
ure that we would better try to squeeze in any big travel while we still
have a steady income and good knees! Younger people frequently do
not have the leisure time or ﬁnancial resources, or have small children
and other obligations that hamper extensive traveling. In those years lead-
ing up to retirement, when the nest is empty and some ﬁnancial stability
has been achieved, an “It’s now or never” attitude about ﬁnally seeing
Michelangelo’s David or Machu Picchu can creep in. A study by the
Transamerica Center for Retirement found that travel is one of the top
two goals for retirement, yet only one in ﬁve Americans has factored sav-
ings into their retirement plan (http://www.transamericacenter.org/docs/
default-source/resources/travel-survey/tcrs2013_sr_travel_and_aging.pdf).
So, maybe for some of us, it really is now or never!
Travel programs designed for this speciﬁc age group can provide a
more relaxed atmosphere for those looking forward to retirement, while
trying to squeeze in some travel time now. Be sure to include some ﬁnan-
cial programs on saving for travel in retirement. A quick and easy pro-
gram is to engage experienced travelers to share their own experiences
and provide an overview of online resources and tools for ﬁnding travel
deals or travel inspiration, such as
• TravelZoo
• TravelMuse
• TripAdvisor
• TravelChannel.com/Destinations
Or start an “It’s Now or Never” travel group for those 50+.
Programming can be a part of the group, but just allowing them a place
to meet and share travel ideas or discuss travel deals can be a good start.
Use travel themed books, book discussions, and programs based on dif-
ferent culture’s foods and music to provide a taste of some exotic locale
for your travel-related programming. Inspiring people to learn about dif-
ferent culture, and, in turn, to maybe explore these cultures through
travel, can be a good ﬁt for the “It’s Now or Never” group. Also focusing
on specialized vacations, such as cuisines, cycling or sports, or hobby-
related activities, are a good way to create interesting travel programs
86
Designing Adult Services

for this age group. Always tie any programming into the library collec-
tions and other events and activities in the community, when possible.
In addition to Fodors, Frommers, National Geographic, and Rick
Steve’s travel guides, look for less well-known, or specialized travel guides
for this type of programming, such as the following:
Lonely Planet’s Ultimate Travel: Our List of the 500 Best Places to
See by Lonely Planet
1,000 Places to See Before You Die: Revised Second Edition by
Patricia Schultz
Atlas Obscura: An Explorer’s Guide to the World’s Hidden Wonders
by Joshua Foer and Dylan Thuras
Frommer’s Easy Guide to River Cruising by Fran Golden and
Michelle Baran
The Cyclist’s Bucket List: A Celebration of 75 Quintessential Cycling
by Ian Dille
Bucket List Adventures: 10 Incredible Journeys to Experience before
You Die by Annette White
My Travel Adventures and Secret Recipes: Culinary Adventures with
Secret Recipes by Chef Wolfgang Hanau
1,000 Foods to Eat before You Die: A Food Lover’s Life List by Mimi
Sheraton
Preretirement-age folk with an adventurous outlook on life and bucket
list of goals for travel might enjoy this “it’s now or never” type of
programming.
The Ultimate in Travel: Dual Residency or Self-Expatriation
Many retirees are taking advantage of better and cheaper health care,
sunny climates, and the bang for their American buck that moving to
another country can bring them in retirement, but this sort of thing takes
some careful planning, which should ideally take place before your last
day on the job! While it might not be possible to ﬁnd someone who has
actually retired to another country for your presentation, some study of
resources available through the AARP could offer enough material to
“create your own” program. An AARP article by Barry Golson (AARP
The Magazine, September/October 2012 issue) lists 10 of the best places
to retire abroad. Best Places to Retire Abroad: Paradise Found 10 Fun,
An End in Sight (or Not): Age Group 55–65
87

Affordable and Stunningly Beautiful Places to Retire Abroad suggests
Argentina, Costa Rica, Italy, France, Portugal, and Spain, among other
destinations, as good locations for retirement. On the AARP website,
you will also ﬁnd a list of questions to ask before making the move, and
more terriﬁcally an Expat Starter Kit. Using these tools, anyone could cre-
ate their own program, if ﬁnding someone who has done the research or
perhaps already has dual citizenship in another country. This could make
for a very exciting and different kind of “planning for retirement” pro-
gram (http://www.aarp.org/home-garden/livable-communities/info-07
-2010/paradise_found.html).
Since such a move would require considerable planning, make sure that
the library has newer resources on hand, such as the following:
The ABA Consumer Guide to Retiring Abroad: Legal, Financial, and
Tax Issues and Solutions by George Hayduk
The Financial Guide to Retiring Abroad: How to Live Overseas and
Avoid Tax, Invest Wisely, and Save Your Money by Rick Todd
The International Living Guide to Retiring Overseas on a Budget: How
to Live Well on $25,000 a Year by Suzan Haskins and Dan Prescher
Best Places to Retire: The Top 15 Affordable Towns for Retirement in
Europe by Clayton Geoffreys
The Happy Expat: Your Guide to Joyfully Retiring Abroad by Ann
Hoffman
MORE DETAILED PROGRAMMING IDEAS
Financial Preparation for Retirement
Facing retirement in the next decade or so, the reality of no longer having
a day-to-day job with a steady income hits home for many, and planning
for retirement takes up more and more of a person’s time and energy.
Assisting older adults with retirement planning before it is too late pro-
vides a beneﬁcial service to this demographic. This programming idea
probably calls for a series, or at the very least a lengthy workshop.
Planning for retirement is multipronged and over simpliﬁcation can lead
to problems down the road.
Learning goals:
• Learn how to calculate how much is “enough” in retirement
• Learn how to invest savings for maximum beneﬁt
• Learn about insurance options in retirement
88
Designing Adult Services

Steps to take:
• Engage a ﬁnancial planning expert to present at least two programs
on the subject
• Budget for honorarium or speaker’s fees
• Advertise through social media, as well as more traditional
Now or Never Vacation Destinations
Not everyone will be able to travel in retirement. Some of us would not be
able to afford it, others will have knees that give out, and still others will just
be too tired. Offer a program in which a travel agent or an individual who
arranges private tours can speak about and arrange trips, according to the
groups taste and budget. This seems especially good for older men and
women who are widowed or divorced and really do not like the thought of
traveling alone. By allowing singles to share a room, they can beat the single
room supplement problem. A travel program for those planning for retire-
ment or those already retired with substantial income and knee cartilage
can be a beneﬁcial and popular program for the “it’s now or never” traveler.
• Learn about travel destinations
• Share travel stories
• Learn about the pros and cons of group travel
• Choose locations for group travel plans
• Meet fellow travel hounds
• Learn about the library’s travel resources
Steps to take:
Find local organizations, individuals, or travel agents who provide
travel advice or arrangement
• Plan a single program to gauge interest
• Gauge interest in forming a recurring group by surveying attendees
at program
• Advertise through Facebook, the library’s website, and traditional
newsletter or e-mail lists
• Set up the space for showing photos or video
• Provide a variety of travel guides, such as Frommer’s, Fodor’s, and
Lonely Planet, and travel magazines to generate ideas and discussion
• Add links to the library website for travel websites such as AARP,
Trip Advisor, or TravelMuse
An End in Sight (or Not): Age Group 55–65
89

• Unless you plan to travel with the group, stay out of the arrange-
ments and planning
• Allow the group to grow and change organically as people come and
go, join and drop out
Traveling in a group can give a greater sense of safety and offer a boost
of courage for timid travelers. For others, just the opportunity to share
travel experiences could be the reward. Let the minds and bodies of your
older library users roam the earth at will.
CONCLUSION
The preretirement years call for some looking into the future and plan-
ning accordingly, even when we may not want to. By using online tools
to create programs on retirement planning, assessing aptitudes and inter-
ests for exploring new careers, travel, or any other ideas you and these
library users might come up with, you can hone your relationship with a
demographic that is likely to be more ﬁnancially secure and interested in
exploring new avenues at this stage in life.
90
Designing Adult Services

CHAPTER 7
Now I Can Finally Relax (or Not):
Age Group 65–75
A
ccording to The Baby Boom Cohort in the United States: 2012 to
2060 by Sandra L. Colby and Jennifer M. Ortman, published by the
U.S. Census Bureau, “The baby boomers began turning 65 in 2011 and
are now driving growth at the older ages of the population. By 2029, when
all of the baby boomers will be 65 years and over, more than 20 percent of
the total U.S. population will be over the age of 65. Although the number of
baby boomers will decline through mortality, this shift toward an increas-
ingly older population is expected to endure. By 2056, the population
65 years and over is projected to become larger than the population under
18 years” (https://www.census.gov/prod/2014pubs/p25-1141.pdf).
Therefore, one should not expect library services to seniors to become less
critical or needful in at least the next three to four decades. The baby
boom wave of retirees has only just begun, and baby boomers will put
their unique stamp on the face of retirement in much the same way that
they have throughout the course of their lives.
JUMPING INTO RETIREMENT OR NOT?
Current marketing toward older adults includes images depicting ﬁt,
gray-haired men and women engaging in all sorts of activities—lounging
on a beach in a soaking tub, playing golf, cruising, sailing, jazzercising,
hiking, and skydiving—and these images suggest that the baby boom gen-
eration must be literally jumping into retirement. Certainly, we are ﬁght-
ing the image of aging more than past generations, or at least advertisers
want us to believe that to be true.
While some of the images of the wining, dining, dancing, and skydiving
grandma ring true for the boomer generation, there is also much, much

evidence that many baby boomers cannot afford to retire, while others
are forced to retire due to health concerns, family obligations, or even
age discrimination, and suffer ﬁnancially for it. According to a blog by
Buck Wango at the Hufﬁngton Post, “Baby Boomers Can’t Quit: Still
Want to Work after They ‘Retire,’ ” many boomers, even though they
are ofﬁcially “retired,” do not necessarily stop working or even want to
have retired in the ﬁrst place. Wango reports from a study from
Banker’s Life Center for a Secure Retirement “that even though 72 percent
of retired Baby Boomers aren’t working for pay, there’s a large group that
is,” and almost half of this group would like to work but are unable to
due to health issues, caregiving duties, or because they cannot ﬁnd a job.
This study also shows that the majority of retired boomers would have
liked to have continued to work but were forced to retire out of circum-
stances beyond their control, such as health and caregiving issues men-
tioned earlier.
Among retired boomers, about one-third of them are working because
they want to. Conversely, of those not yet retired, almost two-thirds are
working because they have to. The article suggests that retirement does
not necessarily mean not working at all but “no longer doing your pri-
mary career.” While money is the top reason for continuing to work after
retirement from a primary career, many retirees work for other reasons,
such as the mental and physical challenge, social interaction, and greater
sense of purpose. Even if the baby boomers were the generation to “shake
things up” and “do their own thing,” economic and physical changes
obviously affect whether or not they are able to retire (http://www
.hufﬁngtonpost.com/buck-wargo/baby-boomers-cant-quit-st_b_7621540
.html).
Libraries are in a unique position to not only serve this demographic
but also to reap the beneﬁts of insuring a continuing relationship with
new full-time and part-time retirees. Having grown up and used libra-
ries all their lives, retirees from the baby boom generation are looking
for volunteer opportunities, a cause to support, and a chance to still
contribute to society. The local public library can provide an array of
services, programs, volunteer, and giving opportunities for these mov-
ers and shakers.
LIBRARY SERVICES TO ACTIVE SENIORS
So now that we have established that newly retired baby boomers are not
acting like the retirees of previous generations, you might want to give
some thought to how you relate to them. Whatever level of service you
92
Designing Adult Services

can afford or choose to offer, try to be creative with the name you give the
service or program. Using the term “senior” with baby boomers just does
not have the caché that you might need to build around this new or
expanded service. How about something like the following:
• Wisdom in Aging Project
• Chapter II Project
• Second Act Library Services
• Late Bloomers Club
• Next Phase Finders Group
Whatever you call your service to this demographic, really promote
what you are doing as a special service to them. Let them know that you
will give them advanced notice of programs that they might like to see
or classes or book discussions to take part in. A very simple service would
be to create and add to an e-mail list after every program geared toward
older adults, and use it as a means of promoting future programs or com-
municating additions to your collections. I am promoting an e-mail list,
because e-mail is like the new “old snail mail” to me. People of my gener-
ation still like to get an e-mail, while younger people only want a text
message and heaven forbid that one should place a phone call to anyone
under the age of 30! I have heard millennials say that if they get a phone
call, they ﬁgure it is some sort of dire emergency on the part of the caller.
While Twitter and text messages are ﬁne (probably preferred) for younger
people, actually getting an actual e-mail that is not spam is still a treat for
me and I ﬁt into the baby boomer demographic.
A few other simple suggestions for serving the newly, or trying to be,
retired are as follows:
• Create a Chapter II Advisory Board
• Offer and promote the convenience of e-books
• Consider creating a comfortable, accessible intergenerational space
in the children’s area, for grandparents and parents to share books
with the wee ones
• Offer a special grandparents story hour in the children’s department
• Create a mentoring program where experienced older adults can
offer their skills and advice to younger people in their areas of
expertise
• Set up a volunteer program for the library or keep tabs on other vol-
unteer opportunities in your community through links on the
library’s website
Now I Can Finally Relax (or Not): Age Group 65–75
93

There are so many small ways in which you can let your devoted older
library users know that their patronage over the years is recognized and
appreciated and that their experience and knowledge can still be put to
good use.
LIBRARY COLLECTIONS AND PROGRAMS
Since you are likely to have a disparate group of older adults using the
library, ranging from those desperately hanging on to jobs, some look-
ing for meaningful work to supplement retirement income and others
already enjoying or ﬁnding ways to enjoy retirement, as with other
age groups, it is important to have a mixture of fun programs and
collections for the active retiree, as well as being able to incorporate
job searching assistance/resume updating types of assistance through
programs already in place for those who need it. This younger cohort
of still working or newly retired active older adults will be looking
for fun and educational programs as they continue to grow at this
stage in life.
Catching up on current events or reading for pleasure might be on the
recent retiree’s list of things that he or she now has time to do. Make sure
that you have sufﬁcient copies of current best sellers, both ﬁction and
nonﬁction, on hand. Biographies and historical ﬁction, as well as the
more traditional genre ﬁction, are also popular with older adults, so keep
up with the most popular crime/mystery series as well as new Western
novels and romances.
When choosing newer titles targeting a particular audience, be sure to
display books in areas where they will be noticed and in displays that
are appealing and eye-catching. If it is a display on ﬁnances in retirement,
post a sign that compliments the display and makes it noticeable. I hate
general “Staff Picks” displays. How about being a little more speciﬁc?
For example, for a display on books about ﬁnances in retirement, post
a sign with “You’ve Earned It, Now Enjoy It” along with titles similar to
these as follows:
• Get What’s Yours: The Secrets to Maxing Out Your Social Security
by Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Philip Moeller, and Paul Solman
• Making Social Security Work for You: Advice, Strategies, and
Timelines That Can Maximize Your Beneﬁts by Emily Guy Birken
• Congratulations on Your Retirement by Ted Heybridge
• It’s Never Too Late: Getting Older, Wiser, and Worry Free in Our
Golden Years by Scott Page
94
Designing Adult Services

• The Retirement Boom: An All Inclusive Guide to Money, Life, and
Health in Your Next Chapter by Catherine Allen and Nancy Bearg
• Purpose and Power in Retirement by Harold Koenig
• 70: The New 50 by William Byham
PROGRAMMING FOR LIFELONG LEARNING
In The Mature Mind: The Positive Power of the Aging Brain, Dr. Gene
Cohen writes about the psychological phases older adults go through.
• Phase I is the midlife reevaluation, which we have already addressed.
• Phase II is the liberation phase, or “If not now, when?” phase.
• Phase III is the summing up phase, where we start to think about our
roots, our family history, and recalling life’s events, frequently with
an entirely new perspective.
With time on their hands, new retirees can once again focus on the
things that they would like to do or wish they had done, sometimes delv-
ing deeper into family history or taking up writing or some other reﬂec-
tion of the self, such as art, music, or other hobbies. It is probably
around retirement age that many people begin to think more about the
“summing up” of our lives—our careers, our ancestry—just trying to
make sense of it all. Here are some programming ideas for the active older
adults age group, continuing their journey of lifelong learning. Always
direct participants to areas in the library where they can ﬁnd information
about their particular areas of interest and allow them to “continue the
journey” by pointing to community activities, outside websites for explo-
ration, and other groups with similar interests.
Program: Blogging Basics
So many truly wonderful, thoughtful writers have blogs these days.
Demonstrate to seniors how to follow a blog and how to set up a blog
using websites such as WordPress and Blogger. Encourage them to share
their wit and wisdom with the rest of the world.
Suggested readings: Blogging for Beginners: Learn How to Start and
Maintain a Successful Blog the Simple Way by Terence Lawﬁeld;
WordPress for Dummies by Lisa Sabin-Wilson; How to Make Money
Blogging: How I Replaced My Day Job with My Blog by Bob Lotich;
and How to Blog for Proﬁt: Without Selling Your Soul by Ruth
Soukup.
Now I Can Finally Relax (or Not): Age Group 65–75
95

Program: Storytellers
Allow seniors to share personal stories and photos from their own
experiences based on various events or times in history within their
local community. Locate accompanying materials from the library
and ﬁnd websites, music, and so on to amplify the experience. I have
seen this program done in different regions but usually with wonderful
results, as each region, each community, and yes, even each person, has
a unique story to tell.
Suggested readings: Ties That Bind: Stories of Love and Gratitude
from the First Ten Years of StoryCorps by Dave Isay; Mom: A
Celebration of Mothers from StoryCorps by Dave Isay; and Gather the
Fruit One by One: 50 Years of Amazing Peace Corps Stories by Pat
Alter and Bernie Alter.
Art Journaling and Scrapbooking
Art journaling and scrapbooking can be very similar, depending upon a
person’s artistic ability, or lack thereof. Great artists have made use of
art journals for centuries, sketching bits and pieces here and there and jot-
ting down thoughts or feelings or insights into what they are seeing. The
great Leonardo da Vinci carried a journal at all times, in which he would
record ideas, impressions, and sketches. His journals included invention
designs, writings about anatomy, botany, geology, as well as drawings
and paintings (http://www.visualjournaling.com/artists.html). For the
artistically inclined, a program about art journaling might stir some
creative juices and lead to other programs or an exhibit.
For the less artistic, simple scrapbooking is a wonderful and reward-
ing way of putting together the story of a life, a family’s journey, or any
number of other ideas. Scrapbooking can be as simple or as compli-
cated as the individual makes it, using personal photos, newspaper or
magazine clippings, stickers, and objects. There is an entire industry
devoted to scrapbooking. This program could be popular for any age
group, but older active adults might really enjoy putting together a fam-
ily scrapbook or two.
Digital Literacy
Librarians have been bridging the digital divide for seniors for many years
now, with wonderful results, but there are still many seniors who con-
tinue to need assistance with technology. Having not been “born digital,”
using technology is something that we (myself included) have had to
96
Designing Adult Services

learn, and libraries can and have assisted many people with technology
skills as part of the mission of lifelong learning. According to technology
benchmarks established by the Edge Initiative, led by the Urban Libraries
Council, at least one of these benchmarks serves to fulﬁll this purpose,
particularly for older adults. The Edge Benchmarks recommend that
libraries provide assistance and training to individuals, personalized
on-demand technology assistance for 10-minute sessions at all branches,
30-minute sessions by appointment, and one-on-one assistance with
personal devices in at least one branch location.
Using these benchmarks as a guideline for serving older adults, as well
as immigrant populations, can assist you in determining if your library
is meeting the information needs of your local community (http://www
.libraryedge.org/benchmarks).
OPPORTUNITIES FOR SERVICE
Since volunteers play such an important role in most libraries and at least
some of the newly retired are ripe for the picking, it is in the library’s best
interest to cultivate a relationship with this demographic.
As I have pointed out in the past, volunteers deserve a planned and organ-
ized effort on the part of the library management and staff when they show
up to work. Depending upon the person’s background and physical capa-
bilities, everyone should have some form of meaningful work to do and pol-
icies and procedures in place to ensure that their time in the library goes
smoothly. I have had the opportunity to work with wonderful volunteers
in more than one position, and from my own experience, volunteers can
make a world of difference in any organization. In smaller organizations,
volunteers can serve in vital roles, and in larger organizations, the work of
volunteers is sometimes just the icing on the cake.
In the interest of ﬁnding more quality volunteers, an annual “Tea for
the Newly Retired” might be in order. Invite current volunteers to come
and mingle and offer up ﬁrst-hand accounts of what it is like to volunteer
at your library. In this instance, especially, be sure that you have treated
your volunteers well. In every instance, you should be treating them well.
Failing that, a simple listing of “Volunteer Opportunities” on the library
web page or posting them on a bulletin board or in a print newsletter is
a must. Outreach to local agencies where retirees gather or have some
interaction might also be in order. If you are interested in taking the
whole volunteer to a new level, VolunteerMatch has formed a partner-
ship with California libraries to support volunteer recruitment efforts in
libraries.
Now I Can Finally Relax (or Not): Age Group 65–75
97

Since 2008, VolunteerMatch has partnered with California libraries as
part of the Preferred Partnership Program for national nonproﬁts, where
all California library volunteer opportunities are searchable by zip code.
The Preferred Partnership Program is available nationwide for a fee.
VolunteerMatch staff can use their expertise to conduct symposiums,
provide training, provide online webinars and customer support—assist
with tracking the number of volunteer referrals, crafting effective post-
ings—and provide regular check-ins with volunteer coordinators (http://
blogs.volunteermatch.org/engagingvolunteers/2011/09/13/california-libraries
-provide-a-great-example-of-volunteer-engagement/). If you are working
with a regional, county, or larger urban library system, it might be worth-
while checking in with VolunteerMatch on the possibility of providing a
more enhanced volunteer search tool and effective volunteer placement
for your library system.
When It Comes to Volunteering, the Size of the Program
Does Not Matter
Whether your library has 2 volunteers or 50, there are certain elements,
other than getting the volunteers there in the ﬁrst place, and making sure
they feel appreciated while they work, that you should be concerned with.
These elements are as follows:
• Volunteer policies
• Volunteer job descriptions and applications
• Background checks
• Volunteer performance evaluations
• Formal appreciation and recognition
While it might be tempting to “take all comers” when it comes to vol-
unteer positions, ﬁnding the right person for the job can be just as impor-
tant, and tricky, as ﬁnding the right person for a staff position. Older
volunteers with work experience in their background might be easier to
place in a volunteer position than younger people on which you might
have only personality or afﬁnity for some task with which to make the
link to the right job. An application, asking for relevant experience, can
help you ﬁnd the right volunteer for the job. Volunteer applications
should follow the same format as a job application, asking for back-
ground and experience, information about criminal activity, contact
information and previous addresses, and references. Volunteer applica-
tions should also state that the applicant understands that they would
98
Designing Adult Services

be working without compensation or beneﬁts as well as the regular certif-
ication of honesty in the application. A sample application can be found
in Appendix D.
Background Checks
In a recent survey taken by members of the Association for Rural and
Small Libraries, my librarian colleagues and I learned that many libraries
perform background checks for their volunteers, and probably most
libraries perform background checks for certain positions, such as youth
and children’s services volunteers. Background checks are frequently pro-
vided by the parent organization, such as city or county government,
including background checks performed by local law enforcement
agencies.
CREATING A SPACE FOR SENIORS
About 10 years ago now, my friend and colleague Allan Kleiman, then
director of Old Bridge Public Library in Old Bridge, New Jersey, started
a new trend, that of “senior spaces” in libraries. Allan ﬁgured that since
the teens have a space and the children have a dedicated space, why not
let the seniors have one? He made his case and received funding to create
his own senior space within the Old Bridge library and also made a little
library history. Since then, Allan has presented on the topic all across
the country and internationally, as well. Allan’s interest in and work with
seniors long precedes the fame that his senior space brought, but the idea
of a senior space is forever associated with Old Bridge Public Library and
Allan Kleiman.
While a space completely devoted to seniors might not be in the realm
of possibilities for your library, here are a few suggestions for, if not cre-
ating a separate senior space, at least approximating one!
1. Choose a quiet corner away from the children and teen areas, and
set up a cozy reading space with a couple of chairs, a side table,
and a reading lamp. Keep books on subjects of interest to older
adults on a shelf nearby. Christen the area with some signage pro-
moting “New Paths from Old” (or any other name) and a location
code in the library catalog for the books you keep in the area and
voila! You have senior space.
2. Have a special section for the classics in children’s literature, books
that grandparents would have read as a child and that they might
Now I Can Finally Relax (or Not): Age Group 65–75
99

want to share with the “grands” now. It can be a small shelf in the
children’s section with a special catalog designation and a rocking
chair nearby.
3. Weather permitting, a library should have some sort of outdoor
space. It could be a bench near some nice landscaping. It could be
an area where gardening takes place. It could be a mentoring oppor-
tunity for accomplished older gardeners and kids. If not a library
project, local garden clubs would probably love to take on such a
project, and having a nice quiet place to take in nature while reading
a book could be just what some apartment dwellers are looking for.
MORE DETAILED PROGRAMMING IDEAS
Genealogy for Beginners
It is no wonder that so many older adults become interested in their roots,
in learning more about their family history, and the branch that they
occupy on the family tree. In The Mature Mind: The Positive Power of
the Aging Brain, Dr. Gene Cohen suggests that the “summing up phase”
in life results from the usage of both sides of the brain, which allows for a
deeper understanding of a person’s life and that this older, more mature
brain, also enjoys reviewing life’s events with a deeper understanding. It
is a lovely compensation for the things that the body can no longer do,
or do as well. Tracing a family’s lineage can be a daunting task for the
uninitiated, so programs for budding genealogists are always a good bet
for older adults.
Learning goals:
• Learn about locating census and death records online.
• Discover web resources where genealogists share family research
and information.
• Learn about “destinations” for genealogical research.
• Learn about using local government records like land, marriage,
court and even local church records to ﬁll in some blanks.
Steps to take:
• Partner with a local genealogical society to do a short series.
• Locate a presenter or presenters through local history or genealogy
society.
• Divide the segments up into shorter one-hour programs.
100
Designing Adult Services

• Try to offer each segment twice, once during the week and once on
the weekend.
• Demonstrate free online websites for genealogy research, such as
FamilySearch.org, Cyndi’s List, and the USGenWeb Project.
• Be sure to include subscription services like Ancestry.com if the
library has a license, or demonstrate the free-trial version.
• Advertise through e-mail lists, the library website, and conventional
newsletters and posters on the library bulletin board.
• Have staff take registration for each program and provide a com-
puter lab when needed as much of this information will be found
online.
Genealogists are the most sharing people I have ever met. They will
share, even when you do not want them to, and many of them are retired
and willing to share their knowledge at little or no cost to your library.
Enthusiastic about the subject matter, local history buffs and genealogists
will help you grow a genealogy program in no time.
Suggested readings:
• Unofﬁcial Guide to FamilySearch.org: How to Find Your Family
History on the Largest Free Genealogy Website by Dana McCullough
• How to Do Everything: Genealogy, Fourth Edition, by George G.
Morgan; Advanced Genealogy Research Techniques by George G.
Morgan and Drew Smith
• Genealogy Research: How to Organize the Notes, Papers,
Documents, Emails, Scans, Computer Files, and Photographs by
D. M. Kalten
• The Family Tree Problem Solver: Tried-and-True Tactics for
Tracing Elusive Ancestors by Marsha Hoffman Rising and Sharon
DeBartolo Carmack
Turn That Passion into $$
Having never been one to say, “I don’t know what I would do in retire-
ment,” I cannot identify with that mind-set, but I certainly know people
who feel that way. Encouraging the newly retired in the community to
start afresh with pursuing a lifelong goal would make a great program.
Many, many people end up in careers that were not exactly what they
were hoping for. With a little retirement income coming in, and time on
their hands, making dreams come true during the “golden years” can
make them really golden, in more ways than one.
Now I Can Finally Relax (or Not): Age Group 65–75
101

Learning goals:
• Learn from local business people, artists, or craftsmen how to get
into the biz.
• Get back in touch with whatever that dream might have been and
start exploring it again.
• Learn about advertising and selling through websites like Etsy and
Craigslist.
Steps to take:
• Consider offering this program as a short series of three to four
presentations.
• Invite local start-up business owners or people who work from home
for budding entrepreneurs. Invite crafts people, artists, and musi-
cians for the artistically aspiring individuals.
• Locate people who have made a second career out of consulting in
their chosen ﬁeld.
Suggested readings:
• The Start of Something BIG: or How to Find an Idea to Make
Money by Maureen Larter and Rachel Mizer
• The Career Guide for Creative and Unconventional People by Carol
Eikleberry, PhD, and Carrie Pinsky
• The Savvy Crafters Guide to Success: Turn Your Crafts into a
Career by Sandy McCall and Turn Your Passion into Proﬁt by
Walt F. J. Goodridge
CONCLUSION
Active seniors can and will continue to use library resources and attend
programs, if you can ﬁnd the right ﬁt to keep their interest, and only
you can determine what that might be. If you have the luxury, create a
separate senior space for these loyal library supporters. If a full-blown
senior space is not in the library’s budget or space allocation, carving
out a small corner dedicated to the use of older adults is not only a nice
gesture but could be a welcome service. Offering a variety of programs,
including more in-depth technology classes, will increase your chances
of drawing in new users and ultimately offer a better idea of what works
or does not work in your community.
102
Designing Adult Services

CHAPTER 8
Reﬂecting upon Life’s Journey:
Age Group 75 and Beyond
M
any older adults ﬁnd in themselves a desire to not only continue to
develop around themes and ideas that they have created through-
out their lives, as suggested by Dr. Gene Cohen in The Mature Mind:
The Positive Power of the Aging Brain, but also to spend time in reﬂec-
tion and “summing up” the many facets of their lives. Library programs
built around oral histories, journaling, and local history can be of great
interest to this demographic. As people live longer, there is ample oppor-
tunity for aging adults to take part in library events, and make use of on-
line and books by mail services. As more tech-savvy younger seniors age,
more and more of the aging demographic will make use of e-books and
online resources, as well. The convenience of checking out a book on
the smartphone just holds too much allure, even for die-hard print readers
like me. At some point, reading electronic books and magazines on a per-
sonal device at home could become a terriﬁc substitute for a trip to the
library for some older adults. Making sure that our older adults know
how to access online resources is a must for libraries.
According to 65+ in the United States: 2010 Special Studies Current
Population Reports by Loraine A. West, Samantha Cole, Daniel
Goodkind, and Wan He, the number of people age 75 and older has
increased from 1 percent to 4.2 percent in the last century. The population
age 85 and older has grown 9 times in the same time period, and the num-
ber of people living beyond 90 years of age is expected to quadruple from
2010 to 2050 (https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/
publications/2014/demo/p23-212.pdf). There is no doubt that people are
living longer and consequently can have longer relationships with their
local library. Providing useful services and programs for the older
population is part of a library’s mission to serve an entire community.

LIBRARY SERVICES TO OLDER ADULTS
Because the older population can have particular needs, there are a
number of services a library can offer that will have signiﬁcant impact
on their golden years. Some of these suggestions are simple courtesy
services and are easy enough to allow current stafﬁng to handle, such
as the following:
• Assistance with carrying out books
• Shopping bags or free totes to make carrying books easier
• Referrals to social services
• Assistance with ﬁlling out online requests to use community rooms
or spaces, if seniors have difﬁculty
• Reserve aisle seats for program attendees 75+ for convenience and
health issues
• Assistance with signing up for programs or allowing “early bird”
registration to older adults
Having a “place,” whether it is a speciﬁc desk, or just the understand-
ing that seniors can go to the circulation or reference desk to ask for con-
cierge or courtesy services, such as assistance with carry-out or advanced
registration for a program, is offering a specialized and meaningful ser-
vice to older adults.
OUTREACH TO INSTITUTIONS AND IN-HOME LIBRARY SERVICES
Providing reading and other materials to people who are unable to come
into the library is a service that is most in keeping with one of the primary
practices of the profession—to provide services to the entire community,
including people unable to visit the library. Many libraries provide out-
reach services to people in assisted living facilities, nursing homes, adult
daycare centers, and even in their homes. Whether this service is accom-
plished through books by mail to homebound individuals or onsite visits
to institutional facilities, it stills falls under the umbrella of outreach serv-
ices. Outreach to other types of institutions will be discussed in the fol-
lowing chapter.
Traditional In-Home Library Service
In-home library services offer library access to many people who cannot
physically get to the library, including those with physical disabilities
and the elderly. Many libraries provide delivery and pick-up of library
104
Designing Adult Services

materials to individuals and nursing or assisted living facilities. While
offering in-home library service is time, staff, and budget consuming,
libraries have an obligation to offer such services to all members of their
communities. As stated in the Homebound Program Toolkit, published
by the North Texas Library Partners in 2011, there are many compelling
reasons to provide this type of service:
• People with disabilities have the same right to access library pro-
grams, materials, and services as all other members of a library’s
community.
• Libraries are grounded in the tradition of providing unfettered
access to information and have taken on the challenge of making
our buildings, materials, and electronic resources accessible for
everyone.
• Providing outreach to homebound individuals takes accessibility a
step closer to achieving Universal Access (UA).
• Our population is aging.
• People are living longer and surviving diseases and injuries that pre-
viously would have been fatal.
• Extended military conﬂicts mean that more veterans are returning
home with one or more disabilities.
• Most people will experience temporary or permanent disability at
some point in their lives.
• Serving this growing demographic is a way for libraries to remain
relevant to their communities.
• Those who cannot easily leave their homes are often the people
who have the highest need for access to library materials and
services.
• Homebound programs often involve partnerships with other organ-
izations, volunteer groups, and service providers, which increases a
library’s visibility and promotes goodwill between organizations
(http://nottypical.org/downloads/FY2011/homebound/HB%
20Toolkit%202011.pdf).
Personal Delivery Programs
Personal delivery programs have many advantages for the library user but
perhaps more disadvantages to the library itself. The programs are
• much more user friendly for the participants, providing personal
contact and an opportunity for interacting with the delivery person,
Reflecting upon Life’s Journey: Age Group 75 and Beyond
105

• a “good will” service in the community,
• based on staff or volunteer interaction with other organizations such
as senior centers, assisted living centers, nursing homes, and individ-
uals, and
• a means of increasing library visibility within the community.
All that is being said, this type of personal delivery program involves
additional costs, staff time, and liabilities that books by mail programs
do not generate. There are liabilities to consider when planning for in-
home delivery service such as insurance coverage and background checks
for volunteers. It is important to know who you are sending into a per-
son’s home. A plan of action for emergency situations in a library
patron’s home should also be in place.
Library Service by Mail
The Mid-Continent Public Library (MCPL) system, serving three
counties in Missouri, offers Library by Mail services, which includes
access to not only books but also audiobooks on CD, music on CD,
and DVDs delivered to “patrons who cannot get to a library branch
because of health, mobility, advanced age, permanent or temporary
incapacity.” A dedicated reader’s advisor will suggest titles based on
the readers interest, or users of the service can place orders for speciﬁc
materials. MCPL allows for application to the program online or by
mail, but certiﬁcation in writing is required from a medical professional
for use of the service.
MCPL also lists the following policies regarding the Library by Mail
service on the library website:
• Eligibility: Must be a resident of the MCPL district.
• Checkout: Up to 25 items per month. 20 items at one time. 6 week
checkout.
• Renewals: Materials can be renewed twice for an additional six
weeks per renewal. No notiﬁcation is needed, renewals are auto-
matically granted for you!
• Overdues: There are no overdue ﬁnes! You will be contacted by
phone or letter if your materials are seriously overdue.
• Lost and Damaged Materials: Lost and damaged materials are noted
in our records and you will be notiﬁed by mail. Excessive instances
of lost or damaged materials may result in reduction and/or suspen-
sion of service.
106
Designing Adult Services

If a Library by Mail service is beyond the scope of what your library is
able to offer, due to stafﬁng or budget constraints, be aware that the
National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped
(NLS) offers recorded books and descriptive videos by mail free to per-
sons who qualify for the service. Qualiﬁcation for NLS services entails
notiﬁcation from a physician that a person is unable to read tradition
print materials because of a physical or visual disability. Find out more
about the service as well as a list of all of the state and regional libraries
of the NLS, which actually provide the service to state and regional
library users at http://www.loc.gov/nls.
You can ﬁnd an example of a public library at home library service
application in the Appendix E.
E-Books and E-Readers
E-readers and e-books are a wonderful option for older adults, offering
convenience in carrying multiple books at a time and the option to make
text larger, brighter, or darker, thereby increasing legibility. As a recent
convert to e-books myself, I can attest to the convenience and freedom
from strain to shoulders and neck by carrying one small device in my
purse instead of two or three books in a bag. Having sworn that I would
never give up print and paper, when I moved to a bigger city and started
commuting by public transportation, I soon realized that reading an
e-book on my smartphone was the ideal solution for me. Older adults,
once taught how to use a dedicated e-reader or to download e-books onto
a smartphone might greatly appreciate this service. I even recently read all
774 pages of Donna Tartt’s The Goldﬁnch on my phone. My vision was
blurry for a couple of days, but I was able to snag the book in e-format
and gobble it up with my eyes in no time. Put forth an extra effort to make
sure your older library users know how to use e-books and e-readers!
They can save an aching back or shoulder and a trip to the library when
a person just cannot get out of the house.
ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGY AND COMPUTER ENHANCEMENTS
In Making Your Web Site Senior Friendly, the National Institute on Aging
provides a list of following suggestions for making the library’s website
easier to read for people with low vision:
• Use a sans serif typeface, such as Helvetica, that is not condensed.
Always avoid the use of serif, novelty, and display typefaces
Reflecting upon Life’s Journey: Age Group 75 and Beyond
107

• Use 12-point or 14-point type size for body text
• Use medium or bold-face type
• Present body text in both uppercase and lowercase letters and
reserve underlining for links
• Double-space all body text
• Left-justify blocks of text
• Avoid yellow, blue, and green in close proximity
• Ensure that text and graphics display correctly on a black and white
monitor
• Use dark type or graphics against a light background
• Avoid patterned backgrounds
• Write in clear, simple language
• Provide an online glossary of technical terminology
• Break lengthy documents into shorter segments
• Use text-relevant images only
• Provide text alternatives such as open captioning or access to a static
version of text for everything animated, video and audio
Other suggestions for layout and design can be found in the same on-
line publication at https://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/checklist.pdf.
Readability is a free reading platform that aims to deliver a great read-
ing experience wherever you are and to provide a system to connect read-
ers to the writers they enjoy. Readability can easily be downloaded onto a
single computer for seniors to use within the library or at home. It is also
available as an app for Android, iPad, iOS, and Mac. When activated,
Readability presents a decluttered version of any web page that they are
viewing. It removes ads and any confusing Flash, leaving just the text of
the web page for clean reading. Web content can be resized for better
viewing using the Readability platform.
The American Federation for the Blind offers a number of tips for opti-
mizing visual computer capability with Windows including as follows:
• Windows Ease of Access Center
• Tips for Web Browsing
• Windows Magniﬁer Screen Magniﬁcation Program
• Windows Narrator Screen Reader
Make sure that library staff are aware of these functions and can assist
low-vision library users with them, when necessary ( http://www.afb.org/
info/living-with-vision-loss/using-technology/using-a-computer/part-ii-
108
Designing Adult Services

for-the-experienced-computer-user-with-a-new-visual-impairment/
windows-accessibility-options/12345).
COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT AND PROGRAMS
A 2005 report NLS: That All May Read Digital Talking Book
Distribution Analysis by NLS, shows that mysteries are the most popular
ﬁction genre distributed by the NLS, followed by romance, biography,
and historical ﬁction. While there are certainly older adults who will have
interest in many other genres, keeping large print and audio versions of
these four genres will be appreciated by older library users (http://www
.loc.gov/nls/technical/distribution/section-2.html).
A Diversity and Outreach Column posted by ALA’s Ofﬁce of Diversity,
Literacy and Outreach Services, reprinted Kansas City Public Library’s
top authors requested by older library users, broken down by age groups.
Kansas City Public Library (KCPL) readers over the age of 85 most
often requested following authors:
1. Maeve Binchy
2. Belva Plain
3. Rosamunde Pilcher
4. LaVyrle Spencer
5. Louis L’Amour
6. Zane Grey
7. Jan Karon
8. Jimmy Carter
9. Margaret Truman
10. Phyllis Whitney
For ages 64–84, the most requested authors were as follows:
1. Barbara Taylor Bradford
2. Tim LaHaye
3. Robert B. Parker
4. Fern Michaels
5. James Patterson
6. Janet Dailey
7. Sandra Brown
8. Patricia Cornwell
9. Catherine Coulter
10. Walter Mosley
Reflecting upon Life’s Journey: Age Group 75 and Beyond
109

This publication also reported that baby boomers reading tastes
seemed to reﬂect a taste for more fast-paced thrillers and accept more
sex, violence, and profanity in their reading. The most requested authors
for the baby boomers at KCPL at this time were as follows:
1. Stephen King
2. Anne Rice
3. Nora Roberts
4. Dean Koontz
5. Suzanne Brockmann
6. Janet Evanovich
7. Terry McMillan
8. Jonathan Kellerman
9. David Baldacci
10. Richard North Patterson
It is safe to say that many new authors have arrived on the literary
scene since the referenced publication, but the preference for genres and
tastes in reading probably still hold true (http://olos.ala.org/columns/?
p=264).
JOURNALING AND ORAL HISTORY PROJECTS
An old African proverb says that when an elder dies, an entire library is
gone. I would have to agree that certainly the most extensive collection
of information about an individual’s life is gone at that point, and with
it, sometimes untold stories. Programs that provide the elderly an oppor-
tunity to tell their stories are a wonderful way to engage with both the
individual and the community. Putting these stories together in the form
of a book or exhibit allows you to share the life’s stories of people from
your community in a public forum.
Depending upon the size of your community, you could either focus on
speciﬁc historical events around which people might gather recollections
for written or oral history projects, pick local leaders in the community
to do a program, or just allow people to focus on their life’s stories in their
entirety through journaling, oral history or photo exhibits. The size and
scope of the project will depend upon your area, your budget, and the
people involved.
From my experience with an oral history project for a small historical
museum in Western Colorado, I can tell you that such a project can be
accomplished on a smaller scale using only volunteers for doing the
110
Designing Adult Services

interviews and transcribing and indexing the recorded sessions. Because
of the size of the local population and rich local history to be found on
the western slopes of the Colorado Rocky Mountains, the Frontier
Historical Society and Museum in Glenwood Springs, Colorado, had an
ongoing oral history project when I was director there. The program
was implemented with volunteer interviewers and served to record the
lives of local artists, political ﬁgures, business owners, and other promi-
nent members of the community. The Houston Public Library is a good
example of oral history on a grander scale. The Houston Public Library
Oral History Project includes the following:
• The Mayor Bill White Collection: Mayor White commissioned 100
initial interviews, directing that it include well-known political, busi-
ness, and civic leaders, and witnesses to the history of Houston. The
interviews are part of the digital archives of the Houston Public
Library.
• The Neighborhood Voices tapes: In the summer of 2008, citizens
came to Houston Public Library locations throughout the city to
record their own brief recollections about life in Houston.
• HMRC Oral Histories: The Houston Metropolitan Research Center
of the Houston Public Library recently digitized more than 200 oral
histories from the 1970s and 1980s and contains interviews with
artists, musicians, civil rights activists, politicians, and civic leaders
who helped deﬁne the growth and history of the city.
• Building Houston Oral History Project: This collection is the result
of a partnership between the William R. Jenkins Architecture and
Art Library, a branch of the University of Houston Libraries, and
the Houston Chapter of the American Institute of Architects and
focuses on the architecture and buildings in the city. To see some of
the oral history interviews from Houston Public Library, visit
http://www.houstonoralhistory.org/index.html.
Nailing the Oral History Interview
According to the Oral History Association (OHA) at Georgia State
University, there are a number of things interviewers can do to make the
interview, and resulting collection, more meaningful and useful. In “Best
Practices for Oral History,” OHA suggests, in a broad sense that “All
those who use oral history interviews should strive for intellectual hon-
esty and the best application of the skills of their discipline. They should
avoid stereotypes, misrepresentations, and manipulations of the
Reflecting upon Life’s Journey: Age Group 75 and Beyond
111

narrator’s words. This includes foremost striving to retain the integrity of
the narrator’s perspective, recognizing the subjectivity of the interview,
and interpreting and contextualizing the narrative according to the pro-
fessional standards of the applicable scholarly disciplines. Finally, if a
project deals with community history, the interviewer should be sensitive
to the community, taking care not to reinforce thoughtless stereotypes.
Interviewers should strive to make the interviews accessible to the com-
munity and where appropriate to include representatives of the commu-
nity in public programs or presentations of the oral history material.”
More speciﬁc suggestions for oral history interviews include these tips:
• Prepare to ask informed questions by conducting background
research on the person, topic, and larger context in both primary
and secondary sources.
• When ready to contact a possible narrator, send an introductory let-
ter outlining the general focus and purpose of the interview via regu-
lar mail or e-mail, and then follow up with either a phone call or a
return email, or when other conditions make it appropriate, via
face-to-face meetings.
• Schedule a nonrecorded meeting, which will allow an exchange of
information between interviewer and narrator on possible ques-
tions/topics, reasons for conducting the interview, share information
about the process involved, and the need for informed consent and
legal release forms.
• Most importantly, “Make sure that the narrator understands oral
history’s purposes and procedures in general and of the proposed
interview’s aims and anticipated uses, his or her rights to the inter-
views including editing, access restrictions, copyrights, prior use,
royalties, and the expected disposition and dissemination of all
forms of the record, including the potential distribution electroni-
cally or on-line, that his or her recording(s) will remain conﬁdential
until he or she has given permission via a signed legal release.”
There are legal issues involved in having access to oral history
recordings.
• Use the best digital recording equipment available to reproduce the
narrator’s voice accurately and, if appropriate, other sounds and vis-
ual images, if video equipment is available. Before the interview,
interviewers should become familiar with the equipment and be
knowledgeable about its function.
• Always prepare an outline of interview topics and questions to use
as a guide to the recorded dialogue.
112
Designing Adult Services

• Obviously, the interview should be conducted in a quiet room with
little or no background noises and possible distractions.
• Recording a “lead” at the beginning of each session to help focus the
narrator’s thoughts to each session’s goals, consisting of, at least, the
names of narrator and interviewer, day and year of session, inter-
view’s location, and proposed subject of the recording.
• Both parties should agree to the approximate length of the interview
in advance, but, in particular, in the case of elderly narrators, the
interviewer is responsible for assessing whether the narrator is
becoming tired and offers a stopping point or rest period. Although
most interviews last about two hours, if the narrator wishes to con-
tinue those wishes should be honored, if possible.
• Along with asking creative and probing questions and listening to
the answers to ask better follow-up questions, the interviewer should
conduct the interview in accordance with any prior agreements
made with narrator, which should be documented for the record.
• Interviewers should work to achieve a balance between the objec-
tives of the project and the perspectives of the interviewees and fully
explore all appropriate areas of inquiry with interviewees.
Superﬁcial responses do not make a good oral history. At the same
time, encourage narrators to respond to questions in their own style
and language and to address issues that reﬂect their concerns.
• Interviewers must respect the rights of interviewees to refuse to dis-
cuss certain subjects, to restrict public access to the interview, or
even to choose anonymity. Interviewers should clearly explain these
options to all interviewees.
• Strive to record candid information of lasting value.
• Always secure a release form, by which the narrator transfers his or
her rights to the interview to the repository or designated body,
signed after each recording session or at the end of the last interview
with the narrator.
For more information about oral history projects and pre- and post inter-
view tips, visit http://www.oralhistory.org/about/principles-and-practices.
Journaling Programs
Harris County Library in Texas, with branches in the Houston area, has a
program called “Journaling in the Library” (http://www.hcpl.net/content/
journaling-library-2). This ongoing program relies on writing prompts to
inspire would be autobiographers to get busy! If there are reluctant
Reflecting upon Life’s Journey: Age Group 75 and Beyond
113

writers among your seniors who have stories that should be told, maybe
journaling would provide the impetus to get those pens moving.
Journaling can be both therapeutic and assist with recall. Seniors who
journal may wish to keep their thoughts private or pass them down as a leg-
acy to other family members. Writing can be a way to work through feel-
ings and memories of the past or deal with present-day stress, fears, hopes,
or even dreams of the future. They can be a way to track goals and develop
strategies for achieving progress on their personal bucket lists.
Journals can be handwritten, be typed, or use other technological aids,
such as tape recorders, video equipment on phones, and other devices, for
those who have difﬁculty writing or seeing. Monthly journaling groups
can keep writers motivated and allow them to share ideas and content.
Books, guest lectures, visual aids, and examples of other journals can help
get your group started, jump start ideas, or allow them to progress
beyond a writer’s block.
For those who prefer handwritten journals, allow writers to unlock
their creativity with things like colored pencils, stickers, markers and
other expressive writing tools to make their journals more beautiful and
expressive. Some seniors may prefer to journal exclusively through artis-
tic rendering. Allowing them access to art supplies in house or to borrow
supplies to take home can help facilitate their creative journeys.
LOCAL HISTORY DISPLAYS AND PROGRAMMING
Journaling and oral history projects can lead to some creative display
opportunities and programming options in the library, focusing on local
history, if participants are willing to share their stories.
One of the best attended programs we hosted at the Frontier Historical
Society, in conjunction with the local public library in Glenwood Springs,
Colorado, was with a group of older gentlemen who referred to them-
selves as “The Romeos,” or “Retired Old Men Eating Out.” This group
of four to ﬁve retired men would get together once a month and tell sto-
ries of this area, which was on the western slopes of the Rocky
Mountains, near Aspen. The area, originally settled by the Ute people,
had been host to outlaws and politicians, dignitaries and diplomats, was
a late nineteenth-century spa, known for its hot springs pool, and a ski
area. There were many stories to tell, and the local community loved to
share them. Putting together a panel discussion of some historical event
or period in a community’s history is usually a winning program.
Almost everyone has old photos that they love to share. Frequently, peo-
ple have artifacts that they would like to exhibit. While collecting artifacts
114
Designing Adult Services

is out of most libraries’ scope, some libraries do indeed have artifact collec-
tions, and many have photo collections. If planning a photo or archive
exhibit is in your future plans and your experience with historical collections
are limited, listed further are a few things to consider in preparation for the
exhibit.
Security
If planning for a short-term exhibit, three to four weeks, of photographs or
artifacts related to local history, security is most likely going to be an area
of concern. While exhibiting items or photos for an extended period of time
requires some attention to preserving and protecting the items from damag-
ing light or other environmental factors, hosting a short-term exhibit should
not create great cause for concern. Having a secure case for the exhibit and
permission to publicly display the items will be the main concern, particu-
larly if the items have any monetary value. Prior to having a security system,
Native American artifacts were stolen from the previously mentioned local
history museum in Colorado. The handmade cases were covered in
Plexiglas and held in place by screws. Some enterprising thieves were able
to unscrew the screws and take the artifacts while unsuspecting volunteers
sat at the information desk on another ﬂoor. When planning an exhibit,
make sure that your library has sufﬁcient security measures in place to pro-
tect artifacts and documents, or use reproductions only. No one wants to
loan the library their ancestor’s Civil War sword for an exhibit, only to have
it come up missing.
Display Housing
If using built-in display cabinets, make sure that they are equipped with
locks, and house the keys away from the display cases. Check the security
of the cases even while locked. I recently had a patron demonstrate for me
how he could open a locked display case, just by lifting up on the doors of
the case. He was quite proud of himself, too. If doors are loose or locks
broken, have the repair work done before the exhibit opens.
If borrowing or using any type of portable display case, similar to dis-
play cases with sliding back doors found in department stores, ensure that
the cases have a locking mechanism or get permission to have some type
of lock installed, even if it is only a padlock on the sliding doors. Check
that all of the glass panels are sealed or attached to the cabinet itself, not
just sitting on top of the cabinet, where it can be lifted off without any
trouble. Providing a sense of security for anyone loaning items for display
or for your own collections is mandatory.
Reflecting upon Life’s Journey: Age Group 75 and Beyond
115

Borrowers and Lenders
When borrowing items, something of equal importance to providing real
security for the items is having some form of agreement in place.
Depending upon the value of the item, insurance might be necessary or
even required by local governing agencies. A simple photo exhibit would
not require the kind of security or insurance as that Civil War sword, but
loan agreements are recommended for any original items, including docu-
ments or photos, and, of course, good copies can be made for exhibit
purposes.
A borrower’s agreement can be a simple one page document between
the lender, which could be an individual or another institution, and the
library, or borrower. The agreement should specify an amount of time
in which the item will be on loan, either in weeks or in terms of from
one speciﬁc date to another. The agreement should also state that the bor-
rower is responsible for the care and preservation of the item while it is in
the borrower’s care, at a minimum. By the same token, if lending items for
display from your library’s collection, be sure to have a lending agree-
ment in place with the borrowing institution.
Other Notes on Local Displays
As I have noted in the past, libraries can often become unwitting collec-
tors of a community’s stuff. When people showed up at the local histori-
cal society with items that did not fall under the scope of our collection,
I would often direct them to the local public library. At one library where
I worked, we had a lovely display case, donated by a library patron, but
speciﬁcally given to us to display the numerous items that he and his wife
collected during their travels, such as clay donkeys, hula girls, and
Russian nesting dolls. Do not fall into such a trap! A Deed of Gift spelling
out the library’s rights to use any gift, without restriction, and to dispose
of gifts when necessary, is a must. It is too easy to just accept someone’s
generosity with strings attached, especially in smaller communities where
feelings might be hurt or toes stepped on.
MORE DETAILED PROGRAMMING IDEAS
Focus on Wellness
While health and well-being is important at any age, paying extra attention
to our bodies and understanding what is going on with them becomes
crucial to the elderly. Libraries can play a critical role in the health literacy
116
Designing Adult Services

of older populations of people. Perhaps not being as aware of the number
of reliable health resources available to them online, older adults can use
a little instruction and guidance for ﬁnding good health and wellness re-
sources online and in the library. Since overall wellness embraces a wide
range of subjects, “Focus on Wellness” could make up a year-long series
for older adults.
Learning goals:
• Become an informed patient
• Become an advocate for your own health
• Learn to ﬁnd online resources
• Learn to talk to your doctor about concerns and issues
• Learn about alternative medicine
• Learn new “easier on the joints” exercise techniques
Steps to take:
• Locate speakers through local county extension services, colleges,
and providers of health services
• Seek out state or regional coordinators of the National Network of
Libraries of Medicine (NNLM) for presentations related to
NNLM’s online resources like MedLine, MedLine Plus, and Center
for Disease Control (CDC) online tools
• Review online resources from the NNLM and CDC, and do your
own presentation
• Have computer terminals or laptops available for hands-on experi-
ence when demonstrating online resources
• Have relevant library materials ready for display and point to online
library resources for further information
• Have listings of local health and ﬁtness agencies readily available
Suggested readings/topics:
• What Patients Say, What Doctors Hear by Danielle Ofri
• The Patient’s Playbook: Find the “No-Mistake Zone” by Leslie D.
Michelson
• Your Health, Your Decisions: How to Work with Your Doctor to
Become a Knowledge-Powered Patient by Robert Alan McNutt
• End Everyday Pain for 50+: A 10-Minute-a-Day Program of
Stretching, Strengthening and Movement to Break the Grip of Pain
by Dr. Joseph Tieri
Reflecting upon Life’s Journey: Age Group 75 and Beyond
117

• The Posture Pain Fix: How to Fix Your Back, Neck and Other
Postural Problems That Cause Pain in Your Body by Rosalind
Ferry
• Medical Terminology: Medical Terminology Made Easy:
Breakdown the Language of Medicine and Quickly Build Your
Medical Vocabulary by Eva Regan
• The Herbal Apothecary: 100 Medicinal Herbs and How to Use
Them by J. J. Pursell
• Healing Superfoods for Anti-Aging: Stay Younger, Live Longer by
Karen Ansel
Offering up informative programming on health and well-being for
seniors creates an opportunity for multiple programs and discussions.
Be sure to include as much material and information as you can online,
to beneﬁt those who might not be able to attend in-house programs.
Exclusive Preview
Many older adults may not be able to get out to the symphony, opera, or
local theater to catch an evening concert or performance. What if you
could offer an “Exclusive Preview” for your seniors during the afternoon
for upcoming events in the community? It might take some persuading,
but providing that you have the space, every performer needs to practice.
Invite musicians, artists, and other performers to practice on your seniors,
allowing them to talk about the music or play, or even explain a little
about the learning process or what goes on behind the scenes. If there is
an art exhibit coming up, maybe an artist wants to show off a work of
art and talk about the artistic process.
Learning goals:
• Learn about new musical, artistic, or theatrical works
• Learn about artistic processes
• Observe practice habits of musicians and performers
• Learn about library resources on art, music, and theater
Steps to take:
• Offer an honorarium to individual artists or a donation to ensembles
• Frame it as an opportunity to practice before a live audience
• Reach out to local university and college music departments for
music students who need performance outlets
118
Designing Adult Services

• Work with local arts agencies to ﬁnd artists who would like to share
their work
• Keep an eye on the theater scene and try to snag some performers to
give a taste of an upcoming production
• Market the “Exclusive Preview” via standard library outlets, and be
sure to market the upcoming full productions and concerts, as a
courtesy
• Be sure to provide library materials to compliment the performance
and continue the learning journey
Suggested reading/topics:
• Biographies of well-known performing and visual artists
• Local histories about local artists and performers, if they exist
• Instructional books on art and music
• Actual music scores or play scripts for more in-depth learning
While not every musician, performer, or artist will have the time to
give, be persistent in seeking out these kinds of opportunities for both per-
former and audience.
CONCLUSION
While older library users do have different needs and interests, much like
any other age group, other programming ideas and services suggested in
earlier chapters can be tailored to meet the older adults’ needs. Making
sure that older patrons are aware of the convenience that new technolo-
gies can provide, such as recorded or e-books online, and insuring that
they can use these technologies is a wonderful service that almost all libra-
ries can offer. In this chapter, I offered some speciﬁc suggestions for pro-
gramming, such as oral and local history projects and journaling
activities, as well as reading materials for this age group, allowing them
to continue on their journey of lifelong learning and sharing. As always,
you and your staff are the ones to determine what works best in your
community, for your older library users. By doing a little reﬂection of
your own, you can come up with successful services and meaningful pro-
grams for this sometimes underserved age group.
Reflecting upon Life’s Journey: Age Group 75 and Beyond
119


CHAPTER 9
Library Service to All
W
hen a library has the mission to serve an entire community, it
means just that—the entire community, regardless of race, color,
creed, sexual preference, gender preference, or lifestyle. It is not our job
to judge or pry into the private lives of those we serve but to provide them
with the information that they are seeking, without censure or even overt
interest. We provide everyone in our local communities with useful serv-
ices, no questions asked.
SERVICE TO IMMIGRANT POPULATIONS
According to data from the Pew Research Center, there are 97 counties in
the United States in which the former white majority has become the
minority, due to lower birth rates among younger Caucasians, aging of
the generation of the “big family,” and the inﬂux of immigrants to the
“Sunbelt” states. While Caucasians still remain the largest single racial
group in all but four of these counties, the combination of immigrant
and African American populations makes up the majority (http://www
.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/04/08/reﬂecting-a-racial-shift-78-counties
-turned-majority-minority-since-2000). Now more than ever, immigrant
populations need the services libraries have to offer in the form of English
as a Second Language (ESL) assistance, obtaining government information
and being on the path to citizenship.
“So what does this mean for my library?” you might be asking
yourself.
It means that you have a golden opportunity to reach out to new users
who will someday become a big part of the foundation of your library
support. It also means that if we ignore these statistics and fail to reach

out to immigrant populations, we will lose a big part of the foundation of
our library support. Every major business concern in the United States
has its automated voice system option in Spanish, which says something
about how businesses understand and market to this growing demo-
graphic. Libraries should be doing the same thing, too.
Different Cultures, Different Perceptions
The Spanish Language Outreach (SLO) program, funded by the Gates
Foundation through WebJunction, explored misconceptions about public
libraries on the part of Spanish-speaking immigrants, demonstrating that
there are frequently “Varying experiences with public libraries in country
of origin.” Some common misconceptions about public libraries in
America, stemming from practices in the immigrant’s country of origin,
are as follows:
• Public libraries are only for students or people with considerable
education.
• Library materials are offered for sale and not loan.
• The word “libreria” in Spanish means “bookstore,” and sounds
more than a bit like “library,” which could account for confusion.
• Access to the library and materials are fee based.
• Libraries might divulge the personal information government agen-
cies, as this could very easily happen in some countries.
• Libraries in America only have English language materials (http://
www.webjunction.org/materials/webjunction/Spanish_Language_
Outreach_Program_Workshop_Curriculum.html).
These types of misconceptions often discourage new immigrants
from coming into the library in the ﬁrst place, which is a good reason
to do outreach to immigrant populations in your community, creating
a visible presence for the library where immigrant populations gather,
such as churches, local groceries, and social services agencies.
Understanding that all immigrants are not familiar with the concept of
“free public libraries” gives you impetus to get out of the library and
ﬁnd the people where they are.
Outreach to Spanish Speakers
Spanish is the second most often spoken language in the United States,
and Spanish-speaking populations can be found all over the United
122
Designing Adult Services

States, in both urban and rural areas. As statewide coordinator of the
Gates Foundation SLO program for the state of Missouri in 2007–2008,
I was privileged to attend training in outreach to Spanish speakers, as well
as plan and implement trainings and grant opportunities for Missouri
libraries in library services to this ever-growing portion of our popula-
tion. The SLO program trained over 6,000 library staff via 440 work-
shops presented in 40 states across the country. The training materials
for the SLO program can still be found on WebJunction at http://www
.webjunction.org/explore-topics/slo.html, in addition to other resources
on outreach to immigrants.
The SLO program stressed the importance of locating and networking
with community leaders within the Spanish-speaking community. Each
local workshop that we presented in libraries in the state of Missouri
required the invitation of local community leaders from the Spanish-
speaking community, ideally, such as ministers and business owners, or
the presence of individuals who worked with the community, such as
social workers, ESL teachers, and other professionals from the commu-
nity. In these workshops, we learned that working to ensure the trust
and friendship of local leaders in the Spanish-speaking community is
key to earning the trust of the general population. This simple practice is
one that could be applied to any immigrant community. Identifying and
reaching out to community leaders is key to building a relationship with
immigrants. Start by doing the following:
• Invite community leaders to be part of an outreach to immigrant
populations committee at the library. Community leaders in the
Spanish-speaking population are considered to be the “gate keep-
ers” and can be the conduit to your success in introducing library
services to this demographic.
• Go where the people are with information about the library and its
services. This could include the local laundromat, schools, churches,
social services ofﬁces, immigrations centers, and even restaurants.
Ask to post ﬂyers or drop-off pamphlets about what the library has
to offer.
• Ask to do presentations at churches, in schools, social clubs, or ESL
classes. Teaching new immigrants about library resources is a way to
ensure that they become library users and supporters on their way to
citizenship.
• Post signage or have library information in as many languages used
in your community as your available resources will allow.
Library Service to All
123

The Library 101
Immigrant populations often need an introduction to the free libraries of
America. In some countries, a free library simply does not exist. By creat-
ing and offering a Library 101 course, you can provide a brief, but
thorough, introduction to the library and its resources. Making this a
“traveling show” is a must. Take your Library 101 introductory course
out to churches, community centers, assistance centers, anywhere that
immigrants might congregate and need to know about the library’s offer-
ings. Have a volunteer translator on hand to overcome the language bar-
riers. New immigrants to the United States will most likely be open and
receptive to your message, once they understand that there are “no strings
attached,” and new immigrant populations=new library users.
Once you have made contact with and gained the trust of immigrant
communities, it is important to have a welcoming and easy to under-
stand system in place to assist people who may or may not speak
English, even as a second language. Signage, forms, and instructions
printed in the dominant languages of bigger immigrant communities
can make for easier communication, once they have found their way
into the library.
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
The Department of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS)
offers a wealth of information on the steps to becoming a U.S. citizen as
well as a free downloadable booklet for starting a citizenship program
in your local community. USCIS recognizes the important role that libra-
ries currently play and have historically played in the assimilation of new
immigrants into our culture and assistance on the path to citizenship. As
recognized in Library Services for Immigrants: A Report on Current
Practices, a 2009 report published by USCIS with funding from the
Institute of Museum and Library Services, “Public libraries in the United
States have a long history of providing resources and education to immi-
grants. This tradition may be traced to Andrew Carnegie’s support for
public libraries as a place for immigrant self-education, enlightenment,
and the study of democracy and English.” Keeping with this tradition is
even more critical in 2016, in light of the current attitudes toward immi-
grants being expressed by some in the United States.
At USA.gov, recognizing that “Libraries are important community
institutions. In the United States, people turn to public libraries as vital
sources of information and service referrals. Immigrants often come to
124
Designing Adult Services

libraries for those reasons and to learn about the resources available to
help them,” links are provided that will help librarians identify resources
to assist newcomers on the following:
• Citizenship Resources for Learners, Adult Educators, and
Organizations: The Citizenship Resource Center from USCIS pro-
vides a one-stop resource for locating information about becoming a
U.S. citizen, lesson plans for citizenship classes, and resources for
immigrant-serving organizations.
• Free Educational Materials for Immigrant-Serving Organizations:
USCIS offers a free Civics and Citizenship Toolkit to immigrant-
serving organizations, including public libraries that help prepare
immigrants for citizenship. The Toolkit contains educational
materials that focus on both naturalization preparation and civic
learning.
• Free Materials to Promote Citizenship Education and Awareness:
Learn about USCIS’ initiative to raise awareness of the rights,
responsibilities, and importance of U.S. citizenship. Find posters,
radio and video messages, and information on how community
organizations, including libraries, can support this effort.
• Find an ESL or Citizenship Class: America’s Literacy Directory
allows immigrants to search for an English and citizenship class in
their local area. If your library offers classes or programs, we
encourage you to add them to the directory.
• Examples of Citizenship Education Initiatives in Public Libraries:
The Los Angeles Public Library established “citizenship corners” in
each of their branches containing essential information for those
looking to apply for citizenship or learn more about the beneﬁts
and responsibilities of being a U.S. citizen.
• The Queens Library includes a “Citizenship and Immigration” sec-
tion on its website, which provides a list of community resources
available to immigrants. The library also has a New Americans
Program highlighting services, programs, and resources the library
provides to immigrants.
The Hartford Public Library’s website includes an “Immigration
and Citizenship” section with information on the services it provides
to immigrants.
• E-mail Alerts on Citizenship and Citizenship Education: Sign up to
receive free email alerts from USCIS with important news and infor-
mation on a variety of topics.
Library Service to All
125

Citizenship Corners in Libraries
The USCIS encourages libraries, as integral parts of their local com-
munities, to establish a digital and physical “Citizenship Corner” in
the library. These Citizenship Corners provide a dedicated space in
your library where immigrants can ﬁnd information about becoming a
U.S. citizen. USCIS has developed educational materials to help prepare
individuals for naturalization. Here immigrants can ﬁnd the informa-
tion and resources they need to start the path toward becoming a U.S.
citizen.
A typical Citizenship Corner includes citizenship test preparation mate-
rials along with information about the naturalization process. Libraries
can also add information about community resources, English teaching
materials, and other relevant books and videos from their collections.
While there are a number of immigration topics that may be of interest
to libraries and their customers, USCIS recommends displaying only citi-
zenship and naturalization-related resources in the Citizenship Corner.
The USCIS offers the following helpful suggestions for establishing a
Citizenship Corner in your library:
• Order one free copy of the USCIS Civics and Citizenship Toolkit. The
Toolkit contains immigration and civics publications, handbooks, and
multimedia tools, such as the USCIS Naturalization Interview and
Test video, Quick Civics Lessons for the Naturalization Test,
Vocabulary Flash Cards for the Naturalization Test, Civics Flash
Cards for the Naturalization Test (English and Spanish), and Civics
and Citizenship Multimedia Presentation.
• Download Form N-400, Application for Naturalization and provide
copies in the Citizenship Corner. (Remind your customers that all
USCIS forms are free.)
• Display and distribute free USCIS informational resources.
• Print 11” × 17” citizenship awareness posters in English, Chinese,
Spanish, and Vietnamese. Display these posters in the Citizenship
Corner, classrooms, and other visible areas.
• Print 6” × 9” informational ﬂyers in English, Chinese, Spanish, and
Vietnamese. These ﬂyers highlight naturalization eligibility require-
ments and resources available on the USCIS Citizenship Resource
Center.
• Download
and
distribute
the
brochure
of
10
Steps
to
Naturalization: Understanding the Process of Becoming a U.S.
Citizen.
126
Designing Adult Services

• Download and display the Pathway to U.S. Citizenship poster.
• Enhance your Citizenship Corner with other citizenship-related and
ESL resources from your library’s collection.
• Locate the Citizenship Corner near ESL textbooks and resources or
post signs directing customers.
• Feature books and magazines that address the content of the
100 civics questions on the naturalization test such as famous
Americans, historical events, and important founding documents.
• Arrange your Citizenship Corner to be welcoming and helpful. Here
are some additional suggestions:
• Decorate the Citizenship Corner in a patriotic theme.
• Distribute promotional ﬂyers for citizenship or ESL classes offered at
your library.
• Distribute ﬂyers from local Board of Immigrant Appeals (BIA) rec-
ognized organizations that may be able to help immigrant customers
with USCIS forms. Visit uscis.gov for more information on ﬁnding
legal services and BIA recognized organizations.
• Create and distribute a referral list of local community organizations
that provide citizenship services and ESL classes in your community.
• Add computers to the Citizenship Corner and set the Internet
browser home page to www.uscis.gov/citizenship, a one-stop
USCIS resource for locating citizenship preparation materials and
activities.
• Set up a video monitor at the Citizenship Corner and play the USCIS
Naturalization Interview and Test video on a continuous loop.
• Set up a computer workstation that displays Preparing for the Oath:
U.S. History and Civics for Citizenship at http://americanhistory.si
.edu/citizenship. This interactive website highlights museum objects
from the Smithsonian Institution to help people prepare for the
civics portion of the naturalization test.
• USCIS often hosts naturalization information sessions and
administrative naturalization ceremonies in libraries. View the
list of upcoming naturalization information sessions at libraries
nationwide at https://www.uscis.gov/citizenship/learners/free
-information-sessions. Contact your local USCIS community rela-
tions ofﬁcer if you are interested in USCIS hosting a similar ses-
sion at your library.
• Create a virtual Citizenship Corner on your library website by add-
ing free web resources from https://www.uscis.gov/citizenship/
learners. You may want to add a link on your website.
Library Service to All
127

• Link to USCIS resources by adding a widget to your website. The
widgets are small online applications in English and Spanish that
can be embedded on social media sites, blogs, or other web pages.
Find widgets here: https://www.uscis.gov/citizenship/see-all-section
-items-title/Widgets/55247?destination=node/41137
• Get your immigrant library users on the road to citizenship by link-
ing to the “Find Help in Your Community” page on the USCIS
Citizenship Resource Center. Another resource for ﬁnding commu-
nity organizations that offer ESL, civics, and citizenship education
classes is America’s Literacy Directory. Search for programs by zip
code.
• To ﬁnish off your virtual Citizenship Corner, be sure to include
information about immigration and citizenship resources available
at your library.
Assisting new immigrants on their path to citizenship is in keeping
with the library’s mission of serving the entire community and
creates an opportunity for the library to provide a service that will
have long lasting impact on individual lives, the local community,
and the nation.
Technology Assistance to Immigrant Populations
According to a Library Journal article titled Many Low-Income Families
“Under-Connected” to Internet, Survey Finds, two-ﬁfths have mobile-
only Internet access by Linda Jacobson, while many lower-income fami-
lies have Internet access, a large number of them rely solely on mobile
devices for Internet access. Often those with computer access at home
are living with slow access, and, in particular, families headed by
Hispanic immigrants are the least likely to have online access. (Library
Journal. 141.4 (Mar. 1, 2016): p29). With students increasingly relying
on Internet access to do research and homework assignments, and with
employers only offering online application for jobs, having access to com-
puters and reliable Internet service is a necessity. In this respect, libraries
are still bridging the digital divide since the term was ﬁrst tossed around
in the mid-1990s and there continues to be a demand for computers in
libraries.
The Edge Benchmarks for technology, referenced in previous chapters,
suggest that libraries offer technology assistance in other languages in at
least one branch. While this may seem like a tall order for some libraries
to ﬁll, particularly the language benchmarks, make an effort to ﬁnd a
128
Designing Adult Services

native speaker of the most predominant foreign language in your commu-
nity to assist with translating written instructions into another language,
at least in urban areas. Short of hiring multilingual staff, it makes sense
that if you have a population speaking another language in your area,
you should be able to ﬁnd a volunteer or contract with someone to assist
with the translation issues, if only to create simple instructions and sign-
age for computer terminals.
While learning library terminology of any kind in every language is not
feasible, it would be helpful to new immigrants to know a least a few sim-
ple library terms in languages that predominate in your area.
E-Government Resources
Edge Benchmarks also lists links to e-government resources as critical in
library service, and especially to immigrant populations. Links to local,
state, and federal online government services should be part of the
library’s web presence. Consider providing links to health and social serv-
ices, housing authority, consumer protection information, state and
federal job services, tax forms, and disaster and emergency services, bro-
ken out by category of service. At a minimum, provide links to the entry
portals for local, state, and federal government pages, which will, in turn,
offer more links to the speciﬁc on e-government resources online.
USA.gov is the ofﬁcial web portal of the federal government and has links
to federal government web pages, services, forms, and so on. USA.gov
also provides a tool for searching for state government portals at https://
www.usa.gov/states-and-territories.
PROGRAMMING FOR IMMIGRANT POPULATIONS
Since there is so much to try to understand when moving to a new coun-
try, practical programming highlighting community services, life skills,
job searching, and resume writing are essential for many new
immigrants.
• A simple program on banking services could be useful, as some-
times immigrants fall prey to check cashing services that charge
higher fees, or paycheck loan services that charge exorbitant inter-
est rates.
• Do a simple program highlighting various community services, such
as health services, after school programs, and services for families in
crisis.
Library Service to All
129

• Find volunteers from within the different immigrant communities to
assist with technology classes, resume and job search assistance, and
have set conversational English classes weekly. Denver Public
Library has an excellent volunteer assisted program with its Plaza
services (https://www.denverlibrary.org/services-immigrants).
• “Months” dedicated to programming for speciﬁc populations, such
as Asian-Paciﬁc heritage month and Hispanic-Latino heritage
month. Highlight cuisine, music, art, or other cultural traditions.
Involve the local community when planning these types of programs
and better your chances of drawing people in.
• Kentucky’s Louisville Free Public Library (LFPL) holds monthly
Cultural Showcases of presentations, food, live music, dance, games,
and elaborate decorations.
• LFPL also provides a venue for immigrant professionals and artists
to share their talents with their new community. Facilitated by
librarians and patrons, the programs consist of lectures and discus-
sions on literature, ﬁlm, psychology, philosophy, and sociology, pre-
sented to populations that speak the same language from different
countries
As new immigrants feel more “at home” in the library, they will soon
learn to make use of the library’s services and ﬁnd other programs that
would be of interest and beneﬁcial. Programs directly targeted to
immigrant populations serve both as a “taste” of what the library has to
offer and to assist them in learning more about the community to which
they have moved.
Links to Library Resources for Spanish Speakers
The Beaufort County Library put together a Communication First Aid Kit
Bienvenidos a la Biblioteca, back in 2008, which is still relevant and use-
ful. The entire guide can be found at http://www.webjunction.org/
content/dam/WebJunction/Documents/webJunction/Bienvenidos-a-la
-Biblioteca!-A-Spanish-Pointing-Guide. The ﬁrst aid kit includes sample
“pointing guides” with side-by-side English and Spanish library terminol-
ogy, which can be used by anyone, regardless of their understanding
of the language. Spanish-speaking information seekers can point to
what they are looking for and English-speaking staff will understand.
The 61-page guide also offers pronunciation tips, conversational and
informational phrases in Spanish and English, Dewey classiﬁcation in
both languages, and sample library location and hour signage as well as
130
Designing Adult Services

sample library forms in Spanish. It is a fairly comprehensive resource for
library terminology in Spanish/English and I hope WebJunction will leave
it online forever!
For more in depth study of library terminology in Spanish, The
Learning Light, LLC, offers an eight-week course in library terminology
called “Spanish That Works!”. The Missouri State Library purchased
multiple licenses for “Spanish That Works!” and offered grants to hire
Spanish-speaking trainers to present the course materials at several loca-
tions around the state. Large urban libraries made good use of the pro-
gram and trained a number of staff in library terminology in Spanish.
You can ﬁnd out more about “Spanish That Works!” at http://www
.spanishthatworks.org/spanish-for-library-staff, if more than a few words
in Spanish is needed at your library or branch.
Providing outreach and services to new immigrant populations ensures
that your library would not be missing out on an opportunity for growth.
LIBRARY SERVICES TO THE INCARCERATED
In Prisons & Publics, “Public libraries are providing service to the
incarcerated and their families in an effort to ease reentry” (Library
Journal, February 2017), April Witteveen highlights library outreach
programs to the incarcerated in Minnesota, Oregon, Pennsylvania,
Utah, New York, and Maryland. While one of the goals of these pro-
grams is to assist inmates in reentry into greater society, fostering fam-
ily literacy is also an important focal point of these public library/prison
initiatives.
The Hennepin County Library system in Hennepin County,
Minnesota, has had a program called “Read to Me” since 1997. The pro-
gram allows inmates of the local county jail to record themselves reading
a story and then share the recording and the book with the inmates’ chil-
dren. Inmates are also encouraged and taught to continue reading with
their children upon release from incarceration. Early in the history of
the program, a newsletter and marketing campaign within the jail pro-
moted library services to inmates. Programming within the jail includes
writing-based activities such as books reports and emphasis on philoso-
phy and journal reading.
The Free Library of Philadelphia offers Stories Alive, a program pro-
viding picture books for inmates to read to their children during family
visitation, including participation through Skype. The aim of the pro-
gram, to promote family literacy and connections between family mem-
bers, once funded by grants, is part of the library’s regular operating
Library Service to All
131

budget. The program also includes the circulation of popular and genre
ﬁction and dictionaries, important to the continued growth and develop-
ment of the inmates themselves.
Salt Lake County Library Services has libraries within the Metro and
Oxbow county jails, with a collection of up to 30,000 titles. Books are
delivered directly to inmates, and about two-thirds of the collection is in
circulation all the time. Library staff there facilitate life-skills classes high-
lighting library and community resources for inmates prior to their
release, including resume and job resources, testing sites, and continuing
education resources.
New York Public Library recently opened a 1,200 volume library in the
women’s facility of the Rikers Island prison complex. The previous
method of delivery to inmates was book carts traveling through the
prison units, and did not allow for enough access for those seeking access
to library resources. Opening an actual facility quadrupled the library’s
prison patron base as well as allows for literacy-based programming with
in the library. One of the more interesting programs offered here is the
“Call Me Ishmael” program, which allows readers to leave a voicemail
describing a book that made a difference in their lives, which is then tran-
scribed into typewritten animation, as a means of allowing prisoners to
share favorite titles.
Library services to the incarcerated are an important step in getting
people who have made mistakes in their lives back to their families, back
into society, and into the workplace. If starting a prison/library partner-
ship is something of interest in your area, learning more from these great
examples would be beneﬁcial.
LIBRARY SERVICES TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
The term “disability” is applied to any number of conditions affecting
human beings. Many people identiﬁed as having disabilities prefer not
to think of themselves as disabled, at all; perhaps just different in some
way, much like all of us are different in many ways. Having been the
Adult Services Consultant for the Missouri State Library, I worked with
various agencies to provide training in the area of library services to peo-
ple with disabilities, in addition to outreach to Spanish speakers, and it
was through this work that I learned of the “People First” movement.
Too often we ﬁnd ourselves thinking and speaking of the perceived dis-
ability ﬁrst, and the person second, using phrases like, “handicapped peo-
ple” or “disabled people.” But we should always remember that people
with disabilities are people, ﬁrst and foremost, and they like to be
132
Designing Adult Services

identiﬁed as such. Consequently, there is a movement dedicated to recog-
nizing people with disabilities as people ﬁrst and some helpful language
that goes along with the movement. Here are some examples of “people
ﬁrst” language:
Say
Instead of
person with a disability
handicapped, disabled
person with a congenital disability
person with a birth defect
person who has been diagnosed
with . . .
person afﬂicted with or suffers from
person who has Down syndrome
Downs person, mongoloid, mongol
person who has been diagnosed with
autism
the autistic
person with quadriplegia
quadriplegic
person with a physical disability
a cripple
people who are blind, person who is
visually impaired
the blind
person with a learning disability
learning disabled
person diagnosed with a mental health
condition
crazy, insane, and mentally ill
Always identify the person ﬁrst and the particular condition second, if
at all, much the same way that we use other characteristics, like brown
eyes, or height, or hair color to identify each other. The People First
movement is an international organization that promotes self-advocacy
for people with disabilities. For more information about People First, visit
http://www.peopleﬁrst.org.
Another wonderful website for advocacy for people with disabilities is
https://www.disabilityisnatural.com, hosted by mother, advocate, and
motivational speaker Kathie Snow. Part of Kathie’s message is clear
from the name of her newsletter and web page, “Disability is Natural.”
Realizing that physical and mental differences exist in all of us, and
makes each of us unique, Snow champions the idea that people with
disabilities are just unique individuals, an inspiring message to
champion. In an effort to serve the entire community, libraries should
put forth a real effort to ensure that people with disabilities can use the
library’s resources, just like everyone else.
Visual Accessibility
Many older, as well as younger, adults are visually impaired and ﬁnd
computer use difﬁcult. While following these guidelines set out by the
National Institute of Health on making your website senior friendly
may not be as exciting as you would like, making the information found
Library Service to All
133

on your website accessible to everyone is important. In “Making Your
Web Site Senior Friendly,” the National Institute on Aging and the
National Library of Medicine make the following suggestions for making
your website easier to read and understand for everyone:
• Use a sans serif typeface, such as Helvetica, that is not condensed.
Avoid the use of serif, novelty, and display typefaces.
• Use 12-point or 14-point type size for body text.
• Use medium or bold-face type.
• Present body text in uppercase and lowercase letters. Use all capital
letters and italics in headlines only. Reserve underlining for links.
• Double space all body text.
• Left justiﬁed text is optimal for older adults.
• Avoid yellow, blue, and green in close proximity. These colors and
juxtapositions are difﬁcult for some older adults to discriminate.
Ensure that text and graphics are understandable when viewed on
a black and white monitor.
• Use dark type or graphics against a light background, or white let-
tering on a black or dark-colored background. Avoid patterned
backgrounds.
• Present information in a clear and familiar way to reduce the num-
ber of inferences that must be made. Use positive statements.
• Use the active voice.
• Write the text in simple language.
• Provide an online glossary of technical terms.
• Organize the content in a standard format.
• Break lengthy documents into short sections.
• Use text-relevant images only.
• Use short segments to reduce download time on older computers.
• Provide text alternatives such as open-captioning or access to a static
version of the text for all animation, video, and audio.
• Carefully label links.
• Use explicit step-by-step navigation procedures whenever possible to
ensure that people understand what follows.
• Use single mouse clicks to access information and provide a consis-
tent layout.
• Use a standard page design and the same symbols and icons
throughout.
• Use the same set of navigation buttons in the same place on each
page to move from one web page or section of the web site to
another.
134
Designing Adult Services

• Label each page in the same location with the name of the
website.
• Incorporate text with the icon if possible, and use large buttons that
do not require precise mouse movements for activation.
• Use pull down menus sparingly.
• Avoid automatically scrolling text. If manual scrolling is required,
incorporate speciﬁc scrolling icons on each page.
• Incorporate buttons such as Previous Page and Next Page to allow
the reader to review or move forward.
• Provide a site map to show how the site is organized.
• Use icons with text as hyperlinks.
• Offer a telephone number for those who would prefer to talk to a
person or provide an e-mail address for questions or comments.
• Solicit unbiased comments from older adults through focus groups,
usability testing or other means, to evaluate the accessibility and
friendliness of the website (https://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/
checklist).
Disability.gov
“Disability.gov is the federal government website for comprehensive
information about disability-related programs, services, policies,
laws and regulations. The site links to thousands of resources from
many different federal government agencies, as well as state and
local governments and nonproﬁt organizations across the country.”
(www.disability.gov)
Disability.gov is an “information and referral” website, which means
that users will generally be referred to another website when seeking
information from Disability.gov. For example, a resource about
Social Security disability beneﬁts will redirect a search to the Social
Security Administration (www.ssa.gov). While Disability.gov cannot
be responsible for the maintenance of information on these referred
websites, new resources are added to Disability.gov’s 10 main subject
areas on a regular basis, including disability beneﬁts, individual
civil rights, education, employment, housing, and transportation.
These resources can lead to a greater understanding of Social Security
disability beneﬁts, job accommodations for employees with
disabilities, accessible housing, and organizations in your local
area that can help people with disabilities ﬁnd a job or live an
independent life.
Library Service to All
135

Disability.gov’s “Guides to Information and Resources” provide infor-
mation and links to other agencies, including state and local agencies
about important topics like as follows:
• Assistive and Accessible Technologies
• Disability Beneﬁts
• Disability Rights Laws
• Emergency Preparedness and Disaster Recovery
• Employment
• Family Caregivers
• Federal Government Grants
• Financial Help for Low-Income Individuals and Families
• Health Information and Resources
• Housing
• Self-Employment and Starting a Small Business
• Student Financial Aid
• Student Transition Planning
• Transportation
This comprehensive portal provides links to more than 14,000 re-
sources from federal, state, and local government agencies; academic
institutions; and nonproﬁt organizations. Consider putting a link to this
and other government agencies on the library’s website, under “E-
government Resources.”
Providing Accommodations
By making the effort to ensure that all of your library’s services and pro-
grams are accessible to those with disabilities, you embrace an often over-
looked library user group. In addition to the physical accessibility of your
library, you should strive for an accessible website, which is, of course, a
major source of access to your library’s digital and physical collections,
and a means of marketing programs and services. Be aware of the
Americans with Disabilities Act requirements for facilities and provide
these minimum accommodations:
• Have a Request for Accommodation policy and form in place and
make it as simple and pleasant as possible (sample Request for
Accommodation is in the Appendix F.
• Maintain an adequate number of accessible parking spaces and,
when possible, police them.
136
Designing Adult Services

• Maintain adequate openings, at least 32 inches wide, or automatic
doors.
• Install handrails, ramps, and an elevator.
• Have accessible tables, computer tables, and desks available.
Remember, too, that large print key labels can assist patrons with low
vision, there is software available to enlarge screen images, or use the
zoom feature to enlarge. Have monitors of at least 17 inches in width
and trackball mouse with good wrist rests. There are any number of other
assistive technologies available for people with disabilities. Check with
state assistive technology programs to learn more about the types of assis-
tive technology available and any ways in which you might partner with
agencies, or beneﬁt from their services. A list of state assistive technology
programs can be found at http://www.resnaprojects.org/allcontacts/
statewidecontacts.html.
So much can be said about library services to people with disabilities. In
many cases, people with disabilities are largely ignored, or merely toler-
ated, in libraries. It is our responsibility to ensure that people with disabil-
ities have the same access to information and library services as everyone
else in our communities.
MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES IN LIBRARIES
Library workers deal with people with mental health issues every day. For
this reason, it is imperative to cultivate skills in dealing with people with
these types of issues. Mental health issues vary greatly and are not always
easily recognizable. It is not necessary that we are able to recognize issues
for what they are, but that we are able to treat all of our library users with
the sensitivity and patience that they deserve.
With the deinstitutionalization of the people with mental illness in the
1950s and 1960s, many people with these issues found themselves living
on the streets. That number has only continued to grow as housing
options began to and continue to diminish over time (National
Coalition for the Homeless, 2005). It is no wonder that libraries, as public
facilities dedicated to serving their communities, have become a haven for
the homeless, often bringing mental health issues with them into the
library.
Most often a person with mental illness might only need some special
assistance or become an annoyance to other library users. Some of them
might require some “mental health ﬁrst aid.” The National Council for
Mental Health offers a course called “Mental Health First Aid”
Library Service to All
137

(MHFA), with the intention of making mental health ﬁrst aid as preva-
lent as cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) instruction. According to
the MHFA website, “Mental Health First Aid is an 8-hour course that
teaches you how to identify, understand and respond to signs of mental
illnesses and substance use disorders. The training gives you the skills
you need to reach out and provide initial help and support to someone
who may be developing and mental health or substance use problem or
experiencing a crisis” (http://www.mentalhealthﬁrstaid.org/cs/about/).
The MHFA website offers a tool for ﬁnding training in your area by
zip code. In many areas, the course is free. In the Washington, DC,
area, there are some courses offered for $25.00. Whether the course is
free or offered at a nominal fee, this seems like a good investment for
library staff.
For several years, the Missouri State Library partnered with the
Missouri Department of Mental Health to provide library training in a
number of areas related to library services to people with mental health
issues in a project called Librarian411. I was honored to be part of that
project. The results of this partnership included a number of videos dem-
onstrating techniques for situations that may arise in public libraries, and
while that particular project is no longer active, the videos created by
Librarian411 can still be found on YouTube. Visit the Librarian411
web page with links to the YouTube videos at http://www.librarian411
.org. These videos cover a wide variety of topics including crisis
preparation and response as well as a number of videos that deal with
library services to people with physical disabilities and assistive
technology in libraries. It is important that library workers have some
skills in coping with emergency situations when they might arise,
including emergencies involving mental illness. Safety is a main concern
when working with the public, in any institution.
Have a Plan
Most libraries have disaster and emergency preparedness plans. Include
plans for emergencies involving the homeless or people with mental ill-
ness. The Treatment Advocacy Center (TAC) of Arlington, Virginia,
posts some very telling statistics on its website stating that a survey of
1,300 libraries reported that 9 out of 10 library workers have seen a
person with mental illness disturb or affect other library users, 28 per-
cent have seen a coworker assaulted by someone with mental illness,
and 66 percent have had to change library policies and procedures to
accommodate people with mental illness. In advocating for more
138
Designing Adult Services

assistance for people with mental illness, the TAC notes that “The
problems facing libraries are part of the larger issue of the lack of avail-
able treatment for people with severe mental illness, especially for those
who are discharged from mental hospitals without any follow up care.
The result is an increase of people with mental illnesses who are home-
less and turn to libraries and other public facilities because they just
need somewhere to go” (http://www.treatmentadvocacycenter.org/
home-page/71/1352).
In the article “Librarians Under Siege: How Can Librarians Protect
Themselves Against Patrons Who Are Troubled or Violent?” Richard
Bermack recounts a gun related incident at the Berkley Public Library
(http://consumer.healthday.com/encyclopedia/work-and-health-41/
occupational-health-news-507/librarians-under-siege-646477.html).
Bermack shares advice from librarians who work with a diverse popula-
tion every day and suggests taking conﬂict resolution and management
courses and self-defense courses, having emergency procedures in place
and understood and practiced by all staff, having a panic button, which
calls police somewhere in the public service area, and professional evalu-
ation of safety procedures.
“Safe Harbor: Policies and Procedures for a Safe Library,” published
by the Alliance Library System of Illinois and funded by a Library
Services and Technology Act (LSTA) grant from the Illinois State
Library, offers the following suggesting in the event of a violent confron-
tation in the library:
• “Any staff member who hears raised voices or sounds of a scufﬂe
should investigate. Recruit other staff to quietly move other custom-
ers out of the way to a safer location.
• If you suspect violence is a possibility, call and alert other staff and
administration. Use teamwork.
• Remain calm. Do not become angry and do not argue.
• Do not block exits.
• Do not invade their personal space. Maintain at least an arm’s
length away. This keeps staff out of punching or kicking range.
• If two adults are ﬁghting, do not get between them.
• Call the police and describe the situation and location of the alterca-
tion. If they are not yet aware, call administration.
• Notice details so you can describe the combatants and the situation
to authorities.
• Staff are expected to cooperate with the police and to serve as a wit-
ness in court if called upon to do so.
Library Service to All
139

• Fill out an incident report and ﬁle it in the Director’s Ofﬁce.
Administration may decide to ban the combatants from the library
for a period of time.”
The entire publication of “Safe Harbor” can be found on the Wyoming
State Library website, as part of the Wyoming Public Library Director’s
Handbook.
MORE DETAILED PROGRAMMING IDEAS
Cultural Showcase
Offering immigrant populations the opportunity to showcase their
culture not only beneﬁts the group that you are showcasing but also
offers the local community a chance to get to know their new neigh-
bors. With immigrants increasingly under scrutiny in the United
States, it is important that libraries assist them in all ways, including
an opportunity to allow others to experience the food, music, art,
and other customs of a culture. This program could be built around a
number of different immigrant groups and provide a monthly pro-
gram, possibly for several months, depending upon your location and
demographics.
Learning goals:
• Get a glimpse into the culture of various immigrant populations
• Taste some of the foods from other cultures
• Learn about music, dance, or other art forms
• Allow for sharing and dissemination of information regarding
immigrant cultures
Steps to take:
• Provide outreach to local immigrant populations by visiting
churches, markets, or other locations where they gather. (Note that
many members of immigrant populations are distrustful of
government institutions.)
• Establish a relationship with members of the community and
approach key members with the idea.
• Make the events long enough to highlight different aspects of a cul-
ture, preferably an afternoon or half-day event.
• Advertise via usual social and other media outlets, but try to get
some local news coverage as well.
140
Designing Adult Services

• Approach this project with the idea that you are not only building
community relations, but also connecting with new library users.
Suggested reading for each event:
• Travel guides to the featured country of origin
• Histories and biographies of famous individuals from each country
• Fiction and poetry
• Children’s books for families
By making these events family friendly and getting in some good mar-
keting for them, cultural showcases might end up being a local favorite!
Alternative Book Group
In addition to regular book groups that might get together to talk over the
latest best seller or biography, make members of the LGBT community feel
welcome in the library. Like immigrants, LGBT people, and particularly the
transgender, are coming under greater scrutiny and perhaps feeling more
marginalized than in recent years. Having a book discussion club focusing
on LGBT ﬁction or nonﬁction about issues that they are facing would be a
step toward making them feel more “at home” in the library.
Learning goals:
• Discover new works of ﬁction
• Learn about issues facing the LGBT community
• Participate in discussion of the issues in a welcoming and safe
environment
• Learn more about library resources available to this community
Steps to take:
• Since each segment of this population will have different interests,
perhaps focus on one group at a time
• Give each group a name other than “Alternative Book Group”
• Advertise on library social media and gauge interest
• Take suggestions for book titles for discussion
• Get one group established before starting another
Suggested authors/topics:
There are so many authors to choose from when forming an LGBT
book discussion group, and group members will obviously have favorites
Library Service to All
141

that they want to share and discuss. Choose better known authors in the
beginning, to get the ball rolling, and then allow the group or groups to
set their own course. Here are a few authors to consider:
• Leslie Feinberg
• Cleve Jones
• Lillian Federman
• Sarah Waters
• Jeffrey Eugenides
• Rita Mae Brown
• Oscar Wilde
• Michael Chabon
• Jeannette Winterson
Giving the LGBT community a place to meet and hold book discus-
sions, discussions on current events, speed dating, or any other type of
programming based on gender or sexual preference falls under the
library’s scope of serving an entire community.
CONCLUSION
As difﬁcult as the task may seem, treat all people, regardless of race, coun-
try of origin, physical or mental characteristics, gender, or sexual prefer-
ence, by putting people ﬁrst as the cornerstone of good customer service
in libraries. The types of issues facing library workers today will not be
resolved overnight, nor will they go away. Library workers can best equip
themselves to deal with each situation, as it is, through training, effective
policies and procedures, and the understanding that whether we like it or
not, we are a “helping” profession. By reaching out to immigrant popula-
tions, people with disabilities, and having patience and policies in place
when dealing with our library patrons, no matter what their life’s circum-
stance may be, we can ensure continued and comprehensive library ser-
vice in our local communities, now and in the future.
142
Designing Adult Services

CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
TAKING ON LIFE’S CHALLENGES
The journey into adult maturity can be a long one, more so for some than
others, and once our formal education ends, there can be little time left for
the continued learning process. Libraries can play a key role in allowing
adults to continue to learn and grow throughout their lifetime. As we all
know, but sometimes fail to admit to ourselves, there is so much to learn
in adulthood: How do I buy a home? How do I raise my child? How can I
ﬁnd a better job? What should I do to prepare for retirement? While
pieces and parts of answers to all these question can be found with a
“Google search,” libraries offer the unique opportunity for people to ﬁnd
in-depth reading about all sorts of issues as well as assistance with ﬁnding
reliable online resources, local community services, and eye-opening per-
spectives. Thoughtful and strategically planned programming can also
assist adults of all ages with many of life’s challenges.
Because we human beings spend the majority of our lifetimes as adults,
the opportunities for libraries to provide successful programs and services
to the grownups are many. It is up to each individual library to determine
the types of programs that will be successful within each community or
neighborhood and then plan accordingly. Grouping adults into categories
of potential interest based on the predominant life changes that most of us
experience as we grow older affords the chance to “get it right the ﬁrst
time” when it comes to planning for adult services. Being aware of
changes in demographics through research and surveys can also contrib-
ute to being on target with library programs and services.
As young adults begin preparation for college or the workplace, set-
tling down with a family, or pursuing career goals that leave little time

for socializing, our libraries can become a destination for assistance with
more serious matters like career and ﬁnance, or just a place to hang out
with friends and enjoy games nights or book discussions. The online re-
sources that libraries make available, at no cost, can also make a great
impact in the lives of young working professionals.
As library users continue on their life’s journey, it is important to keep
them apprised and knowledgeable about what the library has to offer as
well as offering programs and services that remain interesting, useful,
and fresh throughout the lifespan. Looking closely at the later stages in
life will beneﬁt not only the library user but the library as well, as older
adults turn into wonderful volunteers and supporters of the library.
SERVING THE ENTIRE COMMUNITY
Immigrant populations often come to the United States without an under-
standing of free library services, and it is important for libraries to ensure
that each immigrant group is aware of the services offered and made
available to as many as possible through outreach, coordinating with
local organizations and social groups, translating library information into
predominant foreign languages, and making every library user feel wel-
come and appreciated.
While the adults of all ages who we come in contact with on a daily
basis come in all shapes and sizes, with varying information needs, physi-
cal and mental capabilities, levels of education, and different interests and
backgrounds, it is important to remember that we are all people ﬁrst and
deserve the best that the library has to offer in the way of assistance, pro-
gramming, and services.
While planning for adult services through the broad lens, I have sug-
gested here would not necessarily catch every adult in the community in
your library’s web of activities and programs, it does give you a very sim-
ple “jumping off point,” allowing you to add your own knowledge of
local demographics, community and user needs, and regional tastes and
interests to make your library services to adults the best they can be. We
are adults much longer than we are children in life, and while it pays off
in spades to give the kids all the beneﬁts of story time and literacy pro-
grams, do not forget that we continue to grow and develop mentally
throughout our lives. Here is hoping that your efforts to promote and
ensure lifelong learning in your community are fruitful and that your
local library reaps all of the beneﬁts of community support and recogni-
tion that could come your way!
144
Designing Adult Services

APPENDIX A
Customer Satisfaction Surveys
Courtesy of Library Research Service, Colorado State Library
Please take a moment to answer this anonymous survey about the library.
All questions are optional.
Section 1: Please check one answer for each of the following:
1. How would you rate each of the following library services?
Excellent
Good
Fair
Poor
Don’t
know/Not
applicable
Customer service
□
□
□
□
□
Collection (books, DVDs, music,
newspapers, etc.)
□
□
□
□
□
Programs (classes, storytimes, etc.)
□
□
□
□
□
Online services (website, catalog,
research databases, etc.)
□
□
□
□
□
ILL (Interlibrary loan)
□
□
□
□
□
Library policies
□
□
□
□
□
Computers and printers
□
□
□
□
□
Internet access
□
□
□
□
□
Facilities
□
□
□
□
□
Hours of operation
□
□
□
□
□
Overall, how would you rate the
library?
□
□
□
□
□

Section 2: We value your opinions. Please answer the following questions:
2. What do you value most about the library?
3. How could the library or its services be improved, if at all?
Sample Medium Length Survey
Courtesy of Library Research Service, Colorado State Library
Please take a moment to answer this anonymous survey about the library.
All questions are optional.
Section 1: Please check one answer for each of the following:
1. Do you have a library card?
Yes
No
□
□
2. On average, how often do you visit the library?
Daily
Weekly
Monthly
Less than
once a month
Never
□
□
□
□
□
146
Appendix A

3. How would you rate each of the following library services?
Excellent
Good
Fair
Poor
Don’t
know/Not
applicable
Customer service
□
□
□
□
□
Collection (books, DVDs, music,
newspapers, etc.)
□
□
□
□
□
Programs (classes, storytimes, etc.)
□
□
□
□
□
Online services (website, catalog,
research databases, etc.)
□
□
□
□
□
ILL (Interlibrary loan)
□
□
□
□
□
Library policies
□
□
□
□
□
Computers and printers
□
□
□
□
□
Internet access
□
□
□
□
□
Facilities
□
□
□
□
□
Hours of operation
□
□
□
□
□
Overall, how would you rate the
library?
□
□
□
□
□
Appendix A
147

4. How important is each of the following library services to you?
Very
Important
Important
Somewhat
Important
Not
Important
Don’t
know/Not
Applicable
Borrowing materials
(books, DVDs, music,
etc.)
□
□
□
□
□
Reference (research
assistance from
librarians)
□
□
□
□
□
Programs (classes,
storytimes, etc.)
□
□
□
□
□
Computers and printers
□
□
□
□
□
Help using computers,
printers, etc.
□
□
□
□
□
Study rooms/reading
areas
□
□
□
□
□
Community meeting
rooms
□
□
□
□
□
Internet access
□
□
□
□
□
ILL (Interlibrary loan)
□
□
□
□
□
Online services (website,
catalog, research
databases, etc.)
□
□
□
□
□
Photocopier
□
□
□
□
□
Newspapers and
magazines
□
□
□
□
□
Bookmobile
□
□
□
□
□
Homebound services
□
□
□
□
□
Overall, how important
is the library to you and
your family?
□
□
□
□
□
148
Appendix A

Section 2: We value your opinions. Please answer the following questions:
5. What do you value most about the library?
6. How could the library or its services be improved, if at all?
7. How does the library beneﬁt you or the community?
Thank you for your time! If you have questions about this survey or about
the library, please contact us at yourcontactinfo@yourlibrary.com.
Appendix A
149

Sample Long Survey
Courtesy of Library Research Service, Colorado State Library
Please take a moment to answer this anonymous survey about the library.
All questions are optional.
Section 1: Please check one answer for each of the following:
1. Do you have a library card?
Yes
No
□
□
2. On average, how often do you visit the library?
Daily
Weekly
Monthly
Less than
once a month
Never
□
□
□
□
□
3. How would you rate each of the following library services?
Excellent
Good
Fair
Poor
Don’t
know/Not
applicable
Customer service
□
□
□
□
□
Collection (books, DVDs, music,
newspapers, etc.)
□
□
□
□
□
Programs (classes, storytimes, etc.)
□
□
□
□
□
Online services (website, catalog,
research databases, etc.)
□
□
□
□
□
ILL (Interlibrary loan)
□
□
□
□
□
Library policies
□
□
□
□
□
Computers and printers
□
□
□
□
□
Internet access
□
□
□
□
□
Facilities
□
□
□
□
□
Hours of operation
□
□
□
□
□
Overall, how would you rate the
library?
□
□
□
□
□
150
Appendix A

4. How important is each of the following library services to you?
Very
Important
Important
Somewhat
Important
Not
Important
Don’t
know/Not
Applicable
Borrowing materials
(books, DVDs, music,
etc.)
□
□
□
□
□
Reference (research
assistance from
librarians)
□
□
□
□
□
Programs (classes,
storytimes, etc.)
□
□
□
□
□
Computers and printers
□
□
□
□
□
Help using computers,
printers, etc.
□
□
□
□
□
Study rooms/reading
areas
□
□
□
□
□
Community meeting
rooms
□
□
□
□
□
Internet access
□
□
□
□
□
ILL (Interlibrary loan)
□
□
□
□
□
Online services (website,
catalog, research
databases, etc.)
□
□
□
□
□
Photocopier
□
□
□
□
□
Newspapers and
magazines
□
□
□
□
□
Bookmobile
□
□
□
□
□
Homebound services
□
□
□
□
□
Overall, how important
is the library to you and
your family?
□
□
□
□
□
Appendix A
151

5. How do you typically ﬁnd out about library programs? Check all
that apply.
□Library website
□Social media (Facebook or Twitter)
□Newspaper
□Library newsletter
□Signs or ﬂyers in the library
□Word of mouth
□Library staff
□Don’t know/Not applicable
□Other—please specify: ___________________________________
Section 2: We value your opinions. Please answer the following questions:
6. What do you value most about the library?
7. How could the library or its services be improved, if at all?
8.
How does the library beneﬁt you or the community?
152
Appendix A

Section 3: Please tell us about yourself so that we may better serve you.
Please check one answer for each of the following.
9. How old are you?
□12 or under
□13–18
□19–24
□25–64
□65 or older
10. What gender best describes you?
□Male
□Female
11. What is the highest level of education you have completed?
□Some high school
□High school graduate or GED
□Some college
□College degree or higher
12. What is your preferred language?
□English
□Spanish
□Vietnamese
□Other—please specify: ___________________________________
13. What is your employment status?
□Employed or self-employed
□Homemaker
□Retired
□Unemployed
Thank you for your time! If you have questions about this survey or about
the library, please contact us at yourcontactinfo@yourlibrary.com.
Appendix A
153


APPENDIX B
Competency Index for the Library Field,
Adult Services
Compiled by WebJunction
Updated February 2014
Public Services Competencies
All of the services that interface directly with the library’s users come
together under the heading of public services. These frontline staff antici-
pate and meet the needs of users in the most visible way. Fully supported
by all of the other sectors and departments, they work to provide the best
possible programs and services to the library community.
Adult and Older Adult Services
Libraries have the capacity to inspire, engage, and support community
members of all ages. Libraries provide an array of opportunities for adult
patrons from diverse backgrounds.
Outreach
Designs and implements library services to engage and meet the needs
of the community
• Uses a variety of ongoing methods to determine the interests of
adults in the community (obtains demographic data, surveys users
and nonusers, follows current events, collects input from frontline
staff, etc.)
• Analyzes demographic and other data collected about the commu-
nity and develops a wide variety of services to meet the needs and
interests of target audiences
• Identiﬁes potential partner organizations within the institution or in
the community that have compatible goals and objectives to serve

adults, and develops cooperative services and programs to extend
and enhance library service
• Aligns all services and programs with library policies and procedures
• Evaluates all services, using appropriate evaluation strategies (evalu-
ation forms, customer satisfaction surveys, input from frontline staff
and other stakeholders, etc.), and uses the results to improve future
services
Deﬁnes and implements outreach services for the library community to
increase use of library services and to reach underserved populations
• Identiﬁes individuals and groups not adequately served (those with
disabilities, homebound, institutionalized, remote, non-English
speaking, immigrant, low literacy, etc.)
• Determines the particular needs of each target audience and designs
a variety of programs and services appropriate to them
• Identiﬁes individuals and groups not currently served by the library,
determines needs, develops programs and services, and promotes
them to the nonusers with targeted marketing
• Aligns all outreach efforts with the library’s overall goals and objectives
• Determines the best means to deliver library services to remote users
(mail, bookmobile, online, multimedia) appropriate to library
resources
• Designs programs and builds collections and information resources
to meet the special language and literacy needs of the community
• Collaborates with other community groups to meet the literacy
needs of target audiences
Uses online tools and communities to engage with and provide
services to users
• Understands and articulates the importance of engaging with users
virtually
• Investigates and evaluates tools for virtual engagement, and identi-
ﬁes those most applicable to the library’s services and community
needs
• Determines objectives for enhancing library services and access, and
acquires proﬁciency with selected tools to provide effective library
services
• Uses social networking to interact with users and meet their infor-
mation needs
156
Appendix B

• Understands established policies and procedures for online engage-
ment with users
• Devises strategies to keep up with emerging tools and techniques,
and connects with professional communities to seek and share best
practices
Adult (General) Programming
Designs, implements, and sponsors library programs that provide
opportunities for information, entertainment, and lifelong learning
• Demonstrates ability to be creative, promote new ideas and identify
a variety of tools and techniques to create interesting and engaging
programs
• Aligns programs with the library’s goals and objectives and with the
identiﬁed interests and needs of the community
• Provides resources and programming that serve the needs of makers
and do-it-yourselfers in the community
• Actively involves users in planning, implementing, and evaluating
programs
• Creates programs that encourage audience participation and
dialogue and encourage peer-to-peer knowledge sharing
• Promotes the library’s programs to the community in coordination
with marketing efforts
• Develops programs to acknowledge and celebrate the cultural diver-
sity of the community
• Develops programs that encourage learning and dialogue in support
of twenty-ﬁrst-century themes, such as civic literacy, health literacy,
environmental literacy, ﬁnancial literacy, and global awareness
• Understands the value of games and gaming for adults, and develops
gaming programs
• Identiﬁes program venues outside of the library
• Coordinates with collection development efforts in support of
programming
• Evaluates programs using appropriate evaluation strategies (evalu-
ation forms, debrief with presenters, input from frontline staff,
etc.), and uses results to improve future programming efforts
Older Adult Services and Programming
Research has shown that older adults (deﬁned broadly as patrons aged
55+) wish to remain engaged in the community and to continue learning.
Libraries can help them achieve both of these goals.
Appendix B
157

Designs and implements library services to meet the needs and interests
of older adults in the community
• Analyzes demographic and other data collected about older adults in
the community to assess their unique needs
• Develops a wide variety of services to meet the needs and interests of
older adults and of their families and caregivers, as members of the
Sandwich Generation
• Understands the range of older adults (baby boomers to the elderly)
and identiﬁes their particular needs and interests, acknowledging the
range of skills, knowledge, strengths, and limitations they bring to
the library
• Recognizes that older adults need twenty-ﬁrst-century skills and pro-
vides opportunities for building the ﬁve literacies (e.g., basic, infor-
mation, civic and social, health, and ﬁnancial)
• Creates programs and other opportunities for learning and interac-
tion, including intergenerational activities and opportunities for
civic participation
• Partners with organizations within the institution or in the commu-
nity that have compatible goals and objectives to serve older adults,
and develops cooperative services and programs to extend and
enhance older adult services
• Identiﬁes and maintains regular communication with agencies, insti-
tutions, and organizations serving older adults in the community
• Engages older adults for input when planning, implementing, and
evaluating programs and services
Deﬁnes and implements outreach services to increase older adults’ use
of library services and to reach underserved populations
• Ensures that older adult audiences are included in the target audi-
ences for the library’s outreach efforts
• Identiﬁes older adults who are unable to visit the library, determines
their special needs for library resources, and determines the best
means to deliver library services to them
• Understands and addresses specialized concerns of some older adult
users (disliking change, loss of personal freedoms or controls, slowly
adopting new technologies, etc.)
• Designs, implements, and sponsors library programs for older
adults that provide information, entertainment, and opportunities
for lifelong learning
158
Appendix B

• Acknowledges the knowledge and experience of older adults, and
provides opportunities for them to use these lifetime strengths in
volunteering with the library
• Creates programs that provide older adults with an opportunity to
interact and share their knowledge, experiences, and stories
• Actively involves older adults in planning, implementing, and evalu-
ating programs
• Promotes the library’s programs to the older adult community in
coordination with marketing efforts
• Recognizes the challenges and opportunities that digital literacy
provides for older adults, and provides learning assistance to foster
conﬁdence and learning
• Understands the potential of games and other group and individual
activities to foster cognitive and mental stimulation and social
involvement, and identiﬁes a variety of methods to meet those
needs
Readers’ Advisory
Assists users with choosing popular and recreational reading,
viewing, and listening choices
• Demonstrates a broad knowledge of the library’s collection and of a
wide range of materials of interest to library readers
• Demonstrates the ability to read widely, formulate connections
between resources and converse with users about the resources
• Understands the theory of appeal, listens carefully to information
elicited from the user, and bases recommendations on an interpreta-
tion of what appeals to the user
• Communicates succinctly but effectively the character and appeal of
a book, both in writing and speaking
• Identiﬁes and recommends a selection of materials that align with
what appeals to the user
• Seeks feedback from readers on recommended materials, and adjusts
future recommendations accordingly
• Creates booklists, read-alikes, read-arounds, book-talks, displays,
electronic documents, and other special tools to increase access to
library resources and promote their use
• Engages with users virtually as well as face to face for readers’ advi-
sory interactions
• Uses social networking sites and tools to spark conversations with
community members about titles, authors, and reading
Appendix B
159

• Implements reader input forms (both print and online) to provide
personalized service to readers
• Explores and implements ways technology can connect readers’
advisory to the library’s catalog, such as reading lists
Develops strategies and sources to stay well informed as a readers’
advisor
• Identiﬁes and uses a variety of readers’ advisory resources to identify
materials
• Maintains an ongoing knowledge of major new authors, ﬁction
genres, nonﬁction subjects, and current releases
• Keeps current with popular culture through a variety of channels
• Connects with professional communities to seek and share best
practices for readers’ advisory
Reference
Develops and maintains a collection of reference resources to meet
community needs
• Discovers and assesses needs of the community and identiﬁes how
the library can help
• Demonstrates knowledge of the reference collection, including both
print and online resources
• Provides a variety of readily accessible reference resources that meet
identiﬁed community needs, such as job seeking and health informa-
tion seeking
• Prepares bibliographies, subject collections, and other user guides to
resources in a variety of formats, and creates tutorials to help users
navigate information sources
• Ensures that information sources are available in formats accessible
virtually, including users who are accessing via a mobile device
• Compiles and maintains information about community resources
appropriate to users’ needs, and connects users with these resources
when appropriate
• Performs ongoing evaluation of the currency and usefulness of the
reference collection, and makes recommendations for acquisition
or deselection
• Facilitates library users’ requests for information
• Maintains a friendly and approachable demeanor that invites
interaction
160
Appendix B

• Establishes rapport with information seekers quickly
• Communicates effectively in both face-to-face and online interactions
• Practices effective reference interviewing skills to identify and satisfy
a user’s needs
• Addresses the information-seeking behaviors and needs of users
without bias across the spectrum of age, race, gender, ethnicity, abil-
ity, or economic status
• Serves as a guide for collaborative and participatory learning
• Provides support for users and their self-directed learning endeavors
• Provides instruction and support to users that enhances critical
thinking and problem-solving abilities
• Uses current technology tools for research, and makes exploration
of new tools and platforms an ongoing effort
• Acknowledges users’ knowledge, and engages them as partners in
seeking information and choosing resources
• Answers questions knowledgeably, providing information of an
appropriate scope and reading level
• Personalizes and customizes resources for the particular needs and
priorities of individuals
• Evaluates the success of reference services through feedback from
staff, users, and other stakeholders
• Identiﬁes opportunities for instruction, and empowers users to
improve their own information-seeking ability
Demonstrates ability to meet information-seeking needs of users
• Demonstrates ﬂexibility and adapts to the changing ways in which
users interact with information
• Demonstrates advanced search skills
• Understands and performs effective search queries, using multiple
resources and search strategies
• Synthesizes information from a variety of resources, and evaluates
results for quality and accuracy
• Demonstrates proﬁciency in website editing in order to update
online resources and utilize various technologies to interact most
effectively with online users
Appendix B
161


APPENDIX C
Adult Volunteer Application
T
hank you for your interest in volunteering at the San Juan Island
Library. We look forward to talking with you about your
application.
Volunteer’s Contact Information
Date:
Name
Mailing Address
City ST Zip Code
Daytime Phone Number
Alternate Phone Number
Email Address
Availability
How many HOURS PER WEEK do you wish to volunteer? __________________________
Are you volunteering to fulﬁll a community service requirement?
If so, is there a TOTAL NUMBER of hours you need to volunteer?
YES
NO
Total hours needed: ________________
Is there a DEADLINE by which those hours need to be completed?
YES
NO
Deadline: _________________________

Place an X for the times you are available to volunteer. Circle the Xs for
your preferred hours.
Sundays
Mondays Tuesdays Wednesdays
Thursdays
Fridays
Saturdays
9-10am
closed
10-Noon
closed
Noon-1pm
1-3pm
3-5pm
5-6pm
closed
closed
6-8pm
closed
closed
closed
closed
closed
Are you willing to be “on call” for tasks as they arise?
YES
NO
Interests
___ Check-in, shelving & shelf reading
___ Morning prep for library opening
___ Helping with TEND-A-SHELF
___ Helping with ENGLISH CLASS
___ Helping with LIVE & LEARN (Adult Programs)
___ Helping with outreach & book delivery
___ Processing new books & materials
___ Mending books & materials
___ Special projects
___ Other: ___________________________
Skills or Talents You Would Like to Share
164
Appendix C

Person to Notify in Case of Emergency
Name & Relationship
Mailing Address
City ST Zip Code
Primary Phone Number
Alternate Phone Number
Email Address
Agreement & Signature
I understand that the San Juan Island Library reserves the right to screen volunteers and
accept or reject any applications, and to place volunteers in speciﬁc locations & positions
based on the needs of the Library.
Signature
Date
___________________________
Revised:
2013.August.27 LO
File location: Plaza / Volunteers / SJLIB Volunteer Application - Adult
Distribution: Reference desk ﬁle drawer
(Reprinted courtesy of San Juan Island Library)
Appendix C
165


APPENDIX D
Volunteer Policy
I. Purpose
The following policy is designed to promote a maximum degree of excellence
in the library’s volunteer program. The North Liberty Community Library’s
volunteers are an important extension of the Library’s staff. Volunteers
perform a wide variety of tasks that are vital to the institution.
II. Deﬁnition of a Volunteer
One who performs a service of his or her own free will; one who contrib-
utes time, energy, and talents directly or on behalf of the North Liberty
Community Library and is not paid by Library funds.
III. Utilization of Volunteers
In order to achieve the vision and mission statement of the North Liberty
Community Library, we view the active participation of citizens, of a
variety of ages, as a valuable resource to the Library. After fulﬁlling
Library procedures, the Library accepts and encourages the involvement
of volunteers at most levels of the Library and within appropriate pro-
grams and activities. Volunteers shall be extended the right to be given
meaningful assignments, the right to be treated as an equal, the right to
effective supervision, the right to full involvement and participation, and
the right to recognition of good work.
IV. Guidelines for Volunteers
1. Each volunteer is required to complete a volunteer application and
to wear a volunteer badge while performing volunteer work.

Volunteers must be approved by Library staff prior to performance
of assigned tasks.
2. Volunteers will receive regular training from designated library
staff.
3. Volunteers may start service in 6th grade with parental permission.
4. Special accommodations will be made upon request.
5. A background check may be made on each adult volunteer.
6. Volunteers will show respect to patrons, other volunteers and staff.
7. Discriminatory or racist incidents will not be tolerated.
8. Procedures and requirements for the volunteer will vary with age of
volunteer.
9. Should a volunteer have a grievance with a staff person, another vol-
unteer or library patron, every attempt will be made to resolve the
situation with library administration.
10. The North Liberty Community Library reserves the right to termi-
nate the services of the volunteer, if merited.
11. Volunteers may be used to increase current Library services.
12. Volunteers may not be used to establish and maintain new library
services.
13. Volunteers will not be used to replace or reduce the number of paid
staff.
14. Volunteers will be covered with respect to liability insurance in
relation to their duties at the library.
15. Volunteers are recognized as contributors to the goals and services
of the Library.
16. Volunteers are responsible for maintaining the conﬁdentiality of all
library information. Failure to maintain conﬁdentiality will result
in immediate termination.
17. The Library staff will, upon request, provide letters of reference for a
volunteer, if deemed appropriate.
18. All personal information about the volunteer is for internal use only.
19. Volunteers are prohibited from being under the inﬂuence of using,
possessing, selling, or otherwise being involved with illegal substan-
ces and alcohol while volunteering.
Reviewed/Approved by the Library Board of Trustees, May 2016
(Courtesy of North Liberty Community Library, North Liberty, Iowa)
168
Appendix D

APPENDIX E
Library-by-Mail Homebound
Application Form
Contact Information
Full Legal Name: *
First, Middle, Last
Street Address: *
City: *
State: *
Zip Code: *
* You must live within the Mid-Continent Public Library service area to qualify for this service
Phone Number: *
Best time of day to receive phone calls:
○Morning
○Afternoon
Email Address:
Reading Interest
Select all that apply:
Fiction Interests:
□Bestsellers
□Christian Fiction
□Espionage/Military
□Fantasy
□Historical Fiction

□Horror
□Mystery
□Paranormal
□Romance
□Science Fiction
□Thrillers
□Westerns/Gunﬁghter
Nonﬁction Interests:
□Animals
□Biography
□History
□Military
□Religion
□Science
□Self-Help
□True Crime
Favorite Authors:
You can enter several author names separated by commas.
Type of books needed:
□Large Print
□Regular Print
□Paperback
Type of audiovisual needed:
□Audiobooks
□Music CD
□DVD
□Blue-ray
170
Appendix E

I do not want materials that contain:
□Strong Language
□Sex
□Violence
Would you like us to select materials for you based on your interests?: *
○Do not select materials for me. Send only the titles I request.
○Please select materials for me. I may also request speciﬁc titles whenever I wish.
Comments:
Do you have any additional comments or instructions?
Certiﬁcation allows the library to ship materials to qualiﬁed customers without being
charged postage.
Authorization*
I declare that I am homebound and unable to go to the Mid-Continent Public Library due
to health, mobility, advanced age, visual impairment, blindness, physical disability, perma-
nent, or temporary incapacity.
□I am Homebound
Leave this ﬁeld blank:
Submit My Application
Appendix E
171


APPENDIX F
Reasonable Accommodation Request Form
T
he Allegany County Library System provides reasonable accommo-
dations, by request, for physical access, communications, or other
needs to ensure services, activities, and programs are available to people
with disabilities. For the purpose of this form, accommodation requests
will be considered for persons who have disabilities that are expected to
last at least six months.
Name: _________________________________ Date:_________________
Address: ______________________________________________________
City: _________________________ State: ______ Zip Code: ___________
Phone: ______________________ (Alt. Phone): ______________________
Library branch(s) most often visited (circle all that apply) Frostburg
George’s Creek
LaVale South Cumberland Washington Street Westernport
Email (optional): _______________________________________________
Library card number (optional): __________________________________
I am requesting the following accommodation(s): (check all that apply)
Circulation Access: Check here if you have a condition that makes it dif-
ﬁcult or impossible to check out library materials. Please describe the
accommodation you are requesting:
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
Program/Services Access: Check here if you are unable to participate in a
library program or service due to a disability and describe the accommo-
dation you are requesting below.
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________

Other: Describe the accommodation you are requesting and how it will
assist you in your use of Library programs or services: (Attach additional
sheets as necessary.)
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
Please submit your completed form to:
Allegany County Library System
31 Washington Street
Cumberland, MD, 21502
Your request will be addressed as quickly as possible. Please note that cer-
tiﬁcation by a Health Care Provider may be required.
This form is for library use only. All information will be kept conﬁdential.
174
Appendix F

Index
“Act Like an Adult” (program), 37
Adultolescent, 13–14
Adult summer reading, 74–75
Alternative Basic Library Education
(ABLE), 8
Alternative Book Group,
(program), 141
American Community Survey, 1
American Factﬁnder, 1
“Anything 101” (program), 37–38
Assistive technology, 107–109
Bienvenidos a la Biblioteca! A
Spanish Pointing Guide, 130
“Big Board Games at the Library”
(program), 23–25
Big Brother, Big Sister programs, 23
“Blogging Basics” (program), 95
Book awards lists, 21
Business libraries, 31–33
“Buying Your First Home”
(program), 61–62
Career aptitude: online, 22; second,
84; tests, 21; texts, 21
Career centers, 15
Career changes, 70–73
Career Online High School,
16–17
Caregivers: average age, 34;
libraries and, 66–67; millennial,
33–34; Sandwich Generation,
64–65
Caregiving, resources, 66–67
Children, library services to, 49–58
Citizenship and immigration
services, 124–128
“Coffee House Concert Series”
(program), 25–26
Cohen, Gene, 70, 78, 95, 100, 103
Competencies, 6–8
Continuing education, 5–9
Culinary Literacy Center,
Philadelphia Public Library, 38
“Cultural Showcase”
(program), 140
Demographic surveys, 1–2
Digital services, 19
DINKS (Double Income No
Kids), 47
Disability.gov, 135–136
Early literacy, 49–50
Edge Benchmarks, 5–7
ELF (Early Literacy and
Families), 49
Emerging adult, 13

“Engaging Young Entrepreneurs”
(program), 30–31
ESRI Tapestry, 2
Evaluation: customization, 4;
library programs, 3, 4; library
services, 3; survey questions, 5;
technology services, 5–6
Every Child Ready to Read
(ECRR), 50, 53–54
Family literacy programs, 50–58
Financial literacy, 58
Fur babies, 47–48
“Genealogy for Beginners”
(program), 100
Genre ﬁction: deﬁnitions, 19–20;
search tools, 20–21
Goals: comprehensive, 4;
programming, 60–61
Grandpets, 79
Health literacy, 60
Homebound Program Toolkit, 105
“Hot Topics Discussion Group”
(program), 36
H&R Block Business and Career
Center, Kansas City, 31
Immigrant populations: citizenship
corners, 126–127; cultural
perceptions about libraries, 122,
e–government resources, 129;
outreach to Spanish speakers,
123; “Spanish That Works!,”
131; statistics, 122; technology
assistance, 128–129
Incarcerated: library services to,
131; programs, 131–132
In–home library service, 104
Integrated Library System (ILS), 2
Joint–use libraries, 17
Journaling, 113–114
“Keeping Body and Soul Together”
(program), 40
Kleiman, Allan, 99
LGBT community, programs, 39,
141–142
Liberation phase, 78
“The Library 101” (program), 124
Library catalogs, enhancements, 18
Library service by mail, 106
Library surveys, 3
Life hacks, 34–36
Literary dating, 39
“Living off the GridEcoLiving,”
(program), 83
“Living the Dream: Is it Now or
Never?” (program), 86
“Local Business Owners’ Fair”
(program), 73
Local history: displays, 114–116;
programming, 110–112, 114
Maker movement, 34–36
The Mature Mind: The Positive
Power of the Aging Brain, 70, 78,
95, 100, 103
Mental health issues, 137–140
Microblogs, 18–19
Midcontinent Public Library, 106
Midlife crisis, 63
Millennials: attitudes toward
libraries, 14; attitudes toward
sex, 13; attitudes toward work,
12; deﬁned, 12; programs,
19–27, 36–42
National Library Service for the
Blind and Physically
Handicapped, 107
National Network of Libraries of
Medicine, online resources, 60
North Texas Library Partners, 105
“Now or Never Vacation
Destinations” (program), 89
176
Index

Older adults: digital literacy, 96;
genre lists, 109–110;
psychological phases, 95;
volunteering, 97
Older millennials, library usage,
29–30
1,000 Books before
Kindergarten, 55
Online genre searching, 20
Oral history projects, 110–112
Outcomes, 5
Patents, 33
Paws for Reading, 55
People First language, 132–133
People with disabilities:
library services to, 132–137;
request for accommodation,
136–137
“Pet Grooming 101”
(program), 60
Preferred Partnership
Program, 98
Prime Time Family Reading Time,
54–55
Professional development, 5–9
Programming: active seniors,
95–96, 100–102; couples, 46;
elderly, 110–115; empty
nesters, 68–69; entrepreneurial,
30–33; LGBT, 39, 141–142;
millennial approved,
22–23; multi–generational,
23, 26
“Read to Me,” 131
Retirement: ﬁnancial planning, 82,
88; planning, 77–78; working in,
81, 92
Rikers Island prison library, 132
San Jose Public Library, 17
Sandwich Generation, 64–65
SCORE, 30
“Second Careers” (program), 84
Self–expatriation resources, 88
Senior spaces, 99
SINKS (Single Income No Kids), 47
Spanish Language Outreach, 123
Stories Alive, 131
“Storytellers” (program), 96
Suggestions boxes, 3
Supplemental Alternative Basic
Library Education (SABLE), 8
Town hall–style meetings, 3
Trademarks, 33
Violent confrontations, planning
for, 138140
Visual accessibility, 133–135
Volunteer: background checks, 99;
policies, 98
Volunteer Match, 98
Webinars, free, 9
WebJunction, 8, 9
Workforce development: library
services, 15–16; partnerships, 15–16
Index
177


About the Author
ANN ROBERTS is a reference librarian at the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Ofﬁce, Public Search Facility. She has worked in public, aca-
demic, and government libraries as well as with historical collections.
She is author or coauthor of three books in the Crash Course series by
Libraries Unlimited: Crash Course in Library Gift Programs: The
Reluctant Curator’s Guide to Caring for Archives, Books, and Artifacts
in a Library Setting; Crash Course in Library Services for Seniors (with
Stephanie G. Bauman); and Crash Course in Library Services to People
with Disabilities (with Richard J. Smith).


