Behavioral Strategy for the Workplace
Designing
Culture
Kristi Woolsey


Kristi Woolsey
Designing Culture
Behavioral Strategy for the Workplace
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-96364-7
[LSI]
Designing Culture
by Kristi Woolsey
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Laurel Ruma
Production Editor: Colleen Lobner
Copyeditor: Jasmine Kwityn
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
June 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-06-29: First Release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781491963647 for release details.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Designing Culture,
the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
Designing Culture: Behavioral Strategy for the Workplace. . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Understanding the Behavioral Strategy Framework                           1
Applying Behavior Strategy to Today’s Workplace                              2
Example 1: A Biomedical Engineering Company and Driving
Results after Outsourcing                                                                     4
Intentionally Designing Culture                                                             6
Using Behavioral Strategy for Attraction and Retention                    8
Example 2: A University’s Expensive, New, Underperforming
Building                                                                                                11
Understanding Sustainable Engagement                                             13
Case Study: PCA SKIN, Not Just a Remodel                                      14
Conclusion                                                                                               18
v


Designing Culture: Behavioral
Strategy for the Workplace
Humans are the biggest driver of growth, differentiated products,
and profitability. Your workplace environment significantly affects
human behavior. Behavioral strategy is the practice of strategically
arranging environmental influencers to drive the behaviors that
deliver desired results. Environments designed with behavioral sci‐
ence can be used to support creativity, collaboration, and innova‐
tion. They can be used to support execution and productivity, as
well as improve attraction and retention. Your workplace environ‐
ment reinforces brand identity, aligns the efforts of teams, and
drives increased revenue.
This report outlines the framework of a behavioral strategy
approach, looking at attraction and retention as one example of a
business problem that can be resolved using behavioral strategy. At
the end of the report, we’ll look at a case study where workplace suc‐
cess directly affected revenue growth.
Understanding the Behavioral Strategy
Framework
Herb Simon, Nobel Laureate, American political scientist, econo‐
mist, computer scientist, sociologist, and psychologist, authored the
clearest framework for the practice of behavioral strategy. In 1990,
he published a theory of bounded rationality, where using the anal‐
ogy of a pair of scissors he argued that decisions were driven both by
the limitations of the human brain and by the structure of the envi‐
ronment those decisions were operating within (see Figure 1-1):
1

Human rational behavior is shaped by a scissors whose blades are
the structure of task environments, and the computational abilities
of the actor.
—Herb Simon, “Invariants of Human Behavior,” Annual Review
of Psychology #41 (1990)
This model clarifies what behavioral science practitioners have
known for years, allowing that there are only two ways to modify
behavior: change the person or change the environment. The latter
is significantly easier.
Figure 1-1. Scissors as a model for drivers of human behavior
Applied behavioral strategy for most of its history has focused on
driving buying behaviors in retail and reducing negative behavior in
prisons. However, in today’s highly competitive landscape, humans
are not just cogs in a machine but are the machine itself and so the
attention of behavioral sciences has shifted to the workplace.
Applying Behavior Strategy to Today’s
Workplace
Teams are now the fundamental unit of organization, which makes
behavioral sciences in the workplace a new and challenging disci‐
pline. If a company wants to outstrip its competitors, it needs to
influence not only how people work but also how they work
together. As a result, much of the new behavioral research is focused
2 
| 
Designing Culture: Behavioral Strategy for the Workplace

on teams in the workplace and many of the previous prison and
retail behavior studies are being applied and tested in organizations.
We now know that the same nested groups that reduce behavior
challenges in open prison units can be used to normalize behaviors
in any organizational team in order to support collaboration. We
now know that the retail concept of functional inefficiency can be
used to introduce diversity and adjacent possibility in order to drive
innovation. Just as we could measure in dollars the buying impact of
putting milk in the back of the grocery store, we can measure in dol‐
lars the results of an environment designed to influence behaviors in
the workplace.
Relationships are more likely to develop based on brief, frequent,
passive contacts made going to and from regular locations than
develop based on shared attitudes, values, and beliefs.
—L. Festinger, S. Schachter, K. Back, “The Spatial Ecology of
Group Formation” (1950)
I propose that we agree with the seemingly obvious premise that
individual behavior drives individual results. Collective behavior,
usually called “culture,” drives collective or organizational results.
Environment influences behavior, collective behavior creates cul‐
ture, and culture drives results. By following this thread of behavior
backward from our desired result, we can significantly impact per‐
formance (Figure 1-2).
Figure 1-2. A behavioral framework linking environment to business
outcomes
Getting clarity around those desired results is a critical part of the
process. Too often environment projects are completed without
understanding the behavioral connection to critical business issues,
leaving potential value untapped.
Applying Behavior Strategy to Today’s Workplace 
| 
3

Example 1: A Biomedical Engineering
Company and Driving Results after
Outsourcing
Medtronic is a biomedical engineering company with an Electronic
Division in Tempe, AZ. It had outsourced all but the most special‐
ized manufacturing, resulting in a loss of two-thirds of its work‐
force. My company was hired to advise Medtronic Tempe Campus
(MTC) on its real estate strategy: what could it do with eight build‐
ings on 32 acres that it now did not need? However, there were two
real business challenges that were uncovered during the discovery
phase of our work. These challenges could be at least partially solved
by the real estate decisions we would make:
Proving the value of the remaining operation to corporate leadership
The division was originally a specialty manufacturing plant and
now with most of the manufacturing gone, they needed clarity
around who they were in order to market themselves to Med‐
tronic corporate.
Hiring a diverse workforce
Older workers were the significant majority, with an average age
in the low 40s. This was a challenge both for engaging new ways
of working and for knowledge transfer as that generation
approached retirement.
Although Medtronic corporate was clear about its brand and direc‐
tion, the tired manufacturing spaces of the division at MTC said
nothing about the brilliant engineers and researchers who were core
to MTC’s offering. The company had hundreds of patents and
through their work and some truly innovative collaboration practi‐
ces were breaking ground in providing electronics for medical
implants. Yet as visitors entered the lobby and viewed the 1980s era
oak-framed exhibit case of inventions, or as potential hires toured
high-walled cubicle warrens (gray cubicles, on gray carpet, with gray
walls), or as potential customers toured through the labs and fac‐
tory, walking across 300 yards of treeless parking lot in 120-degree
Arizona heat, there was little visual evidence of the brilliant work
that was happening at MTC (unless you stumbled on it).
That lack of alignment between the visual environment and the real‐
ity of MTC’s offering combined with the extreme downsizing that
4 
| 
Designing Culture: Behavioral Strategy for the Workplace

left most buildings empty, created a loss of confidence in their own
understanding of their value, and exacerbated trepidation as to how
MTC would move into the future. My company was first
approached by the MTC tech council, a group of senior employees
with advisory responsibility to the division’s general manager. These
employees knew that MTC needed to discover again what kind of
company it was to present a clear message to customers, potential
hires, and Medtronic corporate. This group also realized that their
new hires demanded a new kind of collaboration. We presented
these findings to the general manager and were then retained to roll
those efforts into a larger real estate strategy that could be handed
back to their facilities group for implementation.
The solutions to these challenges would be implemented over time
and so our charge was to create a road map that identified a few
immediate projects but also lay out a multiyear change plan:
A clear visual representation of the MTC value offering
For example, transforming that long walk across the parking lot
between research building and factory and turning it into a
reinforcement of MTC’s intellectual prowess by creating a sha‐
ded walk that was lined with individual pavers, of which each
would be engraved with one of the hundreds of patents from
MTC’s work.
Increase diversity
This was initiated by supporting connections between research‐
ers, engineers, and the remaining specialty manufacturing. In
his book The Difference: How the Power of Diversity Creates Bet‐
ter Groups, Firms, Schools and Societies (Princeton University
Press), researcher Scott Page very clearly establishes the
problem-solving power of diverse groups. By providing envi‐
ronment vehicles (spaces and programs) to support this at
MTC, we drove better problem solving and innovation.
Attract and retain younger workers
This would include, but not be limited to, a physical space tran‐
sition plan that would find balance, acknowledging the need for
focus in a private cubicle and balancing an open office collabo‐
ration.
The work that my company did for MTC was just a few steps into
the road map, but imagine what would have happened had we sim‐
ply made decisions about what to do with those eight buildings and
Example 1: A Biomedical Engineering Company and Driving Results after Outsourcing 
| 
5

32 acres without considering the larger business issues. The critical
path in using environment to drive behavior is to be clear first on
the desired results. In this case, it was the need for clarity around
value proposition and the need to attract and retain a wider demo‐
graphic. Once those goals were clearly defined, we could design the
culture that would support those results and then design the envi‐
ronment that would support that culture.
Intentionally Designing Culture
So how do we design culture? The simplest definition of the collec‐
tive behaviors that define culture that I have seen was put forward
by Chris McGoff in his book The Primes: How Any Group Can Solve
Any Problem (Wiley). He says that culture is, very simply, the line
between behaviors that are tolerated and those that aren’t. I find that
framework useful, as we can move it into solution space and design
culture by defining the behaviors we aspire to (see Figure 1-3). This
will then support the business results we need and identify those
that interfere with the desired outcome. The path to the results we
want comes from comparing this aspirational picture of culture with
our current state, the behaviors we tolerate, and mapping the differ‐
ence. We can use behavioral science to design the path from a cul‐
ture that does not support desired outcomes to one that does.
Figure 1-3. Framework for designing culture
If culture is a collection of behaviors that result from decisions made
by individuals and that decision making is then affected by its envi‐
ronment, I propose that there are four main levers available that can
be used to create an environment that will drive culture:
6 
| 
Designing Culture: Behavioral Strategy for the Workplace

Organizational structure
Hierarchies, teams and team size, lines of reporting, and
remote/local workforce distribution
Programs and amenities
Everything from free food in the kitchen, to compensation
strategies, to recurring meetings
Technology
Digital and mechanical tools and systems that support our work
processes
Digital/physical space
This is the one seamless area where we work, connect, and col‐
laborate, creating adjacencies, awareness, and opportunities to
know what you didn’t set out to know
Each of these levers is part of the environment that influences
behavior choices that we make. And each will enable or interfere
with the environment that is needed to create the desired behaviors.
Environment is not just the physical/digital workplace but also the
programs, technology, and organizational structure, all working
with our brains as the second blade of the scissors to drive decision
making and behavior (Figure 1-4). That environment can be crafted
to drive the culture that leads to the desired outcome.
Figure 1-4. Environment categories that influence culture
Intentionally Designing Culture 
| 
7

1 “The Role of Classification Skill in Moderating Environmental Influences on Children’s
Gender Stereotyping: A Study of the Functional Use of Gender in the Classroom,” 1995,
http://www.jstor.org/stable/1131799.
Using Behavioral Strategy for Attraction and
Retention
I would like to take you through some ways that environment can
impact attraction and retention as a way of illustrating the value of a
behavioral approach. Let’s begin by looking at the example of one
basic behavioral driver that influences our decision to join an orga‐
nization. Dr. Rebecca Bigler, director of The University of Texas at
Austin’s Gender and Racial Attitudes Lab, has done a number of
experiments with preschoolers and colored T-shirts. In one, she
took a classroom of four- and five-year-olds and put half in red T-
shirts and the other half in blue T-shirts. The children wore these
colored T-shirts for three weeks, but teachers were instructed not to
notice or mention the colors in any way. At the end of the three
weeks, children were asked to evaluate the skill, abilities, character‐
istics, and intelligence of each group. When asked “How many blues
are nice?” kids wearing red were more likely to answer “Some” and
kids wearing blue would answer “All.” When asked “which color
team is better to belong to?” kids almost universally answered with
their own color.1
Although this experiment was conducted with preschoolers, as
adults, we still recognize the dress and environment of those we per‐
ceive to be like us and we credit that group with being smarter, more
innovative, more trustworthy, and more capable of success. We are
naturally drawn to be part of groups that are like us. If you do a web
search for tech founders, you will find endless images of black T-
shirts and jeans. If you search for corporate leaders, you will find
suits and ties. If you want to hire tech founders or corporate leaders,
you need to create an environment that they will recognize as their
own, fitting the symbolic colored shirt of “their” team. Your poten‐
tial hire waiting for the interview will decide by looking at your web‐
site and your reception area whether or not your company wears the
same color they do and based on that, whether they trust you,
whether they believe your company will be successful, and whether
this might be the place they want to work. They will decide that long
before they ever meet you.
8 
| 
Designing Culture: Behavioral Strategy for the Workplace

2 “The 2014 Global Workforce Study Driving Engagement Through a Consumer-Like
Experience,” https://www.towerswatson.com/en-US/Insights/IC-Types/Survey-Research-
Results/2014/08/the-2014-global-workforce-study.
3 Susan J. Ashford, Cynthia Lee, and Philip Bobko, “Content, Causes and Consequences
of Job Insecurity,” Academy of Management Journal 32:4 (1989): 803–829.
Towers Watson (a global professional services firm with a focus on
people and risk management) generates a research-based workforce
study every other year. Its 2014 study surveyed 32,000 employees
from large and mid-sized organizations in 26 markets globally. In
that study, it found that the top driver of attraction and retention
was salary, which, of course, can be manipulated as base pay plus
bonus to create an environment to drive behavior. The next four
drivers can be directly impacted by design strategy: job security,
career advancement opportunities, learning/development, and chal‐
lenging work.2
Job security may seem an odd match with environment design strat‐
egy, but if we look at research focused on the factors that create a
feeling of security, we can tease out behavioral strategies to be used
for decision making in the work environment. In essence, a sense of
job security is directly connected to perceived control:
(Research) results indicated that personal, job, and organizational
realities associated with a perceived lack of control are correlated
with measured job insecurity. Job insecurity in turn leads to attitu‐
dinal reactions—intentions to quit, reduced commitment, and
reduced satisfaction.3
So, if a sense of job security is a critical factor in attraction and
retention, and that sense of security is connected to perceived con‐
trol, then it becomes a matter of determining how we might use the
physical/digital environment to increase the perception of control.
The myriad of ways to make that happen are numerous enough to
warrant another report in itself, but it will suffice for this overview
to simply point out that it is possible through allowance of choice
and empowerment to use both the physical and digital environment
to increase the perceived level of control, increasing a sense of job
security, and thereby increasing retention.
When working on retention, we should also consider the symbolism
attached to physical environment cues. The visual environment
communicates just as strongly as what is said and written. Career
advancement opportunities need to exist, but also be apparent, as
Using Behavioral Strategy for Attraction and Retention 
| 
9

when dealing with people, perception is more important than real‐
ity. Employees must perceive that advancement is easily available for
those who produce results. In a typical old-style office layout with
the C-suite on the top floor and a private lunchroom, advancement
seems more difficult. It looks like only the rarified few make it into
those suites and this is a disincentive for most. The visual cues com‐
municate a stiffly hierarchical structure that is difficult to breach.
According to the Towers Watson study, employees actually want
growth (people, projects, and opportunities) more than promotions
and it is important that the physical environment communicates the
availability of that growth as well. Historically, a move from cubicle
into private office meant a promotion. If you see a friend unpacking
a box in their new private office, you automatically offer congratula‐
tions on the promotion. However, if growth opportunities are more
important than promotions, then the private office as a perk has less
power than perhaps an assignment to head up development of a
cutting-edge idea, leading a team in its own project room. Today’s
equivalent of unpacking in a private office is seeing a friend assigned
to their new team room or launching a Slack channel. Growth and
learning as a retention motivator imply the needs for different kinds
of rewards and different spaces, both physical and digital, to support
those rewards.
Before we move to the next example in our attraction retention
behavioral tool kit, let’s talk about the connection between retention
and sustainable engagement. Attraction and retention have a long
history of research that has evolved as the workplace has evolved.
The earliest research in this area focused on the question “Do I like
my work?” and then subsequently “Will I stay at this job?” In recent
history, as companies push to find areas of greater productivity,
employee surveys have focused more on questions that reveal a level
of engagement. Today, as margins become tighter and competition
increases, the survey questions increasingly focus not just on attrac‐
tion and retention, but also, more importantly, on sustained engage‐
ment. Are employees engaged in a sustainable way that will make
them want to work at maximum productivity for all of the years that
they work for your company? Research has shown time and again
that an engaged employee base is easier to retain and that high levels
of sustainable engagement can be directly attributed to a company’s
profitability.
10 
| 
Designing Culture: Behavioral Strategy for the Workplace

The Towers Watson study built on this, identifying two key factors
that take an employee from being engaged to sustainably engaged.
These factors are having the employee be enabled and energized.
Being enabled includes supporting the employee’s productivity in
multiple ways. Being energized includes a broad sense of health and
well-being, managed stress, and social supports.
Example 2: A University’s Expensive, New,
Underperforming Building
In August of 2013, the W. P. Carey School of Business Graduate Pro‐
grams moved into its beautiful new building, McCord Hall. The
project was a $57 million, 129,000 square foot, LEED-certified mas‐
terpiece designed to support new kinds of learning with more than
50 team rooms, classrooms, lecture halls, and a large new open
office area for the graduate programs staff. It was an amazing build‐
ing for the students, but for the staff who ran the graduate pro‐
grams, the new space was not working. Leadership of the graduate
programs group came to me a year later, because the staff still wasn’t
settled in and the Graduate Programs now had the problem of an
alarming staff attrition rate—the building was not working as well as
it could.
The Graduate Programs office consists of three main teams: recruit‐
ing, student services, and career counselors. Its new spaces had
everyone sitting in the same small hexagonal mid-height wall cubi‐
cle in a large open floor plate. The closest area where one-on-one
meetings could be held required a walk across a bridge into the adja‐
cent wing (Figure 1-5).
The recruiting team, who were outgoing and social with lots of col‐
laboration activities, needed a space that was more open. They were
constantly taking over the adjacent conference room, turning it into
an ad hoc war room for various campaigns. It worked for them but
meant that the room was not always available for others.
Student services staff was happy with the setup, as they could focus
on their work, but it was awkward to have to walk so far for a one-
on-one private conversation. Those challenges were fairly simple to
solve by rearranging the space for more open collaborative work
and the planned addition of a few small meeting spaces, which
Example 2: A University’s Expensive, New, Underperforming Building 
| 
11

would easily allow one-on-one conversations without crossing the
bridge to the other wing.
Figure 1-5. Diagram of Graduate Programs location in ASU’s new
building
However, the group that really suffered in the new environment was
the career counseling team. After less than six months, the team
began suffering an alarming rate of attrition. Much of its work was
in advising students, and because ASU’s MBA student population
has a large international component, these students are far from
their usual personal support network. That meant that much of that
advising from the career counseling came in the form of personal
emotional support. A student might come to a career counselor
because their spouse was on the other side of the globe and wanted a
divorce. The student needed to make a decision about staying in
school. So, that student would sit, half in a cube and half in an aisle,
sobbing while the career counselor tried to book an available room.
Then, together, the student and counselor would walk across the
bridge to the other wing, and finally find a space appropriate for that
conversation.
12 
| 
Designing Culture: Behavioral Strategy for the Workplace

We looked at the career counseling team’s working patterns and
realized that if we put them into small offices, grouped together,
with a common workroom, they would have the best of the private
space they needed with clients (the students), as well as a collabora‐
tive area that would support innovation of the services they pro‐
vided and social cohesion. Luckily, this state-of-the-art building had
been designed with 50 team rooms. We identified a small group of
these rooms adjacent to the career center, changed out their doors
from sliders to locking, and the team was set. The head of that group
sought me out about six months later to thank me, sharing that she
had filled the remaining positions and was now able to retain, moti‐
vate, and build the team she needed.
Understanding Sustainable Engagement
In the example we just looked at, the career counseling group was
not enabled to perform their job, a critical factor according to the
Towers Watson research. In fact, the physical environment dis-
enabled them. Employees left their jobs at an alarming rate until the
physical environment problem was fixed. However, enablement also
extends to creating the right culture through team structure, moti‐
vators, programs, and both the right digital and physical tools. The
environment in all aspects must enable high-performing employees
to do their best work or they will leave.
According to the research, the other factor for sustainable engage‐
ment, being energized, is generated by promoting broad well-being,
including encouraging health, management of stress, and providing
social supports in the work environment. Understanding these driv‐
ers can often allow you to make small/inexpensive corrections,
which provide resources that create a sense of well-being.
Let’s consider a study of behavioral strategy applied to creating an
environment targeted to well-being in the extreme environment of a
prison. Jay Farbstein and Melissa Farling had a hypothesis that being
able to see nature would lower stress for inmates and staff (see
Figure 1-6). They designed a study to prove this at the Sonoma
County Jail in Santa Rosa, CA. Their experiment with design in the
prison started with posting large-scale images of nature to the
inmate intake booking areas. Officers working in those areas are
highly stressed because inmates sometimes arrive at jail in a drugged
or emotionally explosive state. The study measured officer stress
Understanding Sustainable Engagement 
| 
13

before and after their shift by using a perceived stress survey, back‐
ward digit scan (short-term memory test), heart rate, and incident
report (the number of inmate behavior issues). The study took mul‐
tiple measurements of all 12 officers before and after the landscape
mural was installed and also compared average numbers of incident
reports in an extended time frame before and after the murals were
installed. The results were clear across all methods of measurement.
Changing the physical environment by simply installing images of
nature had a significant impact on stress levels for both inmates and
officers. Reducing employee stress might be as simple as beginning
with placing those rooms that have high-stress activities adjacent to
windows, installing images of natural landscape, or providing out‐
door break areas.
Figure 1-6. Diagram of the Farbstein and Farling Prison Intake study
Case Study: PCA SKIN, Not Just a Remodel
PCA SKIN is the industry leader in innovative skin care, with prod‐
ucts that bridge the gap between beauty and medicine. The compa‐
ny’s products are only sold to those who have been trained how to
use them, preventing poor results through incorrect application.
This limitation means that PCA SKIN’s revenue stream comes from
(a) selling training to new customers, and (b) selling additional
training and products to existing customers. The company has an
outbound call staff to sell training and inbound call staff to respond
to product questions. Both of these groups interact with a wide
range of professionals, from aestheticians to dermatologists. This
range of client type means PCA SKIN needs salespeople with differ‐
14 
| 
Designing Culture: Behavioral Strategy for the Workplace

ent types of knowledge, levels of education, and specific area knowl‐
edge that is not necessarily typical of call center workers.
The CEO identified this staffing challenge as critical for business
growth, so he replaced many of the call staff with industry professio‐
nals. The new staff had worked in the industries that were being
targeted and could respond to PCA SKIN product questions, as well
as put product questions or training in context to that specific
industry. This was a great idea, but many of the new hires saw the
call center position as temporary while they looked for their next
“real” job, creating employee churn and the major challenge to busi‐
ness growth.
As the salesforce became more professional and developed relation‐
ships with clients, the clients wanted to visit the headquarters of the
company that generated such great products. However, PCA SKIN’s
existing facility was a dated warren of cubicles and the visual brand
of the physical space in no way supported the company’s marketing
and growth efforts. PCA SKIN needed a headquarters that fit the
brand it was selling. My company was initially retained to design its
new space, creating a physical brand that would visually support the
company brand.
My team went through a discovery phase, and interviewed a variety
of stakeholders who would help us understand all of the business
issues. Through this discovery, we stumbled on the real problem:
hiring and retention issues. With support from the CEO, their lead‐
ership team worked with our team to create an environment that
reorganized the structure of the company in a variety of ways.
Anthropological research from the last 50 years clearly shows that a
sense of individual ownership of results diminishes with increasing
group sizes of more than eight people. Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon,
calls this the “two pizza rule.” Rows of cubicles give the visual and
functional message that the cubicle occupant is alone in an ever-
expanding hive. As the number of cubicles increase, the individual
occupant loses her sense of belonging and feels less responsibility
for the outcome of activities taken on by the group. Our goal was to
create a connected organization that started with small nonhierarch‐
ical groups that were fully responsible for their results both individ‐
ually and as a small team. We could increase their loyalty (and
retention) through team size and a sense of accomplishment. We
also knew that if we could influence the staff to respond as a group,
Case Study: PCA SKIN, Not Just a Remodel  
| 
15

rather than as individuals, we could get them into the habit of col‐
lective problem solving and increase each employee’s sense of
belonging. We accomplished all of these goals with tremendous
results.
The original setup was a typical grid of workstations. We collected
them into groups of eight and removed the back and side of each
workstation so that an individual could face into the corner for
focused work or spin around in her chair and be part of the group.
Building this configuration we balanced individual needs with team
needs (see Figure 1-7).
Figure 1-7. Workstation layout diagrams
To further cement each group bonding, each team took its break at
the same time. We then remodeled the breakroom to look more like
a café, and less like the typical combination lunchroom/fileroom. To
do that, we created a green wall of plants and installed a floor-to-
ceiling wall mural of a nature scene (which, as you’ll remember from
our discussion of Farbstein and Farling’s study, lowers stress). But a
café needs to have nice amenities too, so the renovation included a
restaurant-quality water and ice machine (drinking more water also
lowers stress and increases productivity), as well as a good coffee
machine, healthy snacks, and other supports. This all helped staff
feel valued and energized.
The other challenge was that staff hiring was broad to provide deep
knowledge in a variety of areas, but the customer phone calls came
16 
| 
Designing Culture: Behavioral Strategy for the Workplace

to each salesperson randomly. Only luck would connect the cus‐
tomer to the appropriate serviceperson. However, through this new
physical setup, team members began to understand each other’s
skills so that calls could be transferred to the most knowledgeable
person in that area. By enhancing the idea that both private and
public conversations were possible in the same cubicle, we could
encourage on-the-job cross-training between individuals of differ‐
ent backgrounds and experience.
The workstation layout also provided opportunities to design for
faster on-the-job training. The bulk of learning for any task happens
in one of two ways: through mimicry or through problem solving
related to actually doing the task. Accessory learning of facts or
capabilities not available for on-the-job learning must be taught in
the classroom or online, but the bulk of our workplace learning is
on the job. What is important about the PCA SKIN experiment is
that the design of the workstation layout supported learning
through mimicry and enabled learning through doing. We proposed
stations that were open enough that a new employee could hear and
see how calls were being handled, immersing them in the culture
and appropriate response content and tone for PCA SKIN’s cus‐
tomer base. The same openness allowed others on the team to hear
the new employee and provide immediate feedback, thus allowing
the new person to learn quickly by doing. The small group dynamic
allowed coworkers to feel more comfortable giving feedback and
encouragement. The openness and group design at PCA SKIN
would not only help with the ramp up on specific product and serv‐
ices knowledge, but also illustrate the proper way to relate to a cus‐
tomer in the brand experience.
Outcome: Thinking about Teams, Space, and Training
Lead to Success
I went back to PCA SKIN a couple of years later to see if our efforts
paid off. The COO noted that training times had been significantly
reduced. They now had a practice of placing a new hire or low-
performing staff member between two experienced high-
performing staff members, which cut training times by more than
30 percent. It has worked so well that the company now rotates its
staff every 90 days to continue to cross-pollinate knowledge, build‐
ing both individual and collective capacity.
Case Study: PCA SKIN, Not Just a Remodel  
| 
17

In the five years after the remodel was complete, PCA SKIN
increased its employee numbers by 61 percent, clearly solving its
attraction/retention problem. With that increased capacity, overall
revenues increased more than 78 percent. We could have just
designed a beautiful space that responded to the initial request of
creating a physical brand, but by identifying the business constraint
and using behavioral strategy to address the whole environment, not
just physical, we drove significant revenue increase.
I won’t argue that rearranging the cubicles or remodeling the break‐
room would have worked by themselves—architecture alone doesn’t
solve behavioral challenges—but because the designs of all of the
systems, including physical space, supported the behaviors that were
needed, PCA SKIN was wildly successful. The environment that was
created influenced the behaviors that created the culture that deliv‐
ered the business results.
Conclusion
We know this to be true:
• Physical space affects the experiences people have in that space
• Experience encourages or discourages specific human behavior
• Behavior is responsible for execution
• Execution is the key to accomplishing strategic objectives
In other words, we know and the data proves that the physical
spaces that your team occupies can be leveraged to help you get your
business where you want it to go. In today’s world, digital space is an
extension of physical space and organization and culture are parts of
a continuous work environment. A whole environment behavioral
strategy that aligns the physical and digital spaces, organizational
structure, programs and amenities, and the right technology can
support, encourage, and drive the right behavior patterns, making a
significant difference in the amount of effort required to achieve
your objectives.
While humans are the biggest driver of growth, differentiated prod‐
ucts, and profitability, the biggest impact on human behavior is their
environment.
18 
| 
Designing Culture: Behavioral Strategy for the Workplace

About the Author
Kristine Woolsey is the practice lead for creative environments at
MAYA, a design and technology innovation consultancy. Kristi is
well known as a behavioral strategist, with years of speaking and
research on the impact that the physical environment has on human
behavior. She joined MAYA design in 2015 in order to build a prac‐
tice that looks at the workplace environment holistically—examin‐
ing the physical, digital, and cultural aspects together.
Kristi began as an academic at ASU, SciARCH, USCD, and others,
but left academia to found Woolsey Studio, which by 2000 was the
largest female-led architecture firm on the West Coast. She then
combined her interest in business, organizational psychology, and
physical place to move into management consulting, eventually
joining a Washington, DC-based consulting firm that specialized in
guiding federal agencies through culture change. She left that firm
for the opportunity to join MAYA.

