

Irene Au
Design in Venture Capital
How Design Drives Investment
and Company Success
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-95639-7
[LSI]
Design in Venture Capital
by Irene Au
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editors: Angela Rufino
Production Editor: Colleen Cole
Copyeditor: Dianne Russell
Proofreader: Molly Ives Brower
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
July 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-07-15: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Design in Venture
Capital, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media,
Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
Design in Venture Capital. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Introduction                                                                                               1
Who Was Interviewed for This Report?                                                3
Why Design + VC?                                                                                   6
How Do Design Partners Contribute?                                                 12
What Do Design Partners Work On?                                                  13
Common Challenges                                                                              26
What Success Looks Like                                                                       27
So, You Think You Want to Do This Work                                         28
Design Is More Than Meets the Eye                                                    30
iii

Design in Venture Capital
Introduction
“How can I get a job like yours?” “How do you spend your time?”
“What does a design partner in a venture capital firm do?” The fre‐
quency of these questions posed to me since joining Khosla Ven‐
tures two years ago prompted me to write this report. The role of
design partner inside venture capital (VC) firms is still relatively new
and undefined, with a little more than a handful of people holding
this job title on Sand Hill Road. That prominent VC firms with
multimillion-dollar portfolios would want to include designers as
partners strikes many as a validating sign that design has finally
arrived: entrepreneurs and investors value design so much that they
want designers involved during the most formative stages of a com‐
pany’s development. So, it’s no surprise that there would be consid‐
erable curiosity, interest, and excitement about this role as a possible
career choice for designers.
My goals in writing this report are threefold:
1. To clarify and articulate what this role means to designers,
investors, and entrepreneurs
2. To understand what my colleagues at other VC firms with a
similar job title are doing
3. To answer commonly asked questions about the emerging role
of design partner for curious parties
Rather than have my own personal experience be the definitive,
authoritative voice on what being a design partner in a venture firm
looks like, I sought to include multiple voices and perspectives from
1

others who hold similar roles. Although John Maeda from Kleiner
Perkins Caufield & Byers (KPCB) offers a much broader definition
of designers in his 2016 Design In Tech report (Figure 1-1), for the
purpose of this report, I included only people who self-identify as
designers and are apt to hold the title “design partner” at top-tier VC
firms. Whereas some design partners make investments in their
role, all of them act as operating partners, in which capacity they
work with companies and entrepreneurs in their firms’ portfolios.
Figure 1-1. 2016 KPCB Design In Tech report (John Maeda)
2 
| 
Design in Venture Capital

Who Was Interviewed for This Report?
There are relatively few design partners in VC based on my criteria.
I sought to include the perspectives of designers at top-tier VC firms
including KPCB, Sequoia, Google Ventures (GV), Accel, New Enter‐
prise Associates (NEA), and True Ventures.
Ben Blumenfeld
Ben is cofounder of the Designer Fund alongside Enrique Allen.
Prior to Designer Fund, Ben was a design lead at Facebook for
more than five years, where he helped build products for nearly
a billion people and grow Facebook’s world-class design team.
He was also the design director at Varien, which he helped build
into one of the world’s leading ecommerce firms, and a designer
at CBS where he designed many of their prime-time show web
experiences.
Albert Lee
Albert joined NEA as designer-in-residence in 2015. In this
role, he works closely with portfolio companies supporting
them with product, design, and organizational development
strategies and execution. He’s been actively involved in building
the NEA Studio program, which has an emphasis on supporting
nontraditional founders and also focuses on design-centric
investments for both consumer and enterprise products. Albert
has a deep background at the intersection of design and busi‐
ness. Prior to NEA he was the managing director of IDEO’s
New York office, where he brought more than a decade of expe‐
rience in digital product, communication, and venture design to
bear. He was also named to Fast Company’s 1,000 Most Creative
People in Business in 2014.
Jake Knapp
Jake created GV’s sprint process and is the author of Sprint
(Simon & Schuster, 2016). He has run more than a hundred
sprints with startups such as 23andme, Slack, Nest, and Founda‐
tion Medicine. Previously, Jake worked at Google, leading
sprints for everything from Gmail to Google X. He is currently
among the world’s tallest designers.
James Buckhouse
James joined Sequoia Capital as head of content in August 2014.
He brought with him a focus on story-driven design and user
Who Was Interviewed for This Report? 
| 
3

experience. He helps create exceptional user experiences for the
portfolio and the partnership. He founded the Sequoia Design
Fellows program, which helps launch the careers of high-
potential UX and product designers. Previously, James led stra‐
tegic story, design, and product innovation teams as Twitter’s
senior experience architect. James built his story skills while at
DreamWorks Animation as a cinematographer and choreogra‐
pher, working on the projects Antz, Shrek, Shrek 2, Shrek the
Third, Shrek 4D, Shrek the Halls, Madagascar, and Madagascar 2.
He also served as a production designer for New York City Bal‐
let, Oregon Ballet Theatre, and Pennsylvania Ballet. His artwork
has been shown in museums and galleries including the Gug‐
genheim Works & Process Series, the Whitney Museum of
American Art, The Institute of Contemporary Art in London,
and the Dia Center.
Jason Mayden
Jason joined Accel following more than 13 years at Nike, where
he worked on the designs of everything from Nike+ to the Jor‐
dan Brand. He also spent a year and a half at the hardware
startup Mark One, best known for the smart cup Vessyl. He is a
designer, lecturer, artist, collector of curious and wonderfully
crafted goods, sports junkie, bookworm, equality in education
advocate, 1990s hip-hop enthusiast, and social innovator. He is
also a media designer/lecturer at the Hasso Plattner Institute of
Design at Stanford University, aka the d. School.
Jeff Veen
Jeff is a design partner at True Ventures, where he spends his
time helping companies create better products. He does this as
an advisor, as well, for companies like About.me, Medium, and
WordPress. Previously, Jeff was vice president of design at
Adobe after it acquired Typekit, the company he cofounded and
ran as CEO. Jeff was also one of the founding partners of the
user experience consulting group Adaptive Path. While there,
he led Measure Map, which was acquired by Google. During his
time at Google, he redesigned Google Analytics and led the UX
team for Google’s apps. Much earlier, Jeff was part of the found‐
ing web team at Wired magazine, where he helped build Hot‐
Wired, Webmonkey, Wired News and many other sites. During
that time, he authored two books, HotWired Style (Hardwired,
4 
| 
Design in Venture Capital

1997) and The Art and Science of Web Design (New Riders Press,
2000). Like Jake, Jeff is very tall.
John Maeda
John is a designer, technologist, and catalyst behind the national
movement to transform STEM (science, technology, engineer‐
ing, and math) to STEAM. He served as the 16th president of
the Rhode Island School of Design (RISD), where, as chief exec‐
utive, he repositioned the esteemed and historic institution to
regain its top position in the new economy. An internationally
recognized thought leader at the intersection of design and
technology, Maeda now works with early-, mid-, and late-stage
startup CEOs as design partner at KPCB in Silicon Valley.
John Zeratsky
John is a design partner at GV and the coauthor of Sprint
(Simon & Schuster, 2016). Before joining GV, he was a design
lead at YouTube and an early employee of FeedBurner, which
Google acquired in 2007. John has written about design and
productivity for the Wall Street Journal, Fast Company, Wired,
and Time magazine.
…and then there’s me:
Irene Au
Irene is a design partner at Khosla Ventures, where she works
with CEOs toward company success with design and user expe‐
rience. Irene has unprecedented experience building and lead‐
ing UX teams, including all design and UX teams at Google,
Yahoo!, and Udacity. She began her career as an interaction
designer at Netscape Communications, where she designed the
Internet’s first commercial web browser, integrated mail and
news client, and web page editor. Irene also teaches vinyasa flow
yoga at Avalon Yoga Center in Palo Alto.
Who Was Interviewed for This Report? 
| 
5

Figure 1-2. Panel discussion by designers working in VC. From left to
right, John Maeda (KPCB), Irene Au (Khosla Ventures), Jeff Veen
(True Ventures), Dayna Grayson (NEA), Enrique Allen (Designer
Fund). (photo by Noriko Takiguchi)
Why Design + VC?
Most prominent VC firms have partners who are former entrepre‐
neurs and operators with backgrounds in business or engineering.
To understand why VC firms are interested in having designers join
their ranks, it’s important to look at various factors that are driving
change across the technology industry.
What’s Driving the Rising Interest in Design?
First, technology is increasingly becoming a commodity. Not that
long ago, entrepreneurs needed a lot of capital to start a technology
company. Companies had to build their own infrastructure that
many companies take for granted today, thanks to off-the-shelf serv‐
ices like Amazon Web Services (AWS). And this is not just limited
to the backend either; frameworks like Angular and Bootstrap make
building a reasonably good-looking and performant UI much easier
than ever before. Today, much less capital is required for entrepre‐
neurs to create a product and start a company, leading to an influx
6 
| 
Design in Venture Capital

of products on the market. Design then becomes the differentiator
for these products and companies.
Second, the rise of the iPhone demonstrated to company leaders
how design innovation can propel a company toward capturing the
market and people’s hearts. Apple’s success with its well-designed
products set a higher standard for experiences that are aesthetically
pleasing, easy to use, and delightful. Companies increasingly want to
emulate that success by investing in design.
This investment is not just isolated to consumer-facing companies.
People are now accustomed to the simplicity and power of applica‐
tions such as Gmail and Google Docs as consumer users, and
demand the same quality in the tools they use at work that they
enjoy in their personal lives.
Third, as computing technology becomes smaller, cheaper, and
faster, and the end of Moore’s Law becomes imminent, human fac‐
tors become the impediment to superior user performance, not the
technology. In the case of Nutanix, a startup that builds data center
infrastructure, system administrators have long endured some of the
industry’s most unusable and neglected UIs, and that “even” sysad‐
mins, who are heralded for their technical proficiency, deserve well-
designed experiences that let them accomplish more in less time.
With these factors at play, entrepreneurs crucially need to invest in
design in its most formative stages or risk not being successful.
According to Gartner research, “89 percent of companies believe
that customer experience will be their primary basis for competition
by 2016, versus 36 percent four years ago.” Eighty-one percent of
executives surveyed by Accenture, a global professional services
company specializing in strategy and consulting in digital, technol‐
ogy, and operations, placed the personalized customer experience in
its top three priorities for its organization, with 39 percent reporting
this as their top priority. VC firms that employ operators to support
their entrepreneurs will naturally look to designers to help ensure
their success.
Related reading
• John Maeda, “Design in Tech Report 2016”
• John Markoff, “Moore’s Law Running Out of Room, Tech Looks
for a Successor,” New York Times, May 4, 2016
Why Design + VC? 
| 
7

VC Firms’ Motivation
Ultimately, venture capital firms are interested in having designers
as part of their team because they believe they will bring value to the
firm in some way. Exactly what those expectations are can vary
widely across firms. The expectations are ambiguous because there
is no prototypical person in such a role to follow; the primary moti‐
vation is to get a great designer in the firm and then let the designer
figure out where she can add value.
Generally, design partners are focused on working with portfolio
companies to help them be successful, because it’s so crucial for
companies to get design right. Most partners at VC firms have held
operational roles at successful companies and draw from their prac‐
tical experience to advise companies. In this case, design is no differ‐
ent. Designers might be advising CEOs or working directly with
designers, product managers, or engineers to help them work
through their greatest product and design challenges, or organiza‐
tional challenges as they relate to design.
Although many entrepreneurs would be overjoyed to have design
resources made available to them to do hands-on design work for
their companies, most VC firms believe that such a model does not
benefit the companies in the long run. The intention is to teach the
startups how to build design capabilities and make design successful
within their organizations, not to do the actual design work itself.
James Buckhouse of Sequoia sums it up nicely for all the venture
firms:
In general, our model is to teach people how to solve problems,
rather than be their solution to solve every problem.
Jake Knapp of Google Ventures elaborates:
It’s important for us to do a little fishing alongside them so that we
remember how to fish, and also to build credibility with them. That
said, it’s really important that 90 percent of what we do is teaching
them how to fish because it doesn’t scale for us to be their design
team. We won’t be able to have that kind of impact if we’re doing
the fishing. We’re doing the work alongside them but they are
clearly doing the work in the sprint. That makes it an easier transi‐
tion from when we’re there to when we’re not there.
8 
| 
Design in Venture Capital

Designers’ Motivation
One of the early pieces of advice I heard from a partner at a promi‐
nent VC firm was that the role of an operating partner “is not for
everyone.” Operating partners act as coach and advisor, working
through influence to make things happen. Particularly for designers,
who often prefer to be hands-on and continue to make things, that
kind of indirect ownership can be less than satisfying.
Universally, all the design partners I spoke with were drawn to the
role of design partner because it offered a chance to learn something
new, and because they passionately believe that design should be
more integral to startups and the startup ecosystem because of the
value design brings to businesses. All of the design partners had
reached a high degree of success and proficiency in their careers by
the time they joined their respective venture firms. Joining a venture
firm and working with startups offered a new kind of challenge they
had not previously experienced.
For example, working with startups means that we are able to influ‐
ence the design culture of the company during its most nascent
stages. We can work directly with CEOs to help them understand
the different levels at which design operates, and encourage the kind
of thinking and behavior that sets up design to be successful. In con‐
trast to working inside a larger company whose culture, people, and
practices are already set, working directly with a CEO during a com‐
pany’s earliest stages can be more satisfying and effective.
Moreover, working across a portfolio of companies gives designers
the opportunity to be involved with a wider range of problems in a
short period of time. This kind of opportunity is appealing espe‐
cially to designers who are interested in developing a robust, repeat‐
able process for using design to solve problems. As Jake Knapp
explains:
I was really excited about being able to experiment with the sprint
process with a lot of startups and with John (Zeratsky), Braden
(Kowitz), and Michael (Margolis), who are very experimentation-
minded and would push the process to get better.
Ben Blumenfeld and Enrique Allen were motivated to start Designer
Fund because they identified a significant gap between the startup
ecosystem and designers. Says Ben:
We saw many companies with high potential impact to benefit soci‐
ety in underserved spaces like health care, education, and produc‐
Why Design + VC? 
| 
9

tivity. Many of these companies were reaching out to us to hire
their first designers which made us ask, “Why aren’t designers part
of the founding teams of these companies?” Through extensive
interviews with top designers we realized that there were a few
themes that kept designers from being on the founding teams of
startups. These areas of opportunity included design education,
where institutions weren’t preparing designers for the demands and
skills needed at startups, or connection building, where designers
needed better connections to domain experts in spaces they were
interested in. We created Designer Fund to address these findings
with the explicit mission of helping designers build businesses with
meaningful impact.
Whether they understand it explicitly or not, early stage startups
crucially need to employ design thinking to be successful, and
design partners can play a pivotal role in helping these companies
through the most difficult stages of getting a company off the
ground.
“At this stage, you don’t know what you are building and you have to
figure it out. You are hunting for the right value proposition and
product/market fit,” explains Albert Lee of NEA. “The cycles are
super-short and are highly iterative, which appeals to a designer’s
sensibilities, where you are constantly shifting, layering, tweaking,
iterating, and revising.” The designers in design partnership roles
seem to thrive off the ambiguity that naturally comes with startups.
Working with early stage startups is also highly interdisciplinary,
offering countless opportunities to see a problem through a variety
of different lenses. Startups by nature need people who can think
about a lot of different problems (e.g., user acquisition, supply
chain, and UX) under a lot of different contexts (clean energy,
health tech, food, consumer products, enterprise, wearables, and so
on). All the design partners interviewed for this report had diverse
interests and perspectives that informed how they related to their
roles—technology, architecture, ballet, yoga, sports, writing, fashion,
entrepreneurship, academia, and executive coaching. It’s no coinci‐
dence that people with varied interests, those who might take on
several different kinds of roles in different contexts or have interests
that extend beyond their day jobs, are ripe for recruiting into a
design partnership role.
10 
| 
Design in Venture Capital

“How Did You Get This Job?”
Rarely, if ever, do VC firms advertise for roles they are looking to fill.
No one gets a job in VC by responding to an advertisement for a job.
Moreover, most design partners weren’t even explicitly looking for a
job in VC until someone from a firm reached out to them to solicit
their interest.
Even though almost everyone describes their circumstances as
“being in the right place at the right time,” they created their own
luck in their own ways. Each person I spoke with had a relationship
with someone from the firm prior to joining who recruited them
into the firm. The relationships might have been forged through a
prior working relationship, networking, or friendship. Perhaps their
connection to a VC firm was with someone who was a prior
investor. Or, the designer was already acting as a mentor to several
startups in the portfolio. In other cases, a former colleague joined a
VC firm and then later tapped into his network to recruit the
designer to join the firm.
The moral of the story is this: if you are a designer and you want a
job in VC, hang out with people who are in VC. Keep those weak
ties warm.
Where there is a design partner in a VC firm, there is usually clear
alignment between the firm’s interests and with the skills and experi‐
ence the designer has to offer. Every firm is looking for something
different. Some designers split their time between working with
portfolio companies and working on internal projects for the firm.
Other designers are incubating their own startup at the same time
they are advising other startups. Whereas a design partner from one
firm might camp out with a startup for an entire year to rebuild the
product and brand, as Jeff Veen did with About.me, another design
partner might be publishing massive annual reports on the state of
design in tech, as John Maeda has done.
Why Design + VC? 
| 
11

How Do Design Partners Contribute?
Not all designers at VC firms are acting as design partners 100 per‐
cent of their time. For example, here’s the breakdown for the design‐
ers interviewed for this report:
• Two design partners are working part-time at their respective
VC firms.
• Two people spend 50 percent time on internal projects for the
partnership.
• Two people spend 50 percent of their time as an investing part‐
ner.
• One person spends 50 percent of his time incubating his own
startup (as an entrepreneur-in-residence).
Of the time allocated toward their role as design partners, they
spend the majority that time (60–70 percent) with portfolio compa‐
nies. The remainder of their time might be split among endeavors
that include deal flow (cultivating relationships with entrepreneurs
for possible investment opportunities, doing diligence on potential
investments, and so on), building the firm’s brand and reputation by
writing and public speaking, networking, doing internal projects for
the firm, and working on horizontal efforts that benefit the entire
portfolio, such as hosting events and workshops for entrepreneurs
and/or portfolio companies.
Some design partners work exclusively with the CEOs of the start‐
ups in their portfolios, believing that it is a much faster way to get
things done with companies. An alternative approach other design
partners take is to serve whoever reaches out to them, whether they
are designers, product managers, engineers, marketers, or adminis‐
trative assistants. Regardless of who their stakeholders are, their
endeavors fall into several categories, described the sections that fol‐
low.
Design partners, like their peers in the firm, work independently
with a fair amount of autonomy over what they work on. Design
partners rarely, if ever, turn an entrepreneur away if an entrepreneur
approaches a design partner for help. How deep they go might be
partially informed by the priorities of the partnership and where
they can be most effective. For example, if the VC firm has a sizable
12 
| 
Design in Venture Capital

investment stake in a company, it behooves the partnership to pri‐
oritize that company and direct its resources to ensure that compa‐
ny’s success.
Other inputs that can influence how a design partner spends his
time is the effort-to-payout ratio, affectionately referred to by James
Buckhouse as the “juice versus squeeze ratio” (“Is the juice worth the
squeeze?”). For companies that are mature in their understanding of
design and design practice, they might need less help from a design
partner. At the other end of the extreme, companies that are strug‐
gling with foundational issues like getting their technology to work
and scale or building out the team might not benefit much from a
design partner either. The sweet spot is somewhere in the middle,
where the company understands at some level the potential value of
design and has the requisite curiosity and eagerness to engage with
the design partner.
What Do Design Partners Work On?
Design partners work with portfolio companies in a variety of ways.
These activities range from building design capabilities for portfolio
companies, to teaching them how to use design to solve problems,
to coaching and advising on design leadership and management.
For the VC firm, design partners might get involved in diligence and
deal review, or help cultivate sources of potential investments and a
talent pipeline.
Building Design Capabilities
“Do you know anyone I can hire?”
Many conversations between entrepreneurs and design partners
begin with the challenges of building in-house design capabilities.
By this time, entrepreneurs might implicitly understand the value of
design at some level, and they want to have a designer on the team
to help execute the vision. Their depth of understanding of various
design capabilities and skills, however, can vary, and needs can vary
widely depending on the type of product being built. Design part‐
ners then usually advise on a variety of variables: what kinds of skills
are needed, what level of experience is required, where to find quali‐
fied candidates, how to interview designers, how to assess candi‐
dates, and what kind of compensation should be expected. They
What Do Design Partners Work On? 
| 
13

might help recruit designers, interview them, close them, and later
when they are on board, advise them.
Although hiring designers and building an in-house team has
become conventional wisdom, the hiring climate today proves to be
very difficult for startups. Many do not have the brand to attract
design candidates or even build awareness for their company
because they are just getting off the ground. Most startups are look‐
ing for multiskilled designers who can help drive design strategy,
interaction design, and visual design, and thus are less interested in
candidates who are too junior to work independently and provide
leadership to the company. Nor are they looking for candidates who
are too senior who are less interested in doing hands-on design
work. Paradoxically, designers often want to work in companies that
are proven to be friendly toward design, yet early stage startups are
desperately trying to hire their first designer in order to prove that
they value design.
Because building in-house design capabilities can take as long as
three to six months under the current hiring conditions, in some
cases, hiring a design consultancy can help a startup get its product
off the ground concurrently while it hires a full-time designer.
Design partners can play matchmaker between startups with design
needs and agencies or consultancies who best meet those needs.
Related reading
• Irene Au, “Understanding UX Skills”
Using Design to Solve Problems
“I help the CEO understand that design is not just about visual
appeal.”
—John Maeda
Although the conversation with design partners usually begins with
hiring designers, it often shifts to broader education on what design‐
ers do, and the different kinds of skills required to execute design
well. Ultimately, though, the conversation comes around to how well
a company can execute design and has a lot more to do with how a
company thinks and behaves than the number of designers or kinds
of people who call themselves designers are in the company.
“Design” in this sense of the word is not about how a product looks
14 
| 
Design in Venture Capital

or behaves, but the overall mission and vision of the company, the
values and principles that drive key decisions, ranging from how the
company behaves and operates to what the product does and what
the team should optimize for. Some might call this “design think‐
ing”; if you’re among those who feel the term is overused, you might
think of this level of design as “company design.”
For example, during the formative stages when a company is trying
to find product/market fit, a design partner might work with the
startup to find the best intersection between what the technology or
business innovation has to offer and what the market demands or
needs. Startups at this stage might not know who their users are, or
maybe they have a set of customers and want to know more about
them. The user journey is still being defined and discovered.
Designers crucially need this information to design meaningful
experiences; thus many design partners naturally find themselves
initiating these discussions with startups to flesh out user personas,
the user journey, and the narrative around the product.
Such conversations might happen organically or in a structured way
through workshops that design partners facilitate. “I came from
IDEO where we had to really practice and refine our facilitation
skills. These skills have become extremely valuable in my role,” says
Albert Lee.
James Buckhouse, who lectures at Stanford’s Graduate School of
Business on the power of business stories, uses storytelling as one of
the key tools for aligning startups to ensure that they can execute
successfully.
The story you tell your internal team is what’s going to unify that
team around what they should work on, what problems they’re try‐
ing to solve. That internal story is sometimes different from the
external story. The external story might be the sales pitch, or the
language they use to communicate with their customers. The inter‐
nal story is the North Star, their raison d’etre. A good internal story
is a decision-making machine.
Storytelling is so central to how James collaborates with portfolio
companies that he even made a template, which you can see in
Figure 1-3.
Figure 1-4 shows an example of a journey story map. A journey
story map depicts the transformation of a user from an initial state
to a changed state at the end of an experience. This particular jour‐
What Do Design Partners Work On? 
| 
15

ney map shows Twitter’s World Cup experience. In this scenario, a
person who starts watching the World Cup on TV ends up connec‐
ted to a rich and lively community of fans, celebrities, and enthusi‐
asts.
Figure 1-3. A storyboarding template by James Buckhouse
Figure 1-4. An example of an journey story map for Twitter (courtesy
of James Buckhouse)
16 
| 
Design in Venture Capital

Related reading
• James Buckhouse, “Story Maps”
• James Buckhouse, “Four Types of Business Stories”
• James Buckhouse, “Tell a Four-Word Story”
• James Buckhouse, “Human Experience Design”
True to the experience of every designer who is drawn in by stake‐
holders to solve tactical problems, design partners often need to
work upstream to get to the root of the problem. Jake Knapp
describes:
There are things that people expect designers to help with, and
things they don’t think we’re best suited to help with. Earlier on in
our life as design team at GV most people wanted us to help with
tactical design stuff, and then we would turn it into what’s the ques‐
tion that really needs to be solved. Now we’re getting better
questions.
Thanks to the efforts of Jake Knapp and John Zeratsky, startups and
larger organizations alike have employed the design sprint process
to use design to solve problems in a short amount of time. First
developed while working on the UX team at Google, Jake was par‐
ticularly interested in developing a repeatable process that would
allow teams to generate many ideas in a short amount of time, pro‐
totype the ideas, and test the ideas rapidly. Although many entrepre‐
neurs believe that design costs too much time and money to indulge
in a design process, design sprints have proven to save teams count‐
less hours and money. As Jake points out, “We are saving companies
time. Any startup has a limited potential lifespan. If we do a sprint
with a company, they can get a longer runway, because we keep
them from wasting time on stupid ideas.” Fortunately for the tech
community, the GV team has codified its many years of developing
and refining the design sprint process in a book called Sprint, from
which everyone can learn and can adopt (Figure 1-5).
What Do Design Partners Work On? 
| 
17

Figure 1-5. Jake, John, and Braden’s book on design sprints has become
a bestseller
You can use design sprints to help solve a variety of problems. For
early stage startups, design sprints enable teams to explore different
concepts for the product in a short period of time. As companies
grow and learn more about their market and users, some companies
decide to pivot and change strategy. Design sprints can then help the
team explore new directions for the company and envision a new
kind of story or user journey. In a later-stage B2B company that
exhibits waterfall-like tendencies for software development (where
the product manager specifies the requirements and feature set and
passes this on to designers, who then create the designs that engi‐
neers build), design sprints can help teach the cross-functional team
how to collaborate early and upfront (Figure 1-6), with greater
opportunity for design and technological innovation.
Design sprints in all these cases teach the companies a way to work
that enables good design work to happen: a method that is collabo‐
rative, inspired by an understanding of users, allows for divergent
thinking before convergence, and employs rapid prototyping, test‐
ing, and iteration.
18 
| 
Design in Venture Capital

Figure 1-6. Paul diGioia and John Torres in a design session at Nuta‐
nix (photo by Irene Au)
Related reading
• Jake Knapp, John Zeratsky, and Braden Kowitz, Sprint: How to
Solve Big Problems and Test New Ideas in Just Five Days (Simon
& Schuster, 2016)
Regardless of the method, design partners are unlocking the power
of design for entrepreneurs.
“There is an expectation that design is something that is done by
designers, that there is a productive group of activities that people
don’t think they can get involved with. It turns out those problem-
solving skills are really valuable for the whole team.”
—Jake Knapp
“Design is often not what CEOs think it is. There is a perception that
design is about making things pretty or that it’s about the polish. The
next layer is not just how it looks but how it feels. The next layer is
how to make money, how to generate value and revenue. When all
that comes together, that’s what design is—where value proposition,
business, and user experience all come together. It’s integrative; design
is not an isolated activity.”
—Albert Lee
What Do Design Partners Work On? 
| 
19

“We don’t simply provide a pretty, shiny solution. We obsess about
finding the right problems to solve for the organization, market seg‐
ment and/or consumer. I speak with and in some cases teach portfolio
companies the core principles of design thinking with the sole intent
of empowering the founders to see the strategic and economic impor‐
tance of design as a critical differentiator.”
—Jason Mayden
Design Management and Leadership
Design challenges don’t just end with having an in-house team and
finding product/market fit. The questions only seem to grow from
there.
• How do we ensure consistency in our design and in the experi‐
ence as the company grows?
• What’s the appropriate ratio of designers to engineers to have in
the company?
• Design seems to be the bottleneck. How do we fix that?
• How do we scale the company and our design practice?
• What should the team structure look like? What kinds of skills
do we need on the team and what is the proper level of experi‐
ence needed?
• What should our organization look like and where should
designers be situated within the company?
• What is the relationship between product design and marketing
design?
• How should the design team field requests from stakeholders in
the company and prioritize its efforts?
• How do we gain support for user research within the company?
• How do we get better at making design decisions?
• How can we create a better/more supportive environment for
our designers?
• How do we get the developers to fix UI bugs and details that
they think aren’t important?
• How can designers be involved earlier in the process of conceiv‐
ing features and how they work?
• What does the career path look like for designers?
20 
| 
Design in Venture Capital

• How do we educate the company on the importance of design?
• How can we be more effective at working with cross-functional
stakeholders?
• How do we expand internationally?
Design management and leadership skills can be mystifying for
many startups because they have hired really great individual con‐
tributors as their first few design hires. These designers might be
great practitioners but are new to dealing firsthand with the chal‐
lenges of design management in their careers.
Design partners who have direct experience with the practical reali‐
ties of leading design teams in a growing company can provide the
much needed guidance and mentorship young companies seek.
They might coach the CEO, or the head of product or engineering,
and/or the designers already in place at the company on an ad hoc
basis. They might do it during office hours, or through weekly,
biweekly, or monthly one-on-ones. Although not everyone will
commit to carving out time for regular one-on-ones, predictable,
regular check-ins provide an opportunity to proactively work on
issues rather than reacting to the latest fire.
At some point, the company grows so much that the organization
must change. As Jeff Veen describes:
There is an inflection point where the founder can’t be head of
product anymore and they realize they need a head of design or
chief product officer. I work with a lot of founders on that transi‐
tion. They want someone with the skills design partners have
(design management, team management, team building, someone
who knows what good design is). You have to get the organization
ready for that transition; sometimes it means a reorg or grooming
someone.
“What do you think of the design of my product?”
Design partners are frequently asked for their opinion on the design
of an entrepreneur’s product. Entrepreneurs’ well-intentioned
attempts at getting feedback from the design partner reflect a com‐
monly held misconception that the “design expert” will critique the
design and tell them how to change it. In reality, design partners will
rarely tell entrepreneurs what the design of their product should be.
What Do Design Partners Work On? 
| 
21

“People’s expectations are changing so fast: something that worked
three months ago doesn’t work now. It’s humbling—when we started
testing stuff, solutions I came up with didn’t work. We got a lot of reps
and realize we are wrong so often that it’s better to help companies
figure out how to find the right things.”
—Jake Knapp
“When people ask what their product should look like, my reaction is,
let me talk to the person who designed this thing. I broker conversa‐
tions between the CEO and the designer. The worst thing is to have
an outside opinion on work you weren’t doing without understanding
the context.”
—John Maeda
“I put a lot of effort into teaching people how to do product reviews.
All the engineers come to the product reviews and they bring in
design thinking and ask good questions.”
—Jeff Veen
“It’s not my job to tell them how to make it better. They are the
domain experts and if I inject my own preferences and uniformed
feedback, I may derail their momentum by providing a ‘helicopter
critique.’ I try to empower them to discover their creative voice. I
challenge them to ask themselves if they have done their best to know
and serve the consumer and their respective market segment.”
—Jason Mayden
“I tend to not tell people what to do, but I practice a type of problem
extraction where I pull from them issues and challenges they’re hav‐
ing and partial ideas for how they might solve it. My role is to synthe‐
size their partial ideas to suggest a way forward, and then on top of
that a way to do that better or easier. I try to never put myself in the
position where I’m the one who is telling someone to do something
and they choose to do it or not but I am the one listening and refram‐
ing and augmenting and accelerating the good ideas the leaders and
founders already have.”
—James Buckhouse
Deal Flow
According to CB Insights, 36 percent of the 25 startups with a recent
fundraise in their “Internet Sector” category are designer cofoun‐
ded. Twenty-one percent of the so-called global “unicorn” startups
across all sectors have cofounders who have embraced design or
come from a design, arts, or human-centered background including
architecture, design, music, visualization, fine arts, and media arts.
VC firms are increasingly interested in connecting to designer entre‐
22 
| 
Design in Venture Capital

preneurs for the same reasons they believe design creates value for
businesses.
Some design partners are a source of deal flow for their firm. For
example, some design partners are so well-known that their pres‐
ence at a firm draws entrepreneurs to the firm to seek funding or
sways them to close funding with that firm.
In Jason Mayden’s case, being African American and coming from
the fashion, sports, and performance-technology worlds means he
has an entirely different network than the investing partners at
Accel.
My main role at Accel is to connect them to a new and different
founder community, with my thesis being centered around the con‐
cept of “cultural alchemy.” The next generation of founders will pull
inspiration from global networks—the digital age has shattered the
concept of being identified as being “from” a certain city, culture, or
ideology. You have to dig deeper below the surface and get to the
core of the founder, which may lead to a blurring of the lines
between stereotypes and the reality of who a founder truly is. Cul‐
tural Alchemists are people who consume and understand technol‐
ogy but may have a limited perspective on identifying themselves as
‘tech people.’ They love to solve problems by leveraging technology
to develop new skillsets and broaden their knowledge networks.
They come from unique and various backgrounds. They are global
polymaths that seamlessly blend youth culture, relevant colloquial
nuances, and creative self-expression. If I successfully do my job, I
will be able to identify new types of founders while working with
existing portfolio companies to identify, adopt, and scale this new
way of thinking about the consumer.
Identifying, Growing, and Cultivating Talent
Identifying and cultivating the next generation of talent is the bread
and butter for VC firms, and for design partners, this priority is no
different. Whether the outcome is a connection to someone who
founds a company that the firm wants to invest in, or knowing a
designer that can be recruited to join a portfolio company, relation‐
ships with designers are essential and a natural part of the job.
Design partners identify, grow, and cultivate talent through a variety
of ways. Attending and speaking at conferences is one way to make
connections and nurture relationships in the industry, and make the
brand of the VC firm known to designers.
What Do Design Partners Work On? 
| 
23

Programs such as KPCB’s Fellows Program, Khosla Ventures’
Design Internship Program, and NEA’s Design Residents Program
aim to place young talent (students/interns, new graduates, and peo‐
ple with one to three years of experience) in startups and pair them
with mentors in industry. For people relatively new to industry, pro‐
grams like these are a great way to gain practical work experience
and insight into how startups work. However, for the program to be
successful, startups need to be large enough to be able to absorb jun‐
ior people into their company. Startups that are too small might not
have the bandwidth or the inclination to mentor junior people;
startups that are sizable enough to do so might already have internal
recruiting resource that can find individuals in a more targeted way.
Whereas the programs above serve more as a pipeline for interns
and junior hires into startups, Sequoia has adopted an apprentice‐
ship model in-house with its Design Fellows program. Designers
can apply for a three-month paid fellowship in which they appren‐
tice under James Buckhouse’s supervision for portfolio companies.
Because he takes on only one to two fellows at a time, James is able
to provide direct oversight and mentorship for their work.
Some designers also focus on training and mentoring designers in
their portfolio companies at a broader scale. In some cases, this
might be done by cultivating community among these designers so
that they can mentor each other. To build specific skills and capabili‐
ties that startups often lack, Khosla Ventures and True Ventures
have hosted design-focused workshops with notable speakers and
authors in the design community.
Designer Fund’s Bridge program was created specifically for design‐
ers to help them navigate how to be successful within startups.
Designers apply for acceptance into the program, which meets
weekly for 12 weeks. During this time, designers connect with one
another and invited guests to get advice, network, and participate in
peer feedback sessions. By cultivating community through this pro‐
gram, Designer Fund has successfully placed designers in several of
its portfolio companies.
Aligning with his mission to change his partners’ view of where cre‐
ative talent comes from and to cultivate a new creative class, Jason
Mayden has reached into underrepresented communities such as
Oakland, East Palo Alto, and local community colleges and connec‐
ted them with startup accelerators like YCombinator in what he calls
24 
| 
Design in Venture Capital

an “Exposureship.” The concept of an Exposureship aims to align
each student with someone who might be a few steps ahead in their
career development who can inspire them and provide a familiar,
more relatable example of a particular area of interest. Mayden
believes that “if you provide them with a tangible example and
reveal to them the similarities between themselves and established
founders, they will most certainly see themselves as capable and
competitive. We simply want them to know that they have what it
takes to win, within. ”
Investing and Diligence
Some design partners do spend up to half their time investing, and
to that end, their backgrounds as designers inform their investment
thesis. Ben Blumenfeld and Enrique Allen, for example, look specifi‐
cally for entrepreneurs who are designers to support, because their
investment philosophy is driven by the belief that design and design
thinking result in better products and create better business value.
Jeff Veen looks for areas for which design is a competitive advan‐
tage:
I have been particularly interested in companies that are using
design and user experience practices to compete in areas where
there already are dominant players. Almost every category of enter‐
prise software, for example, is vulnerable to competition from new
products that are more intuitive to use, or employ new design lan‐
guage from the world of consumer software. For lack of a better
term, design can be disruptive.
Furthermore, many partners take advantage of their expertise in UX
to vet entrepreneurs. Jeff explains:
We do a fair amount of diligence on markets and trends, but ulti‐
mately it comes down to spending time with the founders, seeing
what motivates them, and understanding what they’re going to rely
on when they make decisions, prioritize their efforts, and optimize
their products. And in that, I look for people who fall back on user
experience methods, who are empathic, and have good taste.
What Do Design Partners Work On? 
| 
25

Common Challenges
The challenges design partners encounter are nearly universal. Some
startups simply might not want to invest the time and energy to
engage in design. Maybe they have not fully bought into the value of
design, or their attention is focused on other priorities.
On the other hand, the CEO or founder might embrace design’s
value, but the rest of the team does not. In such cases, the design
partner can serve as a valuable ally in helping to change the culture
and getting everyone to understand the value of a true product-
focused lens.
Some design partners choose to work exclusively with CEOs
because they believe it’s the fastest way to effect change. Most part‐
ners will avail themselves to any person who reaches out from a
portfolio company. When a design partner becomes intimately
involved with a company to the extent that the broader organization
feels comfortable enough to reach out, it’s an opportunity to serve
the entire culture. The feedback and stories shared from the depths
of an organization can offer rich, raw details that enable design part‐
ners to more effectively coach CEOs to help them get better.
Among the greatest challenges encountered when elevating design’s
value in a startup is getting the startup to embrace prototyping and
user research. Prototyping might not be considered worthwhile
because it is viewed as coding effort that is thrown away, whereas
user research might be vilified as “asking users what they want.” Mis‐
conceptions about user research are often pervasive and not well
understood, and entrepreneurs often lack prior experience with
high-quality, effective design research to understand its value and
role in product development. Design partners might strategize with
internal advocates to champion research and find ways to gather
user insights to inform design decisions, even in the absence of
someone formally in a design research role. From its early days as a
VC firm, GV has had a user researcher, Michael Margolis, on its
team, which enables it to carry out user research when startups don’t
have that resource (and often they don’t). Michael’s contributions
help to kickstart their design sprints so that startups have a real
understanding of their users, those users’ behaviors, and their needs,
before doing any design work.
26 
| 
Design in Venture Capital

What Success Looks Like
If the design partner role is to help startups realize the full potential
value of design, the return on investment is the ultimate barometer
of success in VC. Given the life of a fund, one doesn’t really know
what the outcomes are for 7–10 years. But there are nearer-term
measures that partners can look at.
For example, if the design partner’s presence, assistance, or brand
draws entrepreneurs to the firm, they are helping the firm win deals.
If entrepreneurs believe the design partner’s involvement is valuable
and helps to change the course of a company positively, that is suc‐
cess. Success also translates into giving portfolio companies a cohe‐
sive story. Tracking a company’s NetPromoter score (NPS) is one
way to quantify that which is inherently qualitative (though very dif‐
ficult to trace a design partner’s contributions back to that score).
When running design sprints, clarifying goals and metrics upfront
makes quantifying results possible. GV design partners are careful
to establish goals and related metrics every time they run a sprint.
For example, GV helped Slack reach and sign up non-tech compa‐
nies as customers. In a series of sprints done together, it prototyped
and tested competing approaches to Slack’s marketing and onboard‐
ing. Slack built and shipped the successful solutions in August 2015.
Since then, its daily active users have tripled.
GV also helped Foundation present complicated genomic cancer
data in a simple cover sheet. Together, they prototyped and tested
their paper test report with an oncologist in the field. They
improved the report’s cover page until oncologists could quickly and
easily understand the results after a quick review between appoint‐
ments. Foundation raised $106 million in a 2013 IPO, and is now
valued at $539 million on NASDAQ.
What constitutes “success” might be deeply tied to the design part‐
ner’s personal mission for being part of a VC firm. Here’s how Jason
Mayden defines it:
Success is when I become the norm rather than the exception. I
want you to see someone who looks like me and who comes from
my neighborhood, and give them a chance. I sincerely want to
encourage founders to adopt the mindset and principles of
mission-driven, servant leadership. If I am the first and only person
like me in my role for years to come, then I did a horrible job.
What Success Looks Like 
| 
27

So, You Think You Want to Do This Work
The number of designers in VC has gradually risen over the years,
but the role is still emerging and naturally ambiguous. Designers
often ask us how they can best prepare themselves for a role in VC,
or position themselves for such a role. The diversity of backgrounds
and experiences of people working as designers in VC today is a tes‐
tament to the fact that there is no one “right” path.
“I think there are many different ways to do this job effectively. We do
it in one way, and even on our team we have different flavors. Some
have very different background and approach. The next person who
becomes a design partner will have a totally different way of
approaching it.”
—Jake Knapp
One cannot overstate the importance of having firsthand, direct
experience making products and running organizations:
“You have to make things. There is a class of investors who are opera‐
tors, and that’s the value they bring to the table. The same is true for
design. Having lived it is very important.”
—Albert Lee
“You have to have operational experience in your background, and
putting every part of the team together.”
—Jeff Veen
Prior experience working with startups certainly helps. Participating
in Sequoia’s Design Fellowship program, Khosla Ventures’ Design
Internship Program, or KPCB’s Fellows Program can be one way to
get valuable experience and build relationships with entrepreneurs
and investors. An entrepreneur-in-residence (EIR) role can give
designers an opportunity to learn what the world of VC is like and
whether one would enjoy working at a VC firm.
Designers should build their own mini portfolio of startups they
were casually advising before committing to joining a firm. With the
exception of running the entire design organization for companies
of the size and scale of Yahoo! and Google, there are not that many
environments where one can get experience advising, mentoring,
and/or overseeing many different teams at once. Designers need to
create that opportunity for themselves. As John Zeratsky advises:
Check in with those companies once a week, and figure out what
they need and what it takes to help them. Even though design is so
28 
| 
Design in Venture Capital

much more respected and desirable, companies are still bad at
understanding how to apply it to their core challenges. Figure out
how to do this for startups to get excellent skills and experience that
would make you well qualified for the job.
Jake Knapp adds:
If you look at some of the people, like Irene Au, Jeff Veen, John
Maeda—there are actually very few people with the caliber of repu‐
tation that make them eligible to be design partner. You want entre‐
preneurs to be excited because they get access to those people. If
you don’t have that kind of reputation (and heck, I don’t!), think
out what’s appealing about the job and try to replicate that in some
way. Maybe it’s an opportunity at a big company or agency where
you can work with different teams. Maybe it’s advising startups on
your own. Maybe it’s something you invent. Look for the elements
of the job, not necessarily the title ‘design partner.’
What other traits are essential for designers working in venture cap‐
ital in addition to having experience as a designer and operator?
Designers need to have a deeper understanding of how design
relates at tactical and strategic levels. The engagement with CEOs
usually begins at tactical conversations around hiring and seeking
feedback on design; it’s incumbent on the design partners to move
the conversation to where design can offer the greatest value.
Designers need to be able to have instant credibility with founders
to be able to engage in such conversations, so a successful track
record helps.
Emotional intelligence (Figure 1-7) is key to facilitating these con‐
versations and uncovering the deeper issues that might be inhibiting
good design work from taking place. Design partners need to be self-
aware, with an accurate assessment of their own strengths and lim‐
its: when to chime in with an answer or opinion and when to back
off and let the team find the answer itself. Inasmuch as great design
is an outcome of an entire organization operating in alignment with
its mission and values, so too must designers recognize their own
mission and values and operate in alignment with that, and adapt
easily to changing situations, overcome obstacles, and deal with
ambiguity (self-management). Social awareness encompasses the
ability to empathize with a founder or organization’s situation and
take an active interest in their concerns, being aware of the larger
organization’s issues, politics, and decision networks while recogniz‐
ing and meeting stakeholder needs. Relationship management skills
enable design partners to inspire groups and individuals they work
So, You Think You Want to Do This Work 
| 
29

with; develop talent; influence a range of people without having
actual authority over anything; initiate new ideas and lead people in
a new direction; and build bonds and maintain relationships.
Figure 1-7. Goleman’s Emotional Intelligence Model (2002)
Last but not least, curiosity plays a huge role in a designer’s success
and happiness in VC. Curiosity provides the fuel for conversations
and inquiry with startups, to better identify opportunities, seek
feedback, and iterate on critical product and organizational design
issues.
Related reading
• Daniel Goleman, Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter
More Than IQ (Bantam Books, 1995)
Design Is More Than Meets the Eye
The work that design partners do looks a lot less like moving pixels
around and making things look pretty, and everything to do with
the inner spirit of the company: why does the company exist; what is
30 
| 
Design in Venture Capital

the best intersection between what its capabilities are, where its
interests lie, and the user needs it want to address; what does it value
and care about that will drive its principles, priorities, and “don’t do”
list.
When there is clarity on these questions, the attention turns to what
kind of skills should entrepreneurs bring on board and how do they
create an environment in which great design can happen. Design
partners teach companies how to manage and lead design teams so
that they can scale, be a strategic asset to the company, and help the
company execute well. This purview is not just limited to the design
team, but all the inner workings of the company: how it is organ‐
ized, what incentives drive it, what principles and values guide its
decisions.
Jason Mayden elaborates on how he approaches these conversations
with entrepreneurs.
The conversation with founders always starts with their interest in
design and design hires. I always employ the “five Whys” to get to
uncover their true need. Why do you want a designer? Why is that
the problem you are trying to solve? Why are you trying to add “X”
to the organization? By the time we get to the fifth why, most
founders understand that their first consumer is the organization
and their first product is there culture. It’s refreshing to see them
discover their own areas of improvement. Introspection and self-
awareness are critical traits in great designers and great founders.
When people think about what “design” means, the first thing that
comes to mind is often the aesthetics. Perhaps others consider
“design” to refer to not only how a product looks but also how it
works. In fact, John Maeda explains it this way:
This word “design” is being reimagined as we speak. It’s not as nar‐
row as it was in the crafty design world, not as narrow as Stanford
d.school thinking, not as narrow as pure UX design scale experts in
tech. It’s some combination of these three: business, engineering,
design people.
Although at the surface it might appear as if design partners do very
little design, they are actually employing all the skills good designers
exercise—design thinking, facilitation, emotional intelligence—to
advise, coach, and work alongside entrepreneurs and their compa‐
nies. Their collective efforts coalesce toward creating an environ‐
ment in which great companies, products, and services can be
conceived and made.
Design Is More Than Meets the Eye 
| 
31

About the Author
Irene Au is an operating partner at Khosla Ventures, where she
works with portfolio companies to make their design great. She has
led the UX teams at Google (2006–2012), Yahoo! (1998–2006), and
Udacity (2012–2014). She began her career as an interaction
designer at Netscape Communications, where she designed the
Internet’s first commercial web browser.

