

Michael Clare and Paul McConnell
Designing for Cities
Technology and the Urban Experience

978-1-491-94346-5
[LSI]
Designing for Cities
by Michael Clare and Paul McConnell
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Angela Rufino
Production Editor: Dan Fauxsmith
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
December 2015:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2015-12-16: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Designing for Cit‐
ies, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

Table of Contents
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Unique Challenges to Designing for Cities                                         2
Changing Landscape                                                                               2
Why Are Designers Suited for This Challenge?                                  3
Our Changing Cities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
Rapid Technology Shifts                                                                         7
Who Builds Cities? Government or Citizens?                                     9
A Balanced Approach                                                                           10
Case Studies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
MTA On the Go                                                                                     11
LinkNYC                                                                                                 14
Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
Consideration 1: Citizens, Cities, and Commerce                           19
Consideration 2: Designing for Everyone                                         20
Consideration 3: Meet Your Users                                                      21
Consideration 4: Design for Maintenance                                         24
Our Approach. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
Alignment                                                                                               26
Working in Iterative Sprints                                                                 27
Concepting                                                                                             27
Prototyping                                                                                            28
Testing                                                                                                     30
vii

Repeat to Move Forward                                                                      32
Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
viii 
| 
Table of Contents

Introduction
Connected products, services, and platforms are increasingly
appearing in cities as shared public resources and civic management
tools, reshaping the way we live within urban environments. By
understanding diverse populations within cities and by prototyping
solutions to address civic challenges, designers can create experien‐
ces that provide value for citizens, government, and commerce.
As the world becomes more urbanized and connected, common
design methods—such as creative problem solving, prototyping, and
testing with people—can be applied to help cities, allowing civic
stakeholders and commercial interests to meet the rising expecta‐
tions of citizens and to improve infrastructure, management, and
quality of life.
This report contains background, examples, and approaches for
leading civic-centered efforts gleaned from our efforts at developing
products and services in New York City with our partner teams at
Intersection. Our work designing solutions for stressed commuters
with our Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) NYC sub‐
way project, harried travelers at LaGuardia Airport, and an entire
diverse city for the largest free municipal WiFi network in the world
(LinkNYC) has given us ripe opportunities to develop methodolo‐
gies for designing large-scale, technology-enabled experiences.
Even if your current assignments don’t directly involve civic
projects, the techniques detailed within this report can help bring
form to ambitious ideas, as there will always be a need to align large
groups of stakeholders, apply form to emerging technology, and
make relevant connections to people you’re trying to help.
1

Unique Challenges to Designing for Cities
Though designing for cities and designing for the private sector
have many similarities, there are challenges unique to the scale of
urban environments. When designing for the private sector, design‐
ers usually have the luxury of being able to narrow the demographic
they’re serving to an isolated target market. In contrast, with civic
design, you must design for diverse populations and cultures with
unique goals. When designing for commerce, you need to ensure
your solution generates value for your consumer. And for business,
civic design may require that you also create value for the commu‐
nity or city government. Finally, designing for commerce histori‐
cally focuses on a single product or service controlled by an organi‐
zation, while civic design requires the understanding of how a solu‐
tion will fit into a complicated system of stakeholders with unique
objectives.
Changing Landscape
Digital technology is fundamentally changing the way we live in and
interact with the world. It is no longer confined to specific objects,
as it was when we could point to a television, radio, or telephone
and identify them as individual pieces of technology. Digital tech‐
nology is now an additional layer on top of many of the touchpoints
and spaces with which we interact. This new landscape is causing
organizations, both public and private, to adjust core practices or
entirely reinvent themselves to stay relevant.
Amid these massive changes, cities around the world are trying to
figure out how to best use technology to shape and improve their
futures. They want to understand what value technology might
bring, and how to develop, implement, and support innovation that
will enhance the operations of different government agencies, serve
as ways to generate revenue or reduce expenses, and improve quality
of life for citizens. These challenges that cities are facing represent a
chance for designers to help define opportunities and shape future
experiences in cities. Leveraging their expertise in systems thinking,
understanding people, and shaping concepts for diverse stakeholder
groups, designers are poised to play a key role in designing for cities.
2 
| 
Introduction

Why Are Designers Suited for This Challenge?
The methods and approaches that are core to creative and empa‐
thetic problem solving—already native to the design community—
are suited to help address the ongoing challenges in cities. There is a
unique opportunity for those who can ask the right questions,
empathize with people, facilitate discussions, and bring form to
ideas. Thinking like a designer is not limited to those who might
consider themselves a professional designer. These capabilities can
be extended to urban planners, government employees, entrepre‐
neurs, technologist, and active members of the community. The fol‐
lowing are traits often seen in designers that add great value when
working at the urban scale.
Understanding people
Designers place extraordinary value on understanding people in
order to shape effective solutions. Many in the design commu‐
nity have embraced the popular human-centered design
approach in order to develop concepts for products and serv‐
ices. This approach builds on methods traditionally associated
with ethnographic research, industrial design, and interaction
design. As the name implies, the people that designers are try‐
ing to help are at the center of their process. By understanding
their needs, behaviors, and motivations, the method promotes
more relevant solutions for actual problems.
New perspective
Some might wonder why designers should attempt to address
such complex subjects as cities, which are usually the domain of
politicians and academics. While civic problems might seem
beyond the reach of a designer, looking at a problem from a dif‐
ferent perspective often leads to breakthroughs. Designers often
spend their careers working within a range of industries, which
allows them to quickly enter new fields and apply fresh perspec‐
tives to problems that others have spent years trying to solve,
enabling them to approach the challenge in a new way. This
experience gives designers an ability to quickly apply analogous
learning to new problems.
Making the complex simple
Design often steps up in moments of confusion to solve com‐
plex problems and shape inspiring experiences. When the col‐
laboration between technology and design occurs, it can lead to
Why Are Designers Suited for This Challenge? 
| 
3

remarkable results. Dieter Rams’ successful designs for Braun
came from a desire to take complex and unfamiliar new tech‐
nologies that people were unfamiliar with and make them sim‐
ple and easy to interact with. Google transformed the complex‐
ity of searching the entire Internet into a simple text box and a
button, making it more approachable and easy to understand.
When designing for cities, we can expect to face a lot of com‐
plexity in the challenges we are trying to overcome. Designers
can help make products and services more simple, easier to
understand, approachable, and more usable.
Braun was an innovator in merging purposeful design and emerg‐
ing technology for many products, including the SK4 record player
(image Modernica)
Delivering great experiences
In order to keep pace with consumer expectations of well-
designed, user friendly, high-quality products and services, pri‐
vate sector brands continually strive to improve the experience
and demonstrate a clear value. If not, customers have a wealth
of options.
People not only require this of consumer products, but of the
cities we live in and government-provided services. “In the past,
there’s been an assumption that if it’s in the public sector it
doesn’t have to be as good as in the private sector. That is ridicu‐
4 
| 
Introduction

lous,” says Ben Terrett of the UK Government Digital Service.
Designers familiar with working in this space can take the same
approaches, tools, and expectation of quality that they deliver in
the private sector and apply them to public sector challenges.
These unique traits make designers ideal candidates for joining
teams that seek to innovate within cities, complementing the skills
brought by the diverse range of team members required to achieve
success in the public realm.
Why Are Designers Suited for This Challenge? 
| 
5


Our Changing Cities
Rapid Technology Shifts
There is an urgent need for design and technology to again collabo‐
rate on civic challenges. Changes in the form of smart connected
objects, services, and platforms have the potential to disrupt how
our cities function as well as our individual experiences within
them. Buildings, networks, city services, and our own personal devi‐
ces are being connected to complex software platforms that can ana‐
lyze and inform decision making. The data gathered through these
channels has the potential to influence everything from government
policy to the management of daily city services. Ubiquitous connec‐
tivity is helping to shape a vision of the responsive city, or a future in
which technology will improve a city’s infrastructure, management,
and quality of life.
This is not just a grand vision for future cities—platforms in our cit‐
ies now promote direct and indirect civic interactions. A clear
example of a direct civic interaction facilitated by technology is
our Talking Transition project for the 2013 transition to a new city
government administration. We helped build a technology platform
to get a daily pulse of public concerns and better facilitate direct
interactions between government and citizens. By arming street
teams with digital tools to capture information and interviews from
New Yorkers over a two-week period, we changed the topic of con‐
versation each day to capture qualitative and quantitative informa‐
tion about the perspective of citizens. This information was then
synthesized every evening in a pop-up event space on Canal Street,
where New York influencers, including the newly elected Mayor Bill
7

de Blasio, could react to the findings and address citizen input in a
timely manner.
Talking Transition was a community engagement initiative that gave
New Yorkers the opportunity to share issues with civic stakeholders
and the new Mayor (Image Worldstage)
But passive interactions and other indirect methods of gathering
data in which citizens aren’t actively trying to communicate infor‐
mation are also valuable. For example, Street Bump, a mobile appli‐
cation designed by Boston’s Mayor’s Office of New Urban Mechan‐
ics, uses sensors in your smartphone to detect pothole shock as you
drive and automatically sends an alert to a service representative,
removing the need for you to interact with your phone to make a
report. This kind of information allows city stakeholders to quickly
understand civic infrastructure and make plans to resolve issues
without relying on the constant participation of citizens.
Looking to the future, we can envision cities that use networks of
connected devices to create both active and passive interactions that
can aid communication and understanding between cities and their
citizens. Distributed networks of interactive screens with Internet
connectivity creates opportunities for cities to engage in direct con‐
versations with citizens through participatory budgeting, commu‐
nity polls, and opportunities to facilitate open conversations on a
tool available to everyone, no matter your level of connectivity or
economic status. Networks of sensors can help give the city a real-
time look at how the city is working and changing, allowing the city
8 
| 
Our Changing Cities

to monitor air quality levels, noise levels, and even natural gas leaks,
enabling cities to make decisions on how to focus new efforts, pri‐
oritize outstanding initiatives, and enact new laws based on data
rather than anecdotes. Understanding how citizens are moving
through the city will enable the city to adapt public transportation
and public infrastructure to better help people get where they need
to go. Making sense of these technological changes and shaping rele‐
vant services for people will be a challenge for cities. The outcome of
poor decisions will cost taxpayers money, time, trust, and long-term
civic prosperity, but, implemented correctly, these applications of
technology can create smart cities that can make informed decisions
based not on political power but on the needs of citizens through
the use of data and democratized communication.
Who Builds Cities? Government or Citizens?
“The city is an evolving organism, that is at once host to, and is con‐
stantly being reinvented by, its citizens. Cities that work well, stimulate
the creativity of their inhabitants, and also present them all with new
opportunities to learn, discover, and improve. A part of the attraction of
cities is their ability to inspire, incubate, and adapt to change.”
—Joe Cortright
Throughout history, cities have been shaped out of a tension
between those with power making top-down decisions and the peo‐
ple attempting to influence change through bottom-up efforts. Start‐
ing from early human settlements, cities have served as gathering
places, defensive military positions, and strategic locations on trade
routes. Over time, in democratic cities, governments and citizens
collectively formed the culture and identity of their cities. The Euro‐
pean Enlightenment explored new methods to structure and govern
society, promoting a consistent grid of streets and boulevards to
help organize neighborhoods and allow the state to easily maintain
order. These planning methods were influential across the United
States as the country expanded and cities struggled to keep pace
with a growing population.
In the U.S., starting in the 1930s, top-down planning efforts resha‐
ped the urban landscape. State and Federal governments began
altering neighborhoods to make room for housing developments,
highways, and commercial zoning changes. After decades of avoid‐
ing public concerns and damaging healthy communities, bottom-up
activism mobilized to question development decisions, eventually
Who Builds Cities? Government or Citizens? 
| 
9

leading to the formation of historic preservation districts, commu‐
nity boards, and the use of participatory design methods when plan‐
ning civic efforts.
A Balanced Approach
You won’t find an agreed upon answer as to whether top-down mas‐
ter planning or ground-up participation is the best approach to
building a sustainable city. Both philosophies can be effective,
depending on the desired outcome. The introduction of a forward-
thinking grid system in New York was a “master plan” that helped
bring order to a sprawling metropolis. Participatory design on the
community level continues to help build trust in new development
efforts. As large civic decisions loom in the years ahead, citizens and
governments must work together to make mutually beneficial deci‐
sions.
The following sections cover case studies that have attempted to bal‐
ance various stakeholder needs for new experiences in New York
City.
10 
| 
Our Changing Cities

Case Studies
MTA On the Go
The MTA OTG kiosks simplify wayfinding and rider communications
across the New York City subway system
Intersection has partnered with the Metropolitan Transportation
Authority (MTA)/New York City Transit since 2012 to develop
interactive touchscreens installed in stations throughout the subway
system. This network of “On The Go” communication kiosks pre‐
sented an opportunity for digital technology to improve the experi‐
ence of using the largest public transit system in the Americas. Our
challenge was to improve the wayfinding experience for subway rid‐
ers under the existing technical constraints of a centuries-old under‐
ground transit system—all while creating a source of sustainable
11

revenue via advertising sales for the MTA to expand and improve its
services.
Understanding Riders and Systems
Navigating a city can be stressful, whether as a commuter getting to
or from work or as a tourist trying to find a popular landmark. New
York’s complex subway system can overwhelm your senses with its
hordes of people, rapid movement, and prevalence of competing
signage. While people at street level can use smartphones to access
accurate and timely transit information, riders underground on
platforms without a data connection don’t have such a luxury.
A project goal was to understand how our kiosks could fit into an
established subway system and provide real benefits to riders. Early
in the process, we spent time observing and interviewing riders to
understand the overall transit journey, challenges, and motivations.
It helped that all of us working on the project are subway riders our‐
selves, giving us an innate understanding of the day-to-day riding
experience.
We then categorized subway users into separate types, from tourists
to veteran riders. This allowed us to define different service journeys
and specific needs. For example, a commuter en route to work will
place a high value on information such as real-time arrival data and
relevant service disruptions, whereas a tourist might prioritize route
simplicity.
In addition to understanding the needs of riders, we worked to
define the MTA’s unique needs and internal workflows for providing
services that our kiosk would depend on, such as arrival times and
alerts. We did this by conducting alignment sessions and interviews
with MTA employees to gather information about past research
efforts, technical constraints, and dependencies that might impact
our efforts.
The Solution
We distilled our initial concept explorations into a select number of
features by testing clickable prototypes with different rider seg‐
ments. These concepts evolved into an intuitive interface for a train
arrival board that constantly surfaced for riders who needed quick
information and preferred not to touch public screens. In addition,
12 
| 
Case Studies

navigation provided access to system maps, directions, service alerts,
and marketing communications.
Over the course of one year, the team worked together in iterative
sprints to design and develop the pilot kiosk: starting with one kiosk
in Bowling Green Station, expanding to 20 kiosks in Grand Central
Station, and soon deploying more than 100 across New York City in
2015. Each stage presented new opportunities to learn from riders,
adapt to technical hurdles, and shape a stable product. The network
of kiosks now provides accurate system information for riders and a
sustainable business model that helps to improve and extend the
platform to additional stations.
Key Learnings
The following section highlights select learnings from some stages of
the project that have helped to inform our design practice.
Keep it simple
Many of the features of the kiosk are simple improvements on exist‐
ing subway communication patterns, designed to blend in with the
existing style guide. For example, we made slight modifications to
the classic subway map, removing bus connections, adjusting colors,
and reducing iconography. This made the digital map more relevant
for simplified routing. In addition, we pulled in alert data and cre‐
ated templates depending on alert type. This structure made it easier
to organize and understand often complex instructions. Finally, we
combined several arrival time feeds and static schedules into a sim‐
ple arrival board, in some cases using directional language such as
uptown or downtown to align with common system conventions.
Understand the client workflow
Learning about current employees that support the transit experi‐
ence was critical for us to ensure we were designing something that
could be maintained and operational for the long run. We spent
time interviewing and shadowing task-level employees, including
data entry administrators, installation teams, and ongoing mainte‐
nance crews, to gain insights about how people do their jobs and
looked at workarounds, or “hacks,” to identify the challenges they
face and potential solutions. These conversations also led us to
understand the intricacies and technical challenges that we could
only untangle by pairing with our MTA stakeholders who have a
MTA On the Go 
| 
13

deep understanding of these challenges and the strategies for resolv‐
ing or working around them.
LinkNYC
Once launched, LinkNYC will be the largest network of digital dis‐
plays in the world. It’s a hugely ambitious project that will bring free
WiFi and public services to streets around New York City through
the installation of at least 7,500 communication hubs that feature
touch screens, Internet connectivity, and advertising. LinkNYC
began as a response to a question put out by the City of New York
asking what they might be able to do with the space that was for‐
merly inhabited by payphones. Over the years, the value of publicly
available payphones diminished due to the widespread adoption of
cell phones. Still, the advertising housed on the payphones was
bringing around 17 million dollars a year to the city through a reve‐
nue share. The city realized that it wouldn’t make sense to replace
the system with more pay-for-use telephones, but they didn’t want
to abandon the revenue that the space was generating, so the city
launched first a request for information, then a design contest.
Finally, they issued a request for proposal to bring in public and pri‐
vate suggestions for what they could do next.
Understanding Capabilities and Partnering
Intersection (then Control Group), leveraging its background in
technology and user experience, and Titan, a leader in out-of-home
advertising, came together to submit a concept to the city contest for
a next-generation communication device that would provide free
connectivity and contextual information to the citizens of New York,
supported by advertising revenue. When it came time to submit a
proposal for the rights for the payphone franchise, the team added
Comark (now CIVIQ Smartscapes), manufacturer of ruggedized
displays, and Qualcomm, wireless technology leader, with Control
Group and Titan to form the joint venture CityBridge. Collectively,
the partnership provided the skills and expertise to propose a new
product that would provide value to New York City and its citizens
and generate new revenue that would support its design, construc‐
tion, implementation, and maintenance.
14 
| 
Case Studies

Defining a Vision
After CityBridge was awarded the franchise from the city, we began
aggressively developing the platform. The physical form factor had
been designed by Antenna, and many of the features were already
defined and solidified by the contact we had with the city, but there
was a lot that was still to be determined. On the experience design
side, we needed to understand the following: How would people
actually use this? What would the interface on the kiosk be? What
kinds of applications would be accessible on the tablet? From an
advertising standpoint, we needed to understand how advertisers
would want to use the platform and what changes we’d need to make
to ensure that they’d want to participate. On the development side,
we needed to figure out how to actually build it and ensure that it
was robust and secure. These questions all needed to be answered
quickly, and in parallel.
We accomplished this by remaining focused on a consistent vision,
which gave us something to build toward and helped us make deci‐
sions that would drive us toward a greater whole. Understanding
from the beginning that this would be financially supported by
advertising, that there would be free WiFi, and a tablet to provide
community services gave each team member the confidence they
needed to make the right decisions. Knowing that it aimed to deliver
connectivity and contextual information helped us figure out which
companies to collaborate with and which features to prioritize.
Key Learnings
The following section highlights select learnings from specific stages
of the project that have helped to inform our civic design practice.
Design with development
Designers cannot come up with a vision in a vacuum. Working with
extremely diverse teams can raise issues of communication, mitigat‐
ing differences in point of view, and overcoming differences in how
quickly different groups work, but cross collaboration is essential
with a project of this scale. Our morning stand ups in which we
begin each day with a face-to-face check-in served as a great way to
understand what the extended team was doing and build a strong
respect for one another. By coming together, making compromises,
and having empathy for the needs of the other individuals, we were
LinkNYC 
| 
15

able to quickly move the project forward together, instead of passing
it off from group to group. This allowed the project to evolve in uni‐
son, while ensuring the integrity of every individual’s area of craft.
Understanding what it will mean to people
One of the biggest challenges for the design team was in under‐
standing, across the diverse needs and abilities of New Yorkers, what
features of the proposed product people would use and what they
would value most. It’s easy to assume that the things that we as indi‐
viduals need and desire will be needed and desired by others as well.
In reality, it’s difficult to know how different people will interpret
your product until they can see it and feel it. So the question
becomes, how can we ensure we make something that people want,
before we build it? Referring back to the vision, we knew what we
were going to create, but there was still a lot of room to define what
it would do for people and how it was going to fit into their lives. To
understand this, we conducted iterative rounds of concepting, creat‐
ing rough interactive prototypes and sharing them with people to
see what was resonating, and what was not. Each round aimed at
gaining a better understanding of how different groups reacted to
specific features in order to gain a deeper understanding of the
range of values we would have to solve for. For example, from this
we learned that for many, WiFi wasn’t going to be the most valuable
feature—they already have access to the Internet. For those who
already have access, contextual information related to your immedi‐
ate surroundings offered the most value. This helped us shape the
features of the tablet and influenced our approach to building rela‐
tionships with advertisers to encourage advertising more relevant to
the location, time, and environment of each individual link.
Design, revise
As we learned more about the features that our users would value
most, we continued to design, prototype, and test our solutions to
ensure that they were delivering on the values we were aiming to
provide, and to ensure the interfaces and interactions were easy to
use by a wide range of users. Each round of design helped us refine
our solution for the attract loop for the tablet, giving us a design that
communicates the functions of the link without needing to be fluent
in English or have much tech proficiency, and an end session button
and exit flow that communicates to a user that they can end their
session with a couple of taps and clear all of the data and any infor‐
16 
| 
Case Studies

mation they may have entered. This process becomes even more val‐
uable after launch, and we will use what we learn from how people
interact with the link to refine existing features and create new ones.
LinkNYC 
| 
17


Considerations
Over the course of these two projects, as well as many others that
exist within complex public spaces, we’ve assembled a running list of
things that we’ve learned and now apply to each new project. Our
hope is that by sharing these considerations, other designers will be
able to speed past some of the challenges that once held us up.
Consideration 1: Citizens, Cities, and
Commerce
One of the biggest differences between civic design and other forms
of design is in how many different people and diverse stakeholder
groups need to be satisfied in order for a project to succeed. Projects
that are entirely focused on serving the needs of the citizens often
don’t get the political support they need to launch nor the financial
backing to thrive. Projects fully focused on making money don’t get
support of the citizens, nor politicians, as it then becomes a purely
commercial endeavor. Projects that are solely focused on pleasing
politicians won’t guarantee funding or public interest. We’ve had
repeated success in this space largely due to respecting these ten‐
sions and designing for the “Three C’s” of Citizens, Cities, and Com‐
merce.
Adhering to the Three C’s ensures that you have the support of the
groups needed to build, adopt, and maintain your project. Citizens
influence the changes that happen to their city, and if they’re not
happy with a change, they have the power to block it. Next, collabo‐
ration with the City or city government is essential if the solution is
using public space or publicly used programs. If the city government
is on your side, they can help push your initiative through chal‐
19

lenges as they arise, and overcome blockers that some may put up.
To put it bluntly, the city needs to see value, because it has the power
to decide if you can or can’t install your project. Finally, not to be
overlooked is Commerce. Bringing in a steady flow of money
ensures that you can fully build your vision and ensures that you can
build a team to construct, implement, and support your product.
Commerce and the city have always had a delicate relationship, but
more and more we’ve seen the value of a close collaboration; from
the revival of Central Park to New York’s CitiBike, great things can
happen when a city and the business community can find mutual
value.
A large part of why LinkNYC has been able to get traction has been
its focus on considering the needs of the city, the citizens, and com‐
merce. LinkNYC’s free WiFi, free phone calls, free mapping, a quick
access 911 button, and other resources are features that many see as
a valuable addition to the streetscape. But this alone won’t bring suc‐
cess to a project. There have been many projects that aim to bring
public WiFi to cities, but many of them have not been sustainable
because of a lack of consistent revenue after the initial funding dries
up. The advertising revenue that will be brought in by LinkNYC will
ensure that the Link’s have the funding they need for updates and
repairs, and the access to free WiFi and other services help to ensure
that there is support from the citizens needed to dedicate public
land to the project. The city, recognizing the greater access and abil‐
ity to generate revenue, has been a strong supporter and collabora‐
tor on the building of LinkNYC.
Consideration 2: Designing for Everyone
Trying to solve for everyone’s needs is usually not advised when
approaching a design project. The concern is that a solution will
become watered down, and instead of serving all people, it will serve
none. But when designing for cities, you don’t get to narrow your
market. In order to put a solution in a public space, you must pro‐
vide value to the entire market; otherwise, citizens or the city will
block your initiative. The question then becomes, how do we design
for everyone and not lose the project in the process?
One way to do this is by defining a clear vision and purpose at the
beginning of the project, and sticking to it. While beginning a
project in the civic space, it can be easy to become overwhelmed as
20 
| 
Considerations

you uncover problems that your city faces. Trying to solve every
problem will be paralyzing. To ensure that you can solve a single
problem well, start with a strong vision to ensure that your product
doesn’t become diluted over time. What is it that you’re trying to
accomplish? What impact do you want to have? What’s your
hypothesis on how to make this work?
Starting with a vision may seem counterintuitive to those with a
human-centered background. This isn’t to say that you’ll ignore
users’ needs—and in fact, your vision should be based on a deep
user need to begin with—but by knowing what you want to do,
you’ll be able to better navigate tough decisions throughout the pro‐
cess. This also ensures that as you begin designing, you can adapt
your solution to the needs of the people you meet, but it also means
that you won’t be swimming in an ocean of needs.
LinkNYC started as a concept for what could replace the payphone
system in NYC and bring connectivity and communication to the
city in a way that was more relevant to modern times. The vision
from the start has been for outdoor connectivity hubs that provide
free services to citizens and are supported by ad revenue. Over the
course of the project, many details have been filled in, and features
and interactions defined and evolved as we learned more about the
needs of different stakeholders, but the core vision has remained the
same. This strong vision gave the teams flexibility to explore and
make decisions while not diluting the purpose of the project.
In addition to creating a vision, it’s important to define what you’re
not doing. Sometimes this is even more important than defining
what you’re doing. In a project for a city, it can be easy to identify
thousands of additional challenges that you’d like to solve for, but if
you were to begin pursuing all of them, you wouldn’t be able to get
anything done. As your project evolves and you identify additional
issues that you might be able to resolve, make a decision as a team
about which you are and aren’t going to try to solve. This ensures
that your project stays focused and you can better address the task at
hand.
Consideration 3: Meet Your Users
It’s impossible to meet everyone you will be designing for, especially
in a city like New York, with millions of residents and millions more
visitors. With many design thinking projects, designers narrow their
Consideration 3: Meet Your Users 
| 
21

focus to meeting a handful of the users who represent the demo‐
graphic groups that they are targeting. When designing for a city,
this is no longer a viable strategy. So how do you get to know your
users and ensure their needs are met? By defining the breadth of
your demographic, you can identify groups that represent the most
extreme needs. By understanding extremes, you can solve for most
of the whole. Looking to extremes is already a core concept for
many design thinkers, but in this case, we reach really wide to meet
groups who represent needs at each end of the spectrum we are
designing for.
Once you identify the representatives of the extreme needs relating
to your project, you can begin to connect with them. Recruiting and
building relationships can take many forms, from on-street inter‐
cepts, friends and family conversations, or full-on recruits. Forging
relationships with community groups has helped us recruit group
members to talk to. Usually we give participants a gift card or other
incentive for their time, and it’s a win-win situation for us and the
groups as we both share a common desire to serve the needs of their
constituents.
Another approach that some designers use to understand the needs
of a community is participatory design. While participatory design
has its benefits, it risks pointing designers in directions that are too
idealized and not feasible to ever accomplish, leading to unrealistic
expectations by participating communities. Instead, by developing
hypotheses, concepts, and prototypes and testing them with people,
you’re able to incorporate diverse needs without losing track of your
vision.
For LinkNYC, it was essential for us to design for all New Yorkers, as
well as commuters and tourists representing every diverse walk of
life. From people who speak English fluently to not at all, people
with full mobility to those who are blind or have a disability, people
who regularly use technology and own a smartphone to those who
have never used a computer, we needed to create something usable
by the greatest number of people possible. To ensure that our
designs would work for everyone, we needed to understand the dif‐
ferent needs that people would have, but we also had to work effi‐
ciently to ensure the project kept moving forward. To do this, we
built relationships with community groups whose member repre‐
sented the most extreme range of needs. For example, we worked
with the Older Adult Technology Services group in New York City
22 
| 
Considerations

with people who were 65+, many of whom didn’t own a computer or
a smartphone and were just now learning how to use tablets to test
our concepts and interfaces and understand what was easy for them,
what was hard, what they valued, and what they didn’t. We also
worked with a group of adult high school students, many of whom
recently immigrated to the United States and didn’t speak much
English, if any at all. Within this setting, we refined how we commu‐
nicate LinkNYC’s features and offerings to those who speak a wide
range of languages other than English. Learning from and designing
for these groups has enabled us to create designs that will serve the
most challenging of situations and will therefore also work for the
vast majority of people in between.
Consideration 3: Meet Your Users 
| 
23

Consideration 4: Design for Maintenance
“It’s not just what it looks like and feels like. Design is how it works.”
—Steve Jobs
We’ve all seen projects that launched with great acclaim only to be
neglected and fall apart over time. To help ensure that a project will
thrive for years to come, it’s important to understand, and design
for, how the product will be maintained. How will broken parts be
replaced, and by whom? How will they know how to fix it? What
happens if it is graffitied or gets dirty? Who will update content?
Who is responsible for the security of data? Understanding how
your project will be maintained can enable you to make thoughtful
design decisions for the people who will be supporting your prod‐
uct. This leads to a user having a good experience with your prod‐
uct, not just on day one, but for years down the line.
In the case of our MTA project, meeting with maintenance teams
who would ultimately be responsible for upkeep early on proved
pivotal in understanding workflows for reporting an issue and reso‐
lution. Insights from these conversations highlighted challenges
from past projects and informed revisions to the layout of internal
components of the kiosk and clear labeling conventions. These
insights took form in a MTA maintenance training manual, ensur‐
ing the efficient and simple replacement of broken parts.
24 
| 
Considerations

Our Approach
Whether civic or commercial, we approach projects with a similar
blend of Design Thinking, Lean Start-Up, and Agile methodologies.
We’ve made adjustments to ensure that we can work efficiently and
across disciplines throughout the design process. Our approach gen‐
erally follows the process of alignment, followed by iterative design
sprints of concepting, prototyping, and testing, which eventually
leads to a pilot and then a full-scale deployment.
This iterative process of concepting, prototyping, and testing allows
us to move from understanding users’ needs and values to creating
the features that will serve those needs and values to designing the
interactions and interfaces that enable the features to come to life.
By prototyping and reviewing with collaborators, we’re able to
incorporate the needs of each group and align the team around a
central vision.
An oversimplified visualization of our approach
25

In this next section, we’ll describe in more detail how we structure
each of these steps for civic design projects.
Alignment
Assuming that the entire team is in agreement about how the
project is defined and what the goals are is entirely common. But
typically, people have different understandings of the project, and if
left uncorrected, the teammates will each head in a different direc‐
tion. Alignment ensures that the team is moving in the same direc‐
tion and that the design team can get the background it needs to run
in the right direction.
As a designer, you can facilitate alignment through some prep work
and a workshop with the key stakeholders on your project. Get the
right people in the room to define the goal of the project as a team
and determine what you want the impact to be. This alone will go a
long way in getting your team on the same page.
Tool: Hosting an Alignment Session
The simplest form of team alignment is the collaborative construc‐
tion of a well-articulated goal statement. Building the goal state‐
ment together surfaces any differences team members may have in
their understanding of project objectives.
To begin, draft a concise, one-sentence goal statement that outlines
what the team will have to do and the intended outcome. Ideally,
someone who was new to the project could read the goal statement
and be able to productively contribute. Once you’ve built the short
goal statement, define any words within it that may be ambiguous.
For example, if your goal is to “Build a consumer facing app that
brings modern intelligence to the city,” explain what each of these
keywords means. Who are your consumers? What does it mean to
bring modern intelligence? Why are you building an app? By call‐
ing out more detailed explanations of each of these words, you can
make sure the team is interpreting these terms in the same way and
all heading in the same direction.
Write your goal statement on a whiteboard and introduce it to your
team. Explain that it’s a draft, and ask if it entirely captures the
project. Is it how everyone had interpreted the project? Is everyone
comfortable moving forward in this direction? Be provocative, and
chances are it won’t be spot on. Then take the time to come to an
26 
| 
Our Approach

agreement about objectives. After everyone seems well aligned, fol‐
low up with a rewrite of the goal statement that captures the spirit
and goals of your project.
Working in Iterative Sprints
After aligning with stakeholders, our teams work in one- to three-
week design sprints, concepting ideas for both the larger service
experience and the individual touchpoints, building quick proto‐
types and testing them with actual users. This process allows us to
move quickly, keeps the team aligned, and ensures our work will be
usable and valuable to users. Because the process is iterative, it’s
okay to be wrong—you can make corrections in the next round. It’s
also alright if you don’t know everything about the users, as you can
make your best guess and use your hypothesis to learn more about
the users when you test your prototype. Before each sprint, make
sure you clearly define the goals of the sprint, what you’re trying to
achieve, and what success looks like.
Concepting
There are ample existing resources about how to run a good brain‐
storming meeting. Think wide, push boundaries, and generate
enough ideas to provide a plentitude of concepts to work with.
Diverging ensures that the team is thinking through the full breadth
of what’s possible.
During concepting, bring in members from across the team and
outside of design whenever possible. By preparing prompts and
thought starters based on what you’re trying to accomplish during
the sprint, you can facilitate the creation of a large number of
diverse ideas as well as understand the underlying desires of the
extended team.
Even if you haven’t been able to learn from users yet, it’s okay to start
hypothesizing and generating initial ideas, as long as you identify
them as hypotheses, and you’re open to them being wrong. The iter‐
Working in Iterative Sprints 
| 
27

ative process makes it okay to be wrong, as there are going to be
opportunities to correct along the way.
Tool: Choosing the Right Ideas
There are many resources that exist on how to run a productive
brainstorming session. The part that can be more challenging is fig‐
uring out which ideas to move forward with and which ones to
leave behind.
To sort through concepts and focus in on the very best, try looking
at the range of ideas and cluster them around key themes and simi‐
lar ideas. Then think critically about which areas of ideas will be
able to serve your project goal and have the potential to create value
for citizens, cities, and commerce. From there, choose the areas you
find most promising, and figure out how you can translate them
into prototypes that will serve as tools for testing with users. Testing
rough prototypes with users means that you can take more risks
with the concepts you chose to move forward with, as there is low
risk to trying them out.
Prototyping
The value of prototyping cannot be understated. Prototyping brings
form to the intangible, opens up the process to enable collaboration
across disciplines, and moves your project forward.
During each sprint, we review what we need to accomplish, take a
look at what we know, what we need to learn, and create prototypes
to answer outstanding questions. Many of the prototypes we make
start out rough and scrappy. For example, pieces of paper without
interfaces, but single words that represent potential features to start
conversations with people about what their lives are like and what
features they value. With each round of concepting, prototyping,
and testing, our prototypes get more refined. We usually sketch out
interfaces and load them onto a tablet to gauge initial reactions to
features and interactions. For concepts that require a more unique
form, we use anything from foam core models to additive printing
to create objects or spaces.
28 
| 
Our Approach

We used scrap paper and a sorting exercise to figure out which features
of LinkNYC were going to be valued and therefore worth building, and
which features we could deprioritize
Prototypes not only set us up for testing with users; they are also
great discussion points for the extended team by giving them a tan‐
gible thing to react to. It also forces us to be realistic about what’s
possible from the beginning of our project and ensures that the
entire team has the end goal in sight.
Tool: Prototyping
Prototypes can take many forms and can be anything that may help
users better imagine what the intended experience would feel like.
When we’re trying to get a better understanding of a user’s wants,
needs, and values, our prototypes often start as sketches on pieces
of paper, or rough mock ups of tape and foam core, that even in
their rough state can be used to approach people and get them to
react. As we learn more and our ideas become more solidified, we
often move to static wireframes that we mock up and load onto an
iPad, iPod touch, or computer, and ask people to use the interface
as if it were real, and navigate between the pages. From this, we can
ask them about each feature and get a sense of whether or not the
feature is delivering the intended value to the user. Next, we often
Prototyping 
| 
29

use the Web and mobile prototyping tool Invision to link together a
series of static images to form interactive prototypes, often starting
as wireframes and moving towards fully designed interfaces. This
enables us to build confidence in our interfaces and a user’s ability
to use our interfaces. These prototypes give us something to rally
around as a team, as well as a tool for us to better understand how
the design will be used by people.
Testing
At its simplest, testing means taking your assumptions to the people
who are meant to use your solution. Testing ensures that what you
plan to build will be valuable to people, that the interactions and
interfaces are usable, and that experience enables your intended
idea.
Months before the hardware for the first Link was built, we were able
to test interfaces with people using rough prototypes. Here you see us
testing a very early version of the phone dialing interface with a tablet
running a quick interactive interface, taped onto a foam core mockup
of the physical structure of Link.
Most of the time, we have one-on-one conversations, either with
recruited respondents or by conducting impromptu intercept inter‐
30 
| 
Our Approach

views in the context of our solutions. For example, with the MTA we
conducted testing in subway stations. We start out our user testing
with a conversation about who they are, and what their lives are like
to get context about their lives outside of the narrow portion we are
focusing on. Next, we dive into questions about their experience
relating to our project and present prototypes. The questions we ask
vary greatly depending on what we’re trying to learn. We use card
sorts to understand people’s values, and test interactive prototypes
and gauge people’s reactions to know if it’s truly something that
they’d appreciate and use if implemented. Later on in the project, we
do light usability testing with interactive prototypes, first as wire‐
frames, and then later as fully designed works like/looks like proto‐
types. Many times we create prototypes that aren’t actually intended
to be implemented, but serve as tools to answer specific questions.
Tools: Recruiting
User research can be intimidating. It can seem time intensive to
recruit and prepare for, and you don’t know what you’re going to
learn, which can make it difficult to decide to invest in it. But meet‐
ing your users doesn’t have to be hard, and it doesn’t have to be
expensive. Friends and family interviews, or pulling in people that
you already know, can be a quick and effective way to handle
recruiting. By thinking about your target user, and filtering through
your network for people who match your need, you can quickly
gain access to people who will be able to give you a reaction and
feedback, without much investment. The downside to this is that it
may skew your findings, as it’s likely to only include a specific range
of people, not too dissimilar to yourself, so another option is to do
intercepts. Intercepts involve stopping people on the street, or in
the context where your design will exist, and offer them a gift card
in exchange for a few minutes of their time. You can then have a
conversation with them about whatever you’d like, whether it be a
general discussion or a focused conversation around a prototype.
This method is great, but doesn’t ensure that you’re speaking to the
right demographic, as you aren’t able to prescreen your users. So
finally, if you need to speak to a very specific group that’s outside of
your network, you then need to conduct a more focused recruit. If
your budget is constrained, or you’re looking to serve those in hard
to reach demographics, partnering with community groups can be
a great way to get people involved and reach the people you need. If
you have a little more time and money, the best thing to do is hire a
Testing 
| 
31

professional recruiter to work with you to find the folks you want
to talk to and set up times for you to talk.
Repeat to Move Forward
Coming out of testing, you should have a better understanding of
what’s resonating with users and what’s not. Test data gathered can
serve as a baseline for future testing rounds and help inform busi‐
ness model projects. Combining this with feedback from your
extended team about what’s technically and politically feasible, you
can push forward. The benefit of conducting an iterative design pro‐
cess before development begins is to work through many of the user
assumptions, kinks, and challenges early on, prior to large develop‐
ment teams focusing on coding. This helps to reduce the risk of
developers working on code that will be thrown away.
The next challenge is to combine valuable concepts into reliable and
systemic solutions. We balance the iterative process by defining
interaction and visual principles and high-level specifications that
will provide ongoing direction to teams.
This iterative process continues beyond implementation. After a
product is launched, you will continue to learn how people are using
your solution and continuously implement updates to make your
product even better. Understanding which features are used most
can give you a better sense of what aspects of the project the public
values and can help you figure out where to focus your efforts.
This process of iterative concepting, prototyping, and testing to
inform development efforts provides the insight and metrics needed
to build the support, approvals, and investment for the next phase.
As many assignments are not isolated features or products but
rather more complex service experiences, this approach can be fol‐
lowed by additional teams working in parallel to build complemen‐
tary touchpoints that come together to form a holistic experience
comprised of many features, products, services, spaces, and cities.
Once individual experiences come together, designers can use the
same methods of testing and adapting to further refine the system.
32 
| 
Our Approach

Conclusion
We are in an exciting era of rapidly changing cities that promise to
improve the fabric of life in urban spaces. As technology continues
to alter the way we live and work within cities, designers have an
opportunity and responsibility to help shape better environments
for people. We recognize the need for shared value between citizens,
civic stakeholders, and commerce. By leveraging existing design
methods for new challenges, we can shape solutions within the com‐
plex and demanding civic ecosystem that can be used by everyone.
By becoming part of this conversation, we as designers can help
ensure that our voices, and the voices of citizens, are heard and that
cities of the future are places that we want to live, work, and contrib‐
ute to.
33

About the Authors
Throughout his career in working in the private and public sector,
Paul McConnell has successfully led strategy, user experience, and
technical development efforts for a variety of products and services.
As Design Director, Paul has built a department of design research‐
ers, strategists, interaction designers, and visual designers who work
to transform physical spaces and urban experiences.
Paul is a graduate of Pratt Institute and continues to teach in Pratt’s
Design and Cultural Management programs, both of which focus on
design thinking principles and sustainable design methods. Outside
of work, Paul is involved with community development initiatives
and serves as a board member of the UA Maker Academy, New York
City’s first public high school for design and technology.
As Design Team Lead, Michael Clare connects emerging technolo‐
gies with consumers’ needs to create new experiences that solve
problems and help grow businesses. He has taken projects from
opportunity identification to concept creation, design, and final pro‐
totype. His tools include qualitative research, innovation strategy,
user experience design, physical interaction design, and user inter‐
face design. Prior to joining Intersection, Mike worked as a Strate‐
gist at Continuum, a global innovation consultancy where he
worked for clients including PepsiCo, UnitedHealthcare, and Sam‐
sung. Mike has a degree in Industrial Design from Rhode Island
School of Design.

