
the devil’s historians

Joseph Mauméjean, Henri Mauméjean, and Charles Mauméjean, 
detail, Execution of St. James, stained glass, 1941 (Église Saint-Jacques, 
Montgeron, France). This window, created and installed in Nazi-occupied 
France, depicts the execution of St. James by King Herod. Local tradition 
holds that Herod looks like Adolf Hitler; if true, this is a subtle act of 
artistic resistance. While no records of its creation remain, this interpre-
tation fits with some other Mauméjean Brothers works, such as their 
depiction of the Holocaust in their window “La Messe de St Grégoire” in 
Église Saint-Pierre-Saint-Paul d’Ivry-sur-Seine. (Photo by Nhuan Doduc)

HOW 
MODERN 
EXTREMISTS 
ABUSE 
THE 
MEDIEVAL 
PAST
THE 
DEVIL’S 
HISTORIANS
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS
Toronto  Buffalo  London
AMY S. KAUFMAN 
AND PAUL B. STURTEVANT

©  University of Toronto Press 2020 
Toronto  Buffalo  London 
utorontopress.com 
Printed in Canada
ISBN 978-1-4875-8785-7 (cloth)    ISBN 978-1-4875-8786-4 (EPUB)
ISBN 978-1-4875-8784-0 (paper)    ISBN 978-1-4875-8787-1 (PDF)
All rights reserved. The use of any part of this publication reproduced, 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, or stored in a retrieval 
system, without prior written consent of the publisher—or in the 
case of photocopying, a licence from Access Copyright, the Canadian 
Copyright Licensing Agency—is an infringement of the copyright law.
library and archives canada cataloguing in publication
Title: The devil’s historians : how modern extremists abuse the medieval  
  past / Amy S. Kaufman and Paul B. Sturtevant. 
Names: Kaufman, Amy S., 1974– author. | Sturtevant, Paul B., author. 
Description: Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: Canadiana (print) 2020017780X | Canadiana (ebook)  
  20200177842 | ISBN 9781487587857 (cloth) | ISBN 9781487587840  
  (paper) | ISBN 9781487587871 (PDF) | ISBN 9781487587864 (EPUB) 
Subjects: LCSH: Radicalism. | LCSH: Middle Ages. 
Classification: LCC HN49.R33 K38 2020 | DDC 303.48/4—dc23
We welcome comments and suggestions regarding any aspect of our 
publications—please feel free to contact us at news@utorontopress.com 
or visit us at utorontopress.com.
Every effort has been made to contact copyright holders; in the event of 
an error or omission, please notify the publisher.
University of Toronto Press acknowledges the financial assistance to its 
publishing program of the Canada Council for the Arts and the Ontario 
Arts Council, an agency of the Government of Ontario.
Funded by the 
Government 
of Canada
Financé par le 
gouvernement 
du Canada

Contents
Acknowledgments  vii
	
Introduction: Weaponizing History  1
1	 The Middle Ages: Foundational Myths  9
2	 Nationalism and Nostalgia  29
3	 The “Clash of Civilizations”  53
4	 White (Supremacist) Knights  81
5	 Knights in Shining Armor and  
Damsels in Distress  103
6	 Medievalism and Religious Extremism  127
	
Epilogue: The Future of the Medieval Past  151
Notes  161
Further Reading  183
Index  187

This page intentionally left blank

vii
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Natalie Fingerhut and the team at 
University of Toronto Press, whose excitement about this book 
and hard work on it have been a joy at every stage. Thanks 
also to the anonymous peer reviewers for their comments and 
advice, which helped make this book as good as it can be.
Our collaboration began at The Public Medievalist, a free 
online magazine started by Paul that features scholars who 
want to share their work with a broader audience. Together, we 
launched two series of essays on some of the subjects covered 
in this book: Race, Racism and the Middle Ages and Gender, 
Sexism and the Middle Ages. We’d like to thank the editorial 
staff at the site for their passion, ingenuity, and persistence: 
Shiloh Carroll, who often held down the fort while this book 
was in progress; Kristina Hildebrand, who helped smooth out 
a passage about the Society for Creative Anachronism; as well 
as editors and contributors Rob Houghton, Vicki Cooper, Sam 
Brinton, and Arielle Gingold. Thank you also to the scholars 
who supported and contributed to the site, including the gener-
ous awards from the Medieval Academy of America, The Lone 
Medievalist, and CARMEN. Additional thanks to those who 
have written for The Public Medievalist and those who have 
read, subscribed to, and shared it. Visit www.publicmedievalist 
.com for a wide range of articles by some of Medieval Studies’ 
best scholars if you want to learn more about the Middle Ages 
or about medievalism in the modern world.
additional acknowledgments 
from amy s. kaufman
My work on this book would not have been possible 
without Kathleen Coyne Kelly, who first introduced me to 

viii  /  Acknowledgments
medievalism studies, whose own brilliant scholarship has 
always set the highest bar, and who has been a supportive men-
tor and friend throughout my career. I’m also deeply grateful 
to Susan Aronstein, Laurie Finke, Kevin Harty, Don Hoffman, 
Marty Shichtman, and Elizabeth Sklar, who welcomed me 
when I was just a baby medievalist and who have inspired and 
encouraged my work ever since. Thanks to all the scholars at 
the International Society for the Study of Medievalism whose 
support, care, and mentoring were invaluable, especially Pam 
Clements, Karl Fugelso, Carol Robinson, M.J. Toswell, Richard 
Utz, and Usha Vishnuvajjala. Thanks to Phillip Edward Phillips 
for the years of encouragement and friendship, and for tell-
ing me to ditch the book I didn’t care about so I could write 
the book I wanted to write instead. Middle Tennessee State 
University provided a 2016 research award that helped fund the 
early work for this book. Cory Rushton and Usha Vishnuvajjala 
were my lifelines throughout the writing process—this book 
would not exist without you either. Finally, thank you to Mike 
James: for your confidence and support, for the late-night beer 
runs, and for being the world’s best second set of eyes.
additional acknowledgments 
from paul b. sturtevant
During the creation of this book, my mother, Professor 
Elizabeth G. Sturtevant, died after a long battle with 
Parkinson’s disease and multiple system atrophy. On all levels, 
both literal and figurative, I would not be the person I am 
today had it not been for her. I wish she had been able to read 
this one. I think she would have liked it.
Many of my friends, family, and colleagues were incredibly 
supportive throughout. Particular thanks to Cash Colburn, 
Tom Caiazza, Jacky Hart, Lee Braddock, Elizabeth Hick-
ernell, and Kay Oss; you were there at the worst. And last, 
thank you to my partner Arielle Gingold for helping me to 
keep putting one foot in front of the other, and for reminding 
me that sometimes it’s okay not to.

1
There is no reason, I feel, to object when antiquity draws no 
hard line between the human and the supernatural: it adds 
dignity to the past, and, if any nation deserves the privilege 
of claiming a divine ancestry, that nation is our own.
—Livy, History of Rome, c. 27–25 bce1
During ancient Rome’s Golden Age, from 27 BCE to 180 
CE, Augustus Caesar enacted a series of reforms focused on 
regulating Roman family life. He passed what became known 
as the Julian marriage laws, which criminalized adultery for 
married women. Fathers could kill adulterous daughters, and 
husbands who did not divorce cheating wives could be pros-
ecuted. Augustus’s laws also encouraged people to produce 
more Roman citizens: he gave money to families with three or 
more children, and he levied taxes against unmarried Romans. 
He also banned women from attending gladiatorial fights and 
athletic events to keep them “pure,” even exiling his own 
daughter and granddaughter for “vice.”
Augustus’s reforms were meant to take Rome back to 
a time that he imagined was simpler, and better. But his 
reforms were also reactionary, part of a backlash against 
rising female power in Rome. By Augustus’s reign, some 
women had begun to reject arranged marriages. They could 
own property, get divorced, and even participate in politics 
in limited ways. Some women gave public speeches, others 
agitated to be gladiators. Thus, Augustus’s new laws aimed 
to limit the threat that women’s liberation presented to both 
patriarchal and aristocratic power. (After all, when women 
are free to choose their sexual partners, family dynasties tend 
to fall apart.)
Introduction: 
Weaponizing History

2  /  The Devil’s Historians
Augustus also argued that women’s immodesty jeopardized 
the Roman state. Fresh from his victory over Mark Antony 
and Cleopatra, the emperor warned his people that Rome had 
almost fallen under the influence of a willful woman—and a 
foreign one, at that. He proposed that in order to restore its 
greatness, Rome should go back in time, to its simpler, more 
virtuous, male-dominated past.
Although Augustus lived in ancient Rome, he relied on 
myths about even more ancient Rome for his notions of ideal 
femininity. He praised the Sabine women who, according to 
legend, were raped by the first Roman men but stayed with 
them for the sake of their children. He also touted the bravery 
of Lucretia, who was raped by the son of a tyrannical king 
and killed herself in shame, a tragedy that led to the establish-
ment of Rome’s Republic. Augustus, in short, wielded Rome’s 
past—or at least, his mythical version of it—as a weapon. He 
used it to control what the Roman people, especially Roman 
women, could do with their lives.
The blissful, simpler Rome that Augustus hoped his moral 
reforms would bring back is not what you or I would con-
sider historical. There was no bold line in the ancient world 
between myth and fact. As our epigraph suggests, some 
ancient Romans believed it was more important for history 
to teach people lessons in the present, or to confirm a nation’s 
illusions about itself, than it was for history to be factually 
true.
That just goes to show you: there’s no story about the 
past too early, or too implausible, for people to turn it into 
propaganda.
misusing history
Augustus is far from the only person who weaponized 
“history” to punish and control people. This book will show 
you many of the ways history has been used to oppress oth-
ers, spread hatred and fear, and even lead people into war.  

Introduction  /  3
And oftentimes, those who use history to incite violence and 
discrimination misrepresent the past, or sometimes outright lie 
about it, in order to sway public opinion.
We tend to think of the past as rigid and fixed, simply a 
collection of things that happened. But history isn’t the same 
thing as the past. History is our way of rendering the past into 
stories. Our whole view of an event can shift depending on 
who becomes the main character of the story, which perspec-
tives we decide to look through, or even which perspectives 
are available to us. For example, the Bayeux Tapestry—one 
of the primary narratives of the Norman Conquest—was 
once considered a relatively unbiased account of William 
the Conqueror’s conquest of England in 1066. But recent 
historians realized just how skewed the tapestry’s perspective  
actually is when they learned it may have been commissioned 
by William’s half-brother.2 The Bayeux Tapestry is a perfect 
visual representation of the old cliché that history is written 
by the victors.
Even when historical bias isn’t quite this obvious, when 
history is unclear or incomplete, or when we have competing 
narratives of what happened, people tend to prefer stories that 
flatter their illusions about themselves or their ancestors. For 
instance, in Augustus’s time, there were at least two competing 
Roman origin stories. There’s the one you probably know, in 
which the brothers Romulus and Remus—raised by a she-
wolf and favored by the god of war—battled to the death for 
control of the city they founded. But another version was that 
Rhome, a Trojan woman who fled the destruction of Troy 
with other survivors, got tired of sailing around and talked 
everyone into settling in Latinum. The new city was called 
Rome in her name. Take one guess which founding legend the 
warlike, patriarchal Roman government decided to promote.
Yet, although history has multiple perspectives, that doesn’t 
mean all we can do is throw up our hands and decide the 
past is just a matter of opinion. Finding the truth means sift-
ing through all those perspectives to figure out what really 
happened. And the stories we choose to tell or to omit mat-
ter very much in the present. For instance, some people in 

4  /  The Devil’s Historians
the United States refer to the American Civil War—some in 
jest and some in all seriousness—as the “War of Northern 
Aggression.” The name is part of what’s known as the Lost 
Cause account of the Civil War, an attempt to rehabilitate 
the Confederacy that claims slavery was a benevolent institu-
tion and that the Civil War was caused by economic factors, 
not slavery. The Lost Cause narrative isn’t just some fringe 
conspiracy theory: it made its way into some states’ history 
textbooks and had been, until recently, the dominant narra-
tive in many southern classrooms. And while this may be the 
way Confederates viewed things during the war, that doesn’t 
make it true.3 Ignoring the suffering of millions of enslaved 
Americans doesn’t make them disappear.
When we’re presented with multiple perspectives on his-
tory, we can determine whether someone is misusing the past 
or wielding history as a weapon not just by checking the facts 
(although that can be useful), but by examining which sto-
ries they choose to tell, the purpose behind their stories, and 
the effects those stories have in the present day. History has 
many uses. It helps us understand ourselves and each other. 
It helps us feel connected to a wider world, and it can give 
our day-to-day actions meaning. It can even inspire us to fight  
injustice. But when histories are rewritten or ignored, when 
common misunderstandings are manipulated, or when the 
past is used to promote prejudice, oppression, and compla-
cency in the face of injustice, these are misuses.
As we illustrate in the following pages, the misuse of the 
past is rarely innocent. Far from being just “another version” 
of a story, the misuse of history can get people killed.
the dangers of “history”
The weaponization of history doesn’t always involve 
actual facts about the past. It can rely on a foggy perception 
of history: a general, impressionistic sense of how things were, 
or even how they always have been. Sometimes it relies on 

Introduction  /  5
what we now consider myth and legend. But accuracy does 
not always matter to people who are so attached to their ideas 
about the past that those myths are part of their identity.
Murky historical narratives can offer toxic ideologies 
a patina of tradition or timelessness that make them seem 
natural, correct, or inevitable. And once that occurs, mis-
conceptions can be difficult to shift. That’s why misuses 
of the past are so important to recognize and rectify. For 
instance, resistance to tearing down Confederate statues in 
American cities comes from the myth that the statues are 
politically neutral, merely a way to remember a war and 
honor the dead. But the truth is, most of these statues were 
erected in the twentieth century by groups with explicitly 
white supremacist agendas—like the United Daughters of 
the Confederacy, who promoted the Lost Cause narrative 
and even built a monument to the Ku Klux Klan. As the 
mayor of New Orleans, Mitch Landrieu, said in a speech 
on 19 May 2017 about the decision to tear down his city’s 
confederate monuments:
These statues are not just stone and metal. They are not 
just innocent remembrances of a benign history. These 
monuments purposefully celebrate a fictional, sanitized 
Confederacy; ignoring the death, ignoring the enslavement, 
and the terror that it actually stood for.4
Augustus’s narrative of a simpler, better Rome “back then” 
conflated foggy history with myth and legend, and he wasn’t 
the only historical personage who misused the imagined past 
to fuel his imperialistic goals. The English used the myth that 
they were descended from King Arthur (who probably didn’t 
exist, or if he existed, may only have been a general)5 to jus-
tify waging war on the world: enslaving Africans, colonizing 
India, and murdering Native Americans, First Nations, and 
other Indigenous peoples. Germany followed a similar path 
of myth-propelled destruction in World War II. The fantasy of 
the “Aryan race,” created by German historians and folklor-
ists, held that white Germans were descended from a group 

6  /  The Devil’s Historians
of prehistoric Indo-Europeans who created all of humanity’s 
religious and cultural achievements (including those in India 
and ancient Greece). This was easily proven false, but that 
hardly mattered. Nazi propaganda weaponized the historical 
myth of Aryan superiority to attack its neighbors and commit 
one of the worst atrocities in human history, the Holocaust. 
In fact, if you look at any murderous regime, odds are good 
that it is using a warped version of history to justify its crimes.
the most misunderstood  
history of all
If history has always been misused, why are we focusing on 
the Middle Ages specifically? To some degree, that’s because 
this is our specialty. But the medieval period is also particu-
larly murky in the modern imagination. It is one of the most 
popular—and one of the most deeply misunderstood—eras 
in world history. It’s the historical moment that people either 
love to love, or love to hate. And as violent, authoritarian 
regimes rise up around the world, medieval “history” is mak-
ing an unfortunate comeback. From the neo-caliphate of the 
Islamic State (also known as ISIS, ISIL, or Daesh) to white 
supremacist terrorists with crusader slogans in their manifes-
tos and on their guns, myths about the Middle Ages are being 
forged into weapons that threaten everyone in the twenty-first 
century.
Modern people have strange ideas about the so-called Dark 
Ages. Many of these ideas come from both popular culture 
and a long history of dismissive scholarship. People imagine 
that medieval life was filthy, backwards, and rife with random 
acts of murder and torture; that medieval men were “real” 
men and that medieval women were utterly powerless; that 
everyone was a religious zealot and that faith and superstition 
governed every aspect of daily life. These sweeping generaliza-
tions make the Middle Ages less a historical past and more 
a mythological past. The fact that many fictional worlds are 

Introduction  /  7
set in someone’s idea of the Middle Ages both illustrates the 
problem and contributes to it.
Today’s medievalist scholars will jump at the chance to 
tell you that there is no such thing as the “Dark Ages.”6 The 
myth of a supposedly ignorant set of centuries taking up space 
between the bright, glorious ancient world and the sparkling 
intellect of the Renaissance is a wildly inaccurate image of the 
past that distorts hundreds of years of human history. But like 
the other myths we have mentioned so far, it is a hard story to 
kill because it makes people feel better about themselves. “I’m 
so glad I didn’t live back then,” we tell each other, or we might 
say, “that idea is practically medieval….” when we want to 
feel smarter than someone else. And because we believe the 
Middle Ages were simpler times, with simpler people, they are 
a landscape we like to imagine ourselves conquering—whether 
in comical stories about modern people tumbling into the 
medieval past, like Mark Twain’s A Connecticut Yankee in 
King Arthur’s Court, or as avatars in the digital world swing-
ing swords and winning castles of our own.
On the other hand, people who are disenchanted with the 
innovations of modern society often idealize the Middle Ages 
as natural and pure, the “original” condition of humankind. 
These people see the Middle Ages as a landscape for hero-
ism, passion, and legendary deeds. When emerging industrial 
capitalism created new heights of human misery in the nine-
teenth century, the Middle Ages came back into vogue as an 
idyllic, rural counterpoint. The Middle Ages have also been 
wielded as a weapon when traditional power structures are 
threatened: in Victorian England, when so many colonized 
peoples struggled to free themselves from British rule, dur-
ing Reconstruction in the United States, and throughout the 
movement for women’s suffrage on both sides of the pond. 
The fantasy of a pure, orderly patriarchal and monarchical 
medieval past in which everyone knew his or her place gives 
people the “historical” evidence they think they need to resist 
social progress. Using the Middle Ages this way is not just 
wrong, it is also wrong. By that, we mean it’s not just morally 
reprehensible—it’s also historically inaccurate.

8  /  The Devil’s Historians
With this book, we hope to expose and challenge the many 
dangerous fantasies—past and present—that are based on 
misperceptions of medieval history. We do this not because 
we want to ruin people’s fantasies, and not because we feel 
the Middle Ages is some sacred, pure space that needs to be 
protected, but because myths about the Middle Ages have a 
long and terrible legacy of being used to hurt people. Medieval 
history is too often wielded by the powerful to justify their 
opposition to positive changes in the world, or to feed their 
prejudices about people they deem inferior. As medievalists, 
we are passionate about challenging these uses of the Middle 
Ages whenever and wherever we find them, and equally pas-
sionate about helping people explore the real history of a 
diverse, rich, and complex medieval world.
Whether you are reading this book in your history class or 
in your favorite armchair, we hope it will give you a clearer 
vision of the medieval past and make it easier for you to sepa-
rate fact from fiction. Because the Middle Ages are not going 
away anytime soon. History is too powerful a rhetorical tool 
for people with violent agendas to ignore it. But hopefully, 
after reading this book, you’ll be better equipped to disarm 
their propaganda.

9
The Middle Ages are at the root of all our contemporary 
“hot” problems, and it is not surprising that we go back to 
that period every time we ask ourselves about our origin.
—Umberto Eco, “The Return of the Middle Ages,” 19861
Popular culture sends a lot of mixed messages about the 
Middle Ages. Some books, movies, and video games represent 
it as an era of heroic knights and epic battles, while others 
portray the medieval past as a dark, dangerous time when 
anyone who stepped out of line would be burned as a witch. 
Despite these dramatic differences, there are a few things 
contemporary people consider “common knowledge” about 
the Middle Ages: that medieval lives were nasty, brutish, and 
short; that this part of the past was a white, Christian man’s 
world; and that medieval people were so religious and super-
stitious that they would throw their neighbor on the pyre for 
using her broom a little too often.
The problem is, common knowledge is wrong.
Take the witch trials, for instance. They’re considered 
a medieval phenomenon, but they were far more prevalent 
during the Renaissance, when they became official legal 
practice. The Church didn’t even officially recognize the 
existence of witches until the end of the Middle Ages, around 
1484. The witch trials took off when a treatise called the 
Malleus Maleficarum—which translates into English as The 
Hammer of Witches—was published in 1487. Written by 
former Inquisitor Heinrich Kramer (who was fired from the 
Inquisition for being overzealous, if you can imagine that), 
the Malleus Maleficarum taught people how to identify and 
torture witches and advocated for their execution.
1
The Middle Ages: 
Foundational Myths

10  /  The Devil’s Historians
Thanks in part to the invention of the moveable-type print-
ing press, which significantly sped up the transmission of texts 
and ideas in Europe, the Malleus Maleficarum grew wildly 
popular after Kramer’s death. Rampant, violent persecutions 
of accused witches spread across Europe and the colonies. 
This lasted for centuries (including, famously, the Salem witch 
trials). The 1600s, the height of the Renaissance, saw mass 
executions of suspected witches. Hundreds of people were 
murdered in a single German city.2
Why does it matter if people think the witch trials were 
a few centuries earlier than they actually occurred? It may 
seem harmless when people get history wrong like this, but 
it can be dangerous too. If we believe witch trials are one 
of the defining features of the Middle Ages, we can imagine 
that “civilized” cultures left torture and religious persecution 
behind in the Dark Ages. We can pretend that torture was 
a phenomenon cured by science and the Enlightenment—
completely ignoring the torture and executions still going on 
today, such as the “enhanced interrogation” practiced by the 
United States.
inventing the past
Why do medieval people have such terrible reputations? 
How did the Middle Ages become the dumping ground for all 
of humanity’s bad behavior? This view of medieval people has 
been with us since the Middle Ages were invented. And, yes, 
the Middle Ages were invented.
Italian humanists in the fifteenth century were the first 
to describe history in the three-part system (ancient, medi-
eval, and modern) we know today. Leonardo Bruni called 
476–1250 CE a “middle period” in his 1442 History of the 
Florentine People;3 Flavio Biondo chose the dates 410–1400 
CE in his 1483 Decades of History from the Deterioration of 
the Roman Empire.4 Giovanni Bussi preferred the more poetic 
media tempestas—“middle season” in the 1469 preface to his 

The Middle Ages: Foundational Myths  /  11
edition of the works of Roman writer Apuleius.5 Clear in 
each of these designations is the sense that the years we know 
as the “Middle Ages” are in between two more important, 
more monumental eras. Renaissance humanists considered the 
medieval past an interruption between their own enlightened 
time and the classical Greek and Roman eras they revered.
Thanks to the preservation and translation of ancient 
Greek and Roman texts by medieval Jewish, Muslim, and 
Byzantine scholars—and thanks in part to the printing 
press—Europe in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries gained 
increased access to classical philosophy, art, literature, science, 
and history. Inspired to draw on the wisdom of ancient Greece 
and Rome to enrich their own cultures, scholars began to 
call the period between the classical world and their world a 
“Dark Age.” Thus, the Middle Ages were born out of resent-
ment, seen as the centuries that broke Europe’s connection to 
a glorious, ancient past. With the stroke of a few quills, the 
lives, experiences, and accomplishments of millions of people 
over hundreds of years were consigned to the trash heap of 
history, and the idea of the Middle Ages as the Dark Ages has 
been with us ever since.
Most scholars today don’t use the term Dark Ages, thanks 
to being corrected by generations of angry medievalists. But 
the concept persists, in part, because the idea of a time so 
much worse than our own allows us to feel superior. In fact, 
myths about the Middle Ages are so persistent that scholars 
have developed methods for thinking, and talking, about the 
way the medieval period is used and abused. We use the term 
medievalism to describe the way filmmakers, game designers, 
artists, musicians, and even everyday people at your local 
Renaissance faire imagine the Middle Ages.
Life in the twenty-first century can make the medieval 
world seem very far away, but we still live in a world full of 
popular medievalisms: video games franchises like Crusader 
Kings, Dragon Age, The Witcher, and The Elder Scrolls; 
never-ending movie adaptations of King Arthur and Robin 
Hood; and wildly popular television shows like Vikings and 
Game of Thrones. Weekend warriors don handmade medieval 

12  /  The Devil’s Historians
outfits for historical reenactments or cosplay, and writers keep 
spinning out medieval-themed fantasy novels for your Kindle. 
You could spend a lifetime playing in the Middle Ages without 
once setting foot in a museum or on a historical site.
As widespread and varied as it is, medievalism also tends to 
court historical inaccuracies. And these aren’t just meaningless 
errors. They can tell us a lot about ourselves. Italian philoso-
pher and writer Umberto Eco wrote that “the Middle Ages 
have always been messed up in order to meet the vital require-
ments of different periods.”6 In other words, how we imagine 
the past—and the way we misremember it—can be a window 
into the present. Our view of the past reveals our understand-
ing of the world, our highest hopes and our darkest fears.
What people get wrong about the Middle Ages, and why 
they do it, are questions we hope to answer in this book. But 
first, in this chapter, we’ll debunk some of the most common 
misunderstandings of the medieval world. And as you’ll see in 
the rest of the book, these misconceptions are far from harm-
less. They fuel some of the most dangerous movements in the 
world today.
myth: medieval people’s lives 
were nasty, brutish, and short
It’s hard to find a version of the Middle Ages in popular 
culture where the knights aren’t rusty brutes, the peasants 
aren’t covered in mud, and the landscape isn’t ravaged by 
war. Just turn on Netflix or HBO. Life in the Middle Ages 
just seems harder: plagues swept the world, dramatic climate 
change led to food shortages, unstable political power created 
unpredictable violence, religious prejudice and superstitions 
were common, and no one had invented a single iPhone. 
Terrible. But the truth is, the medieval period wasn’t radically 
different from other historical eras. You’ll often hear facts 
thrown around like, “Medieval people only lived to be 35!” 
But claims like this fall apart upon closer examination. Life 

The Middle Ages: Foundational Myths  /  13
expectancy is an average, and it includes infant mortality. 
While many more infants and children died in the Middle 
Ages (and throughout all historical periods until modern 
medicine), the average person who survived the vulnerable 
years of childhood lived to be in their 70s, just as they do 
today. And, just like today, wealth and access to health care 
tended to be determining factors.
The medieval period is also considered a uniquely vio-
lent era, and it’s easy to assume that widespread war—the 
Hundred Years’ War, the Mongol invasions, the early Muslim 
conquests, the Crusades—cut most medieval people’s lives 
short. But war is one of the horrifying constants of human 
history. It is not uniquely medieval. And while the hand-to-
hand combat that is the hallmark of much of medieval war-
fare may feel more brutal and savage than, say, a drone strike, 
the murderous capability of the latter far outstrips the former. 
The Geneva conventions outlawed the intentional targeting 
of civilians in war, but they were enacted in 1949, after the 
worst civilian massacres in history: the bombings of Dresden, 
Tokyo, Hiroshima, and Nagasaki. None of the death tolls in 
any medieval battle can compare to these tragedies.
The medieval plague seems to stand out as a particularly 
horrific historical phenomenon, in part because it seized the 
imagination of one of the medieval world’s most famous writ-
ers: Giovanni Boccaccio, whose Decameron, a collection of 
short tales told by noble characters quarantined during the 
Black Death, was so popular that his stories were translated 
and adapted by Chaucer, Shakespeare, Tennyson, Keats, and 
even contemporary filmmakers like Pier Paolo Pasolini 
and Jeff Baena.7 But most of humanity—not just medieval 
people—lacked the ability to fight infections or even under-
stand how they spread for much of history. England during 
the Renaissance suffered regular deadly outbreaks of plague, 
smallpox, syphilis, typhus, malaria, and a mysterious illness 
called “sweating sickness.” Upon contact with Europeans, 
upwards of 95 per cent of the Indigenous peoples of the 
Americas were killed by European diseases. Plagues even rav-
aged the twentieth century: from 1918–1920, half a billion 

14  /  The Devil’s Historians
people were infected with the Spanish Flu global pandemic, 
which killed between 50 and 100 million people. And let’s not 
forget that we are currently living with the global pandemic 
of HIV/AIDS.
Medieval people’s supposed ignorance and filth is blamed 
for these waves of disease. Monty Python and the Quest for 
the Holy Grail and “gritty” television dramas like Game 
of Thrones teach us that medieval people were constantly 
covered in muck. But real medieval people enjoyed bathing 
regularly, especially medieval Vikings. English chroniclers 
remarked on the Vikings’ cleanliness and suave attire, and 
worried that they would seduce all the English women 
because of it. Soap—which medieval people made and used 
regularly (there were entire guilds of soapmakers)—would 
not have saved anyone from the Black Death. Only penicillin 
would. For that, humanity would have to wait until 1928.
The myth that medieval people lived horrible, short lives 
persists because we believe that we are more advanced, more 
sophisticated, more civilized, and frankly, better than the 
people who have come before us. But this historical chauvin-
ism easily slips into racism and xenophobia when it is applied 
to the modern world. People often use the word medieval to 
describe the developing world, or accuse the people in these 
countries of being “stuck in the Dark Ages,” suggesting that 
they are “backwards,” uneducated, or unusually violent. In 
these cases, “medieval” is almost always a racist insult hurled 
by inhabitants of majority-white nations who believe their 
own culture is superior. Politicians and pundits will also use 
the word medieval to refer to anything they want to portray 
as backwards, barbaric, or stupid. This allows their audiences 
to think they are better than those terrible medieval people: 
torture is “medieval torture,” despite the fact that your 
own country might practice it. Rape is “medieval,” despite 
the modern world having globalized the practice of human 
trafficking.8
You can see this kind of rhetoric in the wars waged in 
Afghanistan, Iraq, Yemen, and Syria, and in anti-immigration 
rhetoric flung around the United States and Europe.9 Calling 

The Middle Ages: Foundational Myths  /  15
something modern “medieval” is a rejection, and can cause 
us to mock people’s pain, dismiss their deaths, invade their 
countries to “liberate” them, and lock them up when they 
cross international borders or ask for refuge. In short, calling 
people “medieval” suggests that they—along with historical 
medieval people—are less human than we are.
myth: medieval people were  
uneducated, illiterate, and ignorant
When public figures want to accuse each other of being 
ignorant or authoritarian, they say their opponent is “from 
the Dark Ages” or “practically medieval.” But why do we 
believe that medieval people’s intellectual capacity was so 
radically different from our own? Part of the problem is the 
outsized assessment of just how much the world changed in 
the Renaissance.
It’s quite clear that something big happened in Europe over 
the course of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. In fact, 
several big things did. Around 1439, Johannes Gutenberg 
introduced the moveable-type printing press to Europe, giv-
ing average people access to books that had previously been 
available only to scholars or the wealthy. In the late 1400s, 
European explorers sailed to Africa and the Americas, setting 
out on a program of slavery, genocide, and destruction that 
would turn European nation-states into maritime empires. 
And in 1517, a German monk named Martin Luther pub-
lished his Ninety-Five Theses (though he probably did not nail 
them to any doors) and launched the Protestant Reformation.
Each of these events is used to mark the moment of 
European modernity, the spark of intellectual and national 
growth that separated the Middle Ages from what came 
afterwards. These discoveries supposedly allowed Europe 
to advance out of the “Dark Ages” and move into the light. 
But before we talk about the intellectual accomplishments of 
the Middle Ages—which, contrary to popular opinion, had 

16  /  The Devil’s Historians
a light of their own—it’s important to note the darkness that 
followed some of modernity’s most noted developments.
The Protestant Reformation, for instance, may have 
resulted in a more accessible faith, but it was also a violent 
and destructive revolution. People were executed over minor 
theological disagreements like the doctrine of transubstan-
tiation, monasteries were raided and burned, churches were 
whitewashed, wiping centuries-old art off their walls, and 
sculptures and artifacts were smashed in systematic raids—
not unlike the path of historical devastation ISIS waged 
against art and architecture in the Middle East. Moreover, the 
Renaissance saw the beginning of colonialism and the transat-
lantic slave trade. Explorers like Christopher Columbus dev-
astated and enslaved whole populations in search of plunder, 
not to prove anyone wrong about the earth being flat.
By the way, the flat-earth story promoted by Columbus fans 
is a flat-out lie. And more than that: it’s a lie that shows just 
how dependent our modern sense of self is on the myth of an 
ignorant past. Medieval people were well aware that the earth 
is round. Medieval Muslim scholars, for example, knew the 
earth was spherical and developed trigonometry to measure 
its geography and determine their distance from, and direc-
tion to, Mecca. Medieval Christian scholars knew the earth 
was round too: thirteenth-century astronomer Johannes de 
Sacrobosco wrote a treatise called De Sphaera Mundi—Latin 
for On the Sphere of the World—that discussed the spherical 
nature of the earth in its first chapter. And this wasn’t some 
sort of academic secret. Popular medieval writers like the 
author of Mandeville’s Travels casually referenced the round 
earth. Columbus did not sail west because he believed the 
world was round when others thought it flat—he did so under 
the misguided belief that the world was much smaller than 
astronomers had calculated. This is why he thought he had 
landed in India rather than on another continent. Columbus 
wasn’t a maverick. He simply didn’t trust the experts.
In fact, apart from a few flat-earth conspiracy theorists 
over the years, people have known the earth is round since 
ancient times, all the way back to Aristotle. And that brings 

The Middle Ages: Foundational Myths  /  17
us to another point about the intellectual culture of medieval 
Europe: although many more classical texts flooded Europe 
during the Renaissance, medieval people had access to classical 
literature and philosophy too, thanks in part to the efforts of 
medieval Muslim and Jewish scholars and translators. These 
translations ushered in what is known as the Twelfth-Century 
Renaissance, a period of flourishing art, literature, science, 
and philosophy in medieval Europe, and one of many “mini-
renaissances” that happened thanks to intercultural exchange.
Medieval people were just as intellectual, just as curious 
about the world, and just as adept at complex mental tasks 
as you are (and that’s not an insult). Just because they did 
not have some of the same technological or cultural devel-
opments at their fingertips did not change their interest in, 
or capacity for, learning. For example, many of the intel-
lectual pillars of society that we enjoy today were invented 
during the Middle Ages, like universities, which have been 
around since at least the ninth century. The University of 
al-Qarawiyyin, in Fez, Morocco, was established by Fatima 
al-Fihri in 859 CE. Europe saw its first universities in the 
eleventh century in Bologna, Paris, and Oxford. And while 
these universities were often centers of theological educa-
tion, contrary to popular belief, medieval scholars did not 
spend their time contemplating the number of angels that 
could fit on the head of a pin. Medieval universities were 
dedicated to teaching law, medicine, and the arts in addition 
to theology, and cultivated some of the greatest minds of the 
Middle Ages.
And yes, the Middle Ages did produce some truly staggering 
intellects, like Ibn Sina (also known as Avicenna), an eleventh-
century Persian polymath who developed systems of formal logic 
and scientific inquiry, and whose works The Book of Healing and 
The Canon of Medicine became the standard texts for nearly 500 
years. Medieval medicine was far more involved than leeches, 
magic, and prayer. Medieval doctors developed chemical processes 
for the distillation of medicines and intricate surgical proce-
dures as difficult as removing gallstones and cataracts. Albertus 
Magnus, a thirteenth-century philosopher whose writing brought  

18  /  The Devil’s Historians
Aristotle’s ideas back into medieval Europe, developed scien-
tific treatises on logic, astronomy, minerology, physiology, law, 
morality, and geography. And women participated in medi-
eval intellectual culture too, like Hildegard of Bingen, whose 
twelfth-century medical and theological texts influenced gen-
erations of scholars.
These institutional and textual methods of sharing knowl-
edge were not the only education medieval people had. Myths 
about uneducated medieval people tend to privilege written wis-
dom over other means of transmitting information. Some medi-
eval peasants may not have been literate, but that didn’t make 
them fools. People have always shared information, discoveries, 
and history orally. This includes knowledge of stories, song, art, 
architecture, medicine, and even agricultural and cooking tech-
niques. The fetish for the written word as the height of knowl-
edge is part of what led Western scholars to ignore the history 
of cultures other than Greece and Rome for centuries, and it’s 
also partly to blame for the bizarre modern racist conspiracy 
theory that ancient cultural achievements were secretly built 
by aliens. It is hardly good historical practice to dismiss entire 
groups of people just because they could not read.
myth: medieval people had 
no individuality
If you’ve ever watched a movie about the Middle Ages, you 
might believe the medieval period was an era of all-powerful 
kings and nobles who ruled with iron fists. And don’t get us 
started on popular perceptions of the medieval Church, which 
is usually imagined as a cross between a dystopian surveillance 
state and the mafia. Political and religious power was far more 
diffuse and diverse in the Middle Ages than popular culture 
would have you believe. For one thing, the “divine right of 
kings”—a theory that kings ruled with direct approval from 
God, and thus were not subject to contradiction by popes or 
parliaments—was a post-medieval phenomenon. It wasn’t until 

The Middle Ages: Foundational Myths  /  19
after the Middle Ages that European kings consolidated legisla-
tive, judicial, and executive power into their own person; they 
were the tyrants who could (and did) have people executed on 
a whim. Medieval rulers were far less powerful. Despite what 
various iterations of the Robin Hood legend might tell you, 
they did not collect revenues simply by shaking down peasants. 
In Norman England, the king’s income came from rents on the 
lands he personally held, the obligations owed to him by the 
lords and knights who swore fealty to him, income from tolls 
and fines, and property taxes. But even these taxes were noto-
riously easy to avoid and collected inconsistently—wealthy 
people dodging taxes has an unsurprisingly long history.
A medieval king’s power was often limited, and managing 
a kingdom could be an exercise in herding ambitious, heav-
ily armed cats. Medieval chronicles are filled with examples 
of knights and lords ignoring royal dictates, or even pledging 
their loyalty to more than one ruler, which caused difficulties 
when these rulers went to war with each other. For example, 
the fourteenth-century Chronicle of Hainaut tells the story of 
Jacques of Avenses, a knight who found a way to game the 
system by pledging loyalty to several different local lords, then 
collecting castles from most of the landowners in the region. 
Each of these lords eventually got fed up with Jacques and 
had to spend considerable time and resources going to war 
with him to get their castles back.
Some medieval people were not ruled by monarchs at all. 
Take Iceland, for example. From its foundation in the tenth 
century until it fell under the dominion of the King of Norway 
in 1262, Iceland was ruled by what was called an Alþing. 
The Alþing was a general assembly of sorts, where a group 
of the land’s most powerful and wealthy leaders gathered to 
make laws and decide legal questions. While not a democracy 
exactly (it is best understood as a type of oligarchy—rule by a 
small group of privileged people), it had democratic elements: 
all free men were permitted to attend the Alþing and plead 
their cases, and the rulers (called the goðar) were influenced 
by the popular opinions of their friends and neighbors. Even 
after Iceland became a subject of Norway in the thirteenth 

20  /  The Devil’s Historians
century, the Norwegian king’s power was limited on the 
island. The Alþing continued, but became a coequal legislative 
branch of government.
England did have kings before the Norman Conquest in 
1066, but it also had a system of government that prioritized 
local power over state power. The English developed law by 
committee, first in the village moot (meeting); then in a hun-
dred moot with nearby villages, presided over by a thane; then 
by a shire moot presided over by an earl or his representative; 
and then by the witana gemoot, a parliament that advised the 
king. The medieval Italian peninsula had a wide range of inde-
pendent city-states that were run as republics. Even the Holy 
Roman Empire was never actually an empire, but instead a 
complex confederacy of smaller kingdoms, principalities, 
duchies, counties, free cities, theocratic prince-bishoprics, and 
random patches of land ruled in other ways. Its emperor was 
actually elected by a council of the highest-ranking noblemen.
The Middle Ages featured as much diversity in political 
systems and leadership as any other historical period. Many 
historians nowadays question whether the term feudalism 
is even useful, because in reality, there was not one “feudal 
system” to which everyone ascribed, but instead a patchwork 
of agreements among powerful people based as much on local 
custom and tradition as adherence to some larger ideal.
But what about religion? you might be thinking. Surely 
every medieval person was told what to think by the Catholic 
Church? On the contrary, religious diversity was a predomi-
nant feature of the Middle Ages. First of all, the Middle Ages 
were not only limited to western Europe. Scholars disagree 
on where the geographical boundaries of the Middle Ages 
are (or if there indeed are any such boundaries),10 but suffice 
it to say that medieval studies have regularly included areas 
like modern-day Greece, Turkey, and the Middle East, North 
Africa, Sicily, Spain, the Balkans and Scandinavia—and the 
scope broadens every year. Each of these areas had significant 
populations of Muslims, Orthodox and Coptic Christians, 
Jews, Hindus, and people of other faiths. But even if we limit 
ourselves to looking only at Catholic-dominated Europe, not 

The Middle Ages: Foundational Myths  /  21
only were communities of Jews living alongside the Christians, 
there were significant differences in religious beliefs and prac-
tices even within the same faith.
Medieval Christians expressed a range of relationships and 
attitudes toward the Church. Theologians like Marguerite 
Porete rebelliously wrote that God is love and was burned at 
the stake for it. Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales are full of corrupt, 
sexually rapacious monks and friars alongside a devout, mor-
ally pure parson. The Robin Hood ballads feature a hero who 
chops the heads off of monks after he prays to the Virgin Mary. 
Iceland had been converted to Christianity by the time the sagas 
were written down, but many Norse poems, like the Eddas, 
record the exploits of the Norse gods, not the Christian one. 
Moreover, for some people, religion may have entailed a set of 
cultural practices more than an expression of personal zeal. For 
Christian writers like Dante and William Langland, faith is the 
topic of the text. Muslim and Jewish writers brilliantly blended 
the religious and secular to produce some of the world’s most 
beautiful poetry. But for other writers, religion is either an inci-
dental part of the background or is absent entirely.
Despite all this, even scholars have been slow to recognize 
medieval people’s individuality. Up until recently, many history 
books would tell you that medieval society was fundamentally 
different from our own: more collectivist and less liberated.11 
Medieval people, we were told, did not think of themselves as 
individuals, but as part of family or social groups, cogs in a 
much greater machine. The Renaissance was thought to be the 
era in which the “individual” was born.
Scholars who study the Middle Ages today know that this 
assessment is completely wrong. Medieval people were writing 
vivid autobiographies as early as the twelfth century, and we 
have countless stories of people from all walks of life who 
asserted their independence from their families and local com-
munities. Many of them may have felt the social pressures of 
those communities strongly—you can see the same thing in 
many religious, geographic, or cultural communities today. 
But that does not mean that people who feel social pressures 
have no individuality.

22  /  The Devil’s Historians
This is important, because thinking of medieval people as 
“cogs in a machine” is a condescending way to view them. 
Medieval people, like modern people, experienced life through 
their own subjective encounters. While those experiences 
were, in important ways, different from our own, medieval 
people themselves were more like you than you might care to 
admit.
myth: important medieval people 
were straight and male
Being a woman in the Middle Ages was undoubtedly more 
difficult than being a man. There were no equal rights for 
women enshrined into law (although it might be noted that 
women’s rights are not enshrined in American law either, 
since the requisite 38 states have yet to ratify the Equal Rights 
Amendment).12 Medieval women were forbidden from certain 
occupations, like the priesthood. When women were abused 
or raped, the law gave them some recourse, but not much. 
The power behind a woman’s word largely depended on her 
social status. The punishment for raping a woman also varied 
quite a bit: it might be castration, execution, or a simple fine. 
But medieval women were far from powerless. They were not 
the damsels locked in towers that you find in fairy tales. And 
while many may have found themselves in difficult situations, 
as with any oppressed population, they found ways to prosper 
within or resist the system.
Women were active in a number of professions in the 
Middle Ages. They joined guilds, brewed beer, ran inns, 
governed land, made and sold textiles, farmed, cooked, and 
cleaned for a living. There were female blacksmiths, artists, 
poets, and traveling bards (the men were known as trouba-
dours, the women as trobairitz). Medieval women were not 
full-time stay-at-home parents, and “housekeeping” often 
included farming, manual labor, and business endeavors like 
making candles, soap, or ale. Even the wealthiest women did 

The Middle Ages: Foundational Myths  /  23
not live lives of total leisure. Many medieval noblewomen 
were highly educated. They read and wrote, and some joined 
the Church as nuns and abbesses, becoming scholars who 
had a great deal of power and influence. In fact, despite the 
modern belief that the Church was a fundamental agent of 
women’s oppression in the Middle Ages, more than a few 
women joined the Church so they could evade marriage and 
motherhood, preferring instead a life of education, politics, or 
travel. There was even something of a crisis in twelfth-century 
France when too many women were choosing to marry the 
Church rather than a husband.
You might know about a few extraordinary medieval 
women who led battles, like Joan of Arc, or who led coun-
tries, like the Empress Matilda. But you probably missed Olga 
of Kiev, who led armies to destroy her late husband’s enemies 
and helped bring Christianity to Russia, or Æthelflæd, who 
fought off the Vikings in Mercia, or Raziya, Sultana of Delhi 
in the 1200s. Women practiced medicine in the Middle Ages 
too. Female physician Trota of Salerno wrote important medi-
cal treatises on everything from wound treatments to gynecol-
ogy.13 As medicine became increasingly professionalized (and 
elitist) with the establishment of universities, women were 
gradually pushed out of the profession, but they still prac-
ticed their skills as village healers or midwives well into the 
Renaissance.14 And the medieval midwife wasn’t just respon-
sible for helping women give birth: she had the skills to heal a 
number of different ailments.
Medieval women were also influential in literature and 
the arts. Eleanor of Aquitaine and her daughter Marie de 
Champagne were responsible for sponsoring the Courtly Love 
movement and helped bring us the Arthurian legends that are 
still popular today. Marie de France gave us books of lais (short 
chivalric poems), fables, and a story of Saint Patrick. Murasaki 
Shikibu wrote the world’s first novel, The Tale of Genji, in 
eleventh-century Japan. Julian of Norwich and Catherine of 
Siena were also important writers and theologians.
We could go on and on, but our point is that medieval 
women doing things that seem “extraordinary” in a patriarchal 

24  /  The Devil’s Historians
time is the rule, not the exception. Moreover, medieval women 
were well aware that they were treated unfairly, and they ana-
lyzed and critiqued their own oppression. Christine de Pizan 
wrote an extensive defense of women called The Book of the  
City of Ladies in response to one of the world’s most 
misogynistic poems, The Romance of the Rose. Hrostvitha 
of Gandersheim, a prolific tenth-century writer, rewrote the 
ancient comic Terence’s plays to make the female characters 
more heroic and virtuous.
Finally, not all medieval women, and not all medieval 
men, were straight. Although sexual identity did not exist 
in quite the same way that it does now, same-sex attrac-
tion, love, sex, and relationships were very much a part of 
the Middle Ages. Records of same-sex relationships can be 
found across the entire medieval world, from the Middle 
East to the shores of Iceland and everywhere between. And 
in some of those places, you can even find examples of 
same-sex unions formalized by Christian rites. Of course, we 
don’t always know what medieval people were doing behind 
closed doors. But in some cases, we do—such as in the rela-
tionship between King Edward II of England and his lover 
Piers Gaveston. Al-Hakam II, the second Caliph of Cordoba, 
married a woman and had two children, but also openly 
kept a harem of men. And same-sex love wasn’t limited to 
the nobility: in the Middle Ages, priests were issued manuals 
to help them receive confessions and assign appropriate pen-
ances for same-sex acts.
We also have evidence of medieval people who lived as a 
gender other than the one they were assigned at birth. Some 
monks and even several saints—such as Saint Marinos—
lived their lives as men even though they were born female. 
Stories have also emerged from court records of men liv-
ing as women, such as fourteenth-century John Rykener, 
an English person who sometimes dressed and lived as 
Eleanor and slept with both men and women. But because 
we only have the words of the court, we don’t know if 
John preferred being Eleanor or switched between genders 
as they wanted. We do know that the court doesn’t quite 

The Middle Ages: Foundational Myths  /  25
know what to make of the situation, and thus, neither do 
we—except to know that not all medieval people accepted a 
simple gender binary.
Literature also gives us stories of people living outside nor-
mative gender rules—Yde et Olive is an old French chivalric 
story of a girl who becomes a knight, marries a princess, and, 
by the end, through an angel’s intervention, conceives a child 
with their wife. Silence tells the story of a girl who becomes 
the best male knight in all the realm in order to subvert an 
unjust law that disinherited women.
History has privileged the stories of straight, cisgender men 
for so long that it is important to call attention to stories that 
do not conform to that expectation. Otherwise, people feel as 
though those with less power in a society don’t matter—not 
just that their stories will be forgotten, but worse, that they 
deserve to be forgotten.
myth: the medieval world 
was WHITE AND CHRISTIAN
Most medieval-themed books, games, and shows take 
place in a generic, castle-and-dragon-strewn, white European 
setting. But during the historical Middle Ages, a massive hemi-
spherical trade network emerged between Europe, the Middle 
East, China, Africa, and many points between and beyond. 
Centers of learning, industry, and culture developed across the 
Middle East and Asia. The bulk of the world’s political, military, 
economic, and technological power existed outside Europe, 
which, relatively speaking, was a backwater—a fascinating 
backwater worth ample study, but a backwater nonetheless.
Medieval Europe itself was far more diverse than most 
people know. Inevitably, when shows like the BBC’s Merlin or 
movies like Thor cast non-white actors as characters drawn 
from European legends, or when shows like Outlaw King 
or 1066: The Battle for Middle Earth place Black people in 
medieval Europe, the backlash is as fierce as it is predictable.15 

26  /  The Devil’s Historians
Internet trolls converge to complain, claiming either that 
medieval Europeans were all white or that non-white people 
were such a small proportion of medieval Europe that they 
should be ignored in depictions of the period. To people who 
cling to the myth of an all-white Middle Ages, anything to the 
contrary is “revisionist” or the work of “social justice war-
riors.” But if anything, excluding people of color from depic-
tions of medieval Europe is the revisionist work, which relies 
on an outdated perception of medieval Europe as a place that 
did not change, had no contact with the outside world, and 
whose people were homogenous.
How many people of color lived in medieval Europe? That 
is impossible to know for certain. We do have many accounts 
of people of color in medieval Europe, depictions of people of 
color in medieval art, and records of regular travel between 
Europe and the Middle East, Asia, and Africa. For example, 
Santiago de Compostela in Spain was (and still is) one of the 
most popular pilgrimage destinations in Europe. And, help-
fully for us, we have some records of the names and places of 
origin of visitors to the site. Many are from Europe, but some 
are from places like Nubia, Turkey, and from even further 
afield.
Most of the people who came to European countries from 
other places were travelers and traders, meaning that any 
depiction of medieval European urban centers like Rome, 
Constantinople, Paris, or even far-flung London should 
include racial diversity. Their appearance would not surprise 
anyone along popular merchant roads or pilgrimage routes. 
In order to find places where medieval people of color did not 
travel or live in Europe, you have to look at small, provin-
cial places. You would have to exclude anywhere the Vikings 
settled, since their trading empire, at its height, stretched from 
the Middle East to the Americas. You would also have to 
exclude Italy and Spain, which had regular interaction with 
Arabic cultures.
Religious diversity existed in the Middle Ages as well. 
Medieval Christians were very familiar with people who 
did not worship the way they did—and not just because of  

The Middle Ages: Foundational Myths  /  27
the Crusades. In Al-Andalus (the Arabic term for medieval 
Iberia), Christians, Jews, and Muslims lived alongside one 
another. They also lived side by side in the Byzantine Empire 
and in cities like Damascus and Baghdad. “Saracen” (a 
medieval term for Muslim) heroes can be found across medi-
eval literature. In fact, several of King Arthur’s knights are 
Saracens—Sir Palomides, Sir Safir, and Sir Segwarides were 
Muslim. And at least one Arthurian hero, Sir Moriaen, was 
Black.
We will never know exactly how many people of color vis-
ited and lived in medieval Europe. But we do know that even 
the western Middle Ages were much more diverse than you 
were led to believe, especially in southern Europe, which was 
a cosmopolitan center of racial and religious diversity. The 
fantasy of a white, Christian medieval past is a dangerously 
antiquated myth that has more to do with what some white 
people want the Middle Ages to have been than what they 
actually were.
myth: the middle ages are  
ancient history
As we hope you’ve realized by now, the Middle Ages still 
have a lot of relevance today. Maybe too much relevance. In 
fact, the rest of this book will examine the ways people use 
myths about Middle Ages to promote retrograde and horrific 
ideas in the present. Nationalists pretend the medieval past 
had secure, impenetrable borders, static populations, and firm 
identities. They use these myths to attack people they label out-
siders. Racists idealize an all-white medieval world that never 
was. Sexists try to lock women up in metaphorical towers by 
arguing that medieval princesses were the happiest girls of all 
and that being out of the workforce and stuck at home is a 
woman’s natural place. Religious fanatics think they’re fol-
lowing in medieval footsteps when they attack people of other 
faiths and argue for theocratic government.

28  /  The Devil’s Historians
None of these myths have very much to do with the Middle 
Ages. But they have everything to do with the people who 
interpret the Middle Ages and imbue them with meaning. 
To some degree, that’s part of the power of the Middle Ages: 
it’s a thousand years of the past, containing millions of lives 
and countless stories. Just as the term Middle Ages is, in fact, 
plural, there was no one, singular, identifiable medieval time. 
This is true of other time periods as well. But no other time 
is mythologized in quite such stark terms as the medieval 
period. No one else in history is seen as so pure, or so filthy. 
No period has been made so monolithic, so one-dimensional, 
so “epic.” That is why studying the Middle Ages, with all its 
richness and complexity, can be so rewarding—and why play-
ing with the Middle Ages has so many pitfalls.

29
They say it’s a medieval solution, a wall. It’s true, because it 
worked then and it works even better now.
—President Donald J. Trump, 20191
Nations thrive on stories: stories about why they exist, 
who founded them, and what their place in the world 
is. Many people in medieval England believed they were 
descended from the ancient Trojans, and that a Trojan exile 
named Brutus discovered Britain with the help of the god-
dess Diana. In Chaucer’s time, some people even consid-
ered renaming London Troynovant—“New Troy.” Tourists 
in Italy can wander past statues of Romulus and Remus, 
the mythical founders of Rome, in the city square or see 
their iconic images—two infants suckled by a she-wolf—
tiled into church floors. And of course, there are the stories 
America tells itself: about a president who could never 
tell a lie or about Christopher Columbus “discovering”  
a new world.
So, if all nations have inspirational or even fantasti-
cal myths about their origins, meant to inspire patriotism 
among their citizens, what’s the problem? Well, in each of 
these examples—Washington, Columbus, Brutus, and even 
Romulus and Remus—a nation’s heroes inspire not just 
patriotism but nationalism. Patriotism can be as simple as 
pride in one’s country. But nationalism isn’t a neutral attach-
ment to a preferred place. Nationalism relies on defining a 
people, based on factors that include race, religion, culture, 
and language. These categories are rarely demarcated by geo-
graphical borders, meaning that nationalists turn on people in 
their own countries in the misguided belief that certain people 
2
Nationalism and 
Nostalgia

30  /  The Devil’s Historians
aren’t “loyal” citizens or just don’t “belong.” Nationalists 
also argue for their own global superiority, often with violent 
consequences for their neighbors. In other words, national-
ism inevitably leads to war—either within a nation’s borders, 
against other countries, or both.
Rome’s nationalist myths motivated its armies to conquer 
most of Europe and parts of Africa and Asia Minor, domi-
nating and ultimately burying many of the rich cultures that 
thrived in those places. Brutus became an avatar of the British 
colonial project, with its legacy of war, violence, cultural sup-
pression, and slavery. The narrative that European explorers 
“discovered” a new world in the Americas was used to cover 
up the deaths of millions of Indigenous peoples, and still 
threatens Indigenous cultures today. And despite the fact that 
many nationalist movements tout their own modernity and 
progress, they often root their historical sense of self in the 
medieval period.
Scholars disagree about whether the kingdoms, empires, 
and other political states that existed before the modern 
era can properly be called a “nation.” Historian Benedict 
Anderson, for instance, believes that medieval institutions 
like the Catholic Church precluded medieval states from 
being geographically limited and sovereign in the way modern 
nations are today.2 Modern states are assumed to be broadly 
in control of their own affairs, whereas the medieval Church 
was thought to have acted as a coequal (or even superior) 
government authority—although, as you’ll see in Chapter 
Six, the Church had far less power than you might think. 
But regardless of academic quibbling about the definition 
of a nation, few can argue that when it comes to imagined 
national histories, the Middle Ages play a prominent role. 
From the English Defence League spreading leaflets festooned 
with medieval knights and crusaders, to Vladimir Putin erect-
ing statues to his tenth-century namesake Prince Vladimir the 
Great to boost Russians’ patriotic fervor, to French conserva-
tive leader Marine Le Pen giving speeches in front of statues 
of Joan of Arc, medieval symbolism is vital to nationalist 
sympathies.3

Nationalism and Nostalgia  /  31
a national fairy tale
Over a century before the Holocaust, a strident nationalism 
swept through Europe, one with which racism, antisemitism, 
and medievalism became inextricably entangled during a 
period known as the Romantic Revival.
As a literary and artistic movement, the Romantic Revival 
was a reaction against neoclassicism. Renaissance Europe had 
embraced the art, poetry, philosophy, and science of ancient 
Greece and Rome. But as the Industrial Revolution churned 
ahead, the Romantics rebelled against the prior generations. 
They rejected classical forms as artificial and restrained, and 
they sought to replace them with something they felt was 
more authentic, that would bring them closer to the “natu-
ral” state of humanity, with a greater emphasis on emotion 
and passion. For many artists, this meant going back to the 
Middle Ages.
The Romantic Revival brought the world beautiful, poi-
gnant poetry and art as well as the liberationist spirit that 
led to the French Revolution, and, eventually, the abolition 
of slavery. But Romanticism also had a conservative side, 
in which pride in national history turned into nationalist 
propaganda. Many Romantics believed the medieval past 
was the truest, strongest, and purest spirit of European 
people. Politically speaking, this meant a rejection of cul-
tural influences that came from the Roman Empire and 
an embrace of medieval heroes like Siegfried and King 
Arthur, who were considered proud pre-Roman or even 
anti-Roman figures.
The ancient Roman Empire was famous not just for geo-
graphical conquest but also cultural conquest, via a process 
that philosopher José Ortega y Gasset called “amalgama-
tion.”4 Rome installed native, local governors to rule over 
their own people and send tributes back to Rome. Ancient 
Celtic and Germanic gods were incorporated into the Roman 
pantheon or merged with their Roman equivalents, and local 
festivals were transformed into Roman holidays. During the 

32  /  The Devil’s Historians
Middle Ages, the Roman Catholic Church would convert 
much of Europe to Christianity using the same formula—
Michael the Archangel was popular in medieval Iceland, for 
instance, because of his similarity to Sigurd the dragon-slayer. 
(In fact, medieval priests had to contend with troublesome 
locals who kept erecting statues to Michael and paying more 
attention to him than they did to Christ.) Thanks to a newly 
awakened nationalism, some Europeans in the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries began to view this Roman influence and 
alteration of earlier European ways of life as a kind of cul-
tural genocide. For them, the return to the Middle Ages was 
a recovery project.
One place you might be surprised to find this cocktail 
of nationalism and Romantic nostalgia is in the Grimm 
Brothers’ fairy tales. The Brothers Grimm were two German 
siblings who worked to compile German and Norse folk 
stories. Jacob Grimm, in particular, was committed to 
recovering these tales not just as a literary or aesthetic ven-
ture but as a form of cultural and national mythography—a 
way of tracing all the legends and stories from the past that 
had been lost. He conceived of his research and writing 
as primarily nationalistic, an effort to help Germans free 
themselves from the influence of Rome and form their own 
identity: in his 1848 History of the German Language, 
Grimm lauded ancient Germans for bringing down the 
Roman empire and granting “fresh freedom to the Romans 
in Gaul, Italy, Spain, and Britain,” and medieval Germans 
for ensuring Christianity’s dominance in Europe “by erect-
ing an unbreakable wall against the constantly pressing 
Slavs in Europe’s middle.”5
A key part of nationalist ideologies, both in the Romantic 
period and today, is the belief that each nation has a particu-
lar, well-defined “spirit.” The Grimms saw the tales they col-
lected as representative of the German soul. Wilhelm Grimm 
compiled Danish stories, claiming that they—and other 
Scandinavian myths—were “Germanic” at their core. He is 
quoted in the introduction to the 1944 edition of the Grimm 

Nationalism and Nostalgia  /  33
Brothers’ Fairy Tales as saying, “I strove to penetrate into the 
wild forests of our ancestors ... listening to their whole lan-
guage, and watching their pure customs.”6
And the Grimm Brothers didn’t just compile fairy 
tales. Jacob Grimm undertook literary expeditions to 
recover medieval German grammar, Germanic mythology, 
and “proto-Germanic” languages in order to restore the 
“essence” of what it meant to be German. He proposed that 
many northern European languages had Germanic roots, 
and he probed Norse mythology for its possible Germanic 
connections. Thus, the Grimms didn’t just tell stories; they 
were key figures in a reinterpretation of language, myth, and 
literature that sought to place the German people at the core 
of European culture.
The Grimm Brothers’ works, and their assertions of a medi-
eval Germanic identity (called pan-Germanic by scholars), were 
also rooted in a nation-building project. During their lifetime, 
Germany was not the unified country that we know today but 
a loose collection of competing kingdoms, principalities, and 
duchies. Their assertion of a pan-Germanic identity with deep 
historical roots had the explicitly political aim of arguing that 
these smaller states should be one unified nation. The German 
nation-building project came to fruition with the unification 
of Germany in 1871 but that was hardly the end of German 
nationalism. 
For instance, Richard Wagner’s 1876 opera cycle 
Der Ring des Nibelungen (The Ring of the Nibelung), 
based on the Icelandic Völsunga Saga and the German 
Niebelungenlied, became an unofficial German national epic 
and a core part of German identity. Its hero was Siegfried, 
known as “Sigurd” in Old Norse or “Sîvrit” in Middle High 
German. Siegfried was depicted as a model of medieval 
masculinity and “Germanic” spirit. Here he is introduced in 
Völsunga Saga, Chapter 23, as Sigurd:
Sigurd’s hair was brown and splendid to see. It fell in 
long locks. His beard, of the same color, was thick and 

34  /  The Devil’s Historians
short. His eyes flashed so piercingly that few dared to look 
beneath his brow. His shoulders were as broad as if one 
were looking at two men.... It is a mark of his great height 
that when he girded himself with his sword Gram, which 
was seven spans long, and waded through a field of full-
grown rye, the tip of the sword’s sheath grazed the top of 
the standing grain. And his strength exceeded his stature.7
Siegfried is known for various feats of courage and strength, 
including, in some stories, slaying the dragon Fafnir. He vari-
ously drinks dragon’s blood, bathes in it, or eats a dragon’s 
heart to gain supernatural powers like horned skin and the 
ability to understand what birds are saying.
Siegfried’s physical dominance and outsized masculinity 
were also part of his appeal to modern nationalists, since 
sexism and nationalism tend to go hand-in-hand. Siegfried’s 
romantic counterpart is the maiden Brunhild (also called 
Prunhilt or Brynhild), a famous warrior woman. In Völsunga 
Saga, Brunhild has been cursed by Odin, trapped sleeping in 
her armor as a punishment for fighting Odin’s favorite war-
rior. In the Niebelungenlied, Brunhild is an Icelandic queen 
who forces suitors to compete against her in feats of strength, 
including boulder-hurling. But Siegfried and Brunhild are not 
meant to be. In the Niebelungenlied, another man marries 
Brunhild against her will but has no success getting his new 
wife into bed—at one point, she hangs him from a nail on 
the wall when he tries it—so Siegfried disguises himself as 
the husband and rapes her. Misogyny undergirds nationalism 
to such an extent that his deception and assault of Brunhild, 
while horrifying to us and tragic to some medieval writers, 
was far from a deal-breaker for nationalists enamored with 
his “masculine” prowess.
The medieval Siegfried is a highly flawed hero. He is 
eventually murdered, betrayed by his own wife and a close 
friend. Readers are led to believe that this is just punish-
ment for his deception of Brunhild. But Wagner cleans up 
Siegfried’s flaws, revising the story to leave his hero blameless 
for Brunhild’s rape because he was bewitched by a potion. 

Nationalism and Nostalgia  /  35
Wagner’s Brunhild forgives Siegfried, and she and even the 
gods themselves die with him at the end of the opera as 
Valhalla is destroyed.
Wagner’s nineteenth-century version of Siegfried—a 
Nordic-Germanic, übermasculine warrior beloved by the 
gods—became the avatar of German nationalism that would 
be adopted by the Third Reich’s massive neomedieval pro-
paganda campaign. There was even a “Camp Siegfried” on 
Long Island, New York, in the 1930s that turned out to be a 
Nazi training facility in disguise! But Siegfried’s failures were 
important to German nationalism too. His fatal flaws—lust, 
drunkenness, and disloyalty—served as a warning: allow 
yourself to be corrupted by femininity and weakness, or turn 
your back on your people, and you could be responsible for 
the downfall of the German people.
once and future kings
Germans weren’t the only ones to embrace nationalist 
medievalism in the 1800s. Britain used the Middle Ages to 
prop up its own nationalist and colonial projects as well. Prior 
to the nineteenth century, “British” identity was somewhat 
fragmented. Wales was annexed by England in the 1500s; 
Scotland and England unified in 1707; Ireland was incorpo-
rated into the United Kingdom in 1801. The United Kingdom 
is still comprised of these four distinct nations (though most 
Irish won their independence, and only Northern Ireland 
remains) and remains a tapestry of local and regional identi-
ties. But over the course of the nineteenth century, nationalists 
in the UK attempted to forge a single identity out these many 
component parts—particularly in England and Scotland. And 
like the Germans, they turned to medieval myths, legends, and 
heroes to support this ethnic nationalism.
Who better than King Arthur, the legendary hero famous 
for uniting the warring territories of medieval England under 
a single crown, to represent this mythical English identity?8 

36  /  The Devil’s Historians
Arthur has a very long history of being used to inspire English 
patriotism. The myth of the Trojan hero Brutus we described 
earlier eventually entangled itself with the myth of King 
Arthur during the Middle Ages. In the twelfth century, chroni-
clers proposed that Arthur was Brutus’s descendent, thus con-
necting the two most famous figures in medieval British lore to 
each other. As Arthur’s ancestry improved, and his importance 
to England grew, his reported exploits became more impres-
sive. Arthur’s legend began with merely a single mention in a 
ninth-century chronicle as a general who fought the Saxons 
at the Battle of Badon Hill. But over the centuries, his story 
accumulated a tragic love affair, a legendary circle of knights, 
and the Holy Grail. In some medieval legends, Arthur also 
rebels against Rome by refusing to pay his taxes. (England 
was required to send “tribute” back to Rome in what would 
have been Arthur’s time.) Emboldened by his own rebellion, 
Arthur then goes on a conquering spree, taking over England, 
Iceland, and even Rome itself.
In spite of Arthur’s dubious historicity, by the fourteenth 
century, most prospective English kings had biographies 
commissioned to “prove” they were descended from both 
Arthur and Brutus. During the Wars of the Roses—an 
English civil war in the fifteenth century—Henry Tudor 
finally united the divided country by convincing the Welsh to 
back his claim to the throne. Wales was already suppressed 
under English rule. So how did an English king rally a colo-
nized people to fight his battles for him? One of the tactics 
he used was to fight under the banner of the Red Dragon, a 
symbol of King Arthur that is still on the Welsh flag today. 
Henry Tudor’s infamous son Henry VIII argued for his right 
to divorce (and divorce, and divorce) by claiming that he 
owed no allegiance to the Roman Catholic Church because 
his ancestor, King Arthur, had once conquered the Roman 
Empire. Henry VIII even had his own face painted on 
Arthur’s body on the Winchester Round Table, a supposed 
relic of King Arthur’s court.
All this history and myth made Arthur the perfect ava-
tar for nineteenth-century British nationalism. Alfred Lord 

Nationalism and Nostalgia  /  37
Tennyson, poet laureate for Queen Victoria, drew on this 
aspect of King Arthur in his 1869 poem “The Coming of 
Arthur,” collected in his Idylls of the King:
For many a petty king ere Arthur came
Ruled in this isle, and ever waging war
Each upon other, wasted all the land; […]
And after these King Arthur for a space,
And through the puissance of his Table Round,
Drew all their petty princedoms under him,
Their king and head, and made a realm, and reigned.9
King Arthur’s success in trampling the “petty princedoms” of 
medieval England into submission fed England’s own vision of 
itself as a colonial power. In many English minds, Arthurian 
“history” justified their grip on territories like Ireland, Wales, 
and Scotland, and on colonized peoples further afield, like 
India, Africa, the Americas, and Australia.
Colonial medievalism was often a hypocritical doctrine: 
England touted its medieval heroes when it suited them, but 
they also oppressed the people they conquered by calling them 
“medieval.” As historian Thomas R. Metcalf argues, in the 
nineteenth century the British people viewed India as living in 
a “medieval” state and argued that its brutal colonial occu-
pation of the subcontinent was an effort to “civilize.”10 It is 
ironic that Rome, which had once conquered much of Europe, 
became a focus of hatred and disdain in British and European 
nations—all while they were busily attacking the culture and 
traditions of other people around the globe, behaving like a 
much worse incarnation of the ancient empire they so vehe-
mently rejected.
scotland the brave(heart)
Neomedieval nationalism isn’t just a feature of the for-
mer empires of the world. Sometimes, colonized territories use 

38  /  The Devil’s Historians
the Middle Ages to argue for self-rule. For instance, in 1995, 
the growing cause for Scottish independence from England 
acquired an unexpected ally: Mel Gibson.11 The movie 
Braveheart was a huge success. It also resulted in a significant 
uptick in tourism for Scotland and a surge of Scottish nation-
alism. In fact, the Scottish National Party (SNP) jumped in the 
polls almost overnight.
Among medieval historians, Braveheart is something of 
a joke. But it’s not just the kilts, the blue face-paint, or the 
Battle of Stirling Bridge—fought, as it is in the film, with 
neither the city of Stirling nor a bridge in sight. It’s also the 
way that Braveheart mythologizes the Scottish Highlanders as 
“noble savages,” pure and uncorrupted, allegedly representing 
the essence of their nation.
Braveheart goes to great lengths to promote a single idea of 
the Highland Scots as the heart of a noble civilization. In the 
film, the Scottish are a people on the edge of the world, wild, 
unkempt, barely civilized. But that is fused with a sense that 
despite their rough edges, they possess ancient wisdom and 
superior morals. Take the central character, William Wallace: 
the historical Wallace was a member of the local gentry, but 
Braveheart reimagines him as a rough-and-tumble peasant-
warrior. His secret marriage in the film, in the woods before a 
stone cross rather than in a church, evokes a druidic-mystical 
tradition that is historically dubious at best but incredibly 
popular with the neo-pagan “Celtic” revival of the 1980s and 
1990s. Wallace’s mystical connection to the land is reinforced 
in the many scenes with lengthy shots of vast, craggy scenery 
backed by mournful bagpipes, or the montage of Wallace 
climbing through the mountains. Nationalism often seeks to 
link people spiritually to the land in which they live—although 
in Braveheart’s case, those shots were filmed in Ireland.
Braveheart’s nationalist propaganda depends on the myth 
that a distinctly Scottish spirit developed in raw, uncorrupted 
isolation from the rest of the world. But in real life, medieval 
Scottish and English aristocrats held lands on both sides of 
the border simultaneously, the lowland Scots and the English 
across the border were more-or-less indistinguishable, and the 

Nationalism and Nostalgia  /  39
highlanders were not that distinct from their cousins across 
the sea in Ireland.
In the film, Scottish warriors are ruthless on the battle-
field, and each of the protagonists ends each battle soaked in 
English blood. But despite their battlefield ferocity, the Scots 
are shown to be far more noble than their English counter-
parts. Wallace’s compatriots are rowdy but good-natured, gen-
erous, and kind. By contrast, the English are universally cruel: 
Gibson himself described the character of the English King 
Edward I in his film as a “psychopath.” (Outlander fans will 
recognize a similar dynamic in the way the television show 
portrays the English and the Scots.)
In the wake of Braveheart’s release, the SNP capitalized on 
reenergized patriotism with a campaign they called “head and 
heart” that made use of the film’s imagery in its campaign lit-
erature. The SNP’s leader Andy Salmon called upon the film’s 
climax in the conclusion to his speech at the party’s annual 
conference in 1995: “So that we can say with Wallace—head 
and heart—the one word which encapsulates all our hopes—
Freedom, Freedom, Freedom.”12
Scotland would not have a referendum on full indepen-
dence until 2014. But by that time, the nature of Scottish 
nationalism had changed: many on the “Yes Scotland” 
campaign actively distanced themselves from the romantic 
nostalgia of Braveheart, instead hoping to argue the case for 
independence based on its merits rather than against a bag-
pipe-festooned soundtrack. But the referendum failed, and the 
Scottish people elected to remain part of the United Kingdom, 
only to be faced two years later with another impassioned 
separatist movement: Brexit.
walls, moats, and dragons
Nationalism is experiencing a reawakening all over the 
globe, particularly in Europe and the United States. And medi-
evalism is part of the movement once again. For instance, the  

40  /  The Devil’s Historians
current United Kingdom is an international project: until 
recently a member of the European Union, it also spans mul-
tiple nations, including Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland, 
and England. But thanks to virulent, escalating nationalist 
and populist sentiment, in 2016, the British people narrowly 
voted to leave the EU. And on 31 January 2020, the United 
Kingdom officially left the EU.
Many in the Leave Campaign cited medieval grudges to sup-
port their newfound British isolationism. Brexit proponent Nigel 
Farage, for instance, compared Britain’s membership in the EU to 
England’s defeat in the Norman Conquest. But one of the strang-
est features of Brexit was neomedieval propaganda that revolved 
around Saint George, who, despite being depicted as a heroic 
medieval knight, was not actually medieval—or British.
Saint George was a half-Greek and half-Palestinian officer 
in the fourth-century Roman Empire who was executed for 
his Christian faith. Although George was not medieval, he 
was wildly popular in the medieval imagination, so much so 
that medieval people invented an entire chivalric tradition 
around him, turning him into a knight who rescues a princess 
and slays a dragon. George became one of the most popular 
warrior saints in the medieval Christian world. He was vener-
ated by crusaders, and King Edward III named him the patron 
saint of his Order of the Garter, Edward’s much-criticized 
vehicle for reviving “chivalry.”
In twenty-first century England, far-right political parties 
and hate groups embraced Saint George’s symbolic use in the 
Crusades and used the saint—and his iconic red cross on a 
white background—as a symbol not just of English patriotism 
but also of anti-Muslim, anti-immigrant white nationalism. 
The far-right United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP) 
made marking Saint George’s Day as a national holiday 
part of their party platform.13 The English Defence League  
(EDL), an Islamophobic organization founded in 2009, 
uses the cross of Saint George on a shield as their emblem, 
flanked by the Latin phrase “in hoc signo vinces”—meaning 
“in this sign you shall conquer.” At their rallies, EDL 
members frequently wear face masks adorned with Saint 

Nationalism and Nostalgia  /  41
George’s cross, fly banners with their logos superimposed on 
the flag of England, and wear pins depicting Saint George 
himself as a crusader with “EDL” on his shield. In 2015, a 
UKIP candidate for parliament even retweeted an inflamma-
tory cartoon of Saint George lancing the Prophet Mohammed 
with the caption “Happy St George’s Day Infidels.”14
In the months before the Brexit vote, the campaign to 
leave the European Union was careful not to directly asso-
ciate itself with hate groups like the EDL. But there’s no 
doubt that the anti-immigrant rhetoric employed by the 
Leave campaign was buoyed by the specter of Saint George 
the “crusader,” and may have contributed to Britain’s 
decision to leave the EU and get back to its supposedly 
medieval nature.
Americans, on the other hand, have long imagined their 
nation as the antithesis of a certain vision of what “medi-
eval” means: aristocracy, tyranny, and religious oppression. 
But medievalism has been present in the American cultural 
and political landscape for generations, and despite America’s 
foundation well after the medieval period, nationalist leaders 
often rely on misunderstood medieval concepts to promote 
their agendas.
Recently, the US has seen an almost unprecedented wave 
of medievalism in political propaganda. This may be a result 
of the rise of international far-right groups (like the so-called 
alt-right) that frequently deploy medievalism in their rheto-
ric and recruiting materials. But it may also be because the 
same Russian operatives who used online spaces to encourage 
Brexit relied on similar memes and rhetoric to manipulate 
nationalist and Islamophobic sentiment in the US and used 
that propaganda to assist the election of President Donald J. 
Trump.15
Trump has a long legacy of associations with medieval-
ism.16 Trump even proposed a Madison Avenue apartment 
building, “Trump Castle,” that would have had a drawbridge 
and a medieval-style moat. (Thankfully, it was never built.) 
Trump’s medievalism is also an integral part of his nation-
alism, a label he has embraced despite its associations  

42  /  The Devil’s Historians
with murderous regimes and the racist and xenophobic groups 
that emulate them. “I’m a nationalist,” Trump declared at a 
rally in Texas in 2018, while admitting, “we’re not supposed 
to use that word.”17 And he repeatedly invokes the Middle 
Ages as an expression of his white nationalism. In a 2016 
campaign speech, Trump used myths about the Middle Ages 
to make a case for increased American aggression and even 
the torture of prisoners. He accused Muslims of being “medi-
eval” and argued that the United States should get medieval 
in turn:
We’re living in medieval times. We have to stop it. We have 
to be so strong. We have to fight so viciously and violently 
because we’re dealing with violent people.... Look, we 
have laws, and the laws say, you can’t do this, you can’t 
do that, you can’t do, you know, a lot. Their laws say you 
can do anything you want and the more vicious you are, 
the better.... So we can’t do waterboarding but they can do 
chopping off heads, drowning people in steel cages…. we 
have no leadership. You know, you have to fight fire with 
fire.18
Trump toned down the neomedieval rhetoric during his 
first two years in power, but in the wake of the 2018 
midterm elections, in which his party lost control of the 
House of Representatives, Trump returned to his campaign 
medievalism. He had been pushing the idea of building a 
wall on the US border with Mexico since the first days 
of his 2016 campaign, even promising that Mexico would 
pay for it. 
But after the midterm losses, Trump demanded that 
the wall be built as an emergency priority. Rather than 
getting Mexico to fund it, Trump demanded money from 
American taxpayers, forcing the government to shut down 
for 35 days when he couldn’t get his way. Democratic lead-
ers fired back by declaring that the wall was “medieval.” 
Representative Hakeem Jeffries, Senator Dick Durbin, a 

Nationalism and Nostalgia  /  43
number of Democratic presidential candidates, and Senator 
Chuck Schumer (who had been calling the wall “medieval” 
since 2017) joined the chorus: they all agreed, the wall was 
“medieval”—meaning it was bad, barbaric, and ineffec-
tive.19 Surprising his critics, Trump embraced that medieval 
identity: “They say a wall is medieval—well, so is a wheel,” 
he argued. “A wheel is older than a wall. There are some 
things that work, you know what? A wheel works, and a 
wall works.”20
Leaving aside the fact that wheels are not older than walls, 
this is one of a few examples in contemporary American his-
tory of a political figure lauding an idea not in spite of its 
medieval connotations but because of them. Trump’s critics 
were quick to point out that the wall would be comically 
ineffective—simple to climb over, to cut through, or to tun-
nel under. But the wall’s medievalism has more to do with 
its symbolism than its practicality. It reveals the way Trump 
and his most fervent supporters want to see the United 
States: as a neomedieval fortress, protected from the people 
who might alter the American national “spirit.” For Trump’s 
most fervent supporters, the idea of a “medieval wall” evoked 
a distinctly different image from the one that Democratic crit-
ics saw. Those who celebrated the wall wanted America not to 
be what Ronald Reagan famously called “a shining city on a 
hill”—a beacon that is as inviting as it is inspiring.21 Instead 
they wanted it to be a fortified castle protected by dragons and 
a moat. 
In order for the country to require the wall, dragons, and 
moat, there has to be a “medieval” threat. In the days prior 
to the 2018 midterm election, Trump and many Republican 
candidates used rhetoric that recast groups of poor refugees 
fleeing violence on foot from Honduras, Guatemala, and 
El Salvador into caravans of “invaders” and “terrorists.” 
Unfounded rumors on hate sites like Breitbart and Infowars, 
and repeated by the president himself, warned that these 
caravans included Muslim terrorists and members of the 
notorious gang MS-13.22 This mix of misinformation was 

44  /  The Devil’s Historians
meant to make Americans feel as though they were under 
siege by an invading medieval horde. Trump supporters 
could thus envision themselves as righteous heroes defend-
ing their homes.
Now, the rhetoric most of the media found amusing 
and silly has horrifying and deadly consequences: less 
than one year after Trump’s call for a “medieval wall,” 
the United States began locking up adults and children 
who came seeking asylum in overcrowded cells, deprived 
of basic human needs like water, food, and beds, and even 
simple items like toothpaste. Inflamed by Trump’s propa-
ganda and their own racism, immigration agents are even 
seizing American citizens who “look” like immigrants.23 
Both adults and children have died from these conditions, 
and many more will suffer unless the administration is 
stopped.24
nationalist medievalisms 
around the world
Despite the popularity of medievalism in Europe and 
the United States, the penchant for medievalist nation-
alism is hardly limited to these areas. Vladimir Putin’s 
fervently nationalist regime in Russia has also turned to 
the Middle Ages for inspiration. In 2016, Putin erected a 
statue of Prince Vladimir the Great, tenth-century founder 
of Eastern Orthodox Christianity, in Moscow. Calling the 
elder Vladimir the “spiritual founder of the Russian State,” 
Putin used the statue’s unveiling to honor Russia’s power 
and expansionism.25 As we have shown so far, it isn’t easy 
to separate nationalism from racism, misogyny, and xeno-
phobia, and Putin’s nationalism is no different. Alongside his 
“patriotic” medieval revival, Putin has called multicultural-
ism “untenable,” rolled back women’s rights, and incited 
hatred against European immigrants, saying that they “kill, 

Nationalism and Nostalgia  /  45
plunder, and rape with impunity.”26 The idea that Russia 
has racially or religiously homogenous roots in the Middle 
Ages is completely wrong: medieval Russia was made up 
of Scandinavians, Slavs, Mongols, Turks, Jews, Tatars, and 
many other groups. It was far from insular in ethnicity, 
language, or faith. And many important medieval Russian 
figures were women. But the truth rarely matters in national-
ist narratives.
In increasingly authoritarian Turkey, the medieval televi-
sion drama Ertugrul, taglined “A Nation’s Awakening,” is 
incredibly popular. Ertugrul tells the story of the founder of 
the Ottoman Empire in sweeping, heroic glory. The show’s 
popularity coincides with the rise of far-right nationalist 
President Erdoğan, who has used medieval nostalgia to pro-
mote nationalism and revive several Ottoman traditions. He 
even has his guards dress in Ottoman costume.27 In Brazil, 
as Paulo Pachá wrote in a February 2019 exposé for Pacific 
Standard, the new far-right, nationalist administration under 
president Jair Bolsonaro has been using Deus Vult—“God 
wills it,” a rallying cry attributed to the Crusades—as its 
slogan. Popular videos produced by Bolsonaro’s support-
ers have titles like, “Brazil: The Last Crusade” and “The 
Cross and the Sword,” using the Crusades to promote Brazil’s 
“European” national heritage.28
Leaders who fetishize the Middle Ages tend not only 
to have nationalist agendas but also authoritarian ones. 
Politicians manipulate medieval nostalgia to demand loyalty 
to the state, to break international agreements and alliances, 
and, ultimately, to suppress their own people. They claim to 
do this in favor of replacing “globalism” with “patriotism,” 
and try to justify hatred, harassment, and violence by touting 
a national medieval past. Nationalist medievalism believes 
that it is returning its people to a past that is “safer” by 
shutting out anything it deems foreign to what it decides is 
its original essence. Not only is this propaganda racist and 
often deadly, it’s also not medieval. Because medieval people 
were anything but insular.

46  /  The Devil’s Historians
the cosmopolitan middle ages
The medieval world was far more interconnected and cos-
mopolitan than many people realize. Some scholars argue that 
the medieval period heralded the beginning of globalism—or 
at the very least, a hemispherism that saw greater and greater 
interactions between Europe, Asia, and Africa.29 Western 
Europe was part of this burgeoning hemispherical world, but 
it was not at the center of it. In fact, if you look at maps 
of the world from the eighth century to the fifteenth, you’ll 
be struck by just how tiny western Europe seems compared 
to the empires, caliphates, and kingdoms in the rest of the 
world. Far more powerful and influential were the Chinese 
dynasties; the Byzantine Empire that ringed the Mediterranean 
and Black Seas; the Muslim caliphates across the Middle East, 
Africa, and Europe; and the Mongol empire that stretched 
from the Pacific Ocean to the Mediterranean. As professor of 
anthropology at American University Chapurukha Kusimba 
put it in a 2017 interview with The Public Medievalist,
I think many historians and economic historians now 
characterize the period from the Tang dynasty in the 8th 
century to the end of the Ming Dynasty in the 16th as 
the period when Asia was the world. In many ways Asian 
empires, including the Islamic Caliphates, China, and 
India, were economically and politically powerful. At 
the time, the world revolved around them.… Commerce 
between the Mediterranean world and Southern Europe, 
North Africa, East Africa, South Asia, and East Asia was 
regular—the entire region was completely intertwined.30
This network—one in which the Middle East, India, China, 
and Mongolia formed a center of trade, culture, research, and 
political power—puts Europe on the periphery.
For centuries, American and European writers and film-
makers have reversed this formula, portraying non-Western 
medieval cultures as practically barbaric. (The 1999 film 

Nationalism and Nostalgia  /  47
Thirteenth Warrior, based loosely on a Muslim writer’s 
encounter with Vikings in the tenth century, is a notable 
exception.) Medieval Mongols on film and television are 
portrayed as a horde of fearsome barbarians—the Dothraki 
in Game of Thrones are clearly an analogue. But while 
the Mongols conquered a vast portion of the world, their 
depiction as uncivilized rapists and murderers has more to 
do with the fear and propaganda spread by their European 
opponents than by actual history. The real Mongol Empire 
promoted religious tolerance and safety for civilians across 
their territories, meaning people could travel from Europe 
to China in relative peace. Trade and education flourished 
across the Mongol Empire due to this ability to move freely. 
Marco Polo famously documented his travels along the Silk 
Road, but it was the Mongol Empire that made the Silk 
Road possible.31
And yet, although medieval Europe was less important 
than other areas of the globe, it was not isolated. We have 
ample records of people from the Middle East and sub-
Saharan Africa coming to Europe to trade, learn, and settle. 
Southern Europe—especially Spain, Sicily, and the Byzantine 
Empire—hosted travelers, traders, and migrants from across 
the Mediterranean.32 We have records of sub-Saharan African 
travelers too: in the beginning of the fifteenth century, 
Ethiopian embassies sprang up all around southern Europe 
and grew into burgeoning communities.33
Moreover, Europe itself was cosmopolitan, with people 
traveling back and forth between cultures—and not just 
for war. Al-Andalus (medieval Iberia, now Spain) was 
right next to France, and North Africa was right across the 
Mediterranean. Both were relatively easy to travel to. Parts 
of France were sometimes ruled by England, and vice versa. 
Western European culture relied heavily on the philosophi-
cal, literary, commercial, and scientific exchanges they had 
with people in the Middle East. To this list of cosmopolitan 
and multicultural societies, one can add Norman Sicily, the 
Byzantine Empire, medieval Indonesia, and even Viking 
Scandinavia.

48  /  The Devil’s Historians
Vikings, despite being imagined as a “pure” culture by rac-
ists, were some of the most well-traveled, curious, and non-
insular people in northern Europe. Needless to say, Viking 
depictions in contemporary popular culture bear only pass-
ing resemblance to actual history. First of all, there’s no such 
thing as a “Viking,” at least not in the Middle Ages. Scholars 
aren’t sure exactly how the term emerged, but most agree that 
the word is revivalist, coined by the same nineteenth-century 
medieval-infatuated writers we discussed earlier in the chap-
ter.34 It may be tied to Old Norse or Old English root words 
for “sea” or “camp.” Historically, the people we have come to 
call “Vikings” constituted a wide variety of groups, each with 
its own cultural identity, religious practices, and way of life.35
As a result, there is no such thing as “Viking culture.” 
What we see on television and in video games as “Viking” cul-
ture is a pastiche of medieval Scandinavian, Anglo-Saxon, and 
Germanic cultures. They traded with, raided, and conquered 
places as far-flung as Iceland, France, Sicily, Greece, and 
Russia. They didn’t wear those horned helmets either—those 
came into style about 800 years too late for a “Viking” to 
wear. Drawn by Scandinavian artists in the 1800s, the horned 
helmet became canonical Viking gear when Wagner used it in 
the same Siegfried operas we discussed above.
A medieval “Viking’s” entire way of life was based upon 
international, intercultural, and interreligious interaction. 
Some of those interactions were violent, to be sure, but most 
were not. If Vikings can be said to have built an empire, it was 
an empire of trade and commerce. And instead of seeing their 
ways as inherently superior, Vikings were famously willing to 
adopt and adapt to the local customs of the places they went. 
Vikings conquered and colonized Normandy in the tenth 
century. But within a few generations, they were completely 
indistinguishable from the local populace. The same hap-
pened in Sicily—in the eleventh century, the newly Norman 
Vikings conquered Sicily, and quickly integrated with the 
local population. For the remainder of the book, we’ll use 
the term Viking out of convenience, but keep in mind that 
when we use it, we’re referring to a group of people based 

Nationalism and Nostalgia  /  49
on their activities and interactions with other cultures, not on 
a shared cultural identity.
the myth of “pure” medieval nations
Beginning in the eighteenth century, thanks to pseudo­
scientific and pseudohistorical race theories, many white 
English and American people began to identify as racially 
“Anglo-Saxon.” In fact, in 2014, American presidential can-
didate Mitt Romney touted a shared “Anglo-Saxon heritage” 
as the reason his White House would a have better relation-
ship with Britain than Barack Obama’s.36 This is a peculiar 
bit of historical sleight of hand, given the incredibly diverse 
and mixed heritage not just of modern America but also of 
medieval Britain.
When the Roman Empire first set out to conquer 
“Britannia,” it was populated by a range of tribes—including 
Celts, Picts, Gauls, and Belgae. Archaeological evidence 
suggests that these tribes were already trading with the Irish, 
Gallic, and Germanic tribes on the European continent. 
They even sold tin in Mediterranean ports.37 After a series 
of attempted and failed conquests, the Romans took over 
much of Britain from the first to the fifth century. Keep in 
mind that at this point, Romans themselves had already 
assimilated Greek, African, Middle Eastern, and other cul-
tural practices, beliefs, and peoples. While Romans ruled in 
Britain, they faced periodic invasions by what chroniclers call 
“barbarians”: Frankish, Saxon, and Gallic raiders, as well as 
the Picts, Scots, and Irish, and the Attacotti, whose origins are 
unknown. Romans also hired mercenaries to fight off these 
invasions, bringing in Vandal and Germanic warriors to aid 
their cause.
Rome pulled out of Britain by the fifth century, and Britain 
would then be fought over again: between the Romanized 
Britons; the native forces of what would become Ireland, 
Scotland, and Wales; and the invading Saxons, Angles, Jutes, 

50  /  The Devil’s Historians
and other Germanic peoples. The Saxons won out in the short 
run, and by the eighth century, they ruled much of England.
This is the point at which modern nationalists—especially 
the ones who want to call themselves “Anglo-Saxons”—
would have you believe that England now had a stable, singu-
lar cultural identity. This is when they spoke “Old English,” 
after all, a catch-all term used to describe multiple dialects. 
But even aside from all the different cultures and peoples 
that had already coalesced in England over the centuries, the 
Saxons also had to reckon with Vikings, who continually 
showed up to raid, settle, and sometimes knock Saxon kings 
off their thrones. Vikings didn’t just bring their warriors to 
England, they brought all the cultural influences and artifacts 
they had from their seafaring exploration and trade. If 
England ever really had been “pure”—which, as you can see, 
it hadn’t—Vikings would have quickly put an end to that.
Finally, in 1066, after a long showdown between the Saxon 
and Danish royalty, the Norman French (who had also been 
conquered by Vikings) arrived to complicate English identity 
even more. William the Bastard of Normandy won the battle 
for the English throne and gained a much nicer nickname, 
William the Conqueror. At this point, England became 
French—or at least, French-ish. The island was ruled by 
Normans, who integrated with the local populace and created 
a hybrid language—Anglo-Norman—from which modern 
English eventually arose. By the twelfth century, England was 
a mix of Norman French culture—which was already a mix-
ture of Roman, German, Norse, Breton, and other cultures—
and Anglo-Saxon culture, which was a mix of German, 
Norse, Roman, Celtic and other cultures. Oh, and the Roman 
Catholic Church was constantly bringing people from abroad 
to the shores of the island. Chaucer’s Middle English, a lan-
guage that arose from the blending of Old English and Old 
French languages, was just one of the many simultaneous 
dialects of the English language that slowly grew out of the 
Norman Conquest. And there were at least 400 more years of 
war, invasion, trade, conquest, exploration, conversion, and 
other interactions that would keep changing the shape and the 

Nationalism and Nostalgia  /  51
nature of what we know of as “England” when the Middle 
Ages drew to a close.
The mixture of cultures we just traced in medieval England 
is not a historical exception. It’s the rule. The nation we now 
call Germany was inhabited by different Germanic tribes, but 
also by Romans, French, the Huns, and many others. Parts of 
medieval Iberia were ruled by a Muslim caliphate in the early 
Middle Ages, a center of power and trade that brought people 
and cultures from across the Islamic world and the Byzantine 
Empire. When Iberia was slowly conquered by Christian king-
doms in the latter half of the Middle Ages, it retained much 
of this diversity. And throughout the medieval period, French, 
Spanish, English, and German nobility all regularly intermar-
ried. We even have evidence of marriages between medieval 
Christians and Muslims.
Nationalists from the nineteenth century onward imagine 
that the medieval world not only had concrete, rigid geo-
graphical borders but firm ethnic borders as well. As you can 
see, this is complete nonsense. That’s not to say that there 
were no differences or conflicts between medieval kingdoms 
and countries—there were plenty. But medieval people lacked 
the sense of international enmity that seems to drive so many 
of our deepest conflicts today, both inside nations and between 
them.

This page intentionally left blank

53
In its moments of great achievement, medieval culture posi-
tively thrived on holding at least two, and often many more, 
contrary ideas at the same time.
—María Rosa Menocal, The Ornament 
of the World, 20021
On 27 July 2011, Anders Behring Breivik murdered 77 
people in Norway, driven by his ethnonationalist hatred 
of Muslim immigrants. On 29 January 2017, Alexandre 
Bissonnette murdered six Muslim men in a Quebec City 
mosque because he feared that “non-white, non-European 
immigration” would “lead to the marginalization of whites.”2 
On 27 October 2018, Robert Bowers murdered 11 Jewish 
worshippers at the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, saying he wanted “all Jews to die.”3 He 
believed—thanks to President Trump’s own rhetoric4—that 
Jews were funding a caravan of refugees from South America 
to cause a white genocide. And on 15 March 2019, white 
supremacist terrorist Brenton Tarrant killed 51 people 
and injured 49 more at a mosque and an Islamic Center in 
Christchurch, New Zealand, simultaneously releasing a 
manifesto called “The Great Replacement,” which warned of 
genocide against white people.
What do any of these incidents have to do with medieval-
ism or the misuse of medieval history? A great deal, as it 
turns out. Breivik considered himself a modern-day crusader 
and wrote a 1508-page manifesto that he titled 2083: A  
European Declaration of Independence. He railed against 
Islam, multiculturalism, and feminism, and claimed to be a 
leader of the New Order of the Knights Templar, Europe.5 
3
The “Clash of 
Civilizations”

54  /  The Devil’s Historians
Bissonnette posted crusader knight images on his Facebook 
page alongside his racist screeds. The paranoia behind Robert 
Bowers’ killing spree came directly from Nazi propaganda; 
the Nazis used medieval antisemitic stereotypes to paint 
Jewish people as outsiders who could “contaminate” a nation 
by increasing immigration. And the Christchurch shooter 
scrawled names and dates all over his weapons in white 
paint: among other right-wing hate symbols and the names of 
modern-day killers who had murdered Muslims and migrants, 
he also painted multiple references to the Middle Ages. This 
included the name of medieval military leader Charles Martel, 
along with other figures who have also been lionized by the 
extreme-right for their participation in the Crusades or their 
wars against the Ottoman Empire. His manifesto claims that 
he contacted the “reborn Knights Templar for a blessing in 
support of the attack, which was given,” and it repeatedly 
invokes the Crusades in all capitals: “ASK YOURSELF: 
WHAT WOULD POPE URBAN II DO?” and “UNTIL THE 
HAGIA SOPHIA IS FREE OF THE MINARETS, THE MEN 
OF EUROPE ARE MEN IN NAME ONLY.”6
Medievalism has a long and deadly history of being used 
in antisemitic and Islamophobic propaganda. White suprema-
cists view the Middle Ages as a heroic and glorious time 
not in spite of horrors like the Crusades and the widespread 
violence against Jews, but because of them. They believe 
they are continuing a medieval struggle—whether that’s the 
so-called Aryan medieval hero’s struggle against the gods or 
the Christian crusaders’ holy wars. And their obsessions have 
inspired not only the violent killers we listed above but mas-
sive state-sponsored genocide, including in Nazi Germany.
As you will see throughout the book, racism, sexism, 
homophobia, ableism, and religious discrimination are 
often a feature of white supremacist violence. With anti-
semitism and Islamophobia in particular, the line between 
racism and religious discrimination can be very blurry. Anti-
Muslim violence has been directed against Sikhs, Hindus, 
and anyone else who “looks” Muslim.7 Both Muslims 
and Jews are regularly accused of global conspiracies  

The “Clash of Civilizations”  /  55
that threaten to take the world “backwards.”8 Both have been 
accused of being “medieval,” and both have been persecuted 
by people trying to live out warped medieval fantasies. All this 
hatred and paranoia often has little to do with actual Jewish 
or Muslim religious practices. Instead, white supremacists 
perceive these as ethnic identities that are inherently opposed 
to their own.
medievalism in nazi germany
The same nationalist medievalisms that swept Europe dur-
ing the nineteenth century inspired some of the worst war 
crimes and human rights abuses of the twentieth century. 
Nationalism’s inherent interest in separating people, and 
in arguing for the superiority of one culture over others, 
makes it a natural companion to racism, antisemitism, and 
Islamophobia. In twentieth-century Europe, the nineteenth-
century medievalisms that inspired national unity were 
increasingly conflated with the illusion of a pure, white medi-
eval past. These ideological misuses of the Middle Ages aggra-
vated one another in places like Nazi Germany, with deadly 
consequences.
Medievalism that may have seemed charmingly patriotic 
when deployed by the Grimm Brothers became an unimagi-
nable horror when pushed to its conclusion: the extermina-
tion or domination of all races except the “Germanic ideal” 
imagined by the Nazi regime.9 Wagner brought new life to the 
medieval German Parsifal and Niebelungenlied at the end of 
the nineteenth century. But in the twentieth century, his operas 
became Nazi propaganda. In the nineteenth century, Wagner 
had celebrated the heroic Siegfried; a few decades later, the 
Nazi party adopted him as a model of cultural purity, a hero 
who could conquer the foe they thought was their primary 
adversary: a mythical Jewish conspiracy.
Nazis considered all non-white peoples biologically and 
morally inferior, but they thought Jews were a particularly 

56  /  The Devil’s Historians
sinister racial type that was dangerous to “white purity.” 
The view of Jewish people as a race requires some clarifica-
tion. Some people, Jewish and otherwise, see Judaism as only 
a religion. Others see Judaism as an ethnicity or a culture. 
Judaism even has cultural and historical divisions that are 
sometimes racialized: between Sephardic and Mizrahi Jews, 
whose ancestors were primarily from Spain, North Africa, 
and the Middle East, and Ashkenazi Jews, whose ancestors 
are primarily from Germany, Eastern Europe, and northern 
France. Moreover, many Jewish people are also Black, living 
in the United States, Ethiopia, and a number of other African 
nations. There are also plenty of Indian Jews, Latinx Jews, 
and Asian Jews. But no matter where they are from or what 
they look like, history is full of violence against Jewish people 
from all places. There were times that converting to another 
religion could save a Jewish person’s life and times when it 
would not, because “Jewishness” was seen as part of that 
person’s essential nature.
Nazi Germany was an example of the latter. Its persecu-
tion of Jews was based on both racist nationalism and an 
obsession with racist genetic pseudoscience. Although the 
Nazis prioritized white supremacy and murdered other people 
besides Jews, they reserved a special level of hatred for Jews. 
They even argued that the Jews manipulated other, non-white 
races in a campaign to “debase” white culture. One of Adolf 
Hitler’s many anti-Jewish rants in his 1925 manifesto Mein 
Kampf claims,
It was and is the Jews who bring the Negroes into the 
Rhineland, always with the same secret thought and 
clear aim of ruining the hated white race by the necessary 
resulting bastardization, throwing it down from its 
cultural and political height, and himself rising to be the 
master.
For a racially pure people which is conscious of its 
blood can never be enslaved by the Jew. In this world he 
will forever be master over bastards and bastards alone.10

The “Clash of Civilizations”  /  57
Unfortunately, this myth didn’t die out with the fall of Nazi 
Germany. You can see the direct line from Hitler’s manifesto 
to the ideas espoused by contemporary white supremacists, 
who believe that Jews are behind an intricate plan for “white 
genocide.” Robert Bowers, one of the terrorists we men-
tioned at the beginning of the chapter, repeated the same 
paranoid antisemitism when he murdered 11 Jewish people 
in a synagogue in 2018 because he believed Jews were bring-
ing refugees to the United States to wipe out white people.
Nazis believed that reviving medieval history—or perhaps, 
more accurately, pseudohistory since the Nazis waged an 
extensive campaign to rewrite Germany’s medieval past—
would restore white power. They thought the medieval past 
held buried Germanic glory, and that returning to the mas-
culine models of medieval Germanic heroes would motivate 
Germans to purge the nation of non-Aryan races.
The Nazi neomedieval campaign was meant to inspire 
confidence in, and loyalty to, the Third Reich by invoking 
a sanitized, all-white version of history and its heroes. As 
Laurie A. Finke and Martin B. Shichtman first explored 
in their 2004 book King Arthur and the Myth of History, 
Nazis promoted Arthurian legends, and knighthood in 
general, as their own foundational myths.11 The Third 
Reich created portraits—both rhetorical and artistic—of 
Nazi elites as chivalric knights. They even created “Order 
Castles,” schools for party officials that were intended to 
model medieval knightly orders. And there’s a reason cine-
matic heroes like Captain America and Indiana Jones always 
find Nazis trying to dig up relics from medieval legends: 
the Third Reich was obsessed with the medieval occult. 
Heinrich Himmler, commander of the Nazi SS, even funded 
expeditions to find the Holy Grail.
Nazi neomedieval identity hinged on a revisionist histori-
cal project in which they enlisted an army of literature and 
folklore scholars, archaeologists, historians, and linguists. 
These scholars were tasked with linking the stories, faith, 
and traditions of all the cultures Nazis admired to Germanic 

58  /  The Devil’s Historians
myth and folklore, and creating historical and linguistic “evi-
dence” that German culture was supreme in human history. 
When these scholars could not find any connections, they 
invented them, arguing that links between Aryan cultures 
had decayed because of “foreign elements.” The goal of this 
historical revision was to prove the existence of an Aryan 
race from which Germans could claim descent, and to exter-
minate all the cultural elements they thought of as foreign. 
Ultimately, and tragically, this included the people they 
deemed foreign too.
For instance, Himmler founded the Ahnenerbe, a Nazi 
“research institute” that was part of the SS. It was com-
prised of historians and other scholars devoted to the task of 
inventing a prehistoric pan-Germanic past, with or without 
the cooperation of the facts. Nazi archaeologists worked to 
uncover any scrap of evidence they could to support their 
totalizing worldview of “Aryanism.” In 1937, they funded 
an archaeological expedition to Val Camonica, in the Italian 
Alps; the historian they sent there claimed that he found 
Norse runes among the prehistoric inscriptions (note: he did 
not find anything of the sort). The Nazis took this as evidence 
that the Norse had founded Ancient Rome (note: they did not 
do anything of the sort).12
The early twentieth century saw a whole movement 
of “Ariosophy” (meaning, roughly, “the Wisdom of the 
Aryans”)—a field of people interested in the supposed ancient 
Germanic wisdom being uncovered by the Nazis and their 
predecessors. Ariosophists saw mystical meanings and magi-
cal powers in Norse runes and hidden symbolism everywhere. 
Nazis seeking hidden wisdom could be found staring intently 
at the frames of old wooden houses, desperately trying to fig-
ure out what secret messages were encoded within them.
Folklore was also extremely important to the Nazi revision 
of history. As folklore scholar Christa Kamenetsky explains, 
Nazis claimed that the suppression of Nordic folklore had led 
to the “decline of the West,” and by restoring that medieval 
wisdom, they could save Germany from “cultural decay.”13 

The “Clash of Civilizations”  /  59
So, they enlisted folklore scholars to provide evidence for 
links between the more domestic Germanic folklore recorded 
by the Brothers Grimm and the somewhat grander, heroic 
Norse and Icelandic legends. This led to some pretty wild 
comparisons: the doves seen in Grimm’s fairy tales trans-
formed into Odin’s ravens; the German Cinderella was 
reinterpreted as Gudrun—Siegfried’s wife. Little Red Riding 
Hood was really the primeval Norse mother, a symbol of 
fertility.
Unfortunately, as outlandish as all this “research” sounds, 
it influenced popular common knowledge. Few people under-
stood what was going on behind the scenes in the academy or 
in German universities until decades afterwards. This means 
that much of the research done around the time of the Third 
Reich accidentally utilizes the Nazis’ revisionist treatment of 
folklore, myth, and medieval legend. And some of this work 
is in the public domain—uncritically cited on Wikipedia, free 
on Google Books, and circulated on some blogs—whereas the 
more up-to-date research is often hidden behind an academic 
paywall or in expensive scholarly monographs. This deluge 
of free misinformation makes researching medieval legends 
extremely confusing for students and for the public. Without 
a clear understanding of the origin of a particular idea, it’s 
easy to get taken in. And in the worst-case scenarios, you 
can see the inheritance of Nazi historical revisionism in the 
rhetoric and imagery that inspires today’s white suprema-
cist terrorists: the sonnenrad (sun wheel) that Nazi leader 
Heinrich Himmler used to decorate his castle, a symbol Nazi 
folklorists attributed to medieval “Germanic” cultures, was 
on the cover of the Christchurch terrorist’s manifesto and on 
his ammunition bag.
The Nazis are often viewed as a horrific historical excep-
tion but the truth is, not only did their views and their 
medievalism have roots in the nationalism we discussed in 
the previous chapter but their fantasy of Aryan superior-
ity was common in the Western world throughout the early 
twentieth century. Even in the United States, “Anglo-Saxon” 

60  /  The Devil’s Historians
Protestant heritage was (and, by many white supremacists, 
still is) considered superior, which meant that along with 
horrific discrimination, Black Americans, Jews, Muslims, 
and Asian, Irish, and Italian immigrants (the latter two now 
usually considered white) were barred from certain restau-
rants and jobs, were more likely to be accused of crimes 
thanks to junk racial “science” like phrenology and Social 
Darwinism, and were subject to mob violence. Limits were 
placed on how many non-“Anglo-Saxon” immigrants were 
allowed in the country, which led to boats full of Jews 
being sent back to die in concentration camps during World 
War II. It wasn’t easy to separate religious discrimination 
from racism in this era: Jews were mocked with ethnic ste-
reotypes, Irish and Italians were considered inferior because 
they were Catholic, and Arabs were exoticized and mis-
trusted because of both their religion and their race.
a modern crusade
It was in this climate of early twentieth-century “Anglo-
Saxon” self-aggrandizement that the Crusades surged back 
into the popular imagination. Pro-war propaganda against 
Muslim nations often invokes the Crusades and casts them 
as part of a greater cosmic struggle between good and evil. 
This is done to justify the horrors of war and to excuse 
the atrocities committed by one’s own side. It allows those 
fighting in the conflict to feel righteous, as if they are God’s 
own warriors. This violent propaganda reveals serious mis-
conceptions about the past: that the Crusades were “holy,” 
that the soldiers who fought in them were heroes or martyrs, 
and, most insidious of all, that the Crusades were some-
how inevitable, part of an unending clash of civilizations 
between the Christian West and the Muslim Middle East. You 
might recognize this as the rhetoric around modern warfare 
in Afghanistan and Iraq, but in fact, it is at least as old as 
World War I.

The “Clash of Civilizations”  /  61
A key example of Crusades rhetoric can be found in the 
fighting over the Sinai Peninsula and the region of Palestine 
during World War I. On one side was a coalition of Arab 
revolutionaries and their British allies, and on the other were 
the allied forces of Germany and the Ottoman Empire. The 
presence of the Ottomans in this fight provided easy fuel 
for World War I-as-crusade propaganda for the British. In 
fact, that propaganda was so prevalent that the British Press 
Bureau had to release a D-notice (essentially, a request to 
censor a story for military security reasons) to the press on 
15 November 1917 that read:
The attention of the Press is again drawn to the 
undesirability of publishing any article, paragraph, or 
picture suggesting that military operations against Turkey 
are in any sense a Holy War, a modern Crusade, or have 
anything whatsoever to do with religious questions. 
The British Empire is said to contain a hundred million 
Mohammedan subjects of the King and it is obviously 
mischievous to suggest that our quarrel with Turkey is one 
between Christianity and Islam.14
The press were not the only ones to blame for the 
medieval rhetoric: some members of the British mili-
tary also seemed to believe they were on a holy crusade. 
Edmund Allenby, the leader of the British Empire’s 
Egyptian Expeditionary Force, captured Jerusalem from 
the Ottomans on 9 December 1917. Despite the censorship 
notice put out by the Press Bureau, the influential maga-
zine Punch published a cartoon (see Figure 3.1) in which 
the spirit of Richard the Lionheart personally approved of 
the conquest.
One of Allenby’s subordinates, Major Vivian Gilbert, 
published a book in 1923 entitled The Romance of the Last 
Crusade: With Allenby to Jerusalem, in which he wrote: “of 
the ten crusades organised and equipped to free the Holy 
City, only two of them were really successful,—the first under 
Godfrey de Bouillon and the last under Edmund Allenby.”15 

62  /  The Devil’s Historians
FIGURE 3.1  “The Last Crusade,” in Punch, or the London Charivari, 
19 December 1917, p. 415. Obtained from Project Gutenberg: https://
archive.org/details/punchvol152a153lemouoft/page/n889.
Gilbert viewed the war through a very common lens: that 
the “Holy Land”—or any place that, according to his mind, 
should be ruled by Christians—is “unfree” and in need of 
liberation when it is ruled by Muslims. Other British writers 
made the same medieval references, writing books about the 
battle for Jerusalem with titles like The Modern Crusaders 
(1920), The Last Crusade (1940), and With Allenby’s 
Crusaders (1923).16
After World War I, as European nations broke up the 
Ottoman Empire, divided its territory among themselves, and 
invaded and colonized the Middle East, the memory of the 
Crusades returned. Some Europeans saw themselves as con-
quering crusaders, like French General Henri Gourand who 
said, upon conquering Damascus, “Behold, Saladin, we have  
returned.”17 Thus, it seems only fair that Middle Eastern 

The “Clash of Civilizations”  /  63
leaders eventually began to envision themselves as those who 
resisted the Christian crusaders. In the post-WWII period, as 
the nations of Syria, Egypt, Lebanon, Iraq, and others fought 
for and achieved their independence, their nationalist move-
ments looked to the Middle Ages for inspiration and focused, 
as Gourand did, on the highly mythologized medieval figure 
of “Saladin.”
The historical warrior Salah ad-Din Yusuf Ibn Ayyub 
was important to both Muslim and Christian writers of the 
Middle Ages. Muslim historians like Bahā ad-Dīn, who knew 
Saladin personally, praise him as a just, valorous, and gener-
ous ruler, and make particular note of his humble devotion 
to Islam. But others, like Ibn al-Athir, were less positive: they 
blamed Saladin for destroying the Zengid Dynasty in Syria— 
a particularly scathing accusation since the Zengid hero Nur 
ad-Din had been especially successful against European invad-
ers. Saladin was an entirely different character in medieval 
European poetry, but not always an antagonist. The brave, 
chivalric “Saracen” knight starred in multiple heroic poems 
about the Third Crusade, portrayed as the noble opponent 
of Richard the Lionheart. But in order to make Saladin more 
palatable to medieval Christian audiences, he had to be more 
Christian himself. In several medieval French poems, includ-
ing the thirteenth-century L’Ordene de Chevalerie, Saladin 
is knighted by his French prisoner, Sir Hugh de Tabarie. He 
is called “saintly” in the fourteenth-century medieval Dutch 
poem The Book of Vengeance, and in the French Le pas 
Saladin, he travels around Europe with his buddy Hugh to 
learn all about Christianity.
This chivalric, Christianized Saladin became an appealing 
figure for nineteenth-century British medieval enthusiasts. 
In 1825, Sir Walter Scott published The Talisman, a novel 
set during the Crusades, which solidified and popularized 
Saladin’s myth for a new generation. But Saladin was resur-
rected in the Muslim world too: in 1878 the Ottoman Empire 
restored Saladin’s tomb and promoted him as a hero. In the 
mid-twentieth century, as nations like Egypt and Syria strug-
gled for their independence from England and France, Saladin 

64  /  The Devil’s Historians
was reclaimed as an anti-Western figurehead, an avatar of 
opposition to European, American, and emerging Israeli 
power.
This resulted in a surge of historical and cultural adaptations 
of Saladin’s life as his legend grew. Egyptian filmmaker Youssef 
Chahine made a big-budget film (financed by the Egyptian state) 
called El Naser Salahadin, which equated Saladin to Egyptian 
President Gamal Nasser.18 Nasser also frequently referred to 
the medieval hero in his speeches.19 But Nasser’s approach was 
different from many contemporary leaders in the region—he 
promoted a pan-Arab nationalism that was based on uniting 
the Arab world across both its national and its religious lines, 
embracing, for example, Egypt’s significant Arab-Christian 
and Jewish minorities. Leaders like Iraq’s Saddam Hussein 
and Syria’s Hafaz al-Assad also believed they were inheriting 
Saladin’s legacy: al-Assad erected a massive statue of Saladin 
in downtown Damascus, and Hussein commissioned murals, 
statues, and even a children’s book that likened him to Saladin.20
These associations between contemporary conflicts and 
the Crusades were repeated in the media and became part 
of the popular historical consciousness of conflicts between 
Middle Eastern and Western governments. At that point, both 
sides were manipulating medieval history to stoke interna-
tional conflict.
medieval 9/11
In 1993, American political scientist Samuel P. Huntington 
published in Foreign Affairs what would become his most 
popular and most controversial article: “The Clash of 
Civilizations?”, which he expanded into a book in 1996.21 
Huntington argued that the world was split into civilizations 
defined chiefly by religion and culture: “Western,” Orthodox, 
Islamic, Buddhist, Hindu, etc. He proposed that each of these 
civilizations had such different values that they couldn’t help 
but come into conflict. “The fault lines between civilizations,” 

The “Clash of Civilizations”  /  65
he warned, “will be the battle lines of the future.”22 It’s a 
vastly oversimplified view of world cultures, political his-
tory, and people. It does not give much credence to cultural 
exchange, genuine multiculturalism, or humanistic values. But 
his ideas gained traction after 11 September 2001, because 
Huntington saw “Islamic” civilization as one destined for 
conflict with the “Western” world.
It’s worth noting at this point that “culture” in Huntington’s 
theory functions as a kind of code word—you can tell by 
his long list of religions that are practiced in predominantly 
non-white countries, interrupted only by reference to a 
seemingly theologically neutral “Western” identity. His 
formula became particularly appealing to white Americans 
and Europeans in the post-9/11 world, when the shock of 
the attack on the World Trade Center in New York City 
provoked a wave of Islamophobia that was almost always 
conflated with racism.
At the turn of the new century, the Islamophobia that 
spread like wildfire in the wake of the attack fueled cries 
for a new crusade—and thanks to the internet and 24-hour 
news, this time it echoed on a massive scale. Both Osama 
bin Laden and the United States under the presidency of 
George W. Bush invoked the Crusades in the ensuing wars 
in Iraq and Afghanistan. Two weeks after the 11 September 
2001 attacks, President George W. Bush said in a speech on 
the White House lawn, “This is a new kind of—a new kind 
of evil. And we understand. And the American people are 
beginning to understand. This crusade, this war on terrorism 
is going to take a while. And the American people must be 
patient. I’m going to be patient.”23 In the days that followed 
Bush’s speech, White House staff attempted to walk back 
the statement, because when Bush used the word crusade, he 
seemed to be confirming what bin Laden and others like him 
had preached for years: that no matter its stated intentions, 
the United States was conducting a war not just on a specific 
group of radicals, but on all Muslims.
According to bin Laden, the US was not interested in 
dismantling terrorist organizations, but in conquest. It was 

66  /  The Devil’s Historians
motivated not by a desire for justified retaliation, but by 
religious hatred. He believed the US was conducting a cru-
sade in the medieval sense, not in the bland aspirational 
sense. Bin Laden had been using the word crusader to refer 
to many of his opponents, including Israel and America, 
for years. For example, in his 1996 “Declaration of War 
against the Americans Occupying the Land of the Two Holy 
Places,” he said: “It should not be hidden from you that 
the people of Islam had suffered from aggression, iniquity 
and injustice imposed on them by the Zionist-Crusaders 
alliance and their collaborators.”24 Two years later, he 
issued another statement titled “Jihad Against Jews and 
Crusaders,” within which he railed against “the Crusader-
Zionist alliance.”25 It was through this lens that bin Laden 
saw many of the world’s conflicts: the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflict, the American wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, 
the UN’s condemnation of his actions, and even conflicts 
between India and Pakistan. All of it was part of a grand 
Crusader-Zionist effort against Islam.
Bin Laden’s rhetoric fundamentally divided the world 
into two groups: jihadis and crusaders. For the vast 
majority of Muslims, the word jihad is simply the inter-
nal, everyday spiritual struggle to be a better person. But 
radicals like bin Laden seized on the term and used it to 
mean something violent. The Western media hasn’t helped, 
often further equating jihad with violence in their audi-
ence’s minds.
As the war in Iraq drew on, the shame of Bush’s com-
parison wore off. American conservative media began to root 
enthusiastically for military intervention in the Middle East 
by conjuring up their own vision of a medieval holy war. 
James Pinkerton, Fox News pundit, praised the invasion of 
the Middle East as part of a “crusader spirit” in 2003, arguing 
that, like the medieval Crusades, the war was “about bring-
ing civilization and salvation of a backward people.”26 The 
real medieval Crusades, however, were never about “bring-
ing civilization” to anyone, since by most accounts medieval 

The “Clash of Civilizations”  /  67
Muslims were more culturally and technologically advanced 
than medieval Christians.
The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have gone on for nearly 
two decades as of the writing of this book, and although 
Huntington’s theory has been dismissed by numerous scholars, 
a few continue to embrace it, such as historian Niall Ferguson, 
who writes books with titles like Civilization: The West and 
the Rest (2011) and headlines documentaries like Civilization: 
Is the West History? (2011).27 Unfortunately, scholars like 
Ferguson are particularly influential, in part because their 
ideas resonate with far-right conservative politicians and oth-
ers who hope to profit from continued war.
Western supremacists like Huntington and his intellectual 
descendants take the position that “The West”—which is 
typically only a more-acceptable way of saying “the majority- 
white parts of the world”—is superior, either due to what 
they imagine are its inherent sociological characteristics or 
based upon its history. Those who embrace this idea may 
not consider themselves racists, but the medievalism inherent 
in their project, in which they paint non-Western cultures 
as “medieval,” “barbaric,” and “backwards” in an effort to 
argue for how dangerous they are, is a very sheer veil for 
prejudice.
civilizational conservatives
This same toxic cocktail of white supremacy, antisemitism, 
and Islamophobia dominates the latest pseudointellectual 
incarnation of Huntington’s theory, known as “civilizational 
conservatism.”28 Peter Beinart, writing for The Atlantic in 
2016, coined the term civilizational conservative to describe 
a growing right-wing political force that is willing to cast 
democracy aside to ensure white Christian supremacy.29 
Allied with the so-called alt-right, civilizational conservatives 
believe in restoring a “medieval” world via violent conquest. 

68  /  The Devil’s Historians
They often invoke the Crusades, but what they really want is 
a neomedieval race war, one they are working hard to bring 
to fruition.
Steve Bannon, Trump’s former chief strategist and one of 
the authors of the Muslim travel ban in the United States, is 
the most infamous civilizational conservative in modern poli-
tics. Bannon believes that Christians are already in a “global 
war against Islamic fascism,” and in a 2014 speech at the 
Vatican, he cited the Crusades as a model for action:
If you look back at the long history of the Judeo-Christian 
West’s struggle against Islam, I believe that our forefathers 
kept their stance, and I think they did the right thing. 
I think they kept it out of the world, whether it was at 
Vienna, or Tours, or other places.… It bequeathed to us 
the great institution that is the church of the West.30
Bannon’s speeches and activism are augmented by his film-
making career, which includes a documentary film called 
Torchbearer, starring Duck Dynasty’s Phil Robertson, that 
uses gruesome, violent imagery to argue that forming a 
“Judeo-Christian republic” is the only way to save Western 
civilization.31
Civilizational conservatives love to pay lip service to 
Israel, but antisemitism is always a companion to their 
Islamophobia. Despite his supposed championship of 
“Judeo-Christian” ideals, Bannon is the same man who alleg-
edly did not want his daughters going to school with Jews.32 
He gives speeches full of antisemitic dog whistles, including 
bashing the “corporatist, global media,” and “cosmopoli-
tanism,” both of which translate as “Jewish” in the white- 
supremacist ear.33
The extremist evangelical contingent of civilizational 
conservatism believes that Jews should to go back to Israel 
because of a prophecy that Christ will return during a civili-
zational war in the Middle East. At the end of this war, the 
“twelve tribes” of Israel will convert and usher in the Second 

The “Clash of Civilizations”  /  69
Coming. In order to have their longed-for Armageddon, 
these fanatics need the Jews to stay alive—and in Israel—for 
their eventual conversion. This apocalyptic theory is behind 
Trump’s declaration of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.34
The Russian interference in America’s 2016 election also 
has links to medievalism, antisemitism, and Islamophobia. 
White supremacists, both in shady online venues like the 
neo-Nazi website Stormfront and on mainstream television 
like Fox News, have long touted Russia, and Vladimir Putin, 
as the last great bastions of white civilization. Never mind 
that Russia is technically in the east—Putin fans believe 
he is destined to defend the west. White supremacists who 
populate the message boards at the neo-Nazi website Daily 
Stormer laud Putin’s attempt to raise the white birth rate in 
his country and praise the fact that his regime is caus-
ing Jews to leave Russia. Alt-right leader Richard Spencer, 
who celebrated Trump’s electoral win by leading a room 
full of people in a Nazi salute, praised Putin’s Russia as 
the “sole white power in the world.”35 And it isn’t just 
extreme white supremacists writing love letters to Putin: 
Bryan Fischer, spokesman for the fundamentalist American 
Family Association, called Putin the “lion of Christianity,” 
and Pat Buchanan wrote a 2013 article for The American 
Conservative urging his fellow conservatives to consider 
embracing the Russian leader: “In the culture war for man-
kind’s future, is he one of us?”36
In November 2016, anti-terrorist intelligence specialist 
Malcolm Nance warned in an interview on MSNBC that the 
Trump administration’s embrace of Russia was linked to white 
nationalism and possible plans for war in the Middle East: 
“What we’re seeing is an alignment where people believe that 
they have to align the United States and Russia as an axis 
of Christendom against Islam, in a clash of civilizations that 
Osama bin Laden dreamed about.”37 Nance even predicted—
long before the white-supremacist terrorist attacks in the US 
began—that we would see more mass atrocities committed 
by white supremacist neo-crusaders like Anders Breivik in 

70  /  The Devil’s Historians
Norway. Unfortunately, Nance has turned out to be absolutely 
right.
The internet helped white supremacists eager to stoke anti-
semitism and Islamophobia, spreading their ideas further and 
faster than at any point in history. Even since the first draft of 
this book, the violence continues to grow. In April 2019, John 
T. Earnest attacked a California synagogue, murdering one 
woman and injuring others, and tried to livestream the attack 
on Facebook. He claimed that the Christchurch killer’s mani-
festo, which he found online, inspired his terrorism. Earnest’s 
manifesto railed against Jews who he claimed, just as Hitler 
had, were using immigrants and Black people to destroy the 
white race.
Earnest’s attack on the synagogue shows the way that 
Nazi ideas, once forcefully rejected by America and Europe, 
have been revived, spreading like a contagion across the 
web. And if medieval and modern history teach us anything, 
it is how these ideas can move rapidly from endangering 
innocent people in one mosque or one synagogue to wiping 
out the Jewish or Muslim population of an entire city or 
country.
medieval models of hate
Those who view the Crusades as aspirational or who think 
that Christian and Muslim civilizations are destined to be 
locked in an unending struggle would have you believe that 
medieval Christians, Muslims, and Jews were in a constant 
state of war.38 But although religious violence was a feature of 
the medieval world, it was far from the whole story. Medieval 
interfaith communities thrived, and people of different faiths 
learned from each other, even in the face of persecution and 
invasion. We want to be cautious in this section: to record 
the roots of modern antisemitism and Islamophobia that were 
planted in the Middle Ages, but also to show how rich and 

The “Clash of Civilizations”  /  71
active medieval cultural exchange could be and how people 
of multiple faiths not only survived in the Middle Ages but 
thrived.
Notoriously, anti-Jewish violence was rampant through-
out medieval Europe. Many medieval European kingdoms 
kept Jews isolated and oppressed. Life for Jews could be 
unpredictable, and shifts in leadership, or hatred stoked by 
the Crusades, could turn deadly. Jews in England, France, 
and Germany were often limited in their professions: they 
were sometimes allowed to serve as moneylenders, since 
Christians were forbidden from doing it. Jewish people 
were sometimes employed by medieval kings to collect taxes 
and debts when those kings needed money but personally 
wanted to avoid the prohibition against usury. This not only 
led to resentment from borrowers, it also fed the stereotype 
that Jewish power came from manipulating money. In 1190, 
for instance, the use of Jews as debt collectors led to anti-
Jewish riots in York in which the city’s entire Jewish popula-
tion was massacred.
Jews became a convenient scapegoat for any leader who 
wanted to increase his political power or get himself out 
of trouble, and many rulers made statements by “cracking 
down” on Jews or expelling them. Philip II of France—in debt 
at the ripe old age of 15—kidnapped Jews and held them for 
ransom, then confiscated Jewish property and expelled them 
from France. He allowed Jews to return in 1198 but imposed 
heavy taxes on them. The Fourth Lateran Council in the early 
1200s worsened this kind of antisemitism, and its compan-
ion Islamophobia, by making an official statement that Jews 
didn’t really “belong” in Christian countries. The council 
decreed that Jews could not hold public office or appear in 
public on certain holy days, and that both Jews and Muslims 
had to be marked by special clothing to set them apart so 
that they didn’t mix with Christian women—particularly in 
the “biblical” sense. Edward I exiled Jews from England in 
1290. In 1306, Philip IV of France arrested 100,000 Jews, 
seized their property, and expelled them on the grounds that 

72  /  The Devil’s Historians
they represented a state within a state, a charge of Jewish 
disloyalty that echoes to this day, with President Trump 
recently making that accusation against Jews who vote for 
Democrats.39 French Jews were invited back by Philip’s suc-
cessor, who found that when his own agents tried to collect 
debts, the people didn’t like them so much either; Jews would 
be banished from France and then readmitted in repeated 
cycles for nearly 200 years.
Paranoid fantasies about Jews stoked by religious and 
political leaders resulted in violence all over Europe. In the 
mid-1300s, Jews were even accused of causing the Black 
Death, and they were slaughtered throughout Switzerland and 
Germany because of it. And the Middle Ages saw the birth of 
the “blood libel” conspiracy theory that accused Jews of using 
the blood of Christian children in religious rituals. Though 
it has absolutely no basis in reality, enough medieval people 
believed it that several unsolved murders of children were 
blamed on local Jewish communities, which led to widespread 
anti-Jewish violence.
Life may have reinforced art, and vice versa, in much of 
Europe. Even medieval Christian writers who are known 
for some degree of tolerance toward other faiths—like John 
Mandeville, whose narrator concludes that Christians and 
Muslims have much in common—exhibits a paranoid fear and 
loathing of Jews. Mandeville’s Travels repeatedly asserts that 
Jews are “wicked” and claims that many Jews are enclosed 
between the Scythian hills, but at the time of the antichrist, 
they will emerge to destroy Christians.40 Jews were frequently 
the villains of medieval horror stories, like Chaucer’s infamous 
Prioress’s tale, in which Jews murder an innocent child and 
cast him into a pit “in the same place where these Jews purge 
their entrails.”41 Popular Passion plays, which traveled from 
town to town recreating the torment and crucifixion of Christ, 
regularly whipped up anti-Jewish fervor.
The Crusades pitted Christians against Muslims and Jews 
alike. But although white Christian supremacists like to glo-
rify the Crusades as part of an inevitable Muslim/Christian  

The “Clash of Civilizations”  /  73
holy war, the truth is that medieval crusades were often 
launched against people of multiple faiths, including other 
Christians; sometimes these were for political reasons, or 
sometimes they were simple land-grabs. For instance, the 
infamous slogan “Kill them all and let God sort them out”—
something contemporary Islamophobes use to stoke violence 
against Muslims—was allegedly the instruction when sol-
diers took the city of Béziers in France during Pope Innocent 
III’s  crusade against the Cathar Christian heresy.42 The 
crusaders massacred the entire city. Crusaders also attacked 
Al-Andalus to seize territory from Muslims and launched 
violent efforts to convert pagans in the Baltics.
Even though they weren’t the only targets of crusader 
violence, Muslims and Jews both suffered from these attacks, 
whether they were in territories invaded by crusaders or in 
towns where crusade fervor sparked pogroms. Eliezer bar 
Nathan’s twelfth-century Hebrew chronicle, Persecutions of 
1096, recounts a massacre of Jews at Mainz inspired by cru-
sader sentiment: “The enemy rose against them, killing little 
children and women, youth and old men, viciously—all in 
one day.”43 But some contemporaneous Christian writers con-
demned these murders. Albrecht of Achen’s twelfth-century 
History of the Journey to Jerusalem describes the 1096 massa-
cre by saying Christians “rose up in a spirit of cruelty against 
the Jewish people throughout these cities and slaughtered 
them without mercy.”44 Twelfth-century chronicler William of 
Newburgh recounts the York massacre of 1190 with sorrow 
eight years later, saying,
The zeal of the Christians against the Jews in England ... 
was not indeed sincere, that is, solely for the sake of the 
faith, but in rivalry for the luck of others from envy of 
their good fortune. Bold and greedy men thought that they 
were doing an act pleasing to God, while they robbed or 
destroyed rebels against Christ and carried out the work 
of their own cupidity with savage joy and without any, or 
only the slightest, scruple of conscience.45

74  /  The Devil’s Historians
Even French literature meant to celebrate victories in the 
Crusades mixes admiration for crusading heroes with hor-
ror, even if horror in the reader may be an unintentional 
consequence of their accounts. Richard Coer de Lyon, a 
fourteenth-century Middle English romance that recounts 
the exploits of the famous hero Richard the Lionheart, 
details Richard cannibalizing his Muslim victims during the 
Third Crusade. Chroniclers also document Christian can-
nibalism during the First Crusade.46 Raymond d’Aguilers, 
who traveled with the crusaders, notes in his twelfth-
century account of the First Crusade on Jerusalem that 
the invaders “had taken many Saracen castles and villages 
and forced the Saracens to work, as though they were 
their serfs.”47 He praises the Saracens for their mechanical 
ingenuity, their fortitude in battle, and their perseverance, 
even as he calls the gruesome ending the “judgement of 
God”: “Piles of heads, hands, and feet were to be seen in 
the streets of the city. It was necessary to pick one’s way 
over the bodies of men and horses.”48
Writers today talk about “the Crusades” as one coher-
ent ideological phenomenon, but medieval Muslim writers 
would not recognize the grand narrative spun by Christian 
propagandists. Instead, they experienced what we call 
“the Crusades” as a series of invasions, or as senseless, 
random violence committed not just against their fellow 
Muslims but also against Christians. On their way to 
Constantinople in 1096, “the Franj,” as Muslim writers 
called the French crusaders, raided and burned Christian 
farms and tortured Orthodox priests.49 Muslim writers 
remember the “Franj” as cruel, foolish, and barbaric: there 
are tales of crusaders destroying cities in search of relics 
and treasure, and of cannibalizing Muslims. Usāma Ibn 
Munqidh, a twelfth-century Syrian poet, saw the Christian 
invaders as “beasts superior in courage and fighting 
ardour but in nothing else, just as animals are superior in 
strength and aggression.”50 Other times, Muslim writers 
simply seem irritated by the constant traffic of crusaders 
through their countries. Twelfth-century poet Ibn Sārah 

The “Clash of Civilizations”  /  75
of Santarem gently mocked them in his poem “Pool with  
Turtles”:
Now they squabble on the bank
but when winter comes
they’ll dive below and hide.
At play they resemble
Christian soldiers
wearing on their backs
their leather shields.51
an interfaith medieval world
As you can see, history paints a grim picture of both Jewish 
life in medieval Europe and Christian wars against Muslims. 
But although you might be more accustomed to hearing 
about the medieval history of religious wars and extremism, 
the average medieval Jewish or Muslim person would have 
experienced life very differently, particularly in interfaith 
communities where Christians, Muslims, and Jews lived side 
by side.
The violent discrimination against Jews in places like 
England and France did not reflect the rest of the world’s 
attitudes and practices, not even in the rest of Europe, where 
plenty of medieval Jews pursued science, literature, and the 
arts. In southern Europe, which was diverse, cosmopolitan, 
and innovative, Spanish and Italian Jews thrived alongside 
Muslims and Christians for centuries. Jews also populated 
the medieval Middle East, where tolerance by Muslim rulers 
of other monotheists (like Jews and Christians) was gener-
ally the norm. For much of the Middle Ages, the metropolis 
of Baghdad was the center of the Jewish world. As scholar 
Robert Chazan recounts,
the Jews of the realm of Islam in its heyday (c. 800– 
c. 1100) were by no means regular victims of mob violence,  

76  /  The Devil’s Historians
religious persecution, or exploitation by the ruling class. 
The Jews of the Islamic sphere grew in numbers, flourished 
economically, interacted vigorously with their creative 
non-Jewish milieu, fashioned major institutions of Jewish 
intellectual and spiritual activity, and produced great 
intellectual and spiritual leaders and works.52
The Muslim-ruled section of the Iberian peninsula, known 
by its Arabic name, Al-Andalus, was a thriving center of inter-
faith art, literature, philosophy, science, and medicine and a 
center of relative religious tolerance. We stress the word rela-
tive here, since there can be a tendency to describe Al-Andalus 
either as a “Golden Age” of perfect religious harmony or a 
dark age of violent religious persecution. But although mod-
ern people often see medieval culture in unrealistic, black-
and-white terms, neither the utopic nor dystopic vision of 
Al-Andalus’s past is completely true.
Many Andalusian Jews flourished intellectually and profes-
sionally. Famous figures include Judah ibn Tibbon, “father 
of translators,”  Abraham Ibn Ezra, whose work ranged 
from biblical commentary to mathematics and astrology, 
and Maimonides, one of the medieval world’s most influential 
scholars. The ruling class in Al-Andalus was Muslim, but Jews 
could be, and were, promoted to posts as high as vizier—the 
key advisor to a Muslim ruler. Samuel HaNagid, for instance, 
was a Jewish general in the Muslim king’s army. Jewish poets 
also exchanged literary influences with Muslim writers; there’s 
a clear record of exchange between Andalusian poets and the 
rest of medieval Europe.53
As the political and cultural winds shifted, however, Jews in 
southern Europe were also subject to raids and mass murders, 
especially when fanatical religious movements attempted to 
wipe out difference and dissent. For instance, when the more 
orthodox Muslim Almohad movement invaded Al-Andalus near 
the end of the twelfth century, it overturned the previous ruler’s 
policy of religious tolerance and forced Jews and Christians 
to convert to Islam. Many of those Jews who refused fled to 
Rome. Jews also found themselves in the middle of violent  

The “Clash of Civilizations”  /  77
clashes between Christians and Muslims during the Crusades, 
and later, during repeated Christian efforts to conquer Iberia 
(the peninsula that includes modern-day Spain and Portugal).
Unfortunately, as southern Europe became more religiously 
homogenous, whether Muslim or Christian, it became a more 
hazardous place for Jews. A rising tide of anti-Jewish hatred, 
massacres, and mass conversions in the fourteenth century lay 
the groundwork for the Inquisition launched by Christian 
rulers Ferdinand and Isabella. As the Middle Ages drew to 
a close, the Jews were expelled from Spain in 1492, when 
Christians conquered the remaining Muslim regions. Spain 
officially welcomed Sephardic Jews back in 2012, offering 
Spanish citizenship to those whose ancestors were driven out 
at the end of the Middle Ages.54
In other parts of Europe, although there was little tolerance 
for Jews, Muslims had a more mixed reception. Some medieval 
Christian literature exhibited Islamophobia, but some also 
exhibited curiosity and even admiration, casting “Saracen” 
knights and “Moorish” princesses as courtly heroes and hero-
ines. Nameless “Saracens”—a word that could sometimes mean 
“pagan” but was mostly associated with Arabic Muslims—were 
the enemies in many romances, and Crusades poetry often glo-
ried in their slaughter. Dante’s Inferno places Mohammad in the 
eighth circle of hell, among the sowers of scandal and schism, 
who are split down the middle and tear open their own chests.
However, other medieval writers noted the similarities 
between Muslims and Christians. We mentioned Mandeville 
earlier, and while he may have been fervently antisemitic, 
his opinions on Muslims were relatively enlightened. In The 
Booke of John Mandeville (commonly known as Mandeville’s 
Travels) during the narrator’s fictional dialogue with the sul-
tan of Egypt, Muslims are revealed to have a lot in common 
with Christians, including many shared beliefs, except that 
Muslims are even more devout and honest. The sultan accuses 
Christians of pride, gluttony, and all manner of shallow cov-
etousness: “they are so proud that they don’t even know what 
to wear: sometimes long clothes, sometimes short clothes, 
sometimes straight, and sometimes wide,” and “they are so 

78  /  The Devil’s Historians
covetous, that for a little silver they will sell their wife, child, 
and sister. And men take other men’s wives, and no man will 
keep his faith with another.”55 The Christian narrator seems 
to agree with the sultan and hopes to bring his wisdom back 
to his fellow Christians.
Muslim characters also star as heroic knights in medieval 
romances or as noble damsels living in courts imagined as 
parallels to Christian kingdoms. Saladin, the same histori-
cal figure resurrected in the nineteenth century, appeared in 
many medieval romances; so did the Saracen Arthurian 
knight Sir Palomides, who follows the Questing Beast, and 
his two brothers. (Later versions like Sir Thomas Malory’s 
Le Morte d’Arthur has Palomides and his brothers convert 
to Christianity, but in earlier legends, they remain Muslim.) 
Saracen women are portrayed as love objects or even heroines 
in French and English literature, but only if or because they 
convert to Christianity: Josian, Bevis of Hampton’s wife, is 
one heroic example. Floripas, a sultan’s daughter who appears 
alongside her knightly brother Fierebras in multiple French 
and English poems, turns against her father to side with 
Christian knights and eventually converts. In the fifteenth-
century Sultan of Babylon, Floripas even pushes her own gov-
erness out a window and kills a jailer to protect the knights.
These literary examples of interfaith dialogue and romance 
are imperfect at best, racist and Islamophobic at their worst. 
As depressingly intolerant as it is that in many medieval 
minds, the only good Muslim was one who converts, it does 
show that medieval religious discrimination wasn’t racialized 
in exactly the same way Islamophobia is today. (The roots 
of this racism do exist in medieval literature, something 
we’ll discuss more in the following chapter.) Most important 
to keep in mind, however, is that there was no one way of 
relating among faiths in the medieval world. The medieval 
world was not a monolith. Medieval kingdoms and empires 
fought against their co-religionists far more often than they 
fought kingdoms led by other faiths. There was also signifi-
cant travel, migration, and diversity, especially in major cen-
ters of commerce and in the borderlands between kingdoms, 

The “Clash of Civilizations”  /  79
empires, and nations. Members of different medieval faiths 
coexisted in the same cities and towns throughout most of 
their lives.
Finally, there was nothing uniquely medieval about the 
religious violence that happened in the Middle Ages. The 
persecution of Jews began in the ancient world and continued 
throughout the Renaissance, driven both by the Inquisition in 
Catholic countries and by Martin Luther’s own antisemitism 
in Protestant nations. Anti-Jewish violence persists throughout 
the world today, even after the tragedy of the Holocaust. The 
Inquisition also attacked and forcibly converted Muslims well 
into the Renaissance. Christians waged a centuries-long cam-
paign to violently conquer, convert, and enslave Africa, the 
Middle East, and the Americas. The Muslim Ottoman Empire 
taxed and sometimes forcibly converted Christians.
Throughout the world, since the medieval period, Islam, 
Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism, and other faiths have 
clashed violently, not because of any particular cultural nature, 
or because of the nature of their time period, but because war 
is part of human nature. But, as the medieval period can teach 
us, so are coexistence, shared knowledge, and peace.

This page intentionally left blank

81
Freeland was one of the real chivalry of the South; besides 
being himself a slaveholder, he was a horse-racer, cock-
fighter, gambler, and, to crown the whole, an inveterate 
drunkard.
—William Wells Brown, “Narrative of the Life 
and Escape of William Wells Brown,” 18471
In our last chapter, we detailed the way history’s most infa-
mous white supremacists, the Nazis, had an obsession with 
medievalism that led to horrific violence. But the Third Reich 
had a model for wielding a fake Middle Ages as a weapon: 
the American Ku Klux Klan. Hitler saw American racial  
segregation—and what he called “the southern way”—as a 
promising method for making Germany racially “pure.” The 
Klan used fantasies of an all-white medieval past to fuel its 
propaganda and to cloak its violence in false heroism. In fact, 
white supremacists have long used the Middle Ages to make 
claims for their own greatness and as a weapon to be wielded 
against anyone who isn’t white.
What draws racists so strongly to the medieval past? In 
part, this is due to the myth that the Middle Ages was a 
predominantly white culture. It’s easy to see where this idea 
might come from. Medieval fantasy novels and films, if they 
have non-white characters at all, often depict them as violent, 
backwards, or even sub-human. The notoriously barbaric 
portrayal of the Dothraki in the recent HBO series Game 
of Thrones is one example, as are the clearly racialized evil 
hordes attacking astride elephantine creatures in the Lord 
of the Rings movies. But even the history books you read 
4
White (Supremacist) 
Knights

82  /  The Devil’s Historians
in school probably focused exclusively on the European 
Middle Ages. Popular culture would have you believe that 
white, western Europeans were the most important people 
in the medieval world. But as you already suspect, they’re 
absolutely wrong.
In this chapter, we’ll take you through the centuries of 
propaganda that elevated medieval Europe, and medieval 
white people, in the modern imagination. We will show how 
this was done at the expense of real people in history, whose 
stories have been ignored, and we will illuminate the tragic, 
violent consequences that have come from this misrepresenta-
tion of the past.
medievalism and american racism
The American South had a long love affair with medi-
evalism throughout the antebellum period.2 Southern slave-
holders imagined themselves to be nobles conquering and 
ruling a “new land,” and they created their own version of 
chivalry and courtly society. They whitewashed their murder 
and enslavement of Africans by imagining it as neomedieval 
feudalism and themselves as benevolent neomedieval lords 
ruling over grateful serfs. Southerners challenged each other 
to duels and jousted in tournaments for entertainment. They 
dreamed up bloodlines that connected them to medieval 
heroes and kings, and they commissioned medieval coats 
of arms to display in their homes. Sir Walter Scott’s 1820 
medieval-themed novel Ivanhoe became so wildly popular 
that southern white people reimagined their society in its 
image, something Mark Twain famously derided as “Sir 
Walter disease.”3
After the South lost the Civil War, its attachment to medie-
valism grew even more fervent. Suddenly, southern white men 
had to compete with Black men politically and economically. 
The formerly enslaved people who had been forced to labor 
in white people’s homes and on their plantations joined the 

White (Supremacist) Knights  /  83
workforce, ran for office, bought property, and grew crops 
for their own income instead of lining the pockets of their 
former masters.
Soon after Emancipation, Black writers and intellectuals 
were publishing histories, biographies, philosophy, and fic-
tion. Freed slaves were starting businesses and families. Black 
teachers launched schools to educate the newly freed and to 
help each other build careers and lives. Black culture soared, 
enriching the southern states that had held it back for so long; 
by the late nineteenth century, over 2000 Black men held 
political office. For instance, in 1870, Hiram Rhodes Revels 
was elected to the US Senate, and Joseph Rainey was elected 
to the House of Representatives.
But some southern whites were angry about all this prog-
ress. They believed their medieval “heritage”—their supposed 
right to rule by virtue of their race—had been stolen from 
them. And they were determined to get it back.
We often imagine that social progress is linear—that as 
time goes on, things improve and societies become more tol-
erant, fair, and equitable. It’s an optimistic idea. The prob-
lem is, it just isn’t true. Social progress often goes hurtling 
backwards when people who once had all the power get 
angry about the changes they see around them. The years 
after the Civil War and Emancipation are a key example of a 
time when progress decidedly reversed course. And nostalgia 
for an imagined Middle Ages full of heroic white people 
made it worse. Southern white people turned to the medi-
eval legends they were nursed on for solace and propagated 
a new fantasy of the medieval past to try to reclaim their  
power.
The vanguard of that fantasy was the “White Knights” of 
the Ku Klux Klan. There have been three distinct iterations 
of the Klan. The original Ku Klux Klan first donned their 
hoods just after the Civil War and used violent terrorism, 
political maneuvering, and medievalism in their attempt to halt 
Reconstruction and re-impose white supremacy on the South. 
Calling themselves “The Invisible Empire,” Klan members 
fancied themselves knights and dressed in elaborate, theatrical 

84  /  The Devil’s Historians
costumes and masks to terrorize Black citizens. Though this 
original Klan was only active until 1871, it helped launch a 
violent backlash against Black progress. Klan members didn’t 
just ride through the streets on a campaign of murder and 
terrorism—they seized official channels of power too, through 
voter suppression and intimidation. Once in power, they 
instituted the Jim Crow laws and other oppressive systems to 
take back the freedoms that Black Americans had just won. 
The legacy of the first Klan still lingers: a statue of its original 
“Grand Wizard,” Nathan Bedford Forrest, looms over a major 
Tennessee highway to this day.
Most people are more familiar with the Klan’s second incar-
nation, which formed in the early twentieth century, once white 
southerners had reinstated the social hierarchy they thought 
they deserved. The second Klan’s medievalism was even more 
fervent than the first’s: it was nostalgic for a chivalric antebel-
lum South that never really existed, and it championed the first 
Klan as a knightly band of heroes who slew the twin dragons 
of racial equality and Reconstruction. In 1905, Thomas Dixon 
romanticized the terrorist actions of the first Ku Klux Klan as 
a story of neomedieval vengeance in his novel The Clansman. 
The book portrays Reconstruction as a kind of living hell for 
white people: former slaves have taken over and destroyed the 
government, the banks, and the police force, driving the South 
into violent chaos. But the last straw is the rape of a young 
white woman by a freed slave. Ben Cameron, who will become 
the Grand Dragon of Dixon’s novel, uses the young woman’s 
rape and her resulting suicide to mobilize white men into an 
“Institution of Chivalry,” one that bands together for the sole 
purpose of violently protecting white women’s virtue:
In a land of light and beauty and love our women are 
prisoners of danger and fear. While the heathen walks his 
native heath unharmed and unafraid, in this fair Christian 
Southland our sisters, wives, and daughters dare not stroll 
at twilight through the streets or step beyond the highway 
at noon.4

White (Supremacist) Knights  /  85
The Grand Dragon’s new “chivalric order” launches a cam-
paign of violence, intimidation, and murder to force white 
supremacy back onto the South.
In his novel, Dixon creates medieval origin stories for many 
aspects of the Ku Klux Klan, including the burning cross that 
would be a hallmark of white terrorism in the twentieth cen-
tury, which he calls “The Fiery Cross of old Scotland’s hills.”5 
(In reality, medieval people were, as a rule, not very positive at 
all about burning their crosses.) Dixon’s narrator also gushes 
about his heroes’ knightly appearances and their ancestry as 
the descendants of medieval Scots: “The moon was now shin-
ing brightly, and its light shimmering on the silent horses and 
men with their tall spiked caps made a picture such as the 
world had not seen since the Knights of the Middle Ages rode 
on their Holy Crusades.”6
Dixon’s book might have become just another relic of 
the old South if it hadn’t been for director D.W. Griffith, 
who turned The Clansman into a film that would shake the 
United States to its core in 1915: The Birth of a Nation (see 
Figure 4.1). Thanks to Griffith’s influential connections—
President Woodrow Wilson, who had been friends with 
Dixon in college, screened The Birth of a Nation at the White 
House—Dixon’s dream of white supremacist medievalism went 
mainstream, and countless Black Americans suffered and died 
because of his racist nostalgia. The Klan had already commit-
ted decades of terrorism against Black citizens. Now, thanks to 
the film, its ideology was even more appealing to white people. 
By 1925, millions of Americans had joined the Ku Klux Klan.
Medievalism supercharged the Klan’s recruiting power, 
from its regalia and heraldry to its rhetoric of white knight-
hood and faux chivalry. In 1921, the Charlottesville Klan 
advertised for members by asking potential “knights”: “can 
you take a MAN’S OATH?” A chilling preview of today’s 
white supremacist talking points, the ad calls for “law and 
order” and promises “protection for the good and needy, 
especially for women,” while announcing that the Ku Klux 
Klan is specifically seeking “native-born white Americans” 

86  /  The Devil’s Historians
FIGURE 4.1  Birth of a Nation Theatrical Poster, 1915. Unknown 
artist. Obtained from https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.
php?curid=10122298.
who believe in “Christian religion,” “Free Speech,” “Liberty,” 
and “White Supremacy.”7
These neomedieval fantasies about protecting white female 
bodies led to an epidemic of violence against Black Americans. 
Black men were punished for any relationship with white 
women, whether real or imagined. False accusations against 
one man could turn into violence against whole Black com-
munities: white people with delusions of heroism formed 
lynch mobs in Omaha, Nebraska; they massacred families 
in Rosewood, Florida; and they decimated an entire Black 

White (Supremacist) Knights  /  87
business district in Tulsa, Oklahoma. And these are only the 
most famous examples.
Klan-led violence against Black citizens was both rampant 
and ruthless, and it continues to this day. If you don’t live 
in or travel to the American South, you would be forgiven 
for thinking that the Ku Klux Klan’s ghostly riders have 
faded into the mists of time. But they’re still there, they’re 
still angry, and they still have far too much power. The sec-
ond Klan was dissolved by the 1940s, at least in an official 
capacity. The third Klan, the one that still exists today, rose 
up in the 1950s as part of the backlash against civil rights. 
This latest iteration of the Ku Klux Klan is diffuse: it con-
sists of a patchwork of independent local groups that each 
take the name and mission of the Ku Klux Klan. In 2017, 
the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) estimated that there 
are “at least 29 separate, rival Klan groups currently active in 
the United States.”8
Though the Klan’s membership is far from its 1920s peak, 
its influence is still keenly felt. For example, in February 2019, 
Goodloe Sutton, editor of an Alabama newspaper, declared 
that the “Klan needs to ride again” to raid the communi-
ties of Democrats who wanted to raise taxes in Alabama.9 
“Democrats,” in southern conservative parlance, is thinly 
veiled code for both Black voters and the diverse politicians 
who are winning at the ballot box all over the country. The 
Ku Klux Klan still regularly papers neighborhoods with 
recruitment flyers and is highly active online. And Klan rheto-
ric and Klan members still promote violence: David Duke, 
former Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, is regularly inter-
viewed on television and radio, and has over 50,000 followers 
on Twitter. In 2015, Dylann Roof cited the Klan’s twisted 
“chivalric” white male anxiety about white female bodies 
when he murdered nine Black Americans who had welcomed 
him into their Wednesday night Bible study in Charleston, 
South Carolina. “You rape our women and you’re taking 
over our country,” he told them. “You have to go.”10 After 
the massacre, the Ku Klux Klan papered neighborhoods with 
celebratory flyers and red-and-white-striped candies.

88  /  The Devil’s Historians
The Ku Klux Klan may have gone underground to some 
extent in the twenty-first century, but its ideas have gone 
global. The Klan began recruiting efforts as far north as 
Canada in 2016, with flyers that read “Loyal White Knights 
of the Ku Klux Klan! Yes! White Lives Do Matter!” and 
“We Must Secure the Existence of Our People & A Future 
for White Children” (the latter slogan is known as the 
“Fourteen Words,” used by hate groups and racist mass 
murderers to signal their allegiance to white supremacy).11 
The Klan has also permeated online spaces, from blatant 
hate sites like Stormfront to social media and message 
boards like 8chan, Reddit, and even YouTube, Twitter, and 
Facebook. Racists use the internet to spread their ideas, to 
organize violent rallies, and to incite murder.
racism goes digital
The Klan isn’t the only hate group using the internet 
to spread its poison. Online, global hate groups have 
converged, finding common ground in both racism and 
medievalism. Hate groups today have names soaked in 
medievalism like “Wolves of Vinland,” “Rebel Brigade 
Knights of the True Invisible Empire,” “The Holy Nation 
of Odin,” as well as the enduring “Loyal White Knights of 
the Ku Klux Klan.” The “Soldiers of Odin” attack migrants 
in Sweden and Finland while pretending they’re patrol-
ling the streets. The “Proud Boys” even formed their own 
neomedieval militia: they call it “The Fraternal Order of Alt 
Knights” (FOAK).12
At violent white nationalist riots in Charlottesville, 
Virginia, and Berkeley, California, in 2017 and 2018, mem-
bers of the crowds wore crusader and Templar symbols. 
The Charlottesville hate groups alternately chanted “You 
will not replace us!” and “Jews will not replace us!”13 The 
“great replacement” theory, a clear descendent of the Nazi 
belief that white people will soon be out-populated thanks to 

White (Supremacist) Knights  /  89
immigration, has metastasized online and even become com-
mon among right-wing media pundits and politicians. It also 
has deadly consequences, such as the August 2019 massacre 
in El Paso, Texas, in which the killer railed against a supposed 
white genocide and murdered 22 people, specifically targeting 
Mexican immigrants.
White supremacist groups are also joining forces because 
online culture gives them ample ground for sharing ideas 
and plans. The “Unite the Right” riot at Charlottesville 
in 2017 made it especially clear how much groups that 
had previously seemed distinct—neo-Nazis and neo- 
Confederates, for instance—had been collaborating in online 
spaces. Ostensibly rallying around the proposed removal 
of a Robert E. Lee statue from a park in Charlottesville, 
white supremacist groups used the event to showcase their 
collective strength and present themselves as a neomedi-
eval conquering army. They used chat rooms to teach each 
other how to march with shields, they discuss the histo-
ricity of symbols like Thor’s hammer on message boards, 
and they recruited each other for race riots by posting 
pictures of themselves in chainmail on social media. Once 
they showed up in Charlottesville, they waved medieval 
banners, wore armor festooned with medieval symbols, 
and wielded swords and shields.14 And Charlottesville 
was no mere performance: 32-year-old Heather Heyer was 
murdered when one of the neo-Nazis attacked her with 
his car. White supremacists injured others as well, includ-
ing DeAndre Harris, who was beaten with pipes by six  
neo-Nazis.15
Neomedieval conspiracy theories and pseudo-philosophies 
also run wild online, radicalizing white people in less obvious 
ways. One example is the “Dark Enlightenment,” an internet-
born theory that claims all modern problems started at the 
end of the Middle Ages. According to Dark Enlightenment 
proponents, humanism, democracy, and the quest for equal-
ity are responsible for the decay of Western civilization. Dark 
Enlightenment fans contrast the diversity of modern times with 
a mythological view of the Middle Ages as the height of white 

90  /  The Devil’s Historians
greatness, a time when every race was in its “proper” geo-
graphical place, allowing white civilization to thrive in sup-
posedly glorious isolation. Suffice it to say, this is complete 
nonsense. As you’ve already read in these pages, there was no 
such thing as the homogenous, insular medieval Europe they 
hope to resurrect. But realism is not their strong suit: some of 
them even argue that democracy will lead to a literal zombie 
apocalypse, and that the only way to prevent this is to return 
to medieval monarchy.
Now, we know we’ve been harping on the ways that the 
medieval world has gotten short shrift in modern rhetoric, but 
even we wouldn’t go to this extreme. No matter how rich, 
diverse, or interesting medievalists think the Middle Ages may 
have been, nobody wants our future to look like our past—
especially if it’s the twisted version of the past that lives in a 
racist’s imagination.
neomedieval white feminism
Although there’s very often a strong correlation between 
racism and sexism, that doesn’t mean some white women 
aren’t eager to jump on the white supremacist bandwagon, 
especially when it elevates their own sense of privilege. Plenty 
of women-centered online spaces fester with racism, and 
women often serve as mascots and cheerleaders of today’s 
digital white supremacist movements.
Historically, white women have been portrayed as victims 
in need of protection by white supremacist men. But many 
women have not only been complicit in racist violence, 
they’ve encouraged it. Groups like the United Daughters 
of the Confederacy supported the Klan in the early twen-
tieth century and helped build the confederate monuments 
we’re still fighting about today; in their publication The 
Southern Magazine, they published screeds (many written 
by men) that called the Ku Klux Klan “the bravest and best 
men of the South,” and argued in their August-September 

White (Supremacist) Knights  /  91
1936 issue that Klan violence was necessary to protect white 
womanhood:
Over this once happy land there hung a horrifying dread. 
The South was in the clutches of a veritable “Black 
Death,” for every morn, it seemed, brought news of 
another outrage upon white womanhood.… What would 
you have done, men of the North? Would you have arisen, 
in spite of laws, in spite of Federal troops, in spite of 
impending imprisonment and possible death, in defense of 
a mother, a sister, a wife or a sweetheart? There can be but 
one answer, for manhood still lives, the blood is red, and 
the hearts are pure.16
This mythology of Black violence against white women led to 
the mass murder of Black men and obscured the very real epi-
demic of white violence against Black women, which white men 
could—and in many cases, still can—commit with impunity.
Medievalist racism also allowed white women to imag-
ine themselves as warriors. Young women across the South 
adopted medieval names and regalia for their own rituals. The 
“Women of the Ku Klux Klan” formed just after women won 
suffrage and soon gained more than half a million members, 
complete with matching neomedieval regalia and invocations 
of Joan of Arc. We still live with these women’s legacies today, 
from the confederate statues that inspire far-right riots to 
many modern sorority rituals. As recently as 2017, Wesleyan 
College—a women’s college in Georgia—confessed that its 
class symbols and ceremonies had started when early twentieth- 
century students wanted to express their allegiance to the 
Ku Klux Klan. The class names carried their racist lineage in 
names like “the Tri-K Pirates” and “the Green Knights” until 
the college finally ended the practice in 2018.17
Today’s digital neomedieval white supremacy movement 
has its own female leaders and cheerleaders. As a recent 
exposé by Seward Darby reveals, the alt-right’s self-styled 
“Valkyries” are a major force in normalizing and mainstream-
ing the current radical, racist movement. In an interview with 

92  /  The Devil’s Historians
Darby, alt-right leader Lana Lokteff claims that women’s sup-
port was behind the rise of both Hitler and Trump. Lokteff 
uses medievalism to praise both herself and the white suprem-
acist women she organizes, claiming they are all “lionesses 
and shield maidens and Valkyries” who can “inspire men to 
fight political battles for the future of white civilization.”18
Alexandra Minna Stern’s book Proud Boys and the 
White Ethnostate traces an alt-right “white baby challenge” 
led by women who, at first glance, appear to be harmless 
Instagram homesteader moms, brewing their own kombucha 
and growing organic vegetables.19 These women are happy 
to embrace the submissive homemaker roles they imagine 
existed in some mythical all-white medieval past. They teach 
their YouTube viewers and Twitter followers from-scratch 
recipes alongside encouragement to “restore” a white pagan 
past and have as many white babies as possible. You might 
be surprised that so many women are willing to submit to 
“traditional” gender roles in the name of white patriarchy, 
but they are caught up in their own racist fantasies, imagining 
themselves as princesses and Valkyries standing beside their 
warrior men. That neomedieval appeal is just as effective for 
some white women as it was in the 1940s, when Hitler used it 
in his propaganda posters.
scholars fight back
The wave of current digital white supremacist medievalism 
has inspired a corresponding wave of scholarly pushback, 
with medievalists taking to digital media themselves to cor-
rect the record. Medievalists have long studied the connection 
between medievalism and white supremacy in their schol-
arship. As far back as the 1980s, scholars like Morton W. 
Bloomfield and Eugene D. Genovese were reflecting on the 
ways southern American slaveholders indulged in a fantasy 
of neomedieval “feudalism” to justify slavery and racism.20 
In the early 2000s, Laurie A. Finke and Martin B. Shichtman 

White (Supremacist) Knights  /  93
wrote a series of books investigating the importance of the 
Middle Ages to Nazi Germany and other fascist and white 
supremacist movements. Within the last ten years, scholars 
such as Daniel Wollenberg, Louise D’Arcens, Andrew B.R. 
Elliott, Cord Whittaker, Helen Young, and Matthew Vernon 
have published books on everything from racism in medieval-
themed video games to the neomedieval motivations of white 
supremacist terrorists.21
Until recently, few academics took this analysis outside 
the ivory tower. But because of the rising tide of white 
supremacy and its tendency to adopt medieval symbol-
ism, scholars have felt more urgently that they shouldn’t 
just speak to each other about these issues: they should also 
be speaking to the public. In 2017, just before the inaugu-
ration of Donald Trump, the online magazine The Public 
Medievalist launched a series on “Race, Racism, and the 
Middle Ages” that served as a way for scholars to reach 
out to the public to explain that the Middle Ages weren’t 
an all-white world, and to chronicle the dangerous white 
supremacist movements that spread misinformation about 
the past and use medievalism to try to justify horrific acts 
of violence.22 Many medievalists have also reached out in 
the mainstream media, contributing to mass outlets like 
The Washington Post’s “Made by History” column and the 
Australian news site The Conversation. Medieval historian-
turned-journalist David Perry has published deep-dives of 
medievalism and white supremacy for CNN and Pacific 
Standard, Matthew Gabriele has chronicled the abuse of 
medieval history for Forbes, and Dorothy Kim traced white 
supremacist obsessions with Vikings for Time.23 Scholars 
have even launched social media accounts like “People 
of Color in European Art History” (originally known as 
“Medieval POC”), devoted solely to chronicling the diversity 
of medieval and Renaissance Europe.24 We’ve made links to 
all these articles and more available on the website for this 
book.25
Scholars like Sierra Lomuto, Adam Miyashiro, and Mary 
Rambaran-Olm are also leading important conversations 

94  /  The Devil’s Historians
about how to identify and dismantle white supremacy in 
university classrooms and in academia itself on websites like 
In the (Medieval) Middle and Medievalists of Color, and are 
organizing academic conferences and journal issues, to discuss 
these pressing problems.26 After all, the myth of the all-white 
Middle Ages didn’t just emerge out of thin air: it came from 
decades of textbooks that only talked about white Christians, 
from classrooms confined to a narrow canon of medieval lit-
erature like Beowulf and Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, 
from scholars knowingly or unknowingly perpetuating a 
white supremacist worldview, and from the lack of diversity 
in university faculty.
A classroom isn’t just a space for talking about the past. 
It’s a space that can change minds and hearts in the present. 
Take, for instance, the story of Derek Black. Derek Black was 
born into a family with deep roots in overt white supremacy: 
his father was Don Black, the founder of the neo-Nazi web-
site Stormfront. David Duke, prominent white supremacist 
and white nationalist politician, is Derek’s godfather. Clearly, 
Derek was groomed from an early age to take up the mantle 
as a leader of the American white supremacist movement.
But as Eli Saslow writes in The Washington Post, Derek 
was “outed” on his college campus as the scion of a promi-
nent white supremacist family, which began his slow de-
radicalization. Derek credits this to, among other things, several 
courses he took in medieval studies, which taught him that the 
white supremacist histories he had been taught were lies:
He learned that Western Europe had begun not as a 
great society of genetically superior people but as a 
technologically backward place that lagged behind Islamic 
culture. He studied the eighth century to the twelfth 
century, trying to trace back the modern concepts of race 
and whiteness, but he couldn’t find them anywhere. “We 
basically just invented it,” he concluded.27
Perhaps an equally significant part of the story is that Matthew 
Stephenson, one of the few Orthodox Jewish students on 

White (Supremacist) Knights  /  95
campus, invited Derek to a Friday evening Shabbat. Stephenson 
instructed his friends at the dinner that this “was not ‘ambush 
Derek’ time,” that they were not there to shout at him.28 Over 
the course of several months, and several such dinners, Derek 
began to open up and listen.
Teaching better histories and pushing back against white 
supremacists’ warped ideas about the past is a crucial step in 
stripping racism of its supposed historical authority. We often 
talk about history as though it is purely objective and scien-
tific, a series of facts that always receives a neutral reception. 
But ignoring the diversity of the medieval world—in text-
books, in classrooms, or even in popular culture—isn’t just 
factually inaccurate. It’s an omission with a white supremacist 
agenda, one that attempts to normalize the erasure of people 
of color from the past.
The white supremacists who marched on Charlottesville, 
who erect confederate monuments, who dress up like little 
boys playing knight with dangerous, grown-up weapons, 
profess a passion for all things medieval, but they really aren’t 
interested in learning about history. Instead, they want to live 
in a fantasy world in which the most important and most 
powerful people look exactly like the image they see staring 
back at them in the mirror. And they want to rest of us to be 
forced to live in that world too.
the diverse medieval world
The real medieval period was not a “whites only” apart-
heid world. It was not a fabled time of Aryan heroism, and 
Europe was not the center of the universe. As you already 
learned in Chapter Two, medieval Europeans were not the 
most learned, inventive, or worldly people in the Middle Ages, 
nor were they a homogenous culture isolated from the rest of 
the world.
Finding positive representations of people of color through-
out medieval art and literature, even in places where people 

96  /  The Devil’s Historians
imagine that the only inhabitants were white, is relatively easy. 
The Egyptian Saint Maurice, celebrated throughout Germany, 
became the patron saint of the Holy Roman Empire and is 
clearly portrayed as African in medieval iconography, includ-
ing in a thirteenth-century sculpture beside the grave of Otto I. 
The medieval author Bede recounts the history of Hadrian, an 
African diplomat and abbot who was instrumental to educat-
ing people about Christianity in England, in his Ecclesiastical 
History of the English People. People of color are common 
throughout medieval European art: you can find images of 
Black amazons in a fourteenth-century French painting and 
African and Middle-Eastern kings, knights, and merchants 
throughout illuminated manuscripts. Religious art meant to 
portray scenes from Christ’s life is often particularly diverse. 
At least one—and sometimes all three—of the Magi will often 
be depicted as Black in medieval paintings.
German, French, and English medieval literature features 
plenty of non-white heroes and heroines. In the thirteenth-
century German tale Parzival, written by Wolfram von 
Eschenbach, Parzival’s Christian father falls in love with a 
Muslim woman, Belcane. Together, they have a child named 
Feirefiz, who winds up with variegated skin, black for his 
Muslim mother and white for his Christian father. Despite 
Wolfram’s obvious confusion about how biology works, he 
explicitly states that Feirefiz was just as beautiful, wealthy, and 
strong as all the other knights. A magnificent warrior, aristo-
crat, and lover, it is only Feirefiz’s faith that prevents him from 
seeing the Holy Grail until he converts to Christianity, but in 
every other way he is considered Parzival’s equal—which is 
no small feat.
And Feirefiz was no aberration. The Black knight Sir 
Moriaen teams up with Lancelot and Gawain to find his father 
and rescue King Arthur in the fourteenth-century Middle 
Dutch romance Moriaen. French author Christine de Pizan lists 
African women in her defense of all womankind, The Book 
of the City of Ladies. She writes of Queen Zenobia, “The 
great courage of this lady and the chivalrous inclination she 
possessed were obvious throughout her childhood.”29 Both 

White (Supremacist) Knights  /  97
Christine and Geoffrey Chaucer recount the tale of Dido, 
the queen of Carthage who was wooed and destroyed by the 
legendary Aeneas, with heartfelt pity. In The Legend of Good 
Women, Chaucer’s narrator takes Dido’s side, constantly call-
ing her the “noble queen” and Aeneas “false.”
Asian cultures have positive representations in European 
medieval literature as well—and with good reason. China was 
a thriving center of trade, literature, and the arts. Genghis 
Khan, leader of the Mongol Empire, made multiple cameos 
in French and English medieval literature and art. The most 
famous account is Marco Polo’s travel to the court of Kublai 
Khan. “The Great Khan” was famous among medieval writers 
for his policy of religious tolerance, his interfaith court, and 
the wondrous inventions of his kingdom, which transcended 
the engineering capabilities of medieval Europe.
the roots of modern racism
However, just as in modern literature, not all medieval 
representations of people of color are positive ones. Although 
many scholars were, until recently, reluctant to use modern 
terms like “racism” when discussing medieval people, and 
even though the categories medieval people used to define 
each other were different from our own, a few key medieval 
beliefs may well form the foundation of modern-day racism.30
The first belief was the way medieval people thought about 
the aristocracy. Medieval Europe was not a society with a 
whole lot of class mobility, mostly because that was the way 
the ruling class wanted it. Medieval nobles viewed themselves 
as a breed apart from the people they ruled—literally. They 
thought they had more in common with aristocrats in other 
kingdoms than with the “common” people of their own lands. 
And the aristocracy policed class borders through marriage, 
with particular emphasis on keeping their bloodlines “noble.”
Romance, a medieval genre that celebrated the heroic deeds 
and love stories of very wealthy and powerful characters like 

98  /  The Devil’s Historians
kings, queens, knights, and ladies, constantly comments on 
the noble blood of its characters. Unsurprisingly, the nobility 
believed their blood carried traits that boosted their claims 
to superiority: they thought it made knights better warriors, 
women more modest and intelligent, and both men and 
women more attractive. Whiteness is also factored into class 
status in European medieval romance and was sometimes con-
sidered a symbol of noble birth, partly because nobles did not 
have to labor outdoors all day. Thus, the protagonist of the 
thirteenth-century romance Silence, a noble masquerading as 
a minstrel and living as a man despite being assigned female at 
birth, has to stain their glistening white skin with dye so that 
they will not reveal themself as royalty.
One common plot device in romance is a knight who dis-
guises himself as a commoner but has his cover blown because 
he is just so attractive. Scholars call these the “Fair Unknown” 
romances, or Bel Inconnu, named after a popular medieval 
French tale in which a young man disguised by a fairy never-
theless realizes his “natural” inclination to become a knight. 
In Sir Thomas Malory’s Le Morte d’Arthur, for instance, 
Gareth, brother of the famous Sir Gawain, comes to Arthur’s 
court in disguise, hoping to earn his knighthood just like any-
one else. But the moment he appears, everyone notices that he 
is “large and long and broad in the shoulders, well-visaged, 
and [had] the largest and the fairest hands that ever man did 
see.”31 Arthur declares that he should be treated like a “lord’s 
son.” Lancelot and Gawain even give him clothes and gold.
If you think this idea of “noble blood” giving a person 
extraordinary beauty, nobility, and strength is just a backwards 
medieval thing, you should note that it persists in some of our 
most enduring popular culture. Aragorn in The Lord of the 
Rings has the right to rule Gondor because of his ancestry, 
which also gives him extraordinary longevity. Modern versions 
of Arthurian legend keep the medieval trope that Arthur’s noble 
blood allows him to pull the sword from the stone and rule 
England. Many of our most famous superheroes—Batman, 
Black Panther, Superman, Supergirl, Wonder Woman, Arrow, 
Iron Man—are either royalty in their own realms or mem-
bers of the aristocracy. The question of Rey’s parentage that 

White (Supremacist) Knights  /  99
consumed Star Wars fans since Episode VII’s release focused 
exclusively on the Jedi, and when she seemed to have been sired 
by nobody in particular, some fans were outraged. Fan com-
plaints may have contributed to J.J. Abrams’s decision to reveal 
Rey to be a member of Jedi aristocracy in Episode IX; she spent 
much of that film struggling with the evil “in her blood.”
A second medieval foundation of modern racism is something 
scholars call “geographical determinism.” This is the theory that 
different environmental conditions—like the amount of sunlight 
and heat in a region, access to water, and temperature—could 
create different human capabilities and bodies. This biased 
theory is the one that Julius Caesar employed to argue that 
Rome had the perfect conditions for human flourishing. The 
ancient Roman claim to environmental perfection, though not 
quite what we would call racism, was obviously not ideologi-
cally neutral. It led to a skewed view of the rest of the world as 
somehow flawed and lumped people together based on physical 
appearance when their cultures were actually very distinct.
For instance, ancient Greeks and Romans used the term 
“Aetheopian” to incorrectly conflate the residents of sub-
Egyptian Africa. The word comes from the Greek Aethiops, 
which may have meant “sunburnt” or “fiery-looking.” But 
classical geographical determinism did not privilege whiteness. 
After all, ancient Romans were darker than Germanic tribes, 
whom the Romans considered strong and spirited because 
they bathed in cold rivers, but not particularly bright, because 
all that cold stifled the mind.
Medieval clerics, who often relied upon Roman texts, 
adopted the tendency to paint all of Africa with the broad 
“Aethiopian” brush. But because their nobility prized white-
ness, they began to combine their geographical determinism 
with something that looked more like white supremacy. 
Bartholomaeus Anglicus, a thirteenth-century Franciscan monk, 
argued that the sun gave African men a darker complexion and 
curly hair, but because he thought courage could leak out of a 
man’s pores, he claimed that Africans were “cowards.” By con-
trast, men of the north (like Bartholomaeus himself, of course) 
were lucky enough to live in cold weather that “stoppeth the 
pores” and kept people “bolde and hardy.”32 Albertus Magnus 

100  /  The Devil’s Historians
argued in the thirteenth century that Indians were bound to 
be good at magic and mathematics because a little heat could 
make a person smarter, but he declared that Ethiopians would 
be incapable of such things because they are exposed to too 
much heat. These writers, just like ancient writers, were all 
happy to jump through whatever logical hoops were necessary 
in order to declare themselves the very best.
It’s easy at this point to see how geographical determin-
ism might transform into modern-day racism. But there is one 
important, additional factor that led us to modern racism: 
religion. Medieval people believed that bodies were vessels for 
souls, that souls could be “sick” because of spiritual condi-
tions, and that those conditions could be diagnosed by looking 
at a person’s body. An external change in appearance could 
be evidence of an emotional or religious problem. If a knight 
was looking pallid, he could be diagnosed with lovesickness. 
Leprosy was sometimes considered a physical manifestation 
of sin devouring the body, which led to the ostracization and 
abuse of people living with the disease.
Many medieval writers used this method of diagnos-
ing a body to read meaning into the color of people’s skin. 
Whiteness was often used as a metaphor for spiritual purity 
in aristocratic heroines, such as Chrétien de Troyes’s Enide 
and Fenice, who are described as being white as lilies or 
with a bosom “more white than new-fallen snow.”33 Even 
in Parzival, Feirefiz’s mother Belcane is abandoned by his 
Christian father, and she demonstrates her longing for him by 
constantly kissing her son’s white spots.
Aristocratic hierarchy, geographical determinism, and 
religious beliefs all combined in the Middle Ages to create a 
way of thinking about cultures and bodies that was certainly 
a preview, if not an absolute equivalent, of modern racism. 
But there is one thing medieval people believed that we do 
not: over the course of generations, thirteenth-century German 
writer Albertus Magnus argued, people from Africa or the 
Middle East who were relocated to a cold climate  would 
eventually turn white. In other words, Magnus, and many 
other medieval Europeans, believed that what we would call 
race today was changeable, not permanent. And that change 

White (Supremacist) Knights  /  101
was not always due to something as innocuous as geography. 
Sometimes, it was a matter of faith.
In the fourteenth-century English poem The King of Tars, 
race, faith, geography, and the myth of noble blood come 
together for a clear picture of how different strands of medieval 
racism prefigure modern white supremacy. The King of Tars 
features a Muslim sultan who converts to Christianity. At the 
moment of his conversion, his skin transforms from black to 
white. Worse yet is the poem’s depiction of an interracial child. 
Before his conversion, the sultan has a son with his Christian 
wife, but that child is born a shapeless lump of flesh. He doesn’t 
even have any bones. As soon as the child is baptized, however, 
he instantly transforms into a beautiful, healthy infant. The 
sultan’s whiteness is a marker of his internal religious “purifica-
tion,” and his child isn’t even considered human until he becomes 
a Christian. This medieval poet believed that a person’s faith in 
the Christian God could help him “transcend” biology and birth.
The view of racial difference presented by The King of Tars 
certainly isn’t better than modern racism. Arguably, in some 
ways, it is worse. But it is decidedly different. White suprema-
cists will tell you that racism is somehow natural and constant 
throughout human history—just an example of human nature 
when we encounter someone who looks different from our-
selves. But as you can see, this simply isn’t true. Racism is 
an ideology that develops slowly over time, and that is often 
pushed by the wealthy and privileged. It’s a social problem 
with roots we can very clearly trace.
However, the Middle Ages constituted a thousand years of 
history spanning continents and millions of people; there was 
not one Middle Ages, and as you have seen, these prejudices 
were far from universal, even in Europe. In more cosmo-
politan medieval places like Al-Andalus, people interrogated 
racism. Thirteenth-century poet Ibn Sa’īd al-Maghribī, for 
instance, wove his social commentary into the poem “Black 
Horse with White Chest”:
Sons of Shem and Ham live harmoniously
in him, and take no care for the words
of would-be troublemakers.34

102  /  The Devil’s Historians
Even in today’s supposedly enlightened scientific age, “would-
be troublemakers” persist in looking for physical evidence of 
the condition of someone’s soul and for their capabilities and 
inclinations. Too many people still believe that bodies function 
as prophetic tomes, texts we can read to determine a person’s 
internal characteristics. But although the Middle Ages gave 
us a prototype for modern-day racism, they also gave us just 
as many examples of its opposite: dialogue, education, and 
diversity.

103
For some—they are sometimes called the “optimists”—
women’s status is seen as having steadily improved ever 
since Europeans shrugged off the Middle Ages, woke up, 
bathed, and stopped grievously oppressing women.
—Judith Bennett, History Matters, 20061
George r.r. Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire series—better 
known as the popular television show Game of Thrones—is 
famously considered “grimdark” fantasy, a genre which, when 
set in a neomedieval world, invokes the dirty, brutal Middle 
Ages of modern imagination. In other words, it’s set in the 
so-called Dark Ages. Gender oppression and people’s beliefs 
about gender in medieval times play an enormous role in mak-
ing the world of Westeros feel more “realistic.” In fact, when 
questioned about the sexual violence and misogyny in his 
books, Martin explained it away by saying, “I’m not writing 
about contemporary sex. It’s medieval.”2
Many people are under the impression that life for medieval 
women was radically different “back then,” and that rape was 
a defining part of the medieval world. Men were supposed to 
have been brutal animals whose appetites were barely held in 
check by chivalry, while women were helpless victims. Worse 
yet, not everyone sees this as a problem: people who remain 
wedded to strict gender definitions today often invoke the medi-
eval period as a more authentic time, when men and women 
were “hardwired” to behave in supposedly natural ways.
But medieval evidence doesn’t conform to these gendered 
assumptions. Knights in medieval literature wept, fainted, 
and spent a lot of time being lovesick. Women wielded swords 
and magic, rescued men, and argued philosophy and theology. 
5
Knights in Shining Armor 
and Damsels in Distress

104  /  The Devil’s Historians
In real medieval life, women wrote stories and poems as well 
as scientific and medical treatises. Women writers, philoso-
phers, and theologians also interrogated gender and defended 
each other. Most medieval cultures were patriarchal and privi-
leged men—just like so many cultures throughout history and 
well into the present day. But medieval women still lived rich, 
fulfilling, and impressive lives.
Women’s medieval achievements aren’t the only thing ren-
dered invisible by misinformed hindsight. Most people believed 
that medieval people were, for lack of a better term, completely 
heterosexual. But although same-sex desire was considered a 
sin by the Catholic Church, that certainly didn’t stop every-
one. Moreover, outside western Europe, same-sex desire was 
sometimes a tacitly or even openly accepted part of life. The 
same goes for transgender and nonbinary identities, which in 
the Middle Ages even had a religious aspect—some medieval 
saints were believed to have transcended gender altogether. The 
truth is that medieval people of all genders lived very much 
like we do today: negotiating their lives within and outside 
the rules and strictures used by family, faith, and other social 
structures to try to bind them.
the chivalric racket
One of the most intractable vestiges of medieval culture, 
and medievalism, is the myth of chivalry.3 Most people 
think chivalry is relatively harmless, an old-fashioned idea of 
politeness that just means pulling out a chair or opening a 
car door. More fervent modern fans of chivalry are attracted 
to the “chivalric code” as an ideology of physical protection 
of the weak, fighting in someone else’s defense, or as service 
to morality and faith. One thing almost everyone agrees on, 
however, is that chivalry is a masculine quality, something that 
only men can aspire to if they want to be “better.”
However, there’s a reason that feminist scholars call chiv-
alry an age-old protection racket.4 It’s a concept that depends 

Knights in Shining Armor and Damsels in Distress  /  105
on men to protect women from male violence, and one that 
expects women to meet certain criteria in order to deserve 
protection—sort of like when the mafia leaves your restaurant 
alone because you pay them a bribe every month. And histori-
cally, the category of people who qualify as chivalric hasn’t 
just been limited by gender—it has also been limited by race 
and class, most often considered the exclusive province of 
wealthy, white men. Ku Klux Klan members, as you learned 
in the previous chapter, declared themselves chivalric in their 
violent campaigns to keep white women from having relation-
ships with Black men.
Chivalry has never prevented violence, not even in the 
Middle Ages. It only regulates certain kinds of violence 
against certain kinds of people. Twelfth-century French 
poet Chrétien de Troyes, famous for his chivalric romances, 
declared in Lancelot that if a noble woman were traveling 
alone, a knight could “no more treat her with dishonor than 
cut his own throat should a noble reputation concern him.” 
But if he fought another knight for her, “he might do with 
her as he pleased without receiving censure or shame.”5 In 
Sir Thomas Malory’s fifteenth-century Le Morte d’Arthur, the 
most influential medieval Arthurian legend (Mark Twain even 
called it his favorite book), Arthur’s knights swear to protect  
upper-class women, but they also ignore sexual violence 
against peasants; sometimes that violence is even committed 
by those same knights.6
Because chivalry only values certain women, other women 
become targets. Men feel entitled to those unprotected bod-
ies, and the crimes against them are considered mere “mis-
behavior.” And just as chivalry only protects certain women, 
membership in the chivalric brotherhood is only available to 
certain men. In the Middle Ages, for instance, circular logic 
suggested that because only the highborn were capable of con-
taining their violence, they were the only ones who should be 
trusted with it. In the thirteenth-century Old French Lancelot-
Grail, the Lady of the Lake, who kidnaps Lancelot as a child 
so she can raise him, provides an exhaustive explanation 
of the symbolism behind all knightly accoutrements, from 

106  /  The Devil’s Historians
hauberk to shield to lance. But the horse is what symbolizes 
the aristocratic knight’s relationship to the common people:
The horse that the knight sits on and that takes him 
wherever he needs to go symbolizes the common people, 
for the people must likewise bear the knight and attend 
to his needs. The people must search out and provide him 
with everything he requires to live honorably, so that he 
may protect and defend them night and day. The knight 
sits astride the common people, for, just as the knight spurs 
his horse and guides it toward the goal he chooses, he has 
the task of guiding the people according to his will and 
in legitimate subjection; indeed, the people are under him, 
and that is where they are meant to be.7
You can see how this kind of attitude toward the people a 
knight is supposed to protect might lead to abuses of power. In 
fact, many medieval people themselves were highly suspicious 
of chivalric claims. In tale after medieval tale, chivalry either 
fails or is revealed to be an aristocratic charade. For instance, 
in Chaucer’s Wife of Bath’s Tale, an enchantress teaches a rap-
ist knight, who thinks his noble blood and knightly station 
allow him to do whatever he wants, that true nobility comes 
from good acts, not aristocratic lineage: “Churlish sinful deeds 
make a churl,” she tells him, and “Christ wants us to claim our 
nobility from him,” not from “old richesse.”8 In medieval lit-
erature, courts of ladies often wind up having to judge knights 
for crimes against women. In Malory’s Le Morte d’Arthur, 
Sir Gawain accidentally beheads a woman who throws herself 
in front of her knight to protect him. Lancelot’s commitment 
to chivalry leads Elaine of Astolat to believe he loves her, but 
it’s all a performance, and she commits suicide when he rejects 
her advances.
If these concepts of chivalry sound radically different from 
what you learned about chivalry, that’s because our modern 
view of it developed in the nineteenth century, which tended 
to look back at the Middle Ages through a hazy lens that 
either ignored or simply edited out everything improper or 

Knights in Shining Armor and Damsels in Distress  /  107
offensive. (Scholars use the term bowdlerized to describe the 
way nineteenth-century translators cleaned up medieval texts, 
editing out the sex, blasphemy, and other naughty behavior.)9 
Writers like Sir Walter Scott imagined a chivalry that would 
inspire and prescribe masculine behavior—and which justified 
nineteenth-century gender roles, social mores, and interna-
tional politics. Scott explains what he meant by chivalry in 
his famous 1819 novel Ivanhoe, when the title character is 
debating its merits with a female character:
Chivalry!—why, maiden, she is the nurse of pure and 
high affection—the stay of the oppressed, the redresser of 
grievances, the curb of the power of the tyrant—Nobility 
were but an empty name without her, and liberty finds the 
best protection in her lance and her sword.10
You can, perhaps, see the transition the concept of chivalry 
went through between the Middle Ages and the height of 
nineteenth-century medievalism: Sir Walter Scott believed 
chivalry could “curb the power of the tyrant.” But the medi-
eval knight was the tyrant, riding astride the local commoners.
it’s not a compliment
Chivalry requires both passive women and violent men 
in order to justify its existence, and therefore, it reinforces 
a hierarchy that takes agency away from women. To put it 
plainly: strong, chivalrous men depend on passive women 
to let them be heroes. But you don’t have to take our word 
for it: proponents of chivalry reveal this when they promote 
what they call a “complementary” definition of the sexes—a 
symbiotic relationship in which men and women have suppos-
edly natural roles that support each other.11 For instance, Brett 
McKay, author of the 2009 book The Art of Manliness, argues 
that chivalry “can foster mutual respect and remind us of 
our underlying biological differences and the complementary 

108  /  The Devil’s Historians
nature of the sexes. Some women will bear children, and some 
men will step up to be protectors should danger arise.”12
To those who don’t understand the full implications of his 
words, his thoughts may seem harmless or even natural. But 
the idea of complementary sexes as a natural phenomenon has 
been used by the worst proponents of medievalism to police 
gender roles. For instance, Nazi Minister of Propaganda Joseph 
Goebbels made nearly the same argument during a campaign to 
get women out of the workforce: “The mission of the woman 
is to be beautiful and to bring children into the world.... The 
female bird pretties herself for her mate and hatches the eggs for 
him. In exchange, the mate takes care of gathering the food, and 
stands guard and wards off the enemy.”13
In fact, Nazis saw a complementary gender arrangement 
as a return to the authentic roles of their medieval “Aryan” 
ancestors. Hitler called on German women to stay home 
and nurture their children rather than “interfere” with the 
world of men, dismissing feminism as a “Jewish scheme.”14 
Nazi posters featured their own soldiers drawn as knights 
to rally them to the battlefield, whereas their propaganda 
exhorting women to leave their jobs and nurture their chil-
dren (and there was a lot of this propaganda) featured white 
women surrounded by blond children and nursing infants 
in a medieval-style Madonna-and-child pose, or women and 
children clustered beneath brave, shield-bearing husbands.
The theory that a strict gender binary is both “complemen-
tary” and medieval is still an essential part of white supremacist 
ideology today. Andrew Aglin, editor of the neo-Nazi news 
site Daily Stormer, made this statement on gender equality 
in 2015: “My position on women, very explicitly, is that they 
should in the modern world remain in the exact same role they 
were in during the medieval period and I am unwilling to dance 
around or negotiate on that issue. Women should be honored, 
cherished and cared for, but they should not possess ‘rights.’”15
Complementary is a code word, whether Brett McKay 
realizes it or not. It means that one party gives up power to 
feed the power of another. One sex is valued for its strength 
and the other, for its vulnerability. Based on the theory of 

Knights in Shining Armor and Damsels in Distress  /  109
complementary genders, women need to step aside so that men 
can be strong—just the way we imagine medieval knights were.
Nazis, past and present, aren’t the only ones who use the 
Middle Ages to push for women’s submission to men. In the 
United States, some members of the mainstream Evangelical 
movement also champion this view. John Eldredge, author of 
a popular 2001 book on Christian masculinity entitled Wild at 
Heart, argues that reverting to medieval roles will save modern 
people’s troubled relationships. Eldredge refers to women as 
“the Beauty” throughout his book, and he argues, “This world 
kills a woman’s heart when it tells her to be tough, efficient, and 
independent … her childish dreams of a knight in shining armor 
coming to rescue her are not girlish fantasies; they are the core of 
the feminine heart and the life she knows she was made for.”16
Even though straight, cisgender men are highly privileged by 
neomedieval gender roles, the ideology behind them is also dam-
aging to boys and men. Medievalism encourages men to believe 
that their violent inclinations are natural, healthy, and worth 
cultivating. For instance, Eldredge makes a point of eschewing 
any notion of a passive, loving Christ figure because that’s just 
too wimpy: “Mr. Rogers with a beard. Telling me to be like him 
is like telling me to go limp and passive. I’d much rather be like 
William Wallace.”17 Meanwhile, William Wallace himself, and 
other medieval figures, would have been far more familiar with 
the medieval version of Christ, who was sometimes depicted 
nursing the faithful at his breast.
To Eldredge and other proponents of neomedieval com-
plementary gender roles, male agency depends on having a 
woman to save: “What would Robin Hood or King Arthur 
be without the woman they love?”18 Eldredge asks his reader, 
seemingly unaware that the medieval version of Robin Hood 
didn’t have a girlfriend—his devotion to the Virgin Mary 
was revised to “Maid Marion” after the Middle Ages, when 
Catholicism lost favor—or that the woman King Arthur loved 
is famous for betraying him with his favorite knight and 
destroying his kingdom. As always, this kind of medievalism 
is revisionist history used to advance regressive goals. It is not 
based on any real interest in or knowledge of the Middle Ages.

110  /  The Devil’s Historians
Revisionist medievalism takes pains to put women in their 
places, sometimes literally. Take, for instance, Sleeping Beauty 
and the Five Questions, an instructional audio CD sold by the 
popular American Christian company Vision Forum in 2004. 
The CD’s purpose is to teach fathers how to prepare their 
daughters to be submissive brides. Its cover features a doc-
tored version of Edmund Leighton’s famous 1901 painting The 
Accolade. Leighton’s painting is of a young woman using a 
sword to knight a man who kneels before her (see Figure 5.1). 
But the Vision Forum CD cover adjusts The Accolade  
FIGURE 5.1  The Accolade, painting by Edmund Leighton, 1901. 
Obtained from Wikimedia Commons: https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File: Accolade_by_Edmund_Blair_Leighton_-_complete.jpg

Knights in Shining Armor and Damsels in Distress  /  111
by lifting up the man to hover over the woman and removing 
the sword from her hand (see Figure 5.2). (The CD’s narrator, 
Doug Phillips, was sued for sexual harassment in 2014, and 
Vision Forum had to close down.)
The ill-informed “medieval” theory of complementary 
gender roles saturates modern extremist religious cultures, 
something we’ll talk more about in the following chapter. 
But these ideas aren’t exclusive to the radical fringe. Even 
in something as seemingly innocuous as LEGO—“Knight’s 
Showdown” for boys, so they can imagine themselves at war, 
and “Rapunzel’s Tower” for girls, so they can imagine them-
selves being rescued—neomedieval gender roles work to keep 
women and girls submissive so that men can shine.
Restrictive gender roles are a big enough problem. But 
the theory that two, interdependent, complementary gen-
ders are somehow historically natural also erases LGBTQ+ 
people completely, indoctrinating children into unnatural, 
ahistorical gender roles alongside heterosexism and self-
loathing. Sometimes the anti-LGBTQ+ effects of this kind of 
medievalism are latent and ignorant, but sometimes, they’re 
FIGURE 5.2  Sleeping Beauty and the Five Questions, CD narrated 
by Douglas W. Phillips, 2004. Image obtained from visionfamilyforum.
com’s store page, now defunct.

112  /  The Devil’s Historians
intentional. Gender “purists” use their warped view of the 
Middle Ages to rigidly police gender and sexuality and to 
enforce roles and relationships which, if they were as natural 
as these people claim, would not need to be enforced at all.
neomedieval rape culture
The medievalism-infused gender binary of passive, vic-
timized women and heroic (or brutal) men normalizes sexual 
assault in modern culture. We mentioned the hit television 
show Game of Thrones, based on George R.R. Martin’s A 
Song of Ice and Fire series, at the beginning of the chapter. 
Martin’s novels are full of explicit sexual assaults, constant 
discussions and jokes about rape, and rape threats against 
female characters.19 Nameless women are raped by raiding 
soldiers and warriors, rape is woven into national and familial 
histories in Westeros, and one particularly brutal rape results 
in a woman so traumatized that she is rendered mute. The 
words rape, raped, raper, rapist, or raping combined appear 
at least 171 times in Martin’s books, and that’s not including 
the other synonyms he uses to describe it.
No matter how grim A Song of Ice and Fire’s view of 
medieval sex might be, though, the television show makes it 
worse. When Jaime Lannister and Brienne of Tarth, one of 
the only female knights in Westeros, are captured, Jaime says 
to her, “When we make camp for the night, you’ll be raped, 
more than once. None of these fellows have ever been with 
a noble woman. You’d be wise not to resist…. If you fight 
them, they will kill you.… Let them have what they want. It 
doesn’t matter.”20 Brienne asks him, “If you were a woman, 
you wouldn’t resist? You’d let them do what they wanted?” 
“If I was a woman,” Jaime replies, “I’d make them kill me. 
But I’m not, thank the Gods.”
This conversation comes almost directly from the books; 
both text and television would have us believe that despite 

Knights in Shining Armor and Damsels in Distress  /  113
Brienne being bigger, stronger, and better with her sword than 
Jaime, her womanhood makes her vulnerability inevitable. 
But HBO included two amplifying additions just to reinforce 
Brienne’s vulnerability: “If you fight them, they’ll kill you” 
is never uttered in the books, and it seems to indicate that if 
Brienne chose to “make them kill her” like Jaime would, she’d 
be classified as a victim, not a warrior. Second, and potentially 
more disturbing, is the added line, “none of these fellows have 
ever been with a noble woman,” as though sexual assault is 
the same as “being with” someone, gang-raping a noble pris-
oner is as romantic as a tumble in the hay with the farmer’s 
daughter.
The slippery continuum between sex and rape as well as 
the inevitability of female vulnerability also dictate the trans-
formation of one of Martin’s only erotic scenes into a brutal 
rape: Daenerys Targaryen and Khal Drogo’s wedding night, 
which is consensual in the books. Moreover, in an entirely 
invented plotline for heroine Sansa Stark, the HBO show 
has her married to Ramsay Bolton—the Worst Person in 
Westeros—and he rapes her after their wedding night.
The showrunners for Game of Thrones defend the violent 
sexual assaults added into the television version of Westeros 
by claiming in a March 2017 interview with The Daily Beast, 
“It’s not our world … but it is a real world, and it’s a vio-
lent world, a more brutal world.… It’s a world where these 
horrible things are definitely pervasive elements of their lives 
and their cultures. We felt that shying away from these things 
would be doing a disservice to the reality and groundedness of 
George’s vision.”21 Far too many people believe this version 
of the Middle Ages is authentic. Marital rape did happen in 
the Middle Ages. It’s difficult to know how often. But it was 
not so common that every woman, or even most, went to their 
marital bed expecting violence. Marital rape also happens 
today. It was only criminalized in all 50 states in the USA in 
1993—and only as a result of the concerted effort of feminists 
for nearly 150 years. And overall modern rape statistics are 
appalling: as a conservative estimate, one in six women in the 

114  /  The Devil’s Historians
United States today have either been raped or are the survivor 
of an attempted rape, and women are still abducted into and 
raped in marriage around the world.22
The brutal world HBO created is, in many ways, more 
similar to our modern world. We have to own up to our 
own rape culture, not just displace it onto the past. It is the 
twenty-first century that brought the horrific rape of a two-
year-old girl in India and the ten-year rape and captivity of 
three adolescent girls in Cleveland, Ohio. Ours is the world 
in which teenage boys videotape their crimes and tweet about 
them. And it is the twenty-first century, not the twelfth, in 
which US Senator Saxby Chambliss of Georgia explained 
the rate of sexual assault against women in the US military, 
one woman in three, by explaining, “The young folks that are 
coming into each of your services are anywhere from 17 to 
22–23. Gee whiz—the hormone level created by nature sets in 
place the possibility for these types of things to occur.”23 And 
despite the fact that it is the twenty-first century, men who 
have been accused of rape still sit on the Supreme Court and 
in the White House.24
The almost exclusively female victims of sexual assault 
in Game of Thrones—and in the original books—also give 
lie to any claims of accuracy, historical or otherwise. Apart 
from oblique references to assault against boys, men are 
rarely vulnerable to rape in the faux-medieval world of 
Westeros. But war, hierarchical systems, and the cultural 
elevation of sexual dominance results in rampant sexual 
violence against men too. Between 21 per cent and 80 per 
cent of male political prisoners in Croatia, Iran, Kuwait, 
the former Soviet Union, Sarajevo, and the Congo reported 
being raped by their captors—and that’s only what was 
reported.25 The Pentagon estimates the rate of sexual assault 
against men in the United States military at 1.2 per cent, 
38 men per day.26 And notably, those figures are among 
soldiers; that doesn’t count assaults against enemies or pris-
oners. Finally, the rape of men in prisons is so ubiquitous 
that it is commonly treated like a joke rather than a horrific 
crime.

Knights in Shining Armor and Damsels in Distress  /  115
We don’t have reliable statistical analysis of sexual violence 
against medieval women or men. Like marital rape or the rape 
of slaves, legal protection did not seem to exist for many male 
victims, although sodomy was a punishable offense. And yet, 
we do have some suggestion of sexual violence against men 
in literature, including many Norse sennas (boasting contests 
that preceded a fight) that accuse men of being ridden like 
mares or assaulted by superior warriors. We also have descrip-
tions of the rape of men listed among the many atrocities 
committed during the Crusades. And yet, this aspect of the 
real, violent, and brutal world is not one to which those who 
revel in the authenticity of medieval rape would like to remain 
faithful. Clearly, when reality and fantasy come into conflict, 
it is the illusions that flatter our own ideas about gender that 
will win out over the complexities of history or human nature.
Fictional instances of violence against women are used as 
a shortcut to make medievalism seem authentic. But they also 
shape modern culture, and not just with the smug but false 
assurance that we are better than our past. People today look 
to history to verify and validate their own behavior. For those 
looking to explain rape culture, myths about the brutal, patri-
archal, heterosexist Middle Ages provides “evidence” that this 
is humanity’s natural state. Not only is this deadly for modern 
women but it aggravates the culture of shame surrounding 
sexual assault against men. “Why complain?” this view of 
history seems to ask anyone who hopes to change patriarchal 
culture. “The world has always been a man’s world. Just be 
grateful you don’t live back then.” It’s a grim view of women’s 
lives and an even grimmer view of men themselves—so much 
so that turning to the real Middle Ages is almost a relief.
gender in the medieval world
Despite what you may see on television, most medi-
eval men were not violent, and most of them didn’t fight 
in wars. Only a few wealthy men were knights, and even 

116  /  The Devil’s Historians
men in “Viking” culture were more likely to tend farms and 
fields than raid their neighbors. (Raids were the province 
of the upper class, who had slaves and serfs to tend their 
estates and farms while they were away.) Despite this, re-
enactment groups have far more modern men pretending 
to be sword-wielding aristocrats than farmers, serfs, clerks, 
merchants, parsons, or hermits. When modern people talk 
nostalgically about “medieval men,” they mean warrior-
aristocrats. Few people want to admit how much their 
nostalgia for medieval gender roles is so heavily dependent 
on class or that if they were transported back to medieval  
times, they would more likely be farmers or servants than 
princesses and kings.
Moreover, medieval women were not sheltered princesses 
guarding their purity, even when they were nobles. (The chas-
tity belt never existed in medieval times, and the only ones 
around now were joke or fetish items forged in the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries.) Medieval noblewomen and royalty 
had extensive influence, education, and power. Anna Komnene, 
a twelfth-century Byzantine princess, was also a physician and 
a historian who wrote the Alexiad, which chronicled the First 
Crusade. The Empress Matilda had to fight a civil war for 
England against her own cousin, Stephen of Blois. She lost, 
but she ensured that her son, Henry II, would take the throne 
when Stephen died. Eleanor of Aquitaine, Henry II’s queen, 
joined the Second Crusade with a troop of ladies-in-waiting, 
ushered in a literary renaissance, and eventually joined her son 
in a revolt against her own husband. And these women are the 
tip of the iceberg, not exceptions to the rule.
It can be tempting to write off medieval women because 
of the “common knowledge” that they lived in a patriarchal 
society. Most people don’t know about medieval women and 
their achievements because they haven’t bothered to look—
sometimes, that even includes teachers and scholars. There are 
enough medieval women writers, for instance, to fill several 
semesters worth of reading. Twelfth-century writer Marie de 
France engaged in a literary recovery project, translating the 
legends of the Bretons, a people who lived in what is now 

Knights in Shining Armor and Damsels in Distress  /  117
Brittany in France. Multilingual and an extraordinary poet, 
Marie told tales like Lanval, which was so popular through-
out the Middle Ages that it was even translated into Old 
Norse. She also translated over 102 fables and a number of 
saints’ lives. Christine de Pizan wrote the Book of the City 
of Ladies in defense of women, as well as several other liter-
ary and historical works, including a biography of Charles V. 
Medieval Japan was home to a great many female writers, 
including poets like Shirome and Michitsuna no Haha in the 
tenth century, and Mursaki Shikibu, who wrote the world’s 
first novel, The Tale of Genji, in the eleventh century. In fact, 
women wrote poetry and songs all over the medieval world, 
like the ninth-century Byzantine hymnist Kassia and Jórunn 
Skáldmær, a tenth-century Norwegian skald (the Norse 
word for bard). Ulayya bint al-Mahdī wrote love poetry in 
eighth-century Baghdad, and Khosrovidukht wrote in eighth-
century Armenia. Medieval women such as Julian of Norwich, 
Catherine of Siena, and Marguerite Porete were also prolific 
religious writers.
Many medieval women were polymaths—writers, theolo-
gians, scientists, and physicians—like Hildegard of Bingen, 
Trota of Salerno, and Lubna of Córdoba, a poet and a math-
ematician in tenth-century Iberia. In China, Xue Tao, Yu 
Xuanji, and Li Ye wrote poetry in the Tang Dynasty, Madame 
Huarui and Wang Qinghui were poets and concubines, and 
Guan Daosheng was a twelfth-century poet and painter. Laylā 
bint T. arīf was a ninth-century Muslim warrior-poet—and 
she was not the only one. And there are many more medi-
eval women writers who may exist if we stop assuming that 
“Anonymous” was a man.
Medieval women were also religious leaders and busi-
nesswomen and practiced other professions. Abbesses and 
nuns were extremely influential in both the Church and 
in politics. Women were doctors in the early Middle Ages 
before universities began to exclude them. Still, even in the 
late Middle Ages, whole villages would have died without 
midwives. They would have been naked without the clothes 
women wove, imported, and sold. They would have starved 

118  /  The Devil’s Historians
without women’s crops. And they would have been a lot 
soberer, but a lot sadder, without the leagues of female brew-
ers who supplied the medieval world’s ale.
The Middle Ages were patriarchal, but patriarchy is a 
power structure that changes shape, and that ebbs and flows 
with other social and cultural developments. Its nature is dif-
ferent in different places and times. After all, we’re talking 
about hundreds of years and an entire world full of people 
and customs. So, while it is important to acknowledge real 
medieval women’s suffering and oppression, it’s also impor-
tant not to infantilize them, to imagine that they were always 
helpless, or to dismiss their contributions to the world. 
Medieval women were half the world, and their lives counted.
Although men were privileged in most medieval cultures, 
medieval masculinity was defined very differently than we 
imagine it today. In some ways, medieval men had a much 
broader range of emotional expression available to them than 
American men do now. And they are much more vulner-
able than you might expect. Sir Thomas Malory’s Le Morte 
d’Arthur, which is considered a manly book about man 
things—weapons, knights, and combat—contains plenty of 
examples. His Lancelot is in near constant danger of being 
raped. Typical episodes include one in which Lancelot, hap-
lessly sleeping under an apple tree, is suddenly dragged back 
to the Castle Charyot by four lascivious queens who intend to 
coerce his sexual services on penalty of death: “Choose one of 
us to have as your lover,” they demand, “or die in prison.”27 
Lancelot is rescued from this fate, but his heroic savior is 
a damsel, not another knight. In another episode, Lancelot 
actually is raped. The perpetrator is Elaine of Corbin, whose 
nursemaid enchants her to look like Guinevere, then gets 
Lancelot drunk and leads him to Elaine’s bed. The term rape 
may seem anachronistic for this episode, but we can still rec-
ognize the traumatic reaction Lancelot has after the assault: 
he jumps out a window, takes off into the woods, and runs 
around half-naked for two years.28
Lancelot is not the only vulnerable knight in medieval 
legend. Sir Alexander is kidnapped by Morgan le Fay, who 

Knights in Shining Armor and Damsels in Distress  /  119
captures him to “do her pleasure whenever she wants it.” 
Alexander claims, “I would rather cut away my ‘hangers’ than 
do her any such pleasure!”29 Alexander escapes with both his 
chastity and his masculinity intact, however, thanks to a dam-
sel who rescues him from prison. Even King Arthur is trapped 
by a sorceress, Aunowre, who tries to seduce him with magic. 
He is rescued by another sorceress, Nynyve, who has already 
swooped in to save the king from a mantle that would have 
set him on fire, and who rescued him during his battle against 
the knight Accolon. You might wade into Arthurian legend 
expecting to find knights rescuing ladies from towers, and 
there are a few, but you’ll also find a surprising number of 
ladies rescuing knights.
Women also rescue other women from sexual peril in medi-
eval romance: Thessala, a doctor in Chrétien de Troyes’ Cligès, 
saves the lady Fenice who is forced to marry her beloved’s 
uncle. By slipping the uncle a magical potion, Thessala ensures 
that he will make love to his wife only in his dreams, never 
touching her in reality. Next, she gets Fenice out of her mar-
riage by helping her fake her own death. Thessala even goes up 
against a pack of male doctors: three physicians from Salerno 
are sadistically torturing Fenice to see if she’s really dead when 
Thessala rushes to her rescue with a crowd of more than a 
thousand ladies, who break down the door with axes and 
hammers and hurl the physicians out the windows.
The portrayal of gritty, filthy, brutal masculinity and pas-
sive, victimized femininity in the Middle Ages is a modern 
fantasy in more ways than one. Take, for instance, Vikings, 
often considered the manliest men of medieval times. Viking 
men didn’t run around with bare chests—they wore tunics, 
hats, and colorful clothing with intricate patterns and ribbons. 
Medieval chronicle evidence, such as John of Wallingford’s 
in 1220, described the Vikings as well-groomed, charming 
heartbreakers:
They were—according to their country’s customs—in 
the habit of combing their hair every day, to bathe every 
Saturday, to change their clothes frequently and to draw 

120  /  The Devil’s Historians
attention to themselves by means of many such frivolous 
whims. In this way, they sieged the married women’s virtue 
and persuaded the daughters of even noble men to become 
their mistresses.30
Viking men were also scrupulous groomers. Archaeologists 
have found tweezers, nail cleaners, ear cleaners, and tooth-
picks from the age of Viking raids. And men were not the 
only ones to wield a sword: archaeologists have also found the 
graves of women who may have been Viking warriors.
If you’re surprised by this information about the suppos-
edly übermasculine Vikings, it’s because our gender stereo-
types in the modern era are very different from medieval 
ones. Gender is far from stable—not just among individuals, 
but among cultures and throughout time. Stereotypes of 
women were very different too. Consider a thirteenth-century 
poem called De Coniuge non Ducenda, commonly known 
as “Gawain on Marriage” or “Against Marrying.” Found 
in over 55 manuscripts—so we know it was popular—De 
Coniuge describes one gender as “wanton” and “lustful,” 
pretending to go on pilgrimages so they can sneak out to 
brothels, reveling in “unchastity,” “deceitful, jealous,” and 
“full of pride.”31 Which gender do you think they’re talking 
about?
Women, of course! Medieval people believed that women 
were earthier, less faithful, and needed far more sex than men. 
In fact, unlike the current medievalisms that try to reinforce 
female purity, innocence, and passivity, medieval women were 
thought to be more sexually aggressive by nature. Medieval 
medicine also thought women were naturally colder, more 
calculating, and more deceitful than men because of their dif-
ferent humors. However, this wasn’t quite the feminist view-
point you might think: the beliefs stemmed from patriarchal 
ownership of women. Men who had taken wives by force 
or as a business arrangement were constantly paranoid that 
their “property” would stray. They also thought women were 
less intelligent, less spiritual, and more like animals than like 
people.

Knights in Shining Armor and Damsels in Distress  /  121
What changed? When did we get the prevailing idea that 
women are naturally more chaste and virtuous than men are? 
Well, there has always been something of a class divide at 
work. In the Middle Ages, purity and chastity were reserved 
for highly aristocratic women and saints, who were thought 
to be able to transcend their “typical” female natures. But in 
the nineteenth century, white culture began to use “purity” to 
distinguish white women from everyone else. Racists argued 
that if white people themselves were more “evolved,” which 
those racists fervently wanted to believe, that meant white 
women had transcended qualities as mundane as lust or other 
appetites. As depressing as all this is, it should teach you that 
even the gender stereotypes that seem the most “natural” are, 
in fact, socially constructed and highly dependent on power, 
cultural conditions, and political propaganda.
the LGBTQ+ middle ages
Although everyone who uses medievalism to police 
gender behaves as though there were only two genders in 
the medieval world, and only one sexual orientation, history 
reveals that this is just another set of false assumptions about 
the Middle Ages. Medieval people had same-sex partners 
and desires, lived as a gender other than the one they were 
assigned at birth, and even disrupted or expanded the notion 
of gender altogether.
The concept of sexual orientation as identity is relatively 
modern. Medieval literature will speak to us about same-sex 
acts but not of identities themselves, which can make things 
murkier. But we have enough evidence to conclude that sexu-
ality was a spectrum, like it is today. We can also extrapolate 
this from ancient cultures like Greece and Rome, where for 
over 12 centuries, sexuality was a spectrum, bisexuality was 
the norm, with people who were only attracted to same-
sex partners or opposite-sex partners at either end of that 
spectrum.

122  /  The Devil’s Historians
Asexuality is, perhaps, the easiest orientation other than 
heterosexuality to find evidence for in the Middle Ages. 
Although some who joined monasteries and convents didn’t 
do so by choice (and even if they did, they didn’t always 
remain chaste), asexuality was not just a valid medieval 
lifestyle—it was seen as a holy calling. People could thrive by 
devoting themselves to theology, literature, science, teaching, 
or even politics by taking vows of chastity. Even if one didn’t 
join the Church at a young age, asexuality could be adopted  
later in life. The most famous example is Margery Kempe, 
a medieval mystic who swore off sex after giving birth to 
14 children because she had a vision from God. Margery 
didn’t just abandon her family either: instead, she talked her 
husband into an asexual marriage.
Examples of other queer sexualities in the Middle Ages 
may not be as obvious, but even though medieval people 
didn’t use the exact same language to discuss sexuality, we can 
still identify queer moments in the past. In Marie de France’s 
twelfth-century romance Lanval, the hero angers Guinevere 
by refusing to be seduced by her, so she accuses him of “her-
esy”: “People have often told me that you have no interest 
in women,” she tells him. “You have fine-looking boys with 
whom you enjoy yourself.”32 Now, Guinevere is wrong about 
Lanval—he has a female fairy lover he isn’t allowed to tell 
anyone about. But the episode shows you that medieval peo-
ple thought sexuality was about behavior rather than identity. 
Likewise, Christian clerical texts mention lesbianism as acts, 
not identity, referring to a woman’s “vice with a woman,” 
“devilish ways,” or “playing a male role.”33 Medieval Muslim 
cultures had specific terms for lesbian practice based on the 
Arabic words for pounding and rubbing.34 Their medical texts 
showed some awareness that same-sex desire between women 
was inborn, though they blamed unbalanced humors. And not 
all medieval representations of same-sex desire were negative 
either. A tenth-century Arabic book whose title translates as 
Encyclopedia of Pleasure tells a love story about a Muslim 
woman and a Christian woman and claims their love was far 
stronger than that between man and wife.

Knights in Shining Armor and Damsels in Distress  /  123
People could not usually marry same-sex partners, but 
they often didn’t have to. Men and women who “married the 
church” by joining monasteries and nunneries (and were not 
asexual) lived their whole lives in close proximity to people of 
the same sex. Medieval marriages frequently were pragmatic 
ventures—many people married for procreation, for help on 
the farm, or for political reasons—so quite a few people found 
love and desire outside of matrimonial bonds.
The acceptance of same-sex desire changed over the course 
of the Middle Ages, which grew less rather than more tolerant 
over time. The original Christian prohibition against same-
sex relationships came not from any specific anti-gay biblical 
passages but from the ascetic tradition, which asked humanity 
to reject all pleasures of the flesh in favor of spiritual transcen-
dence. The Apostle Paul, a medieval favorite, basically argues 
that you should have no sex at all—but if you absolutely 
must, you should at least get married and make babies. Thus, 
earlier medieval practice equated same-sex acts with sins like 
masturbation. In the later Middle Ages, as the Church cracked 
down on heresies and as the Inquisition spread, punishments 
became far more severe. And in the Muslim world, the 
Encyclopedia of Pleasure was eventually banned.
We have more concrete records, both literary and histori-
cal, of transgender and nonbinary medieval people. The Norse 
gods, despite having a certain caché among right-wingers 
because of the Nazis’ love affair with Norse culture, had a 
range of sexualities and gender identities. Loki famously 
changes his biological sex: in Gylfaginning, he turns into a 
mare in order to seduce a giant’s stallion and win a bet. As a 
result, Loki gives birth to Odin’s eight-legged horse, Sleipnir.
One of the most modern-feeling romances to emerge from 
the European Middle Ages is the thirteenth-century French 
romance Silence, in which the title character is assigned 
female at birth but takes on the mantle of a male knight 
in order to retain their right to inheritance. There are sev-
eral ways to read this text. You can read it as a transgender 
story—that Silence is a man the whole time and comes to 
accept his gender identity and expression over time. It can 

124  /  The Devil’s Historians
be read as a story of gender fluidity, where Silence adopts 
the gender expression they prefer. Or it can be read through 
as a woman adopting traditionally male dress and behav-
ior in order to succeed within and disrupt the patriarchal 
structures around her. Each of these readings is a reason-
able approach to the text.35 By the time she is 12 years old, 
Silence can defeat all of her peers at jousting, wrestling, and 
skirmishing. At this point, she is visited by three allegori-
cal figures: Nature, Nurture, and Reason. Nature lambasts 
the young knight: “You have no business going off into the 
forest, jousting, hunting, shooting off arrows. Desist from 
all of this! ... Go to a chamber and learn to sew!”36 Just as 
Silence is about to be persuaded by Nature’s rhetoric, words 
which the narrator notably labels sofime—false arguments 
intended to deceive—Nurture arrives, and she is furious. “I 
have completely dis-Natured her!” she declares, “She will 
always resist you!” Finally, Reason convinces Silence that 
taking up the habits of Nature would be almost as bad as 
killing herself. “You will never train for knighthood,” she 
warns, and “you will lose your horse and chariot.”37 After 
listening to Reason, Silence “saw, in short, that a man’s life 
was much better than that of a woman.” “Indeed,” she 
decides, “it would be too bad to step down when I’m on 
top…. Now, I am honored and valued…. I’m a disgrace if I 
want to be one of the women [now that] I have a mouth too 
hard for kisses and arms too rough for embraces.”38 Hence 
Nurture and Reason have succeeded in changing Silence’s 
body as well as her mind.
What’s important about the nature, nurture, and gender 
debate in Silence is that it shows evidence of a medieval rec-
ognition that gender can be fluid. Silence’s behavior erases 
Nature—after all, she is so good at performing masculinity 
that she outfights all the other boys. Moreover, when Nature, 
Nurture, and Reason visit Silence, each one is portrayed as an 
external force to be obeyed at will, and all three are separate 
from what we now label “biological sex.” Reason, who argues 
for remaining male, is considered a prized faculty in medieval 
theology, delivered to the individual from God to lead one to 

Knights in Shining Armor and Damsels in Distress  /  125
His truth. If nature, nurture, reason, politics, physical activity, 
and even God take part in shaping Silence, it’s possible that 
medieval ideas about what we call gender might be even more 
complex than our own.
Religion is also an important factor in medieval gender 
identity, and not always in the ways you might think. Some 
people who were born female dressed as monks, joined mon-
asteries, and only had their biological sex discovered after 
their deaths, like Theodora of Alexandria, Marinos the monk, 
and Smaragdus of Alexandria. Until recently, many historians 
have labeled these people as “cross-dressing” or “disguised” 
saints, rather than acknowledging that medieval people may 
have had similar feelings and experiences as transgender, non-
binary, and genderqueer people today. And while we cannot 
say definitively how they saw themselves since what we know 
was written about them and not by them, the fact that they 
maintained their male identities until their death implies that 
this was more than a “disguise”—this was how they chose to 
live their lives.
Let it not be said, however, that the Middle Ages were espe-
cially enlightened about gender. The infamous case of Joan of 
Arc is a telling one. Joan was celebrated for taking up men’s 
clothing, armor, and weapons to fight the English. But she 
was ultimately burned as a heretic for refusing to renounce 
dressing as a man. The Middle Ages were hardly an open-
minded paradise of feminism and sexual openness. But don’t 
be fooled by anyone who wants to pretend medieval people 
did not have the same range of desires, dreams, and identities 
that we do today.

This page intentionally left blank

127
The theologian may indulge the pleasing task of describ-
ing Religion as she descended from Heaven, arrayed in her 
native purity. A more melancholy duty is imposed on the 
historian. He must discover the inevitable mixture of error 
and corruption, which she contracted in a long residence 
upon earth, among a weak and degenerate race of beings.
—Edward Gibbon, The History of the Decline 
and Fall of the Roman Empire, 17761
When ISIS exploded onto the front pages of western media, 
pundits were in a rush to call their tactics “barbaric” and 
“medieval.” Headlines like “The Return to Medievalism” 
in Slate and “The New Dark Ages: The Chilling Medieval 
Society ISIS Extremists Seek to Impose in Iraq” in The Daily 
Express, and statements such as that from Nick Clegg, then–
deputy prime minister of the UK, that the UK upholds the 
rule of law, “unlike these barbaric, medieval types in ISIL,” 
showed the eagerness of journalists and politicians to portray 
ISIS as a relic of the medieval past.2 Behind these accusations 
was an assumption that both ISIS and the Middle Ages were 
brutal and backwards. Lurking behind that was a thinly veiled 
racism eager to accuse Muslim people of barbarism.
However, ISIS’s medieval label came from two sources. 
Its leaders also embraced medievalism, though their motives 
differed from Western media outlets: the group claimed to be 
establishing a new caliphate. The medieval caliphates were 
Islamic empires that reached their height in the seventh, eighth, 
and ninth centuries, ruling over parts of the Middle East, 
Africa, and Europe. ISIS’s goal was to bring the “medieval” 
caliphate back, not only through violent conquest but through 
6
Medievalism and 
Religious Extremism

128  /  The Devil’s Historians
fundamentalist adherence to the Qur’an and the hadīth, the 
collected accounts and words of the Prophet Muhammad.
One of the most troubling implications in analyses of ISIS’s 
fundamentalism was that non-Muslim people believed the 
radical group’s assertion that they practiced a more authentic 
version of Islam. Writing for The Atlantic in 2015, Graeme 
Wood argued that denying ISIS’s medieval religious nature is 
“dishonest,” and that “much of what the group does looks 
nonsensical except in light of a sincere, carefully considered 
commitment to returning civilization to a seventh-century 
legal environment.”3 Bernard Haykel, a professor of Near 
Eastern Studies interviewed for Wood’s article, declared that 
ISIS fighters “are smack in the middle of the medieval tradi-
tion and are bringing it wholesale into the present day.”4 This 
is a common misunderstanding about all extremist religions: 
that being a literal reader of a religious text, and a rigorous 
adherent to all written religious law, is more “medieval,” and 
therefore more authentic.
Fundamentalist faiths usually claim to practice literal 
interpretations of the Bible, Qur’an, Torah, or other sacred 
texts. And while this is certainly as valid a belief system as 
any other, it isn’t actually an old way of believing. Literalism 
is relatively modern. In fact, scholar Karen Armstrong has 
argued that it coincides with the rise of the scientific method, 
alongside other literal and statistical approaches to humanities 
disciplines. American Christian biblical literalism, for instance, 
didn’t begin until the nineteenth century, and it didn’t fully 
take hold in many churches until the end of the twentieth. 
The Southern Baptist Church’s current website declares that 
the Bible is “God-breathed”: “It has God for its author, sal-
vation for its end, and truth, without any mixture of error, 
for its matter. Therefore all Scripture is totally true and trust-
worthy.”5 But Southern Baptists themselves did not all agree 
on the doctrine of biblical inerrancy and literalism until the 
1990s, when conservative pastors made it a litmus test for 
professors at their universities.
Similarly, the Haredim, or “ultra-Orthodox” Jews, who 
govern their lives by religious texts and shun outside 

Medievalism and Religious Extremism  /  129
influences, are also a nineteenth-century development, even 
though they claim to be practicing the oldest and most authen-
tic form of Judaism: “Our differentness only reflects our fealty 
to the Judaism of the Ages,” spokesperson Avri Shafram wrote 
in The Forward in 2014.6 And Wahhabism, the theology 
behind what many Americans call “Islamic Fundamentalism,” 
did not emerge until the late eighteenth century. Founded in 
Saudi Arabia, it died out in other regions until recently, after 
Saudi charities started funding schools and mosques in the 
1970s to promote it across the globe. Although all of these 
religious movements are considered politically and socially 
conservative, they are, in fact, reformist movements. They 
set out to change the way their respective faiths have been 
practiced for centuries in order to make them more restric-
tive. And they are largely a product of the modern era, not of 
medieval times.
Medievalism makes extremists believe that their practices 
have a firm basis in history, and critics of fundamentalist 
religions use medievalism to accuse religious people of being 
backwards and ignorant. But both sides are wrong. As you 
will see, the varieties of religious extremism active today 
combine all the modes of oppression and violence we’ve 
been discussing throughout the book with all the mistaken 
assumptions about the medieval past, making it a very mod-
ern phenomenon.
the biblical patriarchy movement
It may sound like something out of Margaret Atwood’s 
Handmaid’s Tale, but the American Biblical Patriarchy move-
ment, once relegated to the radical fringes, is a growing force 
in the United States.7 This movement draws on an extreme 
version of the “complementary genders” theory we described 
in the previous chapter; it demands female submission and 
male dominance in marriage and family relations. Young 
women are considered the property of their fathers until they 

130  /  The Devil’s Historians
can marry and bring new Christians into the world. Young 
men should grow up prepared to be warriors for Christ, and, 
eventually, the kings of their own household castles.
Biblical Patriarchy proponents believe that their gender 
enforcement system will both save the Church and solve 
many of the world’s ills. The now-defunct Vision Family 
Forum’s website had a statement on Biblical Patriarchy that 
claimed,
The defining crisis of our age is the systematic annihilation 
of the Biblical family.... Minimize the father and the family 
will perish.... The sad truth is that broken and weak 
families are the norm even within the most conservative 
and doctrinally orthodox church assemblies. This is in 
large part due to the death of Biblical patriarchy with 
its emphasis on father-directed vision, leadership, and 
self-sacrifice.8
But although they described their required gender relations as 
“Biblical,” they don’t look to late antiquity for their models 
of behavior. Instead, they use the Middle Ages—or their thin 
understanding of it—to mold their children into what they 
think are perfect vessels for Christ.
Biblical Patriarchy proponents often use the language 
of princesses and kings—a Disney-inspired neomedieval 
ideal that weirdly omits the prince—to indoctrinate young 
women into their gender roles. The princess’s destiny is to 
marry a man who will become king and to give birth to 
future kings. 
Female purity, beauty, and desirability to men are at the 
heart of the princess myth, but so is female passivity, which 
is required to allow men to be brave, strong, and chivalrous. 
For instance, Vision Forum Ministries, which was a leading 
force in the American Evangelical movement before its presi-
dent, Doug Phillips, was sued for sexual abuse, had a thriving 
marketplace full of educational products that used medieval-
ism to shape children’s gender roles. Supermarket shelves in 
the American South and Midwest are stocked with this kind 

Medievalism and Religious Extremism  /  131
of gender-conformist medievalism, such as books like His 
Princess: Love Letters from Your King, which features inspira-
tional letters from God to girls about how to remain modest, 
feminine, slim, and beautiful.
Nowhere is this medieval symbolism more evident than 
at the purity ball, a medieval-themed prom at which daugh-
ters pledge their virginity to their fathers. Yes, you read that 
right. Purity balls invite young girls to imagine themselves as 
medieval princesses and their fathers as powerful “knights” 
who can protect them from the world. The minor details 
of each purity ball vary depending on the organization and 
location. But most contain three ceremonial elements: the 
“cross dance,” in which very young girls—younger than the 
adolescent daughters who serve as their fathers’ dates—parade 
into the ballroom wearing white tutus and carrying a giant 
cross; the “covenant,” an oath from the father to his daughter 
inspired by medieval chivalric oaths; and a symbolic ritual sac-
rifice, in which daughters pass through an archway of crossed 
swords, then yield their “flowers” to the foot of a giant cross. 
The whole ritual emphasizes the doctrine that women’s sexu-
ality isn’t for themselves—it’s a commodity protected for and 
by “kings.”
Although there is no official gendered indoctrination 
ceremony for boys that is equivalent to the purity ball in 
Evangelical circles, Randy Wilson, the purity ball’s founder, 
recommends a ritual he conducts for his sons called “Brave 
Heart of a Warrior,” in which he gives the boys a purity ring 
and a sword. Wilson recounts the story of his first son’s cer-
emony on the Generations of Light Ministry website: “At that 
time the immense sword was almost his height. I explained to 
him that although he could not wage war right now with this 
imposing sword, he would grow into the weight of the sword 
just as he would grow into the weight of manhood.”9
These rituals connect masculinity to violence in the same 
way they connect a woman’s worth to her sexual purity. 
They bring us back to the unspoken aspects of those comple-
mentary gender roles people seem so bent on locating in the 
Middle Ages: if men are naturally violent, and women must 

132  /  The Devil’s Historians
be “pure” to be worthy of male protection, then “impure” 
women become targets for violence. In other words, it’s a 
recipe for rape culture.
Many people associated with the early Biblical Patriarchy 
Movement—like Doug Phillips—have lost their leadership 
positions after being accused of adultery and sexual assault.10 
But its cultural influence has gone mainstream. Vice President 
Mike Pence embraces purity culture, which sees men as 
unrestrainable animals and women as vessels of lust, when 
he refuses to be alone with a woman who is not his wife.11 
Betsy DeVos, Trump’s Education Secretary, is known for her 
radical religious beliefs, and she is imposing purity culture 
on America’s national education system by revising Title IX 
to make it harder to prosecute rape on campus.12 And since 
far-right evangelical Mike Pompeo took over as Trump’s 
Secretary of State, the US has taken pains to block any refer-
ences to “sexual and reproductive health” in United Nations 
aid activities.13
far-right catholicism
Christian extremist medievalism isn’t limited to Evangelical 
Protestants. There is also a strand of ultra-conservative 
Catholicism that embraces medievalism to support a sexist, 
deeply patriarchal, anti-Jewish, and anti-Muslim worldview. 
In fact, the SPLC says that radical traditionalist Catholics 
“may make up the largest single group of serious antisem-
ites in America.”14 These Catholics reject the reforms of the 
Second Vatican Council, which, as the SPLC writes, “con-
demned hatred for the Jews and rejected the accusation that 
Jews are collectively responsible for deicide in the form of the 
crucifixion of Christ.”15
Perhaps unsurprisingly, especially since 11 September 
2001 and the overall rise in anti-Muslim bigotry around the 
world, these groups have also added anti-Muslim hatred to 
their anti-Jewish animus. They often attempt to justify these 

Medievalism and Religious Extremism  /  133
prejudices—as well as their misogyny—by constructing a 
heroic image of medieval Catholic knighthood and arguing 
that the Crusades and even the Inquisition were justified and 
part of an ongoing “clash of civilizations.”
One such group is the American-based organization 
“Slaves of Immaculate Heart of Mary,” who represent 
themselves as Catholics despite the Vatican demand that they 
stop doing so in 2017 (and who, likely to the extreme con-
sternation of the Vatican, currently hold the website www.
catholicism.org). The extremist view that caught the Vatican’s 
attention was a radical interpretation of the doctrine extra 
Ecclesiam nulla salus (“outside of the Church there is no 
salvation”). It is easy to see how this doctrine, when taken 
literally, can fuel anti-Jewish and anti-Muslim bigotry. And 
that is fully realized by this organization, which publishes fre-
quent articles condemning Muslims and Jews and criticizing 
the Catholic Church’s post-Vatican II attempts to reconcile 
with other faiths.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, the Slaves of the Immaculate Heart 
of Mary’s propaganda employs a warped interpretation of the 
Middle Ages as an idyllic, inspirational era. Their website is 
full of articles with titles like, “Recovering a Bright Medieval 
Vision for the Future,” “Can Chivalry Return?”, and “The 
Thirteenth: The Greatest of Centuries.”16 Clearly, what 
they like about the Middle Ages is the fantasy of patriarchy, 
Christian supremacy, and violence against those outside the 
Church. They are particularly enamored of the Crusades, 
which they regularly characterize incorrectly as “defensive 
wars against Islam” that were meant to “reconquer Christian 
lands.”17 Their website erroneously claims that “much of his-
tory since the seventh century has been shaped by an unending 
conflict between the One True Church and Islam.”18 Of course 
by now, you, the reader, know better: this is just a particularly  
fervent example of the fictional “clash of civilizations” narra-
tive we discussed in Chapter Three.
Several other online organizations and influencers churn 
out content with a radical traditionalist Catholic bent. Perhaps 
the most successful is “Church Militant” (previously known 

134  /  The Devil’s Historians
as “Real Catholic TV,” until the Archdiocese of Detroit 
demanded that they stop using the word Catholic in their title 
in 2012).19 Church Militant is a multimillion-dollar media 
organization that produces articles, videos, and podcasts. 
Alongside rampantly anti-LGBTQ+ content and content 
attacking “leftists,” Muslims, and “globalists” (a common 
anti-Jewish dog whistle), Church Militant displays an obses-
sion with the medieval past. The site hosts apologetics for 
the Crusades and the Inquisition. One episode of their online 
show The One True Faith, titled “One True Faith Revisited: 
The Crusades and the Inquisition,” reframes the Crusades as a 
defensive war by arguing that the Middle East was and should 
be Christian-held territory and uses the medieval expansion of 
Islam to argue that the Crusades were justified.
The presenters of the show also argue that the medi-
eval Inquisition (which they distinguish from the Spanish 
Inquisition) was “a thing of compassion. Christian culture 
was profused [sic] all throughout Europe at the time, and 
heresy was something that struck at the very root of civiliza-
tion. […] it was a way to clear up theological difficulties. It 
was a great protection to the people of Europe.”20 Finally, 
they then use this falsely sanitized idea of the medieval 
Inquisition to spread hatred against Islam by arguing that 
Muslims are more violent than the medieval Church. Calling 
the Inquisition an “absolute watchdog for the faith,” the 
hosts argue that at least the Inquisition’s punishments weren’t 
“having your nose slit or your hands chopped off,” which 
they insist, incorrectly, were common practices in medieval 
Muslim countries.21
It is easy to see how these revisionist arguments help spread 
Islamophobia and violence against Muslims, and can even 
encourage the American invasion of Middle Eastern countries. 
But these arguments are also historically wrong. The medieval 
Inquisition did use torture. Its punishments included impris-
onment for life, forced conversion, and, as demonstrated 
by the fate of Joan of Arc and hundreds of others, execu-
tion. Throughout the Middle Ages, an accusation of heresy 
was no small matter. But rarely do Christian supremacists 

Medievalism and Religious Extremism  /  135
acknowledge the truth of medieval history when it inconve-
niences their anti-Muslim worldview.
Catholic extremists, like their Evangelical counterparts, 
are also deeply committed to a view of “chivalry” that takes 
an uncritical, Victorian-vintage view of Christian knight-
hood. As Charles A. Coulombe wrote for the Slaves of the 
Immaculate Heart of Mary website in an article titled “Can 
Chivalry Return?”, the organization hopes “to reinject chiv-
alry and—dare it be said—Catholic militancy and masculinity 
back into the life of the Church.”22 The allegiance between so-
called chivalry and patriarchal sexism was on full display in 
a conference in May 2019 called “Raising Chivalrous Young 
Men … in an Increasingly Decadent Society.” The website for 
the conference featured a quote by radio host Mike Church, 
who organized and headlined the conference, advising par-
ticipants to take up the mantle of “chivalry” that puts them 
at the head of their households in order to raise subservient 
daughters:
The crisis of a lack of manly formation in our time is real 
and ruthless in it’s [sic] diabolical conquest of so many 
souls for Hell. This conference is an attempt to put a 
halt to the slide and begin the process of realigning men, 
young and old, with their God-given privilege, as professor 
Dilsaver reminds us, of being the Priest, Prophet and 
King of their domains. To raise a generation of modest, 
Christian daughters requires a generation of chivalrous 
knights to court and defend them; this and nothing less is 
the lofty goal we must set and aspire to and pray to Our 
Lady to assist us in.23
Perhaps unsurprisingly, considering his own Catholicism, 
several of these right-wing conservative Catholic men are also 
fond of the medievalisms of J.R.R. Tolkien. Articles by the 
Slaves of the Immaculate Heart of Mary regularly discuss 
Tolkien’s work and freely integrate discussions of the fallen 
Numenoreans (from Tolkien’s Silmarillion) with their condem-
nations of Jewish people, who they argue are a fallen “chosen 

136  /  The Devil’s Historians
people.”24 They also think the Rohirrim from The Lord of 
the Rings embody chivalric virtues for contemporary men. 
One speaker at the “Raising Chivalrous Young Men” confer-
ence, Joseph Pearce, published two books not just proposing 
a conservative Catholic interpretation for The Hobbit and The 
Lord of the Rings but arguing that this was Tolkien’s intent 
all along.25
Though they may have radically different theological 
beliefs, the similarities between Evangelical and Catholic 
extremists are striking: both are governed by their attachment 
to Christian supremacy and male supremacy. And although 
they see themselves as radically opposed to Islam, they have 
far more in common with radical Islamic extremists than 
they do with mainstream Christians. In fact, their apocalyptic 
rhetoric, their emphasis on violent masculinity and submis-
sive female purity, their obsession with the Crusades, their 
perpetuation of rape culture, and their desire to force entire 
nations to follow their religious laws, make them all but indis-
tinguishable from groups like ISIS.
the medieval islamic “golden time”
Like these radical Christian groups, ISIS adopted the 
Crusades rhetoric spread in the wake of 9/11 and used it as a 
key recruitment strategy. Formed in the wake of the Iraq War, 
ISIS was not the only radical Islamist group in the Middle 
East, but it had unprecedented success recruiting soldiers, 
thanks both to its social media savvy and its deft deployment 
of medievalism.26
ISIS marketed the Middle Ages as a time of lost religious 
and ideological purity, a “golden time” to which the world 
should return—under their flag. In ISIS propaganda, the 
neomedieval caliphate they claimed to have reestablished was 
just as much a monument to lost power as it was evidence 
of new power. For ISIS, the medieval Crusades are part of 
the future as well as the past. For instance, Dabiq, an ISIS 

Medievalism and Religious Extremism  /  137
magazine for Westerners, is named for a town in Syria where 
ISIS radicals believe they will defeat the “crusaders” and usher 
in the end of the world.27 A 2014 issue called The Failed 
Crusade used George W. Bush’s own rhetoric to forge links 
between the Crusades, colonialism, and their new war with 
America: “The old colonialism was but a front for the crusad-
ers, just as it is today a front for the Jews and Christians. 
Indeed, the ‘Caesar of Rome’ Bush has declared multiple times 
that, ‘It is a Crusade!’ So why do people lie and deny this?”28
ISIS received a lot of attention for its desire to recreate 
the Crusades, but the tendency of Islamic radicals to appeal 
to the medieval historicity of their faith predates the rise of 
ISIS by nearly decade. Journalist Peter “Theo” Curtis, writ-
ing as Theo Padnos, delved into the recruitment of young 
Western Muslims to a radical madrasa in Dammaj in his 2011 
book, Undercover Muslim: A Journey into Yemen. Curtis 
(a Muslim convert himself) went undercover at the Dar al-
Hadith madrasa, which was known for recruiting young men 
online, and discovered that they were being sold the fantasy 
of a renewed medieval “golden time” in a fundamentalist 
Sunni utopia. The madrasa advocated radical simplicity and 
“repudiated the ‘innovations’ (bi’dah) or false traditions 
which, from century to century, have accrued to the edifice of 
Islam.”29
After 9/11 and during the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, 
young Muslims found themselves increasingly stereotyped or 
disenfranchised in North American and European countries. 
The urge to find a place of acceptance was understandable. 
But Curtis revealed that this madrasa convinced these young 
men that they would be able to live like neomedieval caliphs. 
He describes Westerners who made this journey as particu-
larly privileged in Yemen. Those who acquired Yemeni brides 
(a man can marry up to four women in Yemen) “were the 
aristocrats among the students ... to the outside world, wives 
are a sign of well-being, mastery of the world, prosperity and 
abundance.”30 Strikingly, Curtis notes that conflict in these 
marriages often occurred because the husbands, the Western 
converts, favored a more fundamentalist and more restrictive 

138  /  The Devil’s Historians
version of Islam than their Yemeni wives did. They permitted 
no television in their homes, only allowed strict halal meals, 
and required girls to wear hijab at six years old instead of 
the traditional age of nine.31 The Yemeni Shi’a eventually 
destroyed the madrasa based on their belief that the Saudi-
sponsored university was a shelter for radical Sunni fighters 
and a front for weapons smuggling. But even though the 
school is gone, the fantasies that drew its students thrived in 
ISIS, which declared itself a new caliphate whose mission was 
to reclaim that lost medieval “golden time.”
According to the CIA, at one point there were at least 
15,000 foreign fighters in ISIS’s ranks, many of whom were 
Westerners.32 ISIS recruited young men and women through 
an online propaganda campaign, including sleek videos that 
cast young ISIS soldiers as heroes in a glorious epic battle, rid-
ing horses and carrying swords. They even used footage from 
the recent Tolkien film adaptation The Two Towers. When 
ISIS held territory, its medievalism was a mix of actual history 
and historical fantasy: they revived a medieval tax on non-
Muslims in Raqqua, and announced that anyone “deemed an 
apostate [can] be crucified or beheaded,” a law they claimed 
was medieval.33 (Historically, however, Muslim scholars 
disagreed about the death penalty as much as Americans do 
today.) ISIS also provided bouncy castles with the ISIS logo on 
them to entertain children. To young men who felt dismissed 
and disempowered, ISIS recruitment videos and propaganda 
sold them a life like a neomedieval video game, in which they 
could star as conquering, fierce warriors. And it sold young 
women a Disney Middle Ages in which they could be noble 
princesses, protected and adored by heroic “lions.”
Female purity and rape culture were a disturbing part of 
ISIS’s medievalism, just as they are for the religious extrem-
ists discussed earlier in this chapter. After all, as you have 
seen, the use of the Middle Ages to reinforce traditional 
gender roles is not limited to one religious extremist group, 
or even to one religion. Under ISIS control, even women who 
joined the cause willingly had their behavior strenuously 
controlled: they could not go outside alone, their clothing 

Medievalism and Religious Extremism  /  139
was rigorously policed, and hospitals were emptied of female 
doctors. The universities closed, and official ISIS publications 
stated that “girls [can] be married from the age of nine” and 
“women should only leave the house in exceptional circum-
stances and should remain ‘hidden and veiled.’”34
ISIS perpetrated a horrific campaign of sexual violence 
against women who did not conform to its narrow standards 
of purity. They released a 2014 statement in Dabiq called 
“The Revival of Slavery Before the Hour,” in which they 
argued, “One should remember that enslaving the families of 
the kuffar—the infidels—and taking their women as concu-
bines is a firmly established aspect of the Shariah, or Islamic 
law.”35 Women and girls considered “infidels” reported 
being stored in a warehouse in Mosul with locked doors and 
blacked-out windows, forced to take off their head scarves to 
be assessed for their attractiveness, and, if chosen, dragged 
out by their hair to be raped.36 A woman interviewed by 
The Guardian described being held “in a dark hall together 
with hundreds of other women, and girls. Some of them chil-
dren who were not more than five years old.... On a daily 
basis,” she explained, “men entered the room to pick out a 
girl. First the most beautiful girls, the young ones.”37 These 
reports, along with stories of “adulteresses” being stoned or 
“witches” being executed by ISIS officials, have fueled some 
of the accusations that ISIS is “medieval” or “trapped in the 
Middle Ages.”38 But that makes it all too easy to dismiss just 
how common violence against women still is in today’s world.
ISIS extremists have not been the only ones to embrace 
the fantasy of a neomedieval crusade in violent rhetoric and 
propaganda in today’s Middle Eastern wars. Christians in 
America and Europe are also calling for a new crusade—not 
just the Christians safe at home but also some of the sol-
diers on the battlefield. Throughout the wars in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, some extremist Christian soldiers sported 
Crusades-themed patches meant to inflame their Muslim 
opponents: images of a medieval knight eating a pig’s head 
that read “PORK-EATING CRUSADER” in both English and 
Arabic, for instance, or a crusader knight riding a bomber jet, 

140  /  The Devil’s Historians
or simply a Crusades cross emblazoned with a skull and the 
words “Embrace the Hate.”39 The battle against ISIS seemed 
to give everyone tacit permission to kick their racist Crusades-
mongering up a notch, as though both sides want to recre-
ate one of the most pointless stretches of violence in human 
history. Neither side seems interested in the innocent people 
trying to live their lives and raise their families in the midst of 
the warfare and horror these neocrusaders create.
a neomedieval epidemic
Although modern extremists seem obsessed with the 
Crusades, those wars are not the only medieval inspiration for 
today’s religious violence. Moreover, Christians and Muslims 
are not the only ones playing medieval games with people’s 
lives. In 2014, for instance, leaders in the Hindu nationalist 
movement known as Hindutva invoked the medieval Muslim 
and Christian conquests of Hindu cultures as an invasion that 
needs to be remedied. The leaders of this movement focus 
most of their anger on local Muslims. One Hindu Nationalist 
leader, Sanjay Prajapati, claimed in 2014 that Muslims wanted 
to “convert our daughters to Islam because they feel they can 
increase their population” and warned that if India did not 
take action, “we’ll soon be their slaves.”40 Champat Rai, 
another nationalist leader, declared that “Muslims invaded 
India and used the sword to convert,” arguing that because 
of this, the “motherland” of India should be purely Hindu.41 
Much like the students in Dammaj and the delusional mem-
bers of the Slaves of the Immaculate Heart of Mary, Hindu 
Nationalists want to return to their own “golden time,” 
except for them, this means medieval India before the Muslim 
and Christian invasions. And in 2019, the Indian government 
used this anti-Muslim fervor to invade Kashmir.
Some pagan movements are also dedicated to resurrect-
ing what they see as lost medieval Norse faiths, which they 
believe were stolen from them by conquering Christians. The 

Medievalism and Religious Extremism  /  141
1960s and 1970s saw a renewed interest in the revival of 
“pagan” traditions from medieval and pre-medieval European 
societies and the foundation of a range of faith communities, 
one of the most popular being Ásatrú (in some places known 
simply as “Heathenry” or “Heathenism”). Ásatrú has practi-
tioners in about 100 countries and claims over 10,000 adher-
ents. The core tenets of the religion revolve around reviving 
(or inventing) religious practices tied to the Norse polythe-
istic traditions. But Ásatrú has also had to contend with a 
splinter group of its practitioners who are white supremacists 
and who use the faith as a front for their white nationalist 
ideology.
Some Ásatrú white supremacists, like Stephen McNallen, 
have founded entire branches of this faith that promote a 
white nationalist worldview.42 Often these groups differenti-
ate themselves from the peaceful, inclusive branches of Ásatrú 
by calling their faith “Odinism.” One member of one such 
neo-pagan group called the “Wolves of Vinland” burned 
down a Black American church in 2012. Two other Odinism 
practitioners were arrested in 2016 over a plot to bomb Black 
churches and Jewish synagogues in order to start a “race 
war.”43 Several of the participants in the deadly 2017 “Unite 
the Right” riot in Charlottesville, Virginia, were identified as 
prominent members of white nationalist Odinist groups.44
Most practitioners of Ásatrú are not part of these white 
supremacist splinter faiths. It would be wrong to paint an 
entire religion with the brush of its very worst adherents, just 
as it would be wrong for us to associate all Christians or all 
Muslims with extremist neocrusaders. However, thanks in part 
to the legacy of Nazi Germany, especially its misuses of the 
medieval past, Odinist groups have a lot of white supremacist 
history to draw on. Those Ásatrú groups that are not steeped in 
white supremacy are particularly vigilant about it in their midst. 
Ásatrú devotees who are interested in real medieval his-
tory have plenty to celebrate, just as contemporary Jews, 
Muslims, and Christians can look to medieval accomplish-
ments for positive inspiration. As we showed you in earlier 
chapters, religious and racial intolerance were far from 

142  /  The Devil’s Historians
standard practice in the medieval Scandinavian world, where 
people of different faiths often coexisted peacefully.
biblical literalism and medieval faith
As we mentioned in the introduction to this chapter, there 
is a widespread misconception that following a stricter inter-
pretation of religious texts hearkens back to medieval times. 
But that has far more to do with our myths about the Middle 
Ages than the facts. First of all, most medieval people did not 
read religious texts literally. In fact, most people could not read 
them at all because religious texts were not generally written in 
the vernacular (i.e., in everyday language). The vast majority of 
medieval Christian texts were written in Latin, which was only 
read by religious officials, scholars, writers, merchants, and 
elites. The Qur’an was more often recited in medieval mosques 
than read, and it was recited in a dialect of classical rather than 
colloquial Arabic. Classical Arabic, like medieval Latin, was 
the province of scholars and the elite. Upper-class or scholarly 
Jewish people wrote in Hebrew, but although Hebrew was a 
foundation of the languages used by Jewish rabbis and writers 
for their religious dialogues and scriptural commentaries, it 
was not a fixed language. Yiddish was the colloquial language 
of some medieval Jews, while Jews living in Arab lands spoke 
a dialect known as “Judeo-Arabic,” different from Ladino 
(Judeo-Spanish), and different still from Yiddish.
But even if the language of religious texts had been acces-
sible to the common people, the physical books and scrolls 
themselves would not be. Books were the province of scholars 
and clergy, and they were so expensive to produce that they 
were often chained to desks or locked away to prevent theft. 
The printing press was not brought to Europe until the end of 
the Middle Ages; before that, religious texts were all produced 
by hand. This also meant that there was no singular, authori-
tative version of many religious texts. Take the Christian 
Bible, for instance: medieval scribes were notorious for add-
ing their own wording, changing or removing a line, and 

Medievalism and Religious Extremism  /  143
glossing—adding interpretive advice in the margins of a text. 
And then there’s the issue of translation, that long game of 
telephone: early versions of texts written in Hebrew, Aramaic, 
and Greek were translated into later versions of Hebrew and 
Greek, and those were translated to Latin.
You might also be surprised to learn that in the Middle 
Ages, Church officials did not even agree on the contents 
of the Bible. Before the printing press (and in many cases, 
after), theologians argued about which religious texts 
were authentic and which weren’t. Sacred texts are really 
compilations of writing: letters, stories, and the testimony 
of scribes and disciples who recorded what Moses, Jesus, 
and Mohammad said. In addition to that, many faiths 
have supplementary texts, like the hadīth in Islam and the 
Halakha in Judaism, which list laws, miracles, practices, 
and histories that vary in importance depending on which  
sect you might belong to or what your local religious lead-
ers prefer.
The Christian Apocrypha are a great example of this. For 
centuries, early Christians worked with a body of varied 
and sometimes contradictory texts and debated which ones 
were “canonical,” meaning official or real. The decision-
making process was slow—it lasted until the fifth century. The 
standard medieval bible in Europe was eventually based on 
Jerome’s Latin Vulgate Bible (compiled in 405 CE). It included 
texts deemed to be non-canonical but did not translate them 
from Hebrew into Latin. Martin Luther’s early Protestant 
Bible (1534) omitted some Apocrypha and put the rest in 
its own section. King James Bibles published before 1666 
included the Apocrypha, but in 1826, the National Bible 
Society of Scotland petitioned to have them removed. The 
“literal” Protestant Bible in its most popular, current form 
wasn’t settled on until the 1800s, and other Christians, like 
Catholic or Orthodox Christians, still read various parts of 
the Apocrypha as canonical.
So, even within modern Christianity, there is not one Bible 
but many. And the story of evolution and revision of the 
Christian Bible(s) is much the same for other faiths. Hebrew 
scholars have had centuries of dialogue and debate about the 

144  /  The Devil’s Historians
contents of the Torah, the Talmud, and other important texts. In 
fact, debate and discussion on questions like these are integral 
to Judaism, especially in the Middle Ages. Muslim scholars have 
also debated the contents and meaning of the Qur’an and the 
hadīth throughout the Islamic world, and throughout history.
Because we were well and fully out of the Middle Ages 
when most laypeople could regularly engage with, argue 
about, and come up with their own interpretations of reli-
gious texts, many medieval people found the spirit of faith 
far more important than the letter. (This has historically, 
and disingenuously, been used to argue for the superiority of 
Christianity over Judaism by people who don’t realize just 
how much thought, intellectual debate, philosophy, logic, and 
conversation has always been a feature of Jewish faith.) In the 
medieval world, literal readings were considered simplistic and 
were strongly advised against. For example, Saint Augustine’s 
On Christian Doctrine, written in 426 CE but widely con-
sidered authoritative by theologians throughout the Middle 
Ages, specifically warns against strict literal interpretation. 
His warning is particularly strong for the reader unskilled in 
Hebrew and Greek because of how easy it is for translators to 
make errors: “Many translators are deceived by ambiguity in 
the original language which they do not understand, so that 
they transfer the meaning to something completely alien to 
the writer’s intention.”45 Augustine provides several examples, 
such as how easy it is to confuse plants with baby cows:
Some, because móschos in Greek means “calf,” do not 
know that moscheúmata means “transplantings” and 
have translated it “calves.” This error appears in so many 
texts that one hardly finds anything else written, although 
the sense is very clear and is supported by the succeeding 
words. For the expression “bastard slips shall not take 
deep root” makes better sense than to speak of “calves,” 
which walk on the earth and do not take root in it.46
Far from taking everything at surface value, medieval 
theologians and scholars had sophisticated methods for 

Medievalism and Religious Extremism  /  145
interpreting the Bible. Dante Alighieri’s famous letter to his 
patron Can Grande Della Scalla describes common medieval 
interpretive practices that will look familiar to any literature 
major today (the technical term for these practices is herme-
neutics). He believed all texts were “polysemous,” meaning 
they have multiple meanings: “for it is one sense which we get 
through the letter, and another which we get through the thing 
the letter signifies, and the first is called literal, but the second 
allegorical or mystic.”47 Allegory, for Dante, is “a truth hid-
den under beautiful fiction.” Dante also believed in two more 
layers of interpretation: moral, meaning what can be extracted 
by teachers to enrich themselves and their students, and ana-
gogic, “above the senses”—the easiest way to describe this is 
spiritual reception, a divine connection, or a higher sense of 
understanding. Reading the “letter”—the surface meaning—of 
a religious text, for Dante and other medieval scholars, was 
just the first step on the way to higher spiritual truth, a step 
that wasn’t always trustworthy. This highly complicated way 
of understanding religious texts is behind the rich allegory of 
Dante’s Divine Comedy, which, perhaps ironically, shapes 
many a modern person’s understanding of hell.
Thus, although today’s literalist movements claim to be 
returning to the “roots” of their particular religions, they 
are actually doing the opposite. They believe the Bible is 
fully understandable by a layperson with no special training, 
whereas the roots of their religions are actually filled with 
educated scholars arguing about mistranslations from the 
original languages and about hidden layers of meaning.
How people choose to worship within their own faiths is 
their business. But claims of medieval historicity become a 
problem when they are used in the service of religious extrem-
ism. Because despite the apparent modernity of literalist prac-
tice, extremists use the mistaken belief that their literalism is 
old, authentic, and medieval in order to argue for its superior-
ity. They believe that the whole world should be terraformed 
to suit their particular way of worshipping. They commit vio-
lence within their own communities and against others, and in 
the worst cases, full-fledged acts of terrorism and war.

146  /  The Devil’s Historians
varieties of medieval  
religious experience
You might be used to imagining the medieval world as a 
place where everyone believed the same thing. The Middle 
Ages in popular culture is an era of superstition, of religious 
obedience, and of conformity—a world that will brook no 
dissent or interrogation. But anti-intellectualism was not a 
feature of medieval religion. In the Middle Ages, the world’s 
three major monotheistic religions—Judaism, Christianity, and 
Islam—had, at their core, a spirit of interrogation and ques-
tioning. (Not to mention that an even larger population of the 
medieval world was polytheistic.) Medieval religious practice 
was intellectual and varied. God was supposed to lead you to 
the truth through a rational, logical process of thought, and 
every human being was supposed to possess Reason, a gift 
from God that would lead you back to faith through, not in 
spite of, using your mind.
That doesn’t mean medieval people all believed the same 
thing, even within their own faiths. For instance, medieval 
Christianity was more diverse than you might think. Prior 
to 1054, there were no “Catholic” or “Eastern Orthodox” 
branches of Christianity, but after years of theological and 
political disagreements, 1054 CE saw the Great Schism, 
which split Christianity into those two branches. Then, in the 
fourteenth century, the Church split again as two different 
popes were elected, one who led from Avignon, France, and 
the other who led from Rome. European leaders were forced 
to pick which pope they followed, with each side claiming 
that the other was led by an “antipope.” Things got even 
more complicated when a third contender for the papacy was 
elected by another faction, with each claimant excommunicat-
ing the other. This led to a religious and diplomatic crisis that 
lasted for 40 years.
In spite of the fact that many of our sources from the medi-
eval Christian world were written by people involved in the 
Church, we have as many stories of people rebelling against 

Medievalism and Religious Extremism  /  147
their strictures as we have of people who adhered to them. 
The Cathars solved the age-old question of “why does God 
allow evil to exist in the world” by believing that there were 
two Gods, one good and one bad. The Pelagians believed that 
original sin did not exist and that people did not need the 
Church for morality. And while it was dangerous to be an 
avowed atheist in medieval Europe, religion wasn’t altogether 
that important for many people. Far from being a universal 
“Age of Faith,” for some laypeople, the demands of religion 
were an annoying set of social requirements and dietary 
restrictions rather than a source of fervent belief.
Medieval Christian faith is often imagined by people today 
as the enemy of progress, but in fact, the opposite was true. 
Believers embraced science and knowledge; they didn’t fear 
it. Witchcraft trials and the persecution of scientific figures 
like Galileo are imagined as “medieval,” but these events took 
place after the Middle Ages, during the supposedly intellec-
tually superior Renaissance. In fact, medieval scientists were 
part of the Church, which encouraged research and explora-
tion in fields like medicine, astronomy, philosophy, biology, 
geography, and logic. Religion and science went hand in hand 
in Islam and Judaism too: Muslim scholars like al-Battani and 
al-Zarquali advanced knowledge in astronomy, while others 
worked in math, science, and geography. Persian scholar al-
Khwarizmi even invented algebra. Medieval Jewish scholars 
like Maimonides wrote that science and philosophy were an 
integral part of faith, and plenty of Jews served as physicians 
and pharmacologists.
Nor was the Church the ubiquitous vehicle of gender 
oppression that people imagine: medieval religious women 
studied theology, philosophy, science, and medicine. Take 
Hildegard of Bingen, for example, who wrote two medical 
books in addition to books on theology, music, and language. 
In fact, the medieval Church was one of the few vehicles for a 
medieval woman’s education and independence.
And perhaps it’s worth noting that despite the emphasis 
on purity in modern neomedieval extremist movements, medi-
eval people weren’t anti-sex.48 This includes religious people. 

148  /  The Devil’s Historians
Consider the medieval fabliaux, the traditional “dirty story” 
of the Middle Ages, full of adulterous sex, naked butts, and 
fart jokes. Wildly popular, and widely read and translated, 
fabliaux told stories that could curl even our modern toes. 
French fabliaux had titles like Le fablel de la crote (“The Tale 
of the Turd”), Les trois dames qui troverent un vit (“The 
Three Women Who Found a Dildo”), De l’annel qui faisoit 
les vis grans et roides (“The Ring That Made Dicks Big and 
Stiff”), and Du chevalier qui fist les cons parler (“The Knight 
Who Made Cunts Speak”). Believe it or not, these fabliaux 
were mostly written by clergy: they have been found in manu-
scripts alongside courtly and religious poetry written by the 
very same author.
Men and women of the cloth were not spared as erotic 
subjects or object of ridicule in fabliaux either. There was the 
Old French Du prestre qui ot mere a force (“The Priest Who 
Had a Mother Forced on Him”) and Le Prestre et Alison 
(“The Priest and Alison”). Chaucer’s infamous Miller’s Tale 
involves a clerk, Nicholas, who tricks a religious man into 
thinking that the biblical flood is coming so he can have sex 
with the man’s wife. The Shipman’s Tale features a monk who 
bribes his cousin’s wife to have sex with him. In fact, works 
like Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales and Boccaccio’s Decameron 
brutally and thoroughly parodied most members of the medi-
eval Church—monks, priests, prioresses, and nuns—and put 
them in graphic and compromising situations. Although some 
modern religious sensibilities have found these texts offensive 
(Boston College used to keep its copy of Chaucer locked up 
in a glass case in the 1950s), medieval people had no such 
compunctions.
Medieval people could be very frank about sexuality in real 
life too, and one’s sex life was considered an important factor 
in one’s overall health. In medieval England, for instance, if 
a woman accused her husband of impotence so she could get 
out of a marriage, a local midwife or sometimes a group of 
midwives would come over to test whether the allegation was 
true. (Talk about performance anxiety!) Some medical texts 
prescribed masturbating a woman to orgasm if she had an 

Medievalism and Religious Extremism  /  149
excess of cold humors—a particular problem in widows. It’s 
hard to imagine any of today’s religious extremists—no matter 
how much they are accused of being “medieval”—approach-
ing sex with the same frank spirit and clinical distance.
Whenever someone tells you that medieval people were 
fundamentally different from you—more faithful, more 
“pure,” less individual, or less intelligent—this should raise 
an immediate red flag. An agenda, and sometimes a violent 
agenda, lies behind the claim. The truth of history is that there 
is no simple, unadulterated time to go back to and escape all 
the diversity and complexity of human life. It wasn’t true 
when the Emperor Augustus longed for it in ancient Rome, 
and it isn’t true now. But that shouldn’t make anyone less 
interested in studying the past. Instead, it should open up 
whole new worlds to explore and new ways to find connec-
tions with other human beings that can stretch across time.

This page intentionally left blank

151
You know, films have an ability to show us where we’ve 
been, where we are and where we could be. And Wakanda 
is where we could be….
—Lupita Nyong’o in an interview on 
her role in Black Panther, 20181
The middle Ages have been conscripted for a wide range 
of awful purposes—promoting white supremacy, religious 
violence, racism, homophobia, and patriarchal oppression. 
But the past holds promise too. There’s a reason so many 
people have been drawn to the Middle Ages. Some of our 
most popular heroes—King Arthur, Robin Hood, Saladin, 
Joan of Arc—come from medieval legend. Your most epic 
battle today was probably on Twitter or in traffic. But the 
stakes seem higher when they’re set against a medieval land-
scape: people fighting for their kings, their loves, and their 
lives. In a world full of drones, emails, and oil changes, many 
of us quietly envy people who believed that elves lurked in 
forests, who found power in religious relics, and who lived 
by the work of their hands. It is easy to get caught up imag-
ining what it might have been like to live in medieval times 
or to wonder what wisdom the past might hold for our own 
lives.
In light of all we have written here, it can be tempting to 
quarantine the Middle Ages, to try to create a society that 
lives only in the present moment. We have, after all, taken 
you to some pretty dark places. But we don’t intend to leave 
you there. Medieval history can also enrich your life, help you 
understand the world around you, and help you imagine a 
better future.
Epilogue: The Future 
of the Medieval Past

152  /  The Devil’s Historians
playing in the past
Every year, over 10,000 people from around the world 
gather in a field in rural Pennsylvania. For two weeks each 
summer, a sleepy rural township is transformed into a 
carnival of pre-modern pageantry as the members of the 
Society for Creative Anachronism (SCA) bring their unique 
brand of history to town. The SCA is one of the world’s 
largest living history groups, and they are devoted to study-
ing and creating their own unique vision of the Middle 
Ages. But though it is one of the biggest, it is far from the 
only living history group devoted to medieval times. Each 
one has a different focus, different rules, and a different 
vision of the past. The SCA is quite clear about its purpose: 
many of its members aren’t historical reenactors in the 
strictest sense, married to the idea of authenticity. Instead, 
as the organization has said in some of its advertising mate-
rials, they are creating “the Middle Ages as they should 
have been, without the strife and pestilence, but with an 
attempt to preserve the ideals of beauty, grace, chivalry, and 
fellowship.”
The SCA’s idealized Middle Ages has not always been free 
from structural oppression, but plenty of its members look 
forward while also looking back, creating inclusive spaces 
to imagine a new Middle Ages. Take for example, Clan 
Blue Feather—an LGBTQ+ organization within the SCA 
dedicated to exploring, as they say on their website, “all 
aspects of sexual or gender associated minority expression 
in research and education of their place in period as well as 
advocacy for their concerns and those of our straight allies 
in the SCA.”2
It’s not just re-enactors who try to imagine, and reimag-
ine, the Middle Ages. Maybe you’ve participated in a live-
action roleplaying game or gone to a medieval festival or 
renaissance faire. Maybe you’re learning swordplay with 
Historical European Martial Arts (HEMA) groups, or maybe 
you’re a cosplayer with a badass Arya Stark getup that you 

Epilogue  /  153
made by hand. Maybe your medievalism is digital, and you 
log into your World of Warcraft account every day to raid a 
dungeon for a new set of armor or spend countless hours in 
Foundation crafting a perfect medieval city.
Why do we spend so much time, effort, and money play-
ing in the Middle Ages? None of the medieval worlds we just 
discussed is the real one (though some make efforts to get 
closer than others). But that’s beside the point. The point, 
instead, is to be transported to another time, either alone or in 
a community of peers. Playing in the Middle Ages offers us an 
escape from the stressors of mundane modern reality, offering 
an emotionally heightened, romantic backdrop against which 
we can imagine our lives. Suddenly, we aren’t frustrated bank 
managers or algebra students with 8:00 a.m. exams. We can 
be rogues, wizards, knights in the queen’s service, or even the 
queen herself.
Approaching the Middle Ages playfully can be one of the 
most positive ways to transform our relationship to the past 
and to imagine other possibilities for the future. Game design-
ers have seized on this brand of postmodern medievalism, in 
which they can pick and choose which elements of the past 
they want to recreate and which they want to transform, to 
make more progressive neomedieval spaces that welcome all 
players. The Elder Scrolls and Dragon Age franchises, once 
criticized for racism and sexism, have broadened their digital 
neomedieval worlds. They still let you fight with swords, ride 
horses, and drink plenty of ale, but they now feature same-sex 
partnerships, more racial diversity, transgender characters, 
and plenty of women warriors. A few hardliners react poorly 
to these updates and even try to use “history” to back up 
their claims. But as we hope you’ve learned from the rest of 
this book, those “politically correct” insertions usually bring 
games closer to historical reality—or as close as you can get 
while you’re riding a dragon. Often what we really need to do 
to touch the past is to rip away the illusions that keep us from 
seeing the full humanity of medieval people, to see where their 
experiences were different from our own, and to recognize 
what we have in common.

154  /  The Devil’s Historians
making medievalism
Medievalism isn’t all fun and games. Some participants 
in the SCA and other reenactment societies work for years to 
become world-class practitioners of medieval arts and crafts. 
They join the hundreds of others who have created a cottage 
industry online of selling handmade objects—hand-bound 
books, handmade furniture, home-brewed beer and mead, and 
even handmade swords and armor—either through their own 
small businesses or on websites like Etsy and eBay. The ques-
tion is: why? Why take the time and effort to create things 
by hand (and spend the considerable money to buy them), 
when factories can churn out the same objects at a fraction of 
the cost?
Each craftsperson likely has a unique answer. But as we 
can learn from medievalism’s revival in the nineteenth century, 
the labor is part of the point. William Morris, a nineteenth-
century publisher, translator, designer, author, and artist, was 
a leader in the Victorian “Arts and Crafts” movement, which 
valued both handmade objects and the process of making 
them. Morris sought to restore the glories of medieval crafts-
manship in the face of what he felt were the dehumanizing, 
destructive effects of the Industrial Revolution.3 For Morris, 
a return to the Middle Ages meant turning away from the 
exploitative natures of capitalism and towards craftsmanship 
and individual artistry. He took inspiration from the Middle 
Ages, especially from medieval craft guilds, and promoted the 
idea that learning and practicing these medieval crafts was a 
virtue in and of itself. He was also a political activist, even 
founding socialist organizations throughout his life.
Likewise, A.W.N. Pugin, one of the most famous architects 
of the nineteenth-century Gothic Revival, which used medieval 
architecture as its inspiration, designed a number of medieval-
style buildings, including the Palace of Westminster and the 
tower that holds Big Ben. He also wrote several landmark 
books on architecture in which he explained why he was so 
passionate about recreating medieval designs. He ended one 

Epilogue  /  155
of his books, Contrasts: Or a Parallel between the Noble 
Edifices of the Middle Ages, and Corresponding Buildings of 
the Present day; Shewing the Present Decay of Taste, with this 
statement of purpose:
I wish to pluck from the [current] age the mask of superior 
attainments so falsely assumed, and I am anxious to direct 
the attention of all back to the real merit of past and better 
days. It is among their remains that excellence is only to be 
found; and it is by studying the zeal, talents, and feelings, 
of these wonderful but despised times, that art can be 
restored, or excellence gained.4
In other words, Pugin’s project was not just about buildings 
but about society. He didn’t just want to rehabilitate the image 
of the Middle Ages from the (literal and figurative) ruination 
that had befallen it. He wanted to bring his own society back 
to a more medieval world.
If Morris and Pugin sound like they could be part of the 
twenty-first century “Maker Movement,” that’s because their 
ideology was very similar and because they were inspired 
by the same disenchantment with a technological world. In 
the twenty-first century, the information revolution and the 
globalization of labor have devalued human work, placed an 
unprecedented amount of wealth in the hands of a few, and 
created a world in which everything is disposable.
Makers and other neomedieval artisans are launching a 
quiet rebellion against industrial and technological excesses. 
They value maintaining a link to the past, repairing rather than 
throwing away, and prioritizing the personal over the mass-
manufactured. For example, Linette Withers is a professional 
bookbinder who has her own business and works on repairing 
books in the oldest library in Leeds, England. When asked in a 
2019 personal interview why she binds books, she said:
The object I finish with is not only beautiful to me but also 
very practical. They are objects that I know someone will 
use and even if only in a very mundane sense fill with bits 

156  /  The Devil’s Historians
of themself. Sometimes possibly deeply important bits of 
themself.
And by repairing books, I’m keeping not only the book’s 
content going, but also (depending on how my customer 
feels, admittedly) its context. I am working with what the 
previous binder has done, and maintaining that link to 
the past. Part of me is quite excited by the idea that some 
future binder may work to conserve a book I’ve bound.5
Medieval martial arts practitioners in HEMA and the 
SCA have similar motivation. Reviving medieval martial 
practices is intensely demanding, and to many of us, it also 
seems pretty daunting. None of us will have to fight for our 
lives with a sword in a duel or on the battlefield. In fact, 
there are plenty of reasons not to practice HEMA, including 
the ever-present risk of bodily harm! But enthusiasts do it to  
learn about a fascinating subject, to better themselves, to 
feel a connection to the past, and to keep a once-lost tradi-
tion alive. Swedish HEMA fencer Anders Linnard explains 
why he participates in HEMA in a 2015 documentary about 
the sport entitled Back to the Source: Historical European 
Martial Arts: “By doing this, it connects us to the past. It 
creates a context that is a bit anachronistic in the modern 
world, but that’s also the appeal of it. We want to do this 
because it’s part of a heritage and a tradition that people are 
missing in the modern world where everything changes all the 
time.”6 In other words, the medieval martial arts practice is 
grounding. Adopting practices, crafts, and ways of engaging 
with the world from a time when streetlights didn’t drown 
out all the stars and your phone wasn’t constantly sending 
you notifications, can help people find focus, peace, and even 
learn more about themselves.
None of these movements is immune to the pitfalls of 
nostalgic extremism that we see in other attachments to the 
medieval past. Each one has to guard its borders—from the 
“makers” who bring Nazi-themed jewelry to craft fairs or 
the medieval martial arts practitioners who sexually harass 

Epilogue  /  157
women or commit acts of racist violence. But in this sense, 
technology has been a boon, allowing neomedieval groups to 
expose the violence and hatred in their groups and excise it 
by sharing information and reinforcing rules that keep their 
“medieval” spaces tolerant and safe.
fantasy medievalisms
Medieval-themed fantasy literature has had an enor-
mous influence on the movements we’ve described in this 
chapter—often far more so than actual literature from the 
Middle Ages. But fantasy’s relationship to the Middle Ages 
has been a troubled one. Even one of the foundational authors 
of modern fantasy, J.R.R. Tolkien, reflects sexism and racism 
in his books. As scholar Helen Young has argued, Tolkien 
created different groups of people with distinct abilities and 
characteristics (elves, dwarves, men, hobbits) and gave them 
the label “race.”7 In his Lord of the Rings trilogy, the white 
“Men of the West” are pitted against Sauron’s evil forces, who 
ally with people of color from the east and south. 
Tolkien’s biases may have been a product of his time, but 
his conservative medievalism has been further enhanced by 
his imitators and derivatives in the decades since. Influential 
medieval fantasy roleplaying games like Dungeons and 
Dragons added mathematics to Tolkien’s racial divisions, 
meaning there is now a racialized “bell curve” of ability 
scores for each of the playable fantasy races. Some of the 
most famous additions that D&D writers have added to 
the fantasy canon, such as the evil, dark elves known as the 
“Drow,” are also rooted in the deeply racist idea that non-
white people are inherently bad.
Thankfully, some authors, filmmakers, and game design-
ers are working today to make a fantasy medievalism more 
inclusive. The progress over the last ten years is especially 
promising as audiences have opened up to more diverse, and 

158  /  The Devil’s Historians
more accurate, ideas of what constitutes “medieval.” Just ten 
years ago, many games didn’t even offer playable female char-
acters, and playable people of color were few and far between. 
In Dragon Age: Origins, playing as a woman meant fielding 
constant interrogation and criticism in-game about why a 
woman was fighting.8 The game was set in Ferelden, an alter-
nate version of England, and featured almost no POC char-
acters. By the time the third Dragon Age title was released in 
2014, it featured POC companions and non-player characters, 
transgender heroes, multiple same-sex romances, and a gender-
neutral world (including realistic armor for female avatars 
instead of the dreaded “boobplate”). Despite the complaints 
of a few angry racist and sexist gamers who organized online, 
the third Dragon Age was Bioware’s best-selling game to date.9
A new generation of writers, game designers, filmmak-
ers, and TV writers is constantly imagining broader engage-
ments with the medieval world. Recent fantasy novels like 
Saladin Ahmed’s Throne of the Crescent Moon and S.A. 
Chakraborty’s Daevabad Trilogy guide readers through land-
scapes inspired by 1001 Nights and the medieval Middle East. 
Kingdom, a new show set in medieval Korea, is a smash hit on 
Netflix. In 2015, Indian director Gunasekhar released the epic 
film Rudhramadevi, based on a thirteenth-century medieval 
ruler who disguised herself as a man to rule as a monarch. 
Evan Winter’s Rage of Dragons combines traditional fantasy 
tropes with African influences, R.F. Kuang’s The Poppy War is 
set in a fantasy version of China, and Naomi Novik’s Spinning 
Silver reimagines a medieval fairy-tale world with a Jewish 
main character. Thanks to all of these brilliant creators, no 
fantasy fan has to be stuck in a sexist, homophobic, all-white 
medieval Europe anymore.
Some of the most promising medievalisms come from the 
playful mix of medieval and modern, or even combining fan-
tasy medievalism with futurism and science fiction. Two of 
the most successful Marvel franchise films to date have been 
prime examples of this: Black Panther and Thor: Ragnarok. 
Black Panther is, on its surface, an Afrofuturist story about 
a superhero who comes from an uncolonized part of Africa.  

Epilogue  /  159
But as scholar Matthew Vernon argues, Black Panther also 
blends Afrofuturism and medievalism freely.10 Wakanda’s 
warriors wield swords and shields along with high-tech spears, 
wear neomedieval armor, and drape themselves in furs.
While the film takes its costumes, props, design, and 
language from a wide range of cultures across the African 
continent, several commentators have drawn specific histori-
cal parallels between the Kingdom of Wakanda and medieval 
Ethiopia.11 Ethiopia was the only African country to suc-
cessfully rebuff European colonization, and, in the Middle 
Ages, it was a powerful mountainous kingdom with trading 
and diplomatic connections across the region. Medievalism is 
also woven into Black Panther’s plot: a lost prince’s return, a 
king’s exile, and a grand battle between right and wrong for 
the crown would not be out of place in a medieval romance. 
In short, Black Panther is a story that successfully draws upon 
the past but with an eye firmly looking toward the future.
Thor: Ragnarok also draws on the Middle Ages for its 
source material and mixes it with futuristic tech. Like all films 
in the Thor franchise, Ragnarok features figures and scenes 
drawn from the Prose Edda and the Poetic Edda, which are 
our main source material for Norse theology. The franchise 
has always been more diverse than many racist viewers would 
like: the casting of Idris Elba as Norse god Heimdall in the 
first film caused significant backlash online. But Ragnarok, 
directed by Taika Waititi, integrates anti-racist narratives into 
its medievalism and puts the evils of colonialism front and 
center.12 Ragnarok is not just a tale from history—it’s about 
how history is altered and misused, showing how Europeans 
brutally conquered Indigenous peoples and then recast them-
selves as saviors and benevolent gods. In one particularly 
telling scene, the antagonist Hela details how the Asgardians 
whitewashed their blood-soaked history of conquest with the 
image of themselves as deities. The film dramatically illustrates 
this in a scene where the celebratory ceiling frescoes in Asgard’s 
throne room are torn away to reveal the much darker images 
of death and oppression beneath. Since you’ve read this book, 
you know how white supremacists appropriate medieval Norse 

160  /  The Devil’s Historians
culture and use it for violent ends. Well, Thor: Ragnarok 
knows it too, and it purposely strips away that narrative to 
strike at the heart of historicized racism.
Not every piece of creative medievalism is as revolution-
ary and progressive as Black Panther and Thor: Ragnarok. 
But they don’t all have to be. The success of both these films 
shows us how hungry audiences are for positive, progressive, 
forward-looking medievalisms rather than medievalism rooted 
in outmoded, toxic ideas.
hope for the future
The middle Ages has just as much to offer those who want 
to make the world more inclusive, more forward-looking, 
and a more humane place as it does to those who would do 
otherwise. And the medieval past has plenty of inspiration for 
progressive projects: powerful women who fight their own 
battles; men who spin their love for other men into beauti-
ful poetry; and thriving cultural centers where Christians, 
Muslims, and Jews share ideas about philosophy, science, and 
faith. We can tell stories out of Africa, Persia, and China as 
well as Europe. We can find people committed to the cause of 
peace and harmony, and heroic figures for a vast diversity of 
people to look up to. And most of all, we can have a laugh at 
the things that bind us all together, like fart jokes and bad sex.
The stories we choose to tell about the past can define how 
we see the present, and change what we want the future to be. 
People have been misusing the Middle Ages for a long time. 
But there is plenty of room, and plenty of medieval material, 
to tell a new set of stories about the past. And through these 
stories, we can create a more vibrant, compassionate, and 
connected future.

161
Introduction: Weaponizing History
  1.	 Livy, The Early History of Rome, trans. Aubrey de Sélincourt 
(London: Penguin, 2002), 30.
  2.	 Elizabeth Carson Pastan and Stephen D. White with Kate 
Gilbert, The Bayeaux Tapestry and Its Contents: A Reassessment 
(Woodbridge, UK: The Boydell Press, 2014).
  3.	 David W. Blight, Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American 
Memory (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press, 2001); James W. 
Loewen and Edward H. Sebesta, eds., The Confederate and 
Neo-Confederate Reader: The “Great Truth” about the “Lost 
Cause” (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2018).
  4.	 Mitch Landrieu, “Mitch Landrieu’s Speech on the Removal of 
Confederate Monuments in New Orleans,” New York Times, 
23 May 2017, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/23/opinion 
/mitch-landrieus-speech-transcript.html.
  5.	 Amy S. Kaufman, “In the Shadows of Rome: Building an 
Arthurian England,” Groniek 43, no. 189 (March 2010): 
383–97, 384–85.
  6.	 For just a few examples: Rabia Umar Ali, “Medieval Europe: 
The Myth of Dark Ages and the Impact of Islam,” Islamic 
Studies 51, no. 2 (Summer 2012): 155–68; David Matthews, 
Medievalism: A Critical History (Woodbridge, UK: D.S. 
Brewer, 2015); Robert Houghton, “Reigns: The Great, Simple, 
King Simulator with a ‘Dark Ages’ Problem,” The Public 
Medievalist, 3 October 2019, https://www.publicmedievalist 
.com/reigns/.
1  The Middle Ages: Foundational Myths
  1.	 Umberto Eco, Travels in Hyperreality, trans. William Weaver 
(San Diego: Harcourt, 1986), 65.
  2.	 For example, between 1611 and 1618, almost 400 individuals 
were killed in witch hunts in the city of Ellwangen; witch 
hunting was particularly bad in the southern and western 
regions of what is now Germany. See Brian P. Levack, The 
Notes

162  /  Notes to pages 10–20
Witch-Hunt in Early Modern Europe, 3rd ed. (London: 
Routledge, 2013).
  3.	 Leonardo Bruni, History of the Florentine People: Volume I, 
Books I–IV, ed. James Hankins (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2001), xvii–xviii.
  4.	 Johannes Fried, The Middle Ages, trans. Peter Lewis (Cambridge, 
MA: The Belknap Press, 2015), vii–viii.
  5.	 Giovanni Andea Bussi, Prefazioni alle edizioni di Sweynheym 
e Pannartz prototipografi romani, ed. M. Miglio (Milan: Ed. 
“il Polifilio,” 1978), 7; Angelo Mazzocco, ed., Interpretations 
of Renaissance Humanism (Leiden: Brill, 2006), 112.
  6.	 Eco, Travels in Hyperreality, 68.
  7.	 Chaucer adapted several tales from Boccaccio’s Decameron in 
his Canterbury Tales. Shakespeare used Boccaccio as source 
material for All’s Well That Ends Well, Cymbeline, and The 
Two Gentlemen of Verona. Tennyson adapted Boccaccio for 
his 1879 poem “The Lover’s Tale,” and Keats adapted him in 
his 1818 poem “Isabella, or the Pot of Basil.” Pasolini directed 
a 1971 film called The Decameron, and Baena adapted a 
Boccaccio tale for his 2017 film The Little Hours.
  8.	 Paul B. Sturtevant, “What Politicians Mean When They Call 
the Border Wall ‘Medieval,’” The Washington Post, 22 January 
2019, https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2019/01/22 
/what-politicians-mean-when-they-call-border-wall-medieval/.
  9.	 See, for instance, “‘Medieval Murder’: 19 Illegal Immigrant 
MS-13 Members Charged with ‘Savage’ Killings across LA,” 
Sean Hannity, 17 July 2019, https://hannity.com/media-room 
/medieval-murder-19-illegal-immigrant-ms-13-members 
-charged-with-savage-killings-across-la/; and “Siege of 
Syria’s Eastern Ghouta ‘Barbaric and Medieval,’ Says UN 
Commission of Inquiry,” UN News, 20 June 2018, https://
news.un.org/en/story/2018/06/1012632. For medievalism 
rhetoric during America’s wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, see 
Bruce Holsinger, Neomedievalism, Neoconservatism, and the 
War on Terror (Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press, 2007).
10.	 Marianne O’Doherty, “Where Were the Middle Ages?”  
The Public Medievalist, 7 March 2017, https://www 
.publicmedievalist.com/where-middle-ages/; Geraldine Heng, 
“Afterword: Medievalists and the Education of Desire,” in 
Whose Middle Ages: Teachable Moments for an Ill-Used 
Past, eds. Andrew Abin, Mary C. Erier, Thomas O’Donnell, 
Nicholas L. Paul, and Nina Rowe (New York: Fordham 
University Press, 2019); Bryan C. Keene, ed., Toward a 

Notes to pages 21–30  /  163
Global Middle Ages: Encountering the World Through 
Illuminated Manuscripts (Los Angeles: The J. Paul Getty 
Museum, 2019).
11.	 See, for instance, William Manchester Little, A World Lit Only 
by Fire: The Medieval Mind and the Renaissance, Portrait of 
an Age (Boston: Little, Brown, 1992); and Stephen Greenblatt, 
The Swerve: How the World Became Modern (New York: 
W.W. Norton, 2011).
12.	 On 27 January 2020, Virginia became the thirty-eighth state 
to ratify the ERA. However, it is currently unclear what 
this means for the amendment, as several other states are 
bringing lawsuits arguing that the deadline for ratification has 
passed. Time, and the courts, will tell what the outcome will 
be. Veronica Stracqualursi, “Virginia reaches long-awaited 
milestone by ratifying Equal Rights Amendment, but legal 
fight looms,” CNN.com, 27 January 2019, https://www.cnn 
.com/2020/01/27/politics/virginia-equal-rights-amendment 
-trnd/index.html.
13.	 Monica H. Green, The Trotula: An English Translation of the 
Medieval Compendium of Women’s Medicine (Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press, 2002).
14.	 Monica H. Green, Making Women’s Medicine Masculine: The 
Rise of Male Authority in Pre-Modern Gynaecology (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2008).
15.	 Adam Simmons, “Uncovering the African Presence in 
Medieval Europe,” The Public Medievalist, 27 April 2017, 
https://www.publicmedievalist.com/uncovering-african/; 
Helen Young, “Where Do the ‘White Middle Ages’ Come 
From?” The Public Medievalist, 21 March 2017, https://www 
.publicmedievalist.com/white-middle-ages-come/.
2  Nationalism and Nostalgia
  1.	 Jeremy Diamond and Kevin Liptak, “Trump Calls Border Wall 
a ‘Medieval Solution’ that Works,” CNN.com, 9 January 2019, 
https://www.cnn.com/2019/01/09/politics/trump-executive 
-authority-border/index.html.
  2.	 Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections 
on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism (London: Verso, 
1991).
  3.	 Andrew B.R. Elliott, Medievalism, Politics and Mass Media: 
Appropriating the Middle Ages in the Twenty-First Century 
(Woodbridge, UK: D.S. Brewer, 2018); Vladimir Soldatkin, 

164  /  Notes to pages 31–41
“Putin Unveils Monument to Russia’s ‘Spiritual Founder,’ 
Calls for Unity,” Reuters, 4 November 2016, https://www 
.reuters.com/article/us-russia-monument/putin-unveils 
-monument-to-russias-spiritual-founder-calls-for-unity 
-idUSKBN12Z1MV; John Lichfield, “The 600-Year Struggle 
for the Soul of Joan of Arc,” The Independent, 5 January 
2012, https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/the 
-600-year-struggle-for-the-soul-of-joan-of-arc-6284992.html.
  4.	 José Ortega y Gasset, España Invertebrada, trans. Mildred 
Adams (New York: Howard Fertig, 1974), 20–22.
  5.	 Louis L. Snyder, Roots of German Nationalism (Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1978), 39.
  6.	 Jacob Grimm and Wilhelm Grimm, The Complete Grimm’s 
Fairy Tales, trans. Margaret Hunt and James Stern (New York: 
Pantheon Books, 1944), 943.
  7.	 The Saga of the Volsungs, trans. Jesse L. Byock (London: 
Penguin Books, 1999), 72.
  8.	 The following discussion of King Arthur is an adaptation 
of Amy S. Kaufman, “In the Shadows of Rome: Building an 
Arthurian England,” Groniek 43, no. 189 (March 2010): 
383–97.
  9.	 Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Tennyson: A Selected Edition, ed. 
Christopher Ricks (Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2007), 679.
10.	 Thomas R. Metcalf, The New Cambridge History of India, 
III.4: Ideologies of the Raj (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1995), 72–76.
11.	 This section is an expansion, revision, and adaptation of 
Paul B. Sturtevant, “Mel Gibson, You Magnificent Bastard,” 
The Public Medievalist, 31 July 2015, https://www 
.publicmedievalist.com/braveheart-independence/.
12.	 Colin McArthur, Brigadoon, Braveheart and the Scots: 
Distortions of Scotland in Hollywood Cinema (London:  
I.B. Tauris, 2003), 126.
13.	 Richard Hayton, “The UK Independence Party and the Politics 
of Englishness,” Political Studies Review 14, no. 3 (2016): 
400–10, https://doi.org/10.1177/1478929916649612.
14.	 The tweet was removed after the candidate came under 
criticism for it. ITV Report, “UKIP Candidate Apologises for 
Retweeting Offensive Image of St George Lancing the Prophet 
Mohammed,” ITV News, 27 April 2015, https://www.itv 
.com/news/london/2015-04-27/ukip-candidate-apologises-for 
-retweeting-offensive-image-of-st-george-lancing-the-prophet 
-mohammed/.

Notes to pages 41–43  /  165
15.	 William Booth, Tom Hamburger, Rosalind S. Helderman, and 
Manuel Roig-Franzia, “How the ‘Bad Boys of Brexit’ Forged 
Ties with Russia and the Trump Campaign—and Came Under 
Investigators’ Scrutiny,” The Washington Post, 28 June 2018, 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/how-the-bad-boys 
-of-brexit-forged-ties-with-russia-and-the-trump-campaign 
--and-came-under-investigators-scrutiny/2018/06/28/6e3a5e9c 
-7656-11e8-b4b7-308400242c2e_story.html.
16.	 This section is an adaptation and expansion of Amy S. 
Kaufman, “Muscular Medievalism,” The Year’s Work in 
Medievalism 31 (2016): 56–66 and Paul B. Sturtevant, 
“What Politicians Mean When They Call the Border Wall 
‘Medieval,’” The Washington Post, 29 January 2019,  
https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2019/01/22 
/what-politicians-mean-when-they-call-border-wall-medieval/.
17.	 Chris Cillizza, “Donald Trump Used a Word He’s ‘Not 
Supposed To.’ Here’s Why,” CNN, 23 October 2018, https://
www.cnn.com/2018/10/23/politics/donald-trump-nationalism 
/index.html.
18.	 Remarks by Donald J. Trump, Campaign Speech in 
Clairesville, Ohio, June 2016, https://www.youtube.com 
/watch?v=RhQU6lnU77Q.
19.	 Al Weaver, “Chuck Schumer: Border Wall Is ‘A Medieval 
Solution for a Modern Problem,’” The Washington Examiner,  
9 December 2019, https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/chuck 
-schumer-border-wall-is-a-medieval-solution-for-a-modern 
-problem; Dick Durbin (@SenatorDurbin), “As of today, the 
President’s pursuit of a medieval wall has forced hundreds of 
thousands of federal workers to miss a payday. He’s holding 
their paychecks hostage to fulfill a shortsighted campaign 
promise. It is cruel,” Twitter, 11 January 2019, https://twitter 
.com/SenatorDurbin/status/1083783437767634945; Hakeem 
Jeffries (@RepJeffries), “We are not paying a $5 billion ransom 
note for your medieval 🏰 border wall. And nothing you just said 
will change that cold, hard reality. Not happening. Get. Over. 
It,” Twitter, 8 January 2019, https://twitter.com/RepJeffries 
/status/1082822559920517120.
20.	 “Remarks by President Trump in Roundtable on Border 
Security | McAllen, TX,” The White House, 10 January 2019, 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/remarks 
-president-trump-roundtable-border-security-mcallen-tx/.
21.	 Reagan used the “shining city” metaphor repeatedly 
throughout his political career but employed it most famously 

166  /  Notes to pages 43–46
in his election eve “A Vision for America” address in 1980  
and his farewell address in 1989. Ronald Reagan, “Election 
Eve Address, ‘A Vision for America,’” The American 
Presidency Project, 3 November 1980, https://www.presidency 
.ucsb.edu/documents/election-eve-address-vision-for-america;  
Ronald Reagan, “Farewell Address to the Nation,” The 
American Presidency Project, 11 January 1989, https://www 
.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/farewell-address-the-nation.
22.	 Salvador Rizzo, “A Caravan of Phony Claims by the Trump 
Administration,” The Washington Post, 25 October 2018, 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2018/10/25 
/caravan-phony-claims-trump-administration/.
23.	 Caitlin O’Kane, “18-Year-Old U.S. Citizen Detained by Border 
Officials Said Conditions Were So Bad He Lost 26 Pounds, 
Almost Self-Deported,” CBS News, 26 July 2019, https://
www.cbsnews.com/news/us-citizen-detained-by-ice-francisco 
-erwin-galicia-border-officials-conditions-bad-almost-self 
-deported/.
24.	 Hannah Rappleye and Lisa Riordan Seville, “24  
Immigrants Have Died in ICE Custody during the Trump  
Administration,” NBC News, 9 June 2019, https://www 
.nbcnews.com/politics/immigration/24-immigrants-have-died 
-ice-custody-during-trump-administration-n1015291.
25.	 Dina Khapeva, “Putin’s Medieval Dreams,” Project Syndicate, 
29 December 2017, https://www.project-syndicate.org 
/commentary/russia-resurrecting-ivan-the-terrible-eurasianism 
-by-dina-khapaeva-2017-12.
26.	 Jonathan Marcus, “Putin: Russian President Says Liberalism 
‘Obsolete,’” BBC News, 28 June 2019, https://www.bbc.com 
/news/world-europe-48795764.
27.	 Agence France-Presse in Ankara, “Abbas Welcomed 
at Turkish Presidential Palace by Erdoğan—and 
16 Warriors,” The Guardian, 12 January 2015, 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/12/
abbas-erdogan-16-warriors-turkish-presidential-palace.
28.	 Paulo Pachá, “Why the Brazilian Far Right Loves the 
European Middle Ages,” The Pacific Standard, 18 February 
2019, https://psmag.com/ideas/why-the-brazilian-far-right 
-is-obsessed-with-the-crusades.
29.	 Geraldine Heng, “The Global Middle Ages: An Experiment in 
Collaborative Humanities, or Imagining the World, 500–1500 
C.E.,” English Language Notes 47, no. 1, (2009): 205–16. For 
the numerous research publications of the Global Middle Ages 

Notes to pages 46–53  /  167
project, see http://globalmiddleages.org/research-and-teaching; 
for a complicating viewpoint, see Robert I. Moore, “A Global 
Middle Ages?” in The Prospect of Global History, eds. James 
Belich, John Darwin, Margaret Frenz, and Chris Wickham 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016), 80–92.
30.	 Chapurukha Kusimba and Paul B. Sturtevant, “Recovering a 
‘Lost’ Medieval Africa: Interview with Chapurukha Kusimba, 
Part I,” The Public Medievalist, 30 March 2017, https://www 
.publicmedievalist.com/recovering-medieval-africa/.
31.	 For a reasonably accessible introduction to this view of the 
Mongol Empire, see Jack Weatherford, Genghis Khan and the 
Making of the Modern World (New York: Crown Publishers, 
2004).
32.	 Stephanie L. Hathaway and David W. Kim, Intercultural 
Transmission in the Medieval Mediterranean (London: 
Continuum, 2012); James P. Helfers, ed., Multicultural Europe 
and Cultural Exchange in the Middle Ages and Renaissance 
(Turnhout: Brepols, 2005).
33.	 Matteo Salvadore, The African Prester John and the Birth of 
Ethiopian-European Relations, 1402–1555 (Abingdon, UK: 
Routledge, 2017).
34.	 Andrew Wawn, The Vikings and the Victorians: Inventing the 
Old North in Nineteenth-century Britain (Woodbridge, UK: 
D.S. Brewer, 2000).
35.	 For a readable introduction to Viking history, see Julian D. 
Richards, The Vikings: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2005).
36.	 Usha Vishnuvajjala, “The Strange Medievalism of Mitt 
Romney,” Medieval Electronic Multimedia (blog), 27 April 
2013, http://medievalelectronicmultimedia.org/blog/?p=32.
37.	 Patricia Southern, Roman Britain: A New History, 55 BC–AD 
450 (Stroud, UK: Amberley Publishing, 2012).
3  The “Clash of Civilizations”
  1.	 María Rosa Menocal, The Ornament of the World: How 
Muslims, Jews, and Christians Created a Culture of Tolerance 
in Medieval Spain (New York: Little, Brown, 2002), 11.
  2.	 Jonathan Montpetit, “Whites Risk Marginalization, Mosque 
Shooting Suspect Told Friend a Day before Attack,” CBC, 3 
February 2017, https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/montreal 
/alexandre-bissonnette-trump-travel-ban-quebec-mosque 
-shooting-1.3966687.

168  /  Notes to pages 53–57
  3.	 Nicole Chavez, Emanuella Grinberg, and Eliott C. McLaughlin, 
“Pittsburgh Synagogue Gunman Said He Wanted All Jews to 
Die, Criminal Complaint Says,” CNN.com, 31 October 2018, 
https://www.cnn.com/2018/10/28/us/pittsburgh-synagogue 
-shooting/index.html.
  4.	 Philip Bump, “The Trump Show: Recent Violence Reflects  
Trump’s Rhetoric, Even If It Isn’t Powered by It,” The 
Washington Post, 28 October 2018, https://www.washingtonpost 
.com/politics/2018/10/28/trump-show-recent-violence-reflects 
-trumps-rhetoric-even-if-it-isnt-powered-by-it/.
  5.	 Daniel Wollenberg, “The New Knighthood: Terrorism and the 
Medieval,” postmedieval 5, no. 1 (2013): 22.
  6.	 Brenton Tarrant, “The Great Replacement,” unpublished 
manifesto.
  7.	 Imran Awan, “The Non-Muslims Experiencing Islamophobic 
Attacks,” The New Statesman, 18 October 2017, https://
www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2017/10/non 
-muslims-experiencing-islamophobic-attacks; Sarah Parvini, 
“Being Sikh in Trump’s America,” Los Angeles Times,  
11 June 2017, https://www.latimes.com/local/california 
/la-me-trump-sikhs-20170509-htmlstory.html; Torsten  
Ove, “Bethel Park Man Gets Probation, Community Service 
in Federal Hate Crime Assault,” Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, 6 
April 2018, https://www.post-gazette.com/local/south 
/2018/04/06/Bethel-Park-Jeffrey-Burgess-probation-community 
-service-federal-hate-crime-assault/stories/201804060128.
  8.	 Deborah E. Lipstadt, Antisemitism Here and Now (New 
York: Schocken Books, 2019); Khaled A. Beydoun, American 
Islamophobia: Understanding the Roots and Rise of Fear 
(Oakland: University of California Press, 2018).
  9.	 This section on Nazi Germany is an adaptation and expansion 
of Amy S. Kaufman, “Purity,” Medievalism: Key Critical 
Terms, eds. Elizabeth Emery and Richard Utz (Cambridge: 
D.S. Brewer, 2014), 199–206.
10.	 Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf, trans. Ralph Manheim (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1943), 325.
11.	 Laurie A. Finke and Martin B. Shichtman, King Arthur and the 
Myth of History (Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2004). 
See also Finke and Shichtman, Cinematic Illuminations: The 
Middle Ages on Film (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 
2010), and Finke and Shichtman, “Exegetical History: Nazis at 
the Round Table,” postmedieval 5, no. 3 (2014), 278–94.

Notes to pages 58–65  /  169
12.	 The archaeologist in question was Franz Altheim; his easily 
debunked “research” did not prevent him from receiving 
professorships at the University of Halle and the Free 
University of Berlin after the war. Heather Pringle, The Master 
Plan: Himmler’s Scholars and the Holocaust (New York: 
Hachette Books, 2006).
13.	 Christa Kamenetsky, Children’s Literature in Hitler’s Germany: 
The Cultural Policy of National Socialism (Athens: Ohio 
University Press, 1984).
14.	 Eitan Bar-Yosef, “The Last Crusade? British Propaganda and 
the Palestine Campaign, 1917–18,” Journal of Contemporary 
History 31, no. 1 (January 2001): 87.
15.	 Vivian Gilbert, The Romance of the Last Crusade: With 
Allenby to Jerusalem (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 
1923), 171.
16.	 Mike Horswell, The Rise and Fall of British Crusader 
Medievalism, c. 1825–1945 (Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2018); 
Ralph E.C. Adams, The Modern Crusaders (London: Routledge 
and Sons, 1920); Cyril A. Alington, The Last Crusade (London: 
Oxford University Press, 1940); John N. More, With Allenby’s 
Crusaders (London: Heath Cranton, 1923).
17.	 Nasar Meer, “Islamophobia and Postcolonialism: Continuity, 
Orientalism and Muslim Consciousness,” Patterns of 
Prejudice 48, no. 5 (October 2014): 500–15, https://doi.org 
/10.1080/0031322X.2014.966960.
18.	 Paul B. Sturtevant, “SaladiNasser: Nasser’s Political Crusade 
in El Naser Salah Ad-Din,” in Hollywood in the Holy Land, 
eds. Nickolas Haydock and Ed Risden (Jefferson, NC: 
McFarland, 2009), 123–46.
19.	 Jonathan Phillips, The Life and Legend of the Sultan Saladin 
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2019).
20.	 Phillips, The Life and Legend of the Sultan Saladin.
21.	 Samuel P. Huntington, “The Clash of Civilizations?” 
Foreign Affairs 72, no. 3 (Summer 1993): 22–49, https://doi 
.org/10.2307/20045621; Samuel P. Huntington, The Clash of 
Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order (New York: 
Simon & Schuster, 1996).
22.	 Huntington, “The Clash of Civilizations,” 22.
23.	 “Remarks by the President upon Arrival: The South Lawn,” 
The White House: President George W. Bush, 16 September 
2001, https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news 
/releases/2001/09/20010916-2.html.

170  /  Notes to pages 66–69
24.	 Osama bin Laden, “The Ladenese Epistle: Declaration of 
War,” 23 August 1996, https://scholarship.tricolib.brynmawr 
.edu/bitstream/handle/10066/4784/OBL19960823.pdf.
25.	 Osama bin Laden, “World Islamic Front Statement Urging 
Jihad against Jews and Crusaders,” in Al Qaeda in its Own 
Words, eds. Gilles Kepel and Jean-Pierre Milelli, trans. Pascale 
Ghazaleh (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard 
University Press, 2008), 53–56.
26.	 James Pinkerton, “Century In, Century Out—It’s Crusade 
Time,” Newsday, 4 December 2003, https://web.archive.org 
/web/20131024145450/http://newamerica.net/node/6322.
27.	 Niall Fergusson, Civilization: The West and the Rest (New 
York: Penguin, 2011); Civilization: Is the West History? 
directed by Adrian Pennink, presented by Niall Fergusson, 
aired Channel 4 (UK), 6 episodes (March–April 2011).
28.	 This section is an adaptation of Amy S. Kaufman, “To Russia, 
with Love: Courting a New Crusade,” The Public Medievalist, 
18 February 2017, https://www.publicmedievalist.com 
/russia-love/.
29.	 Peter Beinart, “Why Trump’s Party Is Embracing Russia,” The 
Atlantic, 12 December 2016, https://www.theatlantic.com 
/politics/archive/2016/12/the-conservative-split-on-russia/510317/.
30.	 Feder, J. Lester, “This Is How Steve Bannon Sees the Entire 
World,” Buzzfeed News, 15 November 2016, https://www 
.buzzfeednews.com/article/lesterfeder/this-is-how-steve 
-bannon-sees-the-entire-world#.qiELBV6Bp.
31.	 Torchbearer, directed by Stephen K. Bannon, hosted by  
Phil Robertson, ARC Entertainment, 7 October 2016,  
https://www.amazon.com/Torchbearer-Phil-Robertson/dp 
/B01LZEAEXC.
32.	 Elizabeth Chuck, Ali Velti, and Andrew Blankenstein, 
“Trump Campaign CEO Steve Bannon Accused of Anti-
Semitic Remarks by Ex-Wife,” NBC News, 27 August 2016, 
https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/trump 
-campaign-ceo-steve-bannon-accused-anti-semitic-remarks 
-ex-n638731.
33.	 Amy S. Kaufman, “To Russia, with Love.”
34.	 Diana Butler Bass, “For Many Evangelicals, Jerusalem Is 
about Prophecy, not Politics,” CNN, 14 May 2018, https://
www.cnn.com/2017/12/08/opinions/jerusalem-israel 
-evangelicals-end-times-butler-bass-opinion/index.html.
35.	 Christian Caryl, “How Vladimir Putin Became the World’s 
Favorite Dictator,” The Washington Post, 8 May 2018, https://

Notes to pages 69–74  /  171
www.washingtonpost.com/news/democracy-post/wp/2018/05/08 
/how-vladimir-putin-became-the-worlds-favorite-dictator.
36.	 Miranda Blue, “Fischer Praises Putin, Calls Him A ‘Lion  
of Christianity,’” Right Wing Watch, 10 October 2013,  
https://www.rightwingwatch.org/post/fischer-praises-putin 
-calls-him-a-lion-of-christianity; Patrick J. Buchanan, “Putin’s 
Paleoconservative Moment,” The American Conservative, 
17 December 2013, https://www.theamericanconservative.com 
/putins-paleoconservative-moment/.
37.	 Malcolm Nance, “MSNBC Terrorism Analyst Malcolm Nance 
on Russia, Election 2016, and His Perceptions of Donald 
Trump’s Appointees So Far,” interview by Joy Reid, AM Joy, 
MSNBC, 19 November 2016, https://www.facebook.com 
/amjoyshow/videos/1232430470161977/.
38.	 The next two sections have been adapted and expanded 
from Amy S. Kaufman, “A Tale of Two Europes: Jews in the 
Medieval World,” The Public Medievalist, 20 June 2017, 
https://www.publicmedievalist.com/tale-two-europes-jews 
-medieval-world.
39.	 Eileen Sullivan, “Trump Again Accuses American Jews of 
Disloyalty,” The New York Times, 21 August 2019, https://
www.nytimes.com/2019/08/21/us/politics/trump-jews 
-disloyalty.html.
40.	 The Book of John Mandeville, ed. Tamarah Kohanski and C. 
David Benson (Kalamazoo, MI: Medieval Institute Publications, 
2007), 83. Translations for this book by Amy S. Kaufman.
41.	 Geoffrey Chaucer, The Riverside Chaucer, ed. Larry D. 
Benson, 3rd edition (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987), 211. 
Translations for this book by Amy S. Kaufman.
42.	 Michael Costen, The Cathars and the Albigensian Crusade 
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1997), 123.
43.	 Eliezar bar Nathan, “Persecutions of 1066,” in The Siege 
of Jerusalem, ed. and trans. Adrienne Williams Boyarin 
(Peterborough, ON: Broadview Press, 2014), 142.
44.	 Albert of Aachen, “History of the Journey to Jerusalem,” in 
Boyarin, Siege of Jerusalem, 139.
45.	 William of Newburgh, “William of Newburgh’s Account,” in 
The Jews in Christian Europe: A Source Book, 315–1791, eds. 
Jacob R. Marcus and Marc Saperstein (Pittsburgh: Hebrew 
Union College Press, 2015), 103–4.
46.	 Geraldine Heng, Empire of Magic: Medieval Romance and the 
Politics of Cultural Fantasy (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2004), 17–62.

172  /  Notes to pages 74–84
47.	 Raymond d’Aguilers, “The Conquest of Jerusalem from the 
Historia Francorum,” in Muslim and Christian Contact in 
the Middle Ages: A Reader, ed. Jarbel Rodriguez (Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press, 2015), 63.
48.	 Raymond d’Aguilers, “The Conquest of Jerusalem,” 65.
49.	 Amin Maalouf, The Crusades through Arab Eyes, trans. Jon 
Rothschild (New York: Schocken Books, 1984), 50–51.
50.	 Maalouf, Crusades through Arab Eyes, 39.
51.	 Ibn Sārah, “Pool with Turtles,” Poems of Arab Andalusia, 
trans. Cola Franzen (San Francisco: City Lights Books, 
1989), 40.
52.	 Robert Chazan, “The Arc of Jewish Life in the Middle Ages,” 
The Public Medievalist, 26 September 2017, https://www 
.publicmedievalist.com/arc-of-jewish-life/.
53.	 María Rosa Menocal, The Arabic Role in Medieval Literary 
History (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1983).
54.	 Henry Chu, “Welcome Back, 500 Years Later: Spain Offers 
Citizenship to Sephardic Jews,” Los Angeles Times, 1 October 
2015, https://www.latimes.com/world/europe/la-fg-spain 
-sephardic-jews-20151001-story.html.
55.	 The Book of John Mandeville, 56.
4  White (Supremacist) Knights
  1.	 William Wells Brown, “Narrative of the Life and Escape of 
William Wells Brown,” in William Wells Brown: A Reader, ed. 
Ezra Greenspan (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2008), 
63.
  2.	 The following three sections have been adapted from 
Amy S. Kaufman, “Anxious Medievalism: An American 
Romance,” The Year’s Work in Medievalism 22 (2008): 
5–13; Kaufman, “Purity,” Medievalism: Key Critical Terms 
(2014), 199–206; Kaufman, “A Brief History of a Terrible 
Idea: The ‘Dark Enlightenment,’” The Public Medievalist, 
9 February 2017, https://www.publicmedievalist.com 
/dark-enlightenment; and Kaufman, “The Birth of a 
National Disgrace: Medievalism and the KKK,” The 
Public Medievalist, 21 November 2017, https://www 
.publicmedievalist.com/birth-national-disgrace.
  3.	 Mark Twain, Life on the Mississippi (New York: Harper & 
Brothers Publishers, 1883), 328.
  4.	 Thomas Dixon, The Clansman: A Historical Romance of the 
Ku Klux Klan (New York: A. Wessels Company, 1907), 319.

Notes to pages 85–91  /  173
  5.	 Dixon, The Clansman, 326.
  6.	 Dixon, The Clansman, 316.
  7.	 “Ku Klux Klan Issues ‘Warning,’” The Daily Progress, 19 July 
1921, https://search.lib.virginia.edu/catalog/uva-lib:2119725 
/view#openLayer/uva-lib:2119726/4046/3967/2/1/1.
  8.	 Liam Stack, “Leader of a Ku Klux Klan Group Is Found Dead 
in Missouri,” The New York Times, 13 February 2017, https://
www.nytimes.com/2017/02/13/us/kkk-leader-death-frank 
-ancona.html.
  9.	 Howard Goodloe Sutton, “Time for the Ku Klux Klan to 
Night Ride Again,” Democrat-Reporter, 14 February 2019.
10.	 Lisa Wade, “How ‘Benevolent Sexism’ Drove Dylann Roof’s 
Racist Massacre,” The Washington Post, 21 June 2015, https://
www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2015/06/21 
/how-benevolent-sexism-drove-dylann-roofs-racist-massacre/.
11.	 “KKK Flyers Distributed in Chilliwack Worry Residents,” 
CBC News, 28 July 2016, https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada 
/british-columbia/chilliwack-kkk-flyers-1.3699955.
12.	 Kaufman, “The Birth of a National Disgrace.”
13.	 Yair Rosenberg, “‘Jews Will Not Replace Us’: Why White 
Supremacists Go After Jews,” The Washington Post, 14 
August 2017, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/acts 
-of-faith/wp/2017/08/14/jews-will-not-replace-us-why-white 
-supremacists-go-after-jews/.
14.	 Paul B. Sturtevant, “Leaving ‘Medieval’ Charlottesville,”  
The Public Medievalist, 17 August 2017, https://www 
.publicmedievalist.com/leaving-medieval-charlottesville/; 
Washington Post Staff, “Deconstructing the Symbols and 
Slogans Spotted in Charlottesville,” The Washington Post,  
18 August 2017, https://www.washingtonpost.com 
/graphics/2017/local/charlottesville-videos/.
15.	 Hewes Spencer and Richard Pérez-Peña, “Murder Charge 
Increases in Charlottesville Protest Death,” The New York 
Times, 14 December 2017, https://www.nytimes.com 
/2017/12/14/us/charlottesville-fields-white-supremists.html; 
Daniel Victor, “Third Man Arrested in Beating of Black Man 
at Charlottesville Rally,” The New York Times, 11 October 
2017, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/11/us/charlottesville 
-beating-arrest.html.
16.	 Walter Henry Cook, “Secret Political Societies in the South 
during the Period of Reconstruction: Part II,” The Southern 
Magazine 3, no. 2 (August–September 1936): 14–17,  
http://www.confederateneoconfederatereader.com/detail 

174  /  Notes to pages 91–93
/the-nadir-of-race-relations/the-united-daughters-of-the 
-confederacy-defends-the-ku-klux/.
17.	 Brad Schrade, “Georgia Women’s College Quietly Drops 
Names Tied to Klan History,” The Atlanta Journal-
Constitution, 6 August 2018, https://www.ajc.com/news 
/georgia-women-college-quietly-drops-class-names-tied 
-klan-history/sHK31DimvmFhCUTceEvTPP.
18.	 Seyward Darby, “The Rise of the Valkyries: In the Alt-Right, 
Women Are the Future, and the Problem,” Harper’s Magazine, 
September 2017, https://harpers.org/archive/2017/09/the 
-rise-of-the-valkyries.
19.	 Alexandra Minna Stern, Proud Boys and the White 
Ethnostate: How the Alt-Right Is Warping the American 
Imagination (Boston: Beacon Press, 2019).
20.	 Morton W. Bloomfield, “Reflections of a Medievalist: 
America, Medievalism, and the Middle Ages,” Medievalism 
in American Culture: Papers of the 18th Annual Conference 
of the Center for Medieval and Early Renaissance Studies 
(Binghamton, NY: SUNY Center for Medieval and 
Renaissance Texts and Studies, 1989), 13–27; Eugene D. 
Genovese, “The Southern Slaveholders’ View of the Middle 
Ages,” Medievalism in American Culture: Papers of the 
18th Annual Conference of the Center for Medieval and 
Early Renaissance Studies (Binghamton, NY: SUNY Center 
for Medieval and Renaissance Texts and Studies, 1989), 
31–52.
21.	 For a full list of books by the scholars mentioned here, please 
see the Further Reading section.
22.	 Paul B. Sturtevant and Amy S. Kaufman, eds., “TPM Special 
Series: Race, Racism and the Middle Ages,” The Public 
Medievalist, 2017, https://www.publicmedievalist.com 
/race-racism-middle-ages-toc/.
23.	 A few examples include Matthew Gabriele, “The Medievalist 
Who Fought Nazis with History,” Forbes, 23 October 2019, 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/matthewgabriele/2018/10/23 
/medievalist-who-fought-nazis/; David M. Perry, “How to 
Fight 8chan Medievalism—and Why We Must,” The 
 Pacific Standard, 27 June 2019, https://psmag.com/ideas 
/how-to-fight-8chan-medievalism-and-why-we-must-notre 
-dame-christchurch; and Dorothy Kim, “White Supremacists 
Have Weaponized an Imaginary Viking Past: It’s Time to 
Reclaim the Real History,” Time, 15 April 2019, https://time 
.com/5569399/viking-history-white-nationalists/.

Notes to pages 93–103  /  175
24.	 People of Color in European Art History, last modified March 
2019, https://medievalpoc.tumblr.com/.
25.	 See devilshistorians.com.
26.	 Sierra Lomuto and Adam Miyasharo write regularly for In the 
(Medieval) Middle, http://www.inthemedievalmiddle.com and 
Medievalists of Color, https://medievalistsofcolor.com; see also 
Mary Rambaran-Olm, “Anglo-Saxon Studies, Academia, and 
White Supremacy,” Medium, 27 June 2018, https://medium 
.com/@mrambaranolm/anglo-saxon-studies-academia-and 
-white-supremacy-17c87b360bf3.
27.	 Eli Saslow, “The White Flight of Derek Black,” The Washington 
Post, 15 October 2016, https://www.washingtonpost.com 
/national/the-white-flight-of-derek-black/2016/10/15.
28.	 Krista Tippett, “Derek Black and Matthew Stevenson: How 
Friendship and Quiet Conversations Transformed a White 
Nationalist,” On Being, 17 May 2018, https://onbeing 
.org/programs/how-friendship-and-quiet-conversations 
-transformed-a-white-nationalist-may2018/.
29.	 Christine de Pizan, The Book of the City of Ladies, trans. Earl 
Jeffrey Richards (New York: Persea Books, 1982), 52.
30.	 For two recent studies, see Geraldine Heng, The Invention of 
Race in the European Middle Ages (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2018); and Cord J. Whitaker, Black Metaphors: 
How Modern Racism Emerged from Medieval Race-Thinking 
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2019).
31.	 Sir Thomas Malory, Le Morte d’Arthur, vol. 1, ed. P.J.C. Field 
(Cambridge: D.S. Brewer, 2013), 223. Translations for this 
book by Amy S. Kaufman.
32.	 Suzanne Conklin Akbari, “From Due East to True North: 
Orientalism and Orientation,” in The Postcolonial Middle Ages, 
ed. Jeffrey Jerome Cohen (New York: Palgrave, 2000), 23–24.
33.	 Chrétien de Troyes, The Complete Romances of Chrétien de 
Troyes, trans. David Staines (Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1990), 16, 97.
34.	 Ibn Sa’īd al-Maghribī, “Black Horse with White Chest,” in 
Poems of Arab Andalusia, trans. Cola Franzen (San Francisco: 
City Lights Books, 1989), 69.
5  Knights in Shining Armor and Damsels in Distress
  1.	 Judith M. Bennett, History Matters: Patriarchy and 
the Challenge of Feminism (Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press, 2006), 83.

176  /  Notes to pages 103–12
  2.	 Rachael Brown, “George R.R. Martin on Sex, Fantasy,  
and A Dance with Dragons,” The Atlantic, 11 July 2011,  
https://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2011/07 
/george-rr-martin-on-sex-fantasy-and-a-dance-with 
-dragons/241738/.
  3.	 This section has been adapted from Amy S. Kaufman, 
“Chivalry Isn’t Dead: But It Should Be,” The Washington  
Post, 7 October 2018, https://www.washingtonpost.com 
/outlook/2018/10/08/chivalry-isnt-dead-it-should-be/.
  4.	 Susan Griffin, “Rape: The All-American Crime,” Ramparts 10 
(1971): 30.
  5.	 Chrétien de Troyes, Complete Romances, 186.
  6.	 Malory, Le Morte d’Arthur, 97.
  7.	 Samuel N. Rosenberg and Carleton W. Carroll, trans., 
Lancelot-Grail: Lancelot, Parts I and II (Cambridge: D.S. 
Brewer, 2010), 113.
  8.	 Chaucer, Riverside Chaucer, 120.
  9.	 See, for example, Yunte Huang, “Read This and Blush: 
Naughty Medieval French Tales,” The Daily Beast,  
11 July 2017, https://www.thedailybeast.com 
/read-this-and-blush-naughty-medieval-french-tales.
10.	 Sir Walter Scott, Ivanhoe: A Romance (New York: Penguin 
Books, 2000), 249.
11.	 Material in this section has been adapted from Amy S. Kaufman, 
“Anxious Medievalism,” 5–13; “His Princess: An Arthurian 
Family Drama,” Arthuriana 22, no. 3 (2012), 41–56; and 
“Purity,” Medievalism: Key Critical Terms, 199–206.
12.	 Brett McKay, “Respecting Our Differences,” The New York  
Times, 31 July 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate 
/2013/07/30/can-chivalry-be-brought-back-to-life/chivalry-is 
-a-nod-to-differences-between-the-sexes.
13.	 Richard J. Evans, The Third Reich in Power (New York: Penguin, 
2006), 332.
14.	 Evans, The Third Reich in Power, 331.
15.	 Andrew Aglin, “Departure of a Comrade,” The Daily Stormer, 
30 March 2015.
16.	 John Eldredge, Wild at Heart: Discovering the Secrets of a 
Man’s Soul (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 2001), 16.
17.	 Eldredge, Wild at Heart, 22.
18.	 Eldredge, Wild at Heart, 15.
19.	 This section has been adapted from Kaufman, “Muscular 
Medievalism,” 56–66. See also Shiloh Carroll, Medievalism in 
A Song of Ice and Fire and Game of Thrones (Cambridge: D.S. 
Brewer, 2018).

Notes to pages 112–24  /  177
20.	 “Walk of Punishment,” Game of Thrones season 3, episode 3, 
written and directed by David Benioff and D.B. Weiss, HBO, 
aired 14 April 2013.
21.	 Jace Lacob, “‘Game of Thrones’ Sexual Politics,” The  
Daily Beast, 5 June 2011, http://www.thedailybeast.com 
/articles/2011/06/05/game-of-thrones-sexual-politics.html.
22.	 National Criminal Justice Reference Center, “Victims of 
Sexual Violence,” RAINN, https://www.rainn.org/statistics 
/victims-sexual-violence.
23.	 Katty Kay, “Military Rape: Saxby Chambliss, Hormones, and 
Problems at the Top,” BBC News, 4 June 2013, https://www 
.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-22760944.
24.	 Colby Itkowitz, Beth Reinhard, and David Weigel, “Trump 
Compares Himself to Kavanaugh in Latest Sexual Assault 
Allegation,” The Washington Post, 22 June 2019, https://
www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-compares-himself 
-to-kavanaugh-in-latest-sexual-assault-allegation/2019 
/06/22/81e2c1b4-9509-11e9-aadb-74e6b2b46f6a_story.html.
25.	 Will Storr, “The Rape of Men,” The Guardian, 17 July 
2011, https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/jul/17 
/the-rape-of-men.
26.	 Nathaniel Penn, “‘Son, Men Don’t Get Raped,’” GQ, 2 September  
2014, https://www.gq.com/story/male-rape-in-the-military.
27.	 Malory, Le Morte d’Arthur, 194.
28.	 Malory, Le Morte d’Arthur, 633.
29.	 Malory, Le Morte d’Arthur, 510.
30.	 William Rosen, The Third Horseman: Climate Change and the 
Great Famine of the 14th Century (New York: Penguin, 2014), 7.
31.	 Gawain on Marriage: The De Coniuge Non Ducenda, trans. 
A.G. Rigg (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Medieval Studies, 
1986).
32.	 Marie de France, The Lais of Marie de France, trans. Robert 
Hanning and Joan Ferrante (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Books, 
2000), 112–13.
33.	 Jacqueline Murray, “Twice Marginal and Twice Invisible: 
Lesbians in the Middle Ages,” in Handbook of Medieval 
Sexuality, eds. Vern L. Bullough and James A. Brundage (New 
York: Garland Publishing, 1996), 191–222.
34.	 Sahar Amer, Crossing Borders: Love between Women in 
Medieval French and Arabic Literatures (Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press, 2013), 17–18.
35.	 For our purposes, we will retain the gendered pronouns used 
by the author, but you could just as validly use male or gender-
neutral pronouns when discussing Silence.

178  /  Notes to pages 124–31
36.	 Heldris of Cornwall, Silence, trans. Sarah Roche-Mahdi (East 
Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1999), 119.
37.	 Heldris, Silence, 123.
38.	 Heldris, Silence, 125.
6  Medievalism and Religious Extremism
  1.	 Edward Gibbon, The History of the Decline and Fall of the 
Roman Empire, Complete, 12 vols., ed. David Widger  
(Project Gutenberg, 2008), 1:102, https://www.gutenberg.org 
/files/25717/25717-h/25717-h.htm#Alink2HCH0001.
  2.	 Brad Allenby, “The Return to Medievalism,” Slate, 18 March 
2015, https://slate.com/technology/2015/03/isis-and 
-other-neomedievalists-reject-technology-modernity.html; 
Adrian Lee, “The New Dark Ages: The Chilling Medieval 
Society ISIS Extremists Seek to Impose in Iraq,” The Daily 
Express, 21 June 2014, https://www.express.co.uk/news 
/world/483920/Iraq-Isis-Extremists-Dark-Ages-Muslim 
-Baghdad-Jihadist; Anoosh Chakelian, “Nick Clegg: ‘It’s Not 
Obvious’ What the UK Can Do Legally on New Terror  
Powers in ISIL,” New Statesman, 2 September 2014, https:// 
www.newstatesman.com/politics/2014/09/nick-clegg-it-s-not 
-obvious-what-uk-can-do-legally-new-terror-powers.
  3.	 Graeme Wood, “What ISIS Really Wants,” The Atlantic, 
March 2015, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine 
/archive/2015/03/what-isis-really-wants/384980/.
  4.	 Wood, “What ISIS Really Wants.”
  5.	 “Resolution on Biblical Scholarship and the Doctrine of  
Inerrancy,” Southern Baptist Convention, 2012, http://www 
.sbc.net/resolutions/1225/on-biblical-scholarship-and-the 
-doctrine-of-inerrancy.
  6.	 Ezra Glinter, “Orthodoxy’s Inconvenient Truths,” The 
Forward, 13 July 2014, https://forward.com/culture/311651 
/orthodoxys-inconvenient-truths/.
  7.	 Material in this section has been adapted from Amy S. Kaufman, 
“His Princess,” 41–56.
  8.	 “The Tenets of Biblical Patriarchy,” Vision Forum Ministries, 
https://web.archive.org/web/20130427004848/http://www 
.visionforumministries.org/home/about/Biblical_patriarchy 
.aspx.
  9.	 Randy Wilson, “What about Boys,” Generations of Light 
Ministry, 2008, http://www.generationsoflight.com/html 
/boys.html.

Notes to pages 132–34  /  179
10.	 Amanda Marcotte, “Woman Sues Christian Right Leader 
Douglas Phillips for Alleged Sexual, Mental Abuse,” Slate, 16 
April 2014, https://slate.com/human-interest/2014/04/douglas 
-phillips-lawsuit-woman-alleges-sexual-mental-abuse-against 
-the-former-president-of-vision-forum.html. 
11.	 Aaron Blake, “Mike Pence Doesn’t Dine Alone with Other 
Women. And We’re All Shocked,” The Washington Post,  
30 March 2017, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the 
-fix/wp/2017/03/30/mike-pence-doesnt-dine-alone-with-other 
-women-and-were-all-shocked/. 
12.	 Andrew Kreighbaum, “College Groups Blast DeVos Title IX 
Proposal,” Inside Higher Ed, 31 January 2019, https://www 
.insidehighered.com/news/2019/01/31/higher-ed-groups 
-call-major-changes-devos-title-ix-rule. 
13.	 Colum Lynch, “Trump Administration Steps Up War on 
Reproductive Rights,” Foreign Policy, 18 September 2019,  
https://foreignpolicy.com/2019/09/18/trump-administration 
-steps-up-war-on-reproductive-rights/.
14.	 “Radical Traditional Catholicism,” SPLC Extremist Files, 
https://www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-files/ideology 
/radical-traditional-catholicism.
15.	 “Radical Traditional Catholicism.”
16.	 Brother André Marie, “Recovering a Bright Medieval Vision 
for the Future,” Catholicism.org, 1 May 2019, https://
catholicism.org/ad-rem-no-341.html; Charles A. Coulombe, 
“Can Chivalry Return?” Catholicism.org, 3 September 
2012, https://catholicism.org/can-chivalry-return.html; Sister 
Marie Pierre, “The Thirteenth: The Greatest of Centuries,” 
Catholicism.org, 5 November 2009, https://catholicism.org 
/the-thirteenth-the-greatest-of-centuries.html.
17.	 Brother André Marie, “The Crusades: Just Wars?” Catholicism 
.org, 3 February 2016, https://catholicism.org/ad-rem-no-263 
.html.
18.	 Gary Potter, “Islam Versus the Faith,” Catholicism.org, 
2 February 2008.
19.	 Michael Sean Winters, “Real Catholic TV? Not So Much,” 
National Catholic Reporter, 27 December 2011, https://www 
.ncronline.org/blogs/distinctly-catholic/real-catholic-tv-not 
-so-much.
20.	 Church Militant, “One True Faith Revisited: The Crusades 
and the Inquisition,” ChurchMilitant.com, 26 May 2017,  
https://www.churchmilitant.com/news/article/otf-the-crusades 
-and-the-inquisition.

180  /  Notes to pages 134–39
21.	 Church Militant, “One True Faith Revisited.”
22.	 Charles A. Coulombe, “Can Chivalry Return?”
23.	 Mike Judge, “Raising Chivalrous Young Men … in an 
Increasingly Decadent Society,” The Crusade Channel, https://
www.mikechurch.com/shop/raising-chivalrous-young-men-in 
-an-increasingly-decadent-society/.
24.	 Charles A. Coulombe, “Tolkien and Reality,” Catholicism 
.org, 5 July 2019, https://catholicism.org/tolkien-and-reality 
.html.
25.	 Joseph Pearce, Bilbo’s Journey: Discovering the Hidden 
Meaning of The Hobbit (Charlotte, NC: Saint Benedict Press, 
2012); Joseph Pearce, Frodo’s Journey: Discovering the 
Hidden Meaning of The Lord of the Rings (Charlotte, NC: 
Saint Benedict Press, 2015).
26.	 This section has been adapted from Amy S. Kaufman, “Dark 
Revivals: Medievalism and ISIS,” The Public Medievalist, 
16 October 2014, https://www.publicmedievalist.com 
/dark-revivals-medievalism-isis, and Kaufman, “Muscular 
Medievalism,” 56–66.
27.	 William McCants, The ISIS Apocalypse: The History, Strategy, 
and Doomsday Vision of the Islamic State (New York: 
Macmillan, 2015).
28.	 ISIS, “The Failed Crusade,” Dabiq 4, 11 October 2014.
29.	 Theo Padnos, Undercover Muslim: A Journey into Yemen 
(London: The Bodley Head, 2011), 7.
30.	 Padnos, Undercover Muslim, 112–13.
31.	 Padnos, Undercover Muslim, 117.
32.	 James Harkin, “How the Islamic State Was Won: Interviews 
with Fighters, Enemies, and Potential Recruits,” Harper’s 
Magazine, November 2014, https://harpers.org/archive/2014/11 
/how-the-islamic-state-was-won/.
33.	 Harkin, “How the Islamic State Was Won.”
34.	 Mona Mahmood, “Double-Layered Veils and Despair ... Women 
Describe Life under ISIS,” The Guardian, 17 February 2015, 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/17/isis-orders 
-women-iraq-syria-veils-gloves.
35.	 ISIS, “The Failed Crusade,” Dabiq.
36.	 “Sexual Violence under ISIS Control,” On Point,  
National Public Radio, 25 September 2014 and Rukmini 
Callimachi, “ISIS Enshrines a Theology of Rape,” New York 
Times, 13 August 2015, https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/14 
/world/middleeast/isis-enshrines-a-theology-of-rape.html.

Notes to pages 139–51  /  181
37.	 Annabell Van den Berghe, “Humiliation Replaces Fear for the 
Women Kidnapped by ISIS,” The Guardian, 19 October  
2014, http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/19 
/isis-forced-marriage-syria-iraq-women-kidnapped.
38.	 Kareem Shaheen, “Isis Militants Behead Two Syrian  
Women for Witchcraft,” The Guardian, 30 June 2015,  
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/30 
/isis-militants-behead-syrian-women-witchcraft.
39.	 Anonymous source, personal interview with Amy S. Kaufman, 
Murfreesboro, TN, April 2015.
40.	 Julie McCarthy, “In India, Hindu Nationalists Feel Their 
Moment Has Arrived,” NPR.org, 26 August 2014, https://
www.npr.org/sections/parallels/2014/08/26/343177139 
/in-india-hindu-nationalists-feel-their-moment-has-arrived.
41.	 McCarthy, “In India.”
42.	 Sarah Lyons, “Racists Are Threatening to Take Over Paganism,” 
Vice.com, 2 April 2018, https://www.vice.com/en_us/article 
/59kq93/racists-are-threatening-to-take-over-paganism.
43.	 “Principals in Race War Plot Said to Practice Neo-Pagan Asatru 
Religion,” SPLC Intelligence Report, 17 February 2016, https://
www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/intelligence-report/2016 
/principals-race-war-plot-said-practice-neo-pagan-asatru-religion.
44.	 Sigal Samuel, “What to Do When Racists Try to Hijack Your 
Religion,” The Atlantic, 2 November 2017, https://www 
.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2017/11/asatru-heathenry 
-racism/543864/.
45.	 Saint Augustine, On Christian Doctrine, trans. D.W. Robertson, 
Jr. (New York: Macmillan, 1958), 45.
46.	 Saint Augustine, On Christian Doctrine, 45.
47.	 Dante Alighieri, Letter to Can Grande, The Latin Works of 
Dante (London: Temple Classics, 1904) 346–52, http://sites.fas 
.harvard.edu/~chaucer/special/authors/dante/cangrand.html.
48.	 Information on fabliaux in this section has been adapted from 
Amy S. Kaufman, “Fabliaux,” Encyclopedia of Medieval 
British Literature, eds. Sian Echard and Robert Rouse (West 
Sussex: John Wiley & Sons, 2017).
Epilogue: The Future of Medieval Past
  1.	 Joe Deckelmeier, “Lupita Nyong’o Interview: Black Panther,” 
Screenrant, 8 February 2018, https://screenrant.com/black 
-panther-lupita-nyongo-interview/.

182  /  Notes to pages 152–59
  2.	 “Clan Blue Feather,” Bluefeather.org, http://www.bluefeather.org/.
  3.	 Marcus Waithe, William Morris’s Utopia of Strangers: 
Victorian Medievalism and the Ideal of Hospitality (Cambridge: 
D.S. Brewer, 2006).
  4.	 A.W.N. Pugin, Contrasts: Or a Parallel between the Noble 
Edifices of the Middle Ages, and Corresponding Buildings of 
the Present Day; Shewing the Present Decay of Taste (London: 
A.W.N. Pugin, 1836), 35.
  5.	 Linette Withers (Consultant Bookbinder, The Leeds Library), 
personal interview with Paul B. Sturtevant, March 2019.
  6.	 Cédric Hauteville, dir., Back to the Source: Historical European  
Martial Arts, 2015, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= 
7DBmNVHTmNs.
  7.	 David M. Perry, “How Can We Untangle White Supremacy 
from Medieval Studies?: A Conversation with Australian 
Scholar Helen Young,” The Pacific Standard, 9 October 2017, 
https://psmag.com/education/untangling-white-supremacy 
-from-medieval-studies. For more on this from Dr. Young, see 
our recommended reading list.
  8.	 Bioware, Dragon Age: Origins, Electronic Arts, PC, 2009.
  9.	 Mark Darrah (@BioMarkDarrah), “On to Dragon Age: 
Inquisition where we switched to Frostbite. Bioware’s most 
highly decorated and selling game (so far),” Twitter, 20 April 
2018, https://twitter.com/biomarkdarrah/status/98751789040
3299328?lang=en.
10.	 Matthew Vernon, “Whose Middle Ages? Remembering Early 
African-American Efforts to Claim the Past,” The Public 
Medievalist, 23 October 2018, https://www.publicmedievalist 
.com/whose-middle-ages/.
11.	 Blue Telusma, “Ethiopians Say Wakanda Not a Far Cry 
from Reality,” The Grio, 27 February 2018, https://thegrio 
.com/2018/02/27/ethiopians-wakanda-black-panther/; Paul 
Schemm, “Africa’s Real Wakanda and the Struggle to Stay 
Uncolonized,” The Washington Post, 27 February 2018, https://
www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2018/02/27 
/africas-real-wakanda-and-the-struggle-to-stay-uncolonized/.
12.	 Dorothy Kim, “White Supremacists Have Weaponized an 
Imaginary Viking Past.”

183
This list is limited to print scholarship and focuses on post-medieval 
misuses of the Middle Ages. In general, we list books and full 
journal issues rather than articles or chapters. For an interactive 
bibliography of digital writing on medievalism and additional 
resources, please see our website at devilshistorians.com.
Aberth, John. Contesting the Middle Ages: Debates That Are 
Changing Our Narrative of Medieval History. London:  
Routledge, 2019.
Alexander, Michael. Medievalism: The Middle Ages in Modern 
England. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007.
Albin, Andrew, Mary C. Erler, Thomas O’Donnell, Nicholas L. 
Paul, and Nina Rowe, eds. Whose Middle Ages? Teachable 
Moments for an Ill-Used Past. New York: Fordham University 
Press, 2019.
Altschul, Nadia, and Kathleen Davis. Medievalisms in the 
Postcolonial World: The Idea of the “Middle Ages” Outside 
Europe. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2010.
Arnold, Martin. Thor: Myth to Marvel. New York: Continuum, 
2011.
Aronstein, Susan. Hollywood Knights: Arthurian Cinema and the 
Politics of Nostalgia. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.
Aronstein, Susan, and Tison Pugh, eds. The Disney Middle Ages: 
A Fairy-Tale and Fantasy Past. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2012.
Baker, Kelly J. The Gospel According to the Klan: The KKK’s 
Appeal to Protestant America, 1915–1930. Lawrence: University 
Press of Kansas, 2011.
Barczewski, Stephanie. Myth and National Identity in Nineteenth-
Century Britain: The Legends of King Arthur and Robin Hood. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Bethencourt, Francisco. Racisms: From the Crusades to the 
Twentieth Century. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2015.
Bryden, Inga. Reinventing King Arthur: The Arthurian Legends in 
Victorian Culture. London: Routledge, 2016.
Further Reading

184  /  Further Reading
Caputo, Nina, and Hannah Johnson, eds. “The Holocaust and the 
Middle Ages.” postmedieval 5, no. 3 (Fall 2014).
Carroll, Shiloh. Medievalism in A Song of Ice and Fire and Game 
of Thrones. Cambridge: D.S. Brewer, 2018.
Chazan, Robert. Medieval Stereotypes and Modern Antisemitism. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997.
D’Arcens, Louise, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Medievalism. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016.
D’Arcens, Louise, and Andrew Lynch. International Medievalism 
and Popular Culture. New York: Cambria, 2014.
Eco, Umberto. Travels in Hyperreality. London: Picador, 1987.
Elliott, Andrew B.R. Medievalism, Politics, and Mass Media: 
Appropriating the Middle Ages in the Twenty-First Century. 
Woodbridge, UK: D.S. Brewer, 2017.
———. Remaking the Middle Ages: The Methods of Cinema and 
History in Portraying the Modern World. Jefferson, NC:  
McFarland & Company, 2011.
Emery, Elizabeth, and Richard Utz, eds. Medievalism: Key Critical 
Terms. Cambridge: D.S. Brewer, 2014.
Finke, Laurie A., and Martin B. Shichtman. Cinematic Illuminations: 
The Middle Ages on Film. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 2010.
———. King Arthur and the Myth of History. Gainesville: 
University Press of Florida, 2004.
Finn, Kavita Mudan, ed. Fan Phenomena: Game of Thrones. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017.
Frankel, Valerie Estelle. Women in Game of Thrones: Power, 
Conformity, and Resistance. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2014.
Fugelso, Karl, ed. Studies in Medievalism XXVIII: Medievalism 
and Discrimination. Cambridge: D.S. Brewer, 2019.
Gabriele, Matthew, and Cord J. Whitaker, eds. “The Ghosts of 
the Nineteenth Century and the Future of Medieval Studies.” 
postmedieval 10, no. 2 (June 2019).
Gardell, Mattias. Gods of the Blood: The Pagan Revival and 
White Separatism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003.
Harty, Kevin J. The Reel Middle Ages: American, Western and 
Eastern European, Middle Eastern, and Asian Films about 
Medieval Europe. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 1999.
———, ed. The Vikings on Film: Essays on Depictions of the 
Nordic Middle Ages. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2011.
Haydock, Nickolas, and Ed Risden, eds. Hollywood in the Holy 
Land: Essays on Film Depictions of the Crusades and Christian-
Muslim Clashes. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2009.

Further Reading  /  185
Holsinger, Bruce. Neomedievalism, Neoconservatism, and the War 
on Terror. Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press, 2007.
Horswell, Mike. The Rise and Fall of British Crusader 
Medievalism, c. 1825–1945. New York: Routledge, 2018.
Kamenetsky, Christa. Children’s Literature in Hitler’s Germany: 
The Cultural Policy of National Socialism. Athens: Ohio 
University Press, 1984.
Kim, Dorothy. Digital Whiteness and Medieval Studies. York: Arc 
Humanities Press, 2019.
Larrington, Carolyne. Winter Is Coming: The Medieval World of 
Game of Thrones. London: I.B. Tauris, 2016.
Lipton, Sara. Dark Mirror: The Medieval Origins of Anti-Jewish 
Iconography. New York: Metropolitan Books, 2014.
Matthews, David. Medievalism. New York: Boydell and Brewer, 
2015.
McArthur, Colin. Brigadoon, Braveheart and the Scots: Distortions 
of Scotland in Hollywood Cinema. London: I.B. Tauris, 2003.
Miller, Mary Dockray. Public Medievalists, Racism, and Suffrage in 
the American Women’s College. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2017.
Montoya, Alicia C. Medievalist Enlightenment from Charles Perrault 
to Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Cambridge: D.S. Brewer, 2013.
Moreland, Kim Ileen. The Medievalist Impulse in American Literature: 
Twain, Adams, Fitzgerald, and Hemingway. Charlottesville: 
University of Virginia Press, 1996.
Paul, Nicholas, and Suzanne Yeager. Remembering the Crusades: 
Myth, Image, and Identity. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 2012.
Phillips, Jonathan. The Life and Legend of the Sultan Saladin. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2019.
Pugh, Tison. Queer Chivalry: The Myth of White Masculinity in 
Southern Literature. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 
2013.
Pugh, Tison, and Angela Jane Weisl. Medievalisms: Making the 
Past in the Present. London: Routledge, 2013.
Ramey, Lynn Tarte, and Tison Pugh, eds. Race, Class, and Gender 
in “Medieval” Cinema. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.
Simmons, Clare. Popular Medievalism in Romantic-Era Britain. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016.
Snyder, Louis L. The Roots of German Nationalism. Ann Arbor, 
MI: UMI Books on Demand, 1997.
Sturtevant, Paul B. The Middle Ages in Popular Imagination: Memory, 
Film, and Medievalism. London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2018.

186  /  Further Reading
Toswell, M.J. Today’s Medieval University. Kalamazoo, MI: Arc 
Humanities Press, 2017.
Utz, Richard. Medievalism: A Manifesto. Kalamazoo, MI: Arc 
Humanities Press, 2017.
Vernon, Matthew. The Black Middle Ages: Race and the Construction 
of the Middle Ages. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018.
Warren, Michelle R. Creole Medievalism: Colonial France and Joseph 
Bédier’s Middle Ages. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
2011.
Watson, Ritchie Devon, Jr. Normans and Saxons: Southern Race 
Mythology and the Intellectual History of the American Civil 
War. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2009.
Whitaker, Cord J. Black Metaphors: Modern Racism/Medieval 
Race-Thinking. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 
2019.
Wollenberg, Daniel. Medieval Imagery in Today’s Politics. Leeds: 
Arc Humanities Press, 2019.
Young, Helen. “‘It’s the Middle Ages, Yo!’ Race, Neo/medievalisms, 
and the World of Dragon Age.” The Year’s Work in Medievalism 
27 (2012): 2–9.
———. Race and Popular Fantasy Literature: Habits of Whiteness. 
New York: Routledge, 2016.

187
Figures indicated by page numbers in italics
Index
A
Abraham Ibn Ezra, 76
acadamia, against white supremacy, 
92–95
Æthelflæd, 23
Afrofuturism, 158–59
Aglin, Andrew, 108
Ahmed, Saladin
Throne of the Crescent  
Moon, 158
Al-Andalus, 27, 47, 51, 73,  
76–77, 101
Albertus Magnus, 17–18, 99–100
Albrecht of Achen, 73
allegory, 145
Allenby, Edmund, 61–62
Almohad movement, 76
Altheim, Franz, 169n12
alt-right, 41, 67, 91–92
Alþing, 19–20
American Civil War, 4. See also 
United States of America
Anderson, Benedict, 30
“Anglo-Saxon” identity, 35, 49, 50
anti-Muslim bigotry. See under 
Muslims
antisemitism. See under Jews
Arabic language, 142
aristocracy, 97–99. See also 
chivalry
Armstrong, Karen, 128
Arthurian legends
British nationalism and, 29, 
35–37
chivalry in, 105
colonialism and, 5
complementary gender roles 
and, 109
“Fair Unknown” romance in, 98
male vulnerability in, 118–19
Nazis and, 57
racial and religious diversity in, 
27, 78, 96
women and popularization of, 23
Arts and Crafts movement, 154
Ásatrú (neo-pagan religion), 141
asexuality, 122
Assad, Hafaz al-, 64
Augustine (saint)
On Christian Doctrine, 144
Augustus Caesar, 1–2, 5
authoritarianism, 45
Avicenna, 17
B
Baghdad, 27, 75
Bannon, Steve, 68
Bartholomaeus Anglicus, 99
Battani, al-, 147
Bayeaux Tapestry, 3
Bede, 96
Beinart, Peter, 67
Bel Inconnu (“Fair Unknown” 
romances), 98
Bennett, Judith, 103
Bible and biblical literalism, 128, 
142–43, 144–45
Biblical Patriarchy movement, 
129–32
Bin Laden, Osama, 65–66
Biondo, Flavio, 10
The Birth of a Nation (film), 85

188  /  Index
Bissonnette, Alexandre, 53, 54
Black, Derek, 94–95
Black Death, 13, 72
Blank Panther (film), 158–59
blood libel conspiracy theory, 72
Bloomfield, Morton W., 92
Boccaccio, Giovanni
Decameron, 13, 148, 162n7
Bolsonaro, Jair, 45
Bowers, Robert, 53, 54, 57
Braveheart (film), 38–39
Brazil, 45
Breivik, Anders Behring, 53
Brexit, 40–41
Britain. See United Kingdom
Brown, William Wells, 81
Bruni, Leonardo, 10
Brutus, 29, 30, 36
Buchanan, Pat, 69
Bush, George W., 65, 137
Bussi, Giovanni, 10–11
C
caliphate, 46, 127. See also ISIS
Cathars, 73, 147
Catherine of Siena, 23, 117
Catholic Church. See Roman 
Catholic Church
Chahine, Youssef, 64
Chakraborty, S.A.
Daevabad Trilogy, 158
Chambliss, Saxby, 114
Charlottesville (VA)
“Unite the Right” rally, 88, 89, 
95, 141
chastity belt, 116
Chaucer, Geoffrey
Canterbury Tales, 21, 72,  
106, 148
The Legend of Good Women, 97
Chazan, Robert, 75–76
China, 47, 97, 117
chivalry, 104–7
Catholic extremism and, 135–36
complementary gender roles 
and, 107–8
medieval conception of, 104–6
modern conception of, 104, 
106–7
Chrétien de Troyes
Cligès, 100, 119
Erec and Enide, 100
Lancelot, 105
Christians
Bible and biblical literalism, 
128, 142–43, 144–45
Biblical Patriarchy movement, 
129–32
Catholic extremism, 132–36
Christian supremacy, 67–68, 
134–35, 136
civilizational conservatism and, 
68–69
complementary gender roles 
and, 109
conversion via amalgamation, 32
diversity within, 21, 146
gender identities and, 124–25
ISIS, responses to, 139–40
religious violence and, 79
sexuality and, 147–48
witch trials and, 9
women and, 23, 147
See also religion
Christine de Pizan, 117
The Book of the City of Ladies, 
24, 96–97
Chronicle of Hainault, 19
Church, Mike, 135
Church Militant, 133–34
civilizational conservatism, 67–70
The Clansman (Dixon), 84–85
clash of civilizations theory,  
64–65, 67
class, 97–99, 105, 116, 121
Clegg, Nick, 127
colonialism, 5, 16, 30, 37, 137
Columbus, Christopher, 16, 29

Index  /  189
complementary gender roles, 
107–12
Biblical Patriarchy movement, 
129–32
chivalry and, 107–8
definition, 108–9
Evangelical Christians and, 109
LGBTQ+ people and, 111–12
Nazis and white supremacists 
on, 108
revisionist history and, 110–11
Confederate States of America, 4, 5.  
See also Ku Klux Klan
cosmopolitanism, 46–48
Coulombe, Charles A., 135
Courtly Love movement, 23
Crusades rhetoric, 60–64
Catholic extremism and, 133, 134
civilizational conservatism  
and, 68
vs. historical reality of Crusades, 
72–73, 74–75
ISIS and, 136–37, 139–40
Palestine conflict in WWI and, 
61–62
in pro-war propaganda, 60
Saladin and Middle East, 62–64
September 11 attacks and war 
on terror, 65–67, 139–40
Curtis, Peter “Theo,” 137–38
D
Dante Alighieri, 21, 145
Inferno, 77
Darby, Seward, 91
D’Arcens, Louise, 93
Dark Ages, use of term, 7, 11. 
See also medieval period
Dark Enlightenment, 89–90
De Coniuge non Ducenda  
(poem), 120
Der Ring des Nibelungen (Wagner), 
33–35, 48
Deus Vult. See Crusades rhetoric
DeVos, Betsy, 132
divine right of kings, 18–19
Dixon, Thomas
The Clansman, 84–85
Dragon Age Origins (game), 158
Duke, David, 87, 94
Dungeons and Dragons (game), 157
Durbin, Dick, 42–43, 165n19
E
Earnest, John T., 70
Eco, Umberto, 9, 12
Edward I (king of England), 71
Edward II (king of England), 24
Edward III (king of England), 40
Egypt, 64
Eldredge, John, 109
Eleanor of Aquitaine, 23, 116
Eliezer bar Nathan
Persecutions of 1096, 73
Elliott, Andrew B.R., 93
Encyclopedia of Pleasure, 122, 123
England. See United Kingdom
English Defence League (EDL), 30, 
40–41
Erdoğan, Recep Tayyip, 45
Ertugrul (TV show), 45
Eschenbach, Wolfram von. See 
Wolfram von Eschenbach
Ethiopia, 47, 159
Evangelical Christians
Biblical Patriarchy movement 
and, 129–32
civilizational conservatism and, 
68–69
complementary gender roles 
and, 109
See also Christians
exploration, global, 15, 16, 30
F
fabliaux genre, 148
“Fair Unknown” romances (Bel 
Inconnu), 98

190  /  Index
fairy tales and folklore, 32–33, 
58–59
fantasy genre medievalisms, 103, 
157–60
Farage, Nigel, 40
fascism. See Nazi Germany
Ferdinand (king of Spain), 77
Ferguson, Niall, 67
feudalism, 20
Finke, Laurie A., 57, 92–93
Fischer, Bryan, 69
flat-earth story, 16
folklore and fairy tales, 32–33, 
58–59
Forrest, Nathan Bedford, 84
Fourth Lateran Council, 71
France, 30
G
Gabriele, Matthew, 93
Game of Thrones (TV show), 14, 
47, 81, 103, 112–13, 114
Gaveston, Piers, 24
gender and sexuality, 103–25
introduction, 103–4
asexuality, 122
Biblical Patriarchy movement, 
129–32
chivalry, 104–7
complementary gender roles, 
107–12
gender identities, 24–25, 104, 
123–25
male roles, 115–16
male vulnerability, 118–19
medieval frankness about, 148–49
religion and, 147–48
same-sex relationships, 24, 104, 
122–23
sexual assault and rape culture, 
112–15
sexual orientation, 121
stereotypes and role reversals, 
119–21
white women and white 
supremacy, 90–92
women and Christianity, 23, 147
women in medieval period, 
22–24, 116–18
See also sexual assault and rape 
culture
Genovese, Eugene D., 92
geographical determinism, 99–100
George (saint), 40–41
Germany
Der Ring des Nibelungen 
(Wagner), 33–35, 48
Grimm Brothers and fairy tales, 
32–33
Nazis and, 5–6, 55–59
Gibbon, Edward, 127
Gibson, Mel, 38, 39
Gilbert, Vivian
The Romance of the Last 
Crusade, 61–62
globalism, 46
Goebbels, Joseph, 108
Gourand, Henri, 62–63
Great Britain. See Great Britain
great replacement theory, 88–89
Greece, ancient, 11, 31, 121
Griffith, D.W.
The Birth of a Nation (film), 
85, 86
grimdark fantasy, 103. See also 
fantasy genre medievalisms
Grimm Brothers, 32–33
Guan Daosheng, 117
Gunasekhar
Rudhramadevi (film), 158
Gutenberg, Johannes, 15
H
Hadrian, 96
Hakam II, al- (caliph of Cordoba), 24
Haredim, 128–29
Harris, DeAndre, 89
Haykel, Bernard, 128

Index  /  191
Hebrew language, 142
Henry Tudor (king of England), 36
Henry VIII (king of England), 36
Heyer, Heather, 89
Hildegard of Bingen, 18, 117, 147
Himmler, Heinrich, 57, 58, 59
Hindu Nationalists, 140
Historical European Martial Arts 
(HEMA), 152, 156
history, misuse of, 2–6
Hitler, Adolf, 56, 81, 108
Holy Roman Empire, 20, 96
Hrostvitha of Gandersheim, 24
Huarui, Madame, 117
humanists, Italian, 10–11
Huntington, Samuel P., 64–65, 67
Hussein, Saddam, 64
hygiene, 14, 119–20
I
Iberia, medieval, 51, 77. See also 
Al-Andalus
Ibn Sa’īd al-Maghribī
“Black Horse with White 
Chest,” 101
Ibn Sārah of Santarem
“Pool with Turtles,” 74–75
Iceland, 19–20, 21
immigrants. See xenophobia
India, 37, 140
individuality, 21–22
Inquisition, 9, 77, 79, 134
Internet, and white supremacy, 70, 
88–89
Isabella (queen of Spain), 77
ISIS, 136–40
Crusades rhetoric and, 136–37, 
139–40
medievalism and, 127–28, 
137–38
sexual assault and rape culture, 
138–39
Islam and Islamophobia.  
See Muslims
Italian humanists, 10–11
Italy, 20
J
Jacques of Avenses, 19
Japan, 117
Jeffries, Hakeem, 42–43, 165n19
Jews
approach to, 70–71
blood libel conspiracy theory, 72
civilizational conservatives on, 
68–69
interpretation of scriptures, 
143–44
languages used by, 142
in medieval period, 71–72, 73, 
75–77
Nazis against, 55–57
persecution since medieval 
period, 79
as race, 56
science and, 147
ultra-Orthodox Judaism, 
128–29
white supremacists’ 
antisemitism, 53–55, 57, 70
jihad, 66
Joan of Arc, 23, 30, 125
John of Wallingford, 119–20
Jórunn Skáldmær, 117
Judah ibn Tibbon, 76
Julian marriage laws, 1–2
Julian of Norwich, 23, 117
Julius Caesar, 99
K
Kamenetsky, Christa, 58–59
Kassia, 117
Kempe, Margery, 122
Khan, Genghis, 97
Khosrovidukht, 117
Khwarizmi, al-, 147
Kim, Dorothy, 93
Kingdom (TV show), 158

192  /  Index
The King of Tars (poem), 101
Komnene, Anna, 116
Kramer, Heinrich
Malleus Maleficarum, 9–10
Kuang, R.F.
The Poppy War, 158
Ku Klux Klan, 82–88
chivalry and, 84–85, 105
context for, 83–83
first iteration of, 83–84
Nazis and, 81
second iteration of, 84–87
third (contemporary) iteration of, 
87–88
United Daughters of the 
Confederacy and, 5, 90–91
Kusimba, Chapurukha, 46
L
Lancelot-Grail (romance), 105–6
Landrieu, Mitch, 5
Langland, William, 21
Lanval (Marie de France), 117, 122
Laylā bint T. arīf, 117
LEGO, 111
Leighton, Edmund
The Accolade, 110, 110–11
Le Pen, Marine, 30
LGBTQ+ people, 121–25
asexuality, 122
complementary gender roles 
and, 111–12
gender identities, 24–25, 104, 
123–25
historical evidence for, 121
same-sex relationships, 24, 104, 
122–23
life expectancy, 12–13
Linnard, Anders, 156
literacy, 18
Livy, 1
Li Yi, 117
Lokteff, Lana, 92
Lomuto, Sierra, 93
The Lord of the Rings (Tolkien), 
98, 135–36, 157
Lost Cause narrative, 4
Lubna of Córdoba, 117
Luther, Martin, 15, 79, 143
M
Magi, 96
Maimonides, 76, 147
Maker Movement, 155
Malleus Maleficarum, 9–10
Malory, Sir Thomas
Le Morte d’Arthur, 78, 98, 105, 
106, 118
Mandeville, John
The Booke of John Mandeville, 
16, 72, 77
Marco Polo, 47, 97
Marie de Champagne, 23
Marie de France, 23, 116–17
Lanval, 117, 122
Marinos (saint), 24, 125
martial arts, 156
Martin, George R.R.
A Song of Ice and Fire series, 
103, 112–13, 114
See also Game of Thrones (TV 
show)
Matilda (empress), 23, 116
Maurice (saint), 96
McKay, Brett, 107–8
McNallen, Stephen, 141
medicine, 17, 23
medievalism, definition, 11–12. 
See also gender and sexuality; 
nationalism; religious 
extremism; white supremacy
medieval period
approach to, 8, 12, 151, 160
asexuality, 122
chivalry, 104–6
cosmopolitan nature of, 46–48
crafts and recreations of, 
154–57

Index  /  193
Crusades, historical reality of, 
72–73, 74–75
cultural diversity during, 49–51
fantasy medievalisms, 157–60
gender identities, 24–25, 104, 
123–25
hygiene, 14, 119–20
individuality during, 21–22
intellectual accomplishments, 
15–18
invention of, 10–11
Jews in, 71–72, 73, 75–77
life expectancy, 12–13
medicine, 17, 23
medieval as insult, 14–15
misunderstandings and misuse 
of, 6–7
Muslims in, 51, 71, 72–73, 
74–75, 77–78
myths about, 12–28
plagues, 13–14, 72
playing within, 152–53
political systems, 18–20
racial diversity, 25–26, 27, 
95–97, 101–2
racism rooted in, 97–101
relevance of, 27–28
religious diversity and interfaith 
relations, 20–21, 26–27, 
75–79, 146–47
same-sex relationships, 24, 104, 
122–23
science, 17–18, 147
sexuality, 147–49
war, 13
women, 22–24, 116–18, 147
men
in medieval period, 115–16
sexual assault of, 114–15, 
118–19
vulnerability of, 118–19
Menocal, María Rosa, 53
Metcalf, Thomas R., 37
Michitsuna no Haha, 117
Middle Ages. See medieval period
Middle East. See Crusades rhetoric; 
Islam
Middle English language, 50
midwives, 23, 117, 148
misogyny, 34–35, 44–45, 103. 
See also sexual assault and 
rape culture
Miyashiro, Adam, 93
Mongol Empire, 47, 97
Monty Python and the Quest for 
the Holy Grail (film), 14
Moriaen (Dutch romance), 96
Morris, William, 154
Murasaki Shikibu
The Tale of Genji, 23, 117
Muslims
approach to, 70–71
Catholic extremism, anti-
Muslim bigotry by, 132–33, 
134–35
contemporary Islamophobia, 
53–55
Hindu Nationalists, anti-
Muslim bigotry by, 140
Jews and, 75–76
medievalism and, 137–38
in medieval literature, 27, 78, 96
in medieval period, 51, 71, 
72–73, 74–75, 77–78
religious violence since medieval 
period, 79
science and, 147
Wahhabism (Islamic 
Fundamentalism), 129
See also Crusades rhetoric; ISIS
N
Nance, Malcolm, 69–70
Nasser, Gamal, 64
nationalism, 29–51
introduction, 29–30
authoritarianism and, 45
Brazil, 45

194  /  Index
Brexit, 40–41
vs. cosmopolitan medieval 
period, 46–48
England and Arthurian legends, 
29, 35–37
France, 30
myth of cultural and ethnic 
purity, 49–51
Romantic Revival and, 31–35
Russia, 30, 44–45
Scotland and Braveheart, 37–39
Turkey, 45
US and medievalisms, 29, 41–44
Nazi Germany, 55–59
antisemitism, 55–57
complementary gender roles 
and, 108
contemporary influences of, 
57, 59
folklore and, 58–59
inspiration from Ku Klux Klan, 
81
medievalism appropriated by, 
5–6, 55, 57–58
neo-Nazis, 69, 88–89. See also alt-
right; white supremacy
nobility, 97–99. See also chivalry
Norman Conquest, 3, 40, 50
Normandy, 48
Norse gods, 21, 123. See also Vikings
Norse pagan movements, 140–42
Novik, Naomi
Spinning Silver, 158
Nyong’o, Lupita, 151
O
Obama, Barack, 49
Odinism, 141
Olga of Kiev, 23
Order of the Garter, 40
Ortega y Gasset, José, 31
Ottoman Empire, 45, 61, 62, 63, 79
Outlander (TV show), 39
P
Pachá, Paulo, 45
pagan movements, neo-, 140–42
Palestine, 61–62
Parzival (Wolfram von 
Eschenbach), 96, 100
Paul (apostle), 123
Pearce, Joseph, 136
Pelagians, 147
Pence, Mike, 132
Perry, David, 93
Philip II (king of France), 71
Philip IV (king of France), 71–72
Pinkerton, James, 66
Pizan, Christine de. See Christine 
de Pizan
plagues, 13–14, 72
political systems, 18–20
Pompeo, Mike, 132
Porete, Marguerite, 21, 117
Prajapati, Sanjay, 140
printing press, 15
Protestant Reformation, 15, 16. 
See also Christians
Proud Boys, 88
The Public Medievalist  
(magazine), 93
Pugin, A.W.N., 154–55
Punch (magazine), 61, 62
purity culture, 131–32
Putin, Vladimir, 30, 44–45, 69
Q
queer people. See LGBTQ+ people
Qur’an, 128, 142, 144
R
racial diversity, 25–26, 27, 
95–97, 101–2. See also 
Jews; Muslims
racism, 97–101
belief in ability to change race, 
100–1
development of, 101
nationalism (continued)

Index  /  195
geographical determinism and, 
99–100
medieval aristocracy and, 97–99
religious belief and, 100
See also white supremacy
Rai, Champat, 140
Rainey, Joseph, 83
Rambaran-Olm, Mary, 93
rape. See sexual assault and rape 
culture
Raymond d’Aguilers, 74
Raziya (sultana of Delhi), 23
Reagan, Ronald, 43, 165n21
religion
diversity within, 20–21, 26–27, 
146–47
gender identities and, 124–25
interfaith relations, 75–79
racism and, 100
science and, 147
sexuality and, 147–48
violence within, 79
women and, 23, 147
See also Christians; Jews; 
Muslims
religious extremism, 127–49
Biblical Patriarchy movement, 
129–32
fundamentalism as modern 
phenomenon, 128–29
Hindu Nationalists, 140
ISIS, 127–28, 136–40
literalist movements, 128, 
142–45
vs. medieval religious 
experiences, 146–49
pagan movements, 140–42
in Roman Catholic Church, 
132–36
Renaissance, 9, 11, 15–16, 21,  
31, 79
Revels, Hiram Rhodes, 83
Richard Coer de Lyon (romance), 74
Robertson, Phil, 68
Robin Hood legend, 19, 21, 109
Roman Catholic Church
British cultural diversity and, 50
conversion via amalgamation, 32
extremism in modern, 132–36
political role, 30
witch trials and, 9
women and, 23, 147
See also Christians
romance (medieval genre), 97–98
The Romance of the Rose, 24
Roman Empire
amalgamation by, 31–32
conquest of Britain, 49
geographical determinism and, 99
Julian marriage laws, 1–2, 5
origin stories and nationalism, 
3, 29, 30
Renaissance inspiration from, 
11, 31
sexuality in, 121
Romantic Revival, 31–35
Der Ring des Nibelungen 
(Wagner), 33–35, 48
Grimm Brothers and fairy tales, 
32–33
inspiration from medieval 
period, 31–32
Romney, Mitt, 49
Romulus and Remus, 3, 29
Roof, Dylann, 87
Russia, 23, 30, 41, 44–45, 69
Rykener, John, 24–25
S
Sacrobosco, Johannes de
De Sphaera Mundi, 16
Saladin, 62–64, 78
Salmon, Andy, 39
same-sex relationships, 24, 104, 
122–23. See also LGBTQ+ 
people
Samuel HaNagid, 76
Santiago de Compostela, 26

196  /  Index
Saslow, Eli, 94–95
Schumer, Chuck, 43
science, 17–18, 147
Scotland, 37–39
Scott, Walter
Ivanhoe, 82, 107
The Talisman, 63
Scottish Nationalist Party (SNP), 
38, 39
September 11 attacks, 65–66
sexism, 34, 54, 90, 135, 157
sexual assault and rape culture, 
112–15
Biblical Patriarchy movement 
and, 131–32
Game of Thrones (TV show), 
103, 112–13, 114
ISIS, 138–39
medieval period as  
justification, 115
of men, 114–15, 118–19
in US, 113–14
sexuality. See gender and sexuality
Shafram, Avri, 129
Shichtman, Martin B., 57, 92–93
Shirome, 117
Sicily, 48
Silence (romance), 25, 98, 123–25
slavery, 4, 92, 116, 139
Slaves of the Immaculate Heart of 
Mary, 133, 135
Sleeping Beauty and the Five 
Questions (instructional 
CD), 110–11, 111
Smaragdus of Alexandria, 125
soap, 14
social progress, 83
Society for Creative Anachronism 
(SCA), 152, 156
Soldiers of Odin, 88
A Song of Ice and Fire (Martin), 
103, 112–13, 114. See also 
Game of Thrones (TV show)
Southern Baptist Church, 128
Southern Poverty Law Center 
(SPLC), 87, 132
Spain, 77. See also Al-Andalus
Spencer, Richard, 69
Star Wars, 98–99
Stephenson, Matthew, 94–95
Stern, Alexandra Minna, 92
Sultan of Babylon (romance), 78
superheroes, 98, 158–60
Sutton, Goodloe, 87
T
Tarrant, Brenton, 53, 54
Templars, 54, 88. See also Crusades 
rhetoric
Tennyson, Alfred, Lord
“The Coming of Arthur,” 37
terrorism
Bin Laden, and war on, 65–66
by Bissonnette, 53, 54
by Bowers, 53, 54, 57
by Breivik, 53
by Earnest, 70
by Ku Klux Klan, 83–84,  
86–87
by Roof, 87
by Tarrant, 53, 54
Theodora of Alexandria, 125
Thirteenth Warrior (film), 46–47
Thor: Ragnarok (film), 159–60
Tolkien, J.R.R.
The Lord of the Rings, 98, 
135–36, 157
Torchbearer (documentary), 68
transgender people. See LGBTQ+ 
people
Trota of Salerno, 23, 117
Troyes, Chrétien de. See Chrétien 
de Troyes
Trump, Donald J., 29, 41–43, 44, 
53, 69, 72
Turkey, 45
Twain, Mark, 82, 105
Twelfth-Century Renaissance, 17

Index  /  197
U
Ulayya bint al-Mahdī, 117
United Daughters of the 
Confederacy, 5, 90–91
United Kingdom
Brexit, 40–41
colonialism by, 5, 30, 37
cultural diversity, 49–51
medieval political system,  
19, 20
nationalism and Arthurian 
legends, 29, 35–37
United Kingdom Independence 
Party (UKIP), 40, 164n14
United States of America
Biblical Patriarchy movement, 
129–32
civilizational conservatism, 
67–70
Civil War and confederate 
monuments, 4, 5
Ku Klux Klan, 81, 82–88
nationalism and medievalism, 
29, 41–44
Russian interference in 2016 
election, 69
sexual assault in, 113–14
white women and white 
supremacy, 90–92
“Unite the Right” rally 
(Charlottesville, VA), 88, 89, 
95, 141
universities, 17
Usāma Ibn Munqidh, 74
V
Valkyries, 91–92
Vernon, Matthew, 93, 159
video games, 11, 158
Vikings, 14, 26, 48–49, 50, 116, 
119–20
Vision Family Forum, 110–11, 130
Vladimir the Great, 30, 44
Voris, Michael, 134
W
Wagner, Richard
Der Ring des Nibelungen, 
33–35, 48
Nazis and, 35, 55
Wahhabism, 129
Wallace, William, 38, 109
Wang Qinghui, 117
war
American Civil War, 4, 5
Crusades imagery and, 60
misconceptions about, 13
Palestine conflict in WWI, 
61–62
war on terror, 65–67, 139–40
WWII, 5–6, 60
Wesleyan College, 91
white nationalism, 40–41, 42, 
69–70, 88–89, 141
white supremacy, 81–102
introduction, 81–82
academics against, 92–95
civilizational conservatism and, 
67–70
clash of civilizations theory, 
64–65, 67
complementary gender roles 
and, 108
in early twentieth century, 
59–60
gender stereotypes and, 121
Internet and, 88–90
Ku Klux Klan, 81, 82–88
medievalism and, 53–55
vs. medieval racial diversity, 
25–26, 27, 95–97, 101–2
Nazis, 5–6, 55–59
Norse paganism and, 141
roots of modern racism,  
97–101
white women and, 90–92
Whittaker, Cord, 93
William of Newburgh, 73
William the Conqueror, 3, 50

198  /  Index
Wilson, Randy, 131
Winter, Evan
Rage of Dragons, 158
witch trials, 9–10, 147, 161n2  
(ch. 1)
Withers, Linette, 155–56
Wolfram von Eschenbach
Parzival, 96, 100
Wollenberg, Daniel, 93
Wolves of Vinland, 88, 141
women. See gender and  
sexuality
Wood, Graeme, 128
X
xenophobia, 14–15, 44–45, 53–54, 
70, 88–89
Xue Tao, 117
Y
Yde et Olive (chivalric story), 25
Yiddish, 142
Young, Helen, 93, 157
Yu Xuanji, 117
Z
Zarquali, al-, 147

