
©2015 O’Reilly Media, Inc. The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. #15306
“	Velocity is the most 	 	
	valuable conference I have 
	ever brought my team to. 	
	For every person I took 	 	
	
	this year, I now have three 	 	
	who want to go next year.”
		 	
   —Chris King, VP Operations, SpringCM
Join business technology leaders, 
engineers, product managers,  
system administrators, and developers  
at the O’Reilly Velocity Conference.  
You’ll learn from the experts—and  
each other—about the strategies,  
tools, and technologies that are  
building and supporting successful,  
real-time businesses. 
Santa Clara, CA
May 27–29, 2015
http://oreil.ly/SC15

Dave Zwieback
DevOps Hiring

DevOps Hiring
by Dave Zwieback
Copyright © 2014 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://my.safaribooksonline.com). For
more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-9938
or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Mike Loukides
April 2014:
First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition:
2014-04-07: First release
2014-04-09: Second release
2015-03-24: Third release
Nutshell Handbook, the Nutshell Handbook logo, and the O’Reilly logo are registered
trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their prod‐
ucts are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and
O’Reilly Media, Inc., was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been
printed in caps or initial caps.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher
and authors assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting
from the use of the information contained herein.
ISBN: 978-1-449-37002-2
[LSI]

Table of Contents
DevOps Hiring. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
DevOps Hiring Versus Hiring DevOps                                            1
Hello, <name>                                                                                      2
Recruiting: A Broken Model                                                              3
Toward a Common Goal: A Culture of Engagement                     4
Identifying Strengths                                                                           5
Automation: Finding “Dark Pools” of Candidates                          5
Don’t Automate All the Things                                                          6
Measurement and Metrics                                                                  7
Sharing                                                                                                   8
Conclusion                                                                                            9
Acknowledgments                                                                             10
iii


1. “On Hiring in a DevOps World”
DevOps Hiring
DevOps Hiring Versus Hiring DevOps
In early 2013, I gave a short talk at devopsdays in New York about
hiring in a DevOps world.1 The main point of the talk was that or‐
ganizations that have embraced DevOps needed people who would
naturally resist organizational silos. One way to identify these rare
individuals (a.k.a. polymaths, generalists, or comb-shaped people) was
by their non-linear career paths and wide-ranging interests. I also
shared some practical suggestions for finding such people (e.g., not
on LinkedIn).
When I revisited the subject for this report, I realized that the approach
I used for recruiting DevOps people was fundamentally different from
traditional recruiting. In this paper, I describe a more effective model
for finding, hiring, and retaining non-commodity talent in ultra-
competitive markets—DevOps hiring. This holistic approach to re‐
cruiting is based on core DevOps principles and can be used to hire
for in-demand positions in any part of an organization. It’s based on
my personal experience with implementing DevOps hiring at a quickly
growing software company in New York City.
Before delving into DevOps hiring and its benefits, let’s briefly review
current recruiting practices.
1

2. “the recruiter honeypot”
3. “the best recruiters — followup”; “Shit recruiters say”
4. “Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population Survey”
5. “Skills gap creating candidate shortfall”
Hello, <name>
My name is [REDACTED NAME], I’m a recruiter for [REDACTED
COMPANY]. I came across your profile and I’d like to speak with you
regarding an exciting opportunity with [REDACTED COMPANY]!
They currently have a need for a DevOps Engineer and based on your
profile, it looks to be a great fit! I would value the chance for us to
speak in detail. What is the best time and number to reach you at to
discuss this position in detail? Thanks again for your time and if you
know of anyone else that may be in need of assistance, I would love
to chat with them too.
All the best,
[REDACTED NAME]
Experienced engineers (or those pretending to be experienced engi‐
neers)2 receive emails like these on a daily basis.3 Mostly originating
on LinkedIn, these messages are spam—low-cost, impersonal, and
widely distributed without much hope of a response. (In an informal
poll of recruiters, the most optimistic estimates for the response rates
for LinkedIn emails barely reach 20%, and these estimates are usually
followed with “I haven’t measured in a while.”)
These unsolicited emails are one reason that some engineers have de‐
leted their LinkedIn profiles. More important, the emails betray a re‐
cruiting business model that shares more with selling counterfeit sil‐
denafil citrate than finding the perfect role for a perfect candidate.
This approach is also unsustainable given the current state of the IT
job market. As of the first quarter of 2013, the unemployment rate in
IT-related fields in the US dropped to 3%,4 even falling below 2%5 for
software developers and other in-demand roles—well below the 4%
level that is considered “full employment.” This is excellent news for
experienced IT professionals, who can expect both a wider range of
opportunities and better compensation. However, it presents a real
challenge for hiring managers, many of whom have jobs that go un‐
2 
| 
DevOps Hiring

6. “2012 Talent Shortage Survey”
filled for months or years. (In fact, about half of US employers are
having difficulty filling jobs.)6
Recruiting: A Broken Model
Hiring managers often rely on external recruiters (a.k.a. headhunters)
to improve the recruiting pipeline—a pool of qualified candidates for
a particular role. These recruiters are typically compensated by the
hiring company with a percentage of the candidate’s first-year salary
(10–30%), payable after three to six months of employment. Although
external recruiters’ incentives appear on the surface to be aligned with
the hiring managers’ (i.e., fill the job opening as quickly as possible!),
they diverge in two areas. First, external recruiters may be motivated
to either inflate the candidate’s salary to get a larger fee (which is bad
for the company), or deflate the candidate’s salary to close the deal
more quickly (which is bad for the candidate). Second, taken to the
extreme, the external recruiters’ business model favors short-term
profit over long-term outcomes—i.e., candidates who survive at the
new job just long enough for the recruiter to receive the finder’s fee
before being placed at another company shortly thereafter.
To be clear, these are not criticisms of any external recruiter personally,
but simply an observation that the current business model puts them
at odds with both the company and the candidate. It’s important to
keep these conflicts of interest in mind when working with external
recruiters, either as a candidate or as a hiring manager.
The incentives of internal recruiters (who typically work in HR de‐
partments) are more aligned with those of companies—most are con‐
cerned with the long-term success of hires well beyond the initial three
to six months. However, because they also deal with myriad regulatory
and compliance issues related to personnel, they often approach re‐
cruiting from a risk-management perspective and focus on finding
reasons for rejecting qualified candidates. Internal recruiters are also
often constrained by salary benchmarks, which can be disconnected
from the value that the candidate brings to the company.
As a result, the candidate, recruiters, and hiring manager typically find
themselves in silos, with distinct goals:
DevOps Hiring 
| 
3

7. Corporate Leadership Council, Driving Performance and Retention Through Em‐
ployee Engagement, 2004
8. “The New Bill of Rights for All Students”
Candidate
External recruiter
Internal recruiter/HR
Hiring manager
Maximize
salary
Maximize own revenue
(e.g., by either minimizing
or maximizing candidate
salary)
Minimize salary +
recruiting costs; match
salary benchmarks
Maintain salary parity within
the team; maximize
candidate value to the
organization
Maximize
impact
Maximize own revenue
Minimize risk
Maximize team/company
success
DevOps is at its core a cultural movement to remove unnatural and
dysfunctional silos, and its principles—the four pillars of Culture, Au‐
tomation, Measurement, and Sharing—can be applied to building a
hiring process that emphasizes a common goal for all the participants.
Toward a Common Goal: A Culture of
Engagement
The first step in breaking down the silos that keep candidates, recruit‐
ers, and hiring managers focused on divergent outcomes is identifying
a common goal. Luckily, all three groups share the desire to be—and
to employ or work with—highly productive and engaged workers. A
culture of engagement is a key component of DevOps hiring.
Employee engagement is “the extent to which employees commit to
something or someone in their organization and how hard they work
and how long they stay as a result of that commitment.”7 According to
a 2004 analysis by the Corporate Leadership Council, employee en‐
gagement accounts for about 40% of observed performance improve‐
ments. Sadly, a Gallup survey, which covered 24 million workers
worldwide, found that at most 30% of the US workforce is “actively
engaged in their work.”8
The level of employee engagement is one of the key elements that en‐
ables teams and companies to achieve both higher performance and
retention. Engagement is part of company culture, and a clear com‐
petitive advantage. Highly engaged teams operate from a deeply held
belief that each individual possesses a unique set of strengths and that
the role of management (and other members of the team) is to help
identify these strengths and support individuals in developing and
4 
| 
DevOps Hiring

9. “Hacking Culture at VelocityConf”
10. “The Research Behind StrengthsFinder 2.0”
11. “200 Million Members!
applying them every day. That is, instead of largely focusing on reme‐
diating weaknesses, high-performance organizations embrace and
emphasize their strengths and follow Jesse Robbins’ (the cofounder of
Opscode) rule to “Make More Awesome!”9
Identifying Strengths
More specifically, there are three main factors that increase employee
engagement:
• Having someone (e.g., a manager) care about employee develop‐
ment
• Employees doing what they like to do each day
• Employees doing what they’re best at every day
The last two factors are strongly related to individual strengths—peo‐
ple naturally like doing what they’re good at and are good at doing the
things they like. Both individuals and managers can use tools such as
Gallup’s StrengthsFinder to help identify and describe individual
strengths, as well as create a team’s overall strengths map. Strengths‐
Finder in particular is based on a 40-year study of human strengths,10
and while it does not directly measure experience or technical skill, it
can quickly assess fundamental strengths in four broad categories: ex‐
ecuting, influencing, relationship building, and strategic thinking.
Automation: Finding “Dark Pools”
of Candidates
Most of the world’s recruiting pipeline currently comes from LinkedIn.
This is reflected in the fact that more than half of LinkedIn’s revenue
comes from “Talent Solutions”—a product that enables recruiters to
identify and contact candidates. As of early 2013, LinkedIn had
reached over 200 million members (74 million in the US),11 which
certainly makes it the largest “professional” social network. However,
compare this number with Facebook’s 1.1 billion monthly active
DevOps Hiring 
| 
5

12. http://tcrn.ch/1gvnXHs
13. “Twitter Now the Fastest Growing Social Platform in the World”
users12 or Twitter’s 288 million monthly active users13 to get a sense of
magnitude for a valuable pool of candidates that is missing form Link‐
edIn, and therefore from most recruiters’ view. There are also smaller,
more focused social networks (e.g., Hacker News or GitHub) whose
populations are likely underrepresented on LinkedIn. Being able to
identify candidates outside LinkedIn—in the “dark pools” of candi‐
dates—is a competitive advantage.
Although searching these dark pools still requires considerable man‐
ual effort, there are several services, such as TalentBin, Entelo, and
Gild), that collect and organize information from multiple sources
(e.g., blogs, Twitter, GitHub, Quora, etc.) in order to present a fuller
picture of potential candidates and to identify candidates who are not
on LinkedIn.
One of the most powerful methods of identifying qualified candidates
is through employees’ immediate personal and professional networks.
Many companies offer referral bonuses, and increasing the amount of
such incentives (e.g., to $10,000 or more) often results in quickly filling
even the most hard-to-fill openings. However, depending on the types
or amount of open positions, personal networks may be insufficient
or become depleted. Encouraging all team members (not just hiring
managers) to expand their professional networks—for example, by
making it a stated goal for all team members to speak to at least 10
engineers about the company per year—is an effective way to increase
the pool of qualified candidates.
Finally, presenting at conferences, hosting meetups, blogging, or con‐
tributing to open source projects are all effective methods for both
increasing your team or company’s visibility for potential candidates
and identifying dark pools of candidates.
Don’t Automate All the Things
While people may join a company because they are excited by the
challenges, identify with the company mission, or are enticed by com‐
pany benefits and perks, how long they will stay and how productive
they’ll be is directly related to the level of their engagement. As we’ve
seen above, employee engagement is primarily a reflection of the qual‐
6 
| 
DevOps Hiring

14. “People leave managers, not companies”
ity of management and the strength of the person’s relationship with
his manager.
It’s a well-known saying that “people leave [bad] managers, not com‐
panies,”14 but it’s also true that people join (and stay at) companies
because of great managers. Great managers excel at engaging both
their current and prospective employees. That is, engagement starts
well before the person is hired, and the candidate’s first interaction
with the company is crucial. An email direct from the hiring manager
that not only introduces the company and the role but also refers to a
candidate’s blog or social media posting, contributions to open source
software, or participation in specific meetups and that details how the
candidate’s apparent skills and interests would be applied and how her
career might progress over the next three to five years is a great first
step in establishing a long-term relationship with the candidate.
Conducting candidate research and crafting such highly personalized
emails is time consuming, but it will be significantly more effective
then any automated or non-personalized message. In fact, during my
search for experienced systems engineers, I have achieved a response
rate of 96% (n = 72). In contrast, the traditional recruiter approach
(i.e., LinkedIn searches and job board postings) produced no viable
candidates in over six months. In addition, by investing in preliminary
research, I reached out only to the people who I thought would be a
great fit for the role. To even get the same number of responses, a
typical recruiter would have to spam almost 350 candidates on Link‐
edIn (assuming the overly optimistic 20% response rate).
Measurement and Metrics
Another key DevOps attribute that can be applied to hiring is the em‐
phasis on measurement and metrics. Recruiters and hiring managers
typically track the number of prospective candidates “in the pipeline,”
the length of time from first contact to hiring decision, how long po‐
sitions stay open, the ratios of interviewees to hires, and so on. These
metrics are attractive in part because they’re limited in scope, easy to
measure, and relatively easy to influence. They’re also at best proxies
for important business metrics (e.g., profitability), and at worst, can
be used through incorrect analyses to establish illusory causation or
correlation. For example, measuring the response rate to the initial
DevOps Hiring 
| 
7

15. Harter, James K., Frank L. Schmidt, and Theodore L. Hayes. “Business-unit-level re‐
lationship between employee satisfaction, employee engagement, and business out‐
comes: A meta-analysis.” Journal of Applied Psychology 87, no. 2 (April 2002): 268-279,
doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.87.2.268.
email from the hiring manager may be interesting, but does improving
the response rate actually result in hiring better-qualified people faster
—or, more important, does it influence critical business outcomes like
customer satisfaction?
Similarly, although one of the explicit goals of DevOps hiring is opti‐
mizing for long-term employee engagement, measuring employee en‐
gagement via qualitative surveys may not be necessary. A large meta-
analysis study of 7,939 business units in 36 companies established
correlation between higher employee engagement and increased cus‐
tomer satisfaction, productivity, profit, and reduced employee turn‐
over.15 Instead of finding easy-to-influence local metrics (e.g., time to
hire) or measuring proxy metrics (e.g., employee engagement), the
DevOps approach strongly favors identifying direct, global metrics
that support optimization for the whole (e.g., productivity of the entire
organization). Directly measuring and focusing on improving these
critical business metrics helps orient the entire company toward im‐
proving the right business outcomes.
Sharing
Sharing both the successes (best practices, open source tools) and fail‐
ures (postmortems), often publically, is one of the hallmarks of the
DevOps movement. In contrast, sharing candidates between organi‐
zations is rare. Given the difficulty of finding capable candidates, and
maxims such as the “war for talent” and “talent is a competitive ad‐
vantage,” it’s not surprising that most recruiters and hiring managers
hoard candidates, even those whom they won’t be hiring.
In reality, there are many excellent reasons for hiring managers to
introduce candidates—with their permission, of course—to other or‐
ganizations: it clearly demonstrates that the hiring manager prioritizes
the candidate’s long-term fulfillment and engagement instead of short-
term need to fill a role. It also builds long-term relationships with other
hiring managers, who are likely to reciprocate the sharing.
In addition, I encourage employees to interview at other organizations
several times a year and will personally make introductions within my
8 
| 
DevOps Hiring

network. It has the same effects as above for current employees, with
the additional benefit of bringing back good ideas from other organ‐
izations. Furthermore, it is consistent with the fact that most in-
demand employees are—or should be—proactively interviewing,
even if they’re happy in their current jobs.
Despite best intentions, hiring does not always go well, or there may
be other reasons (e.g., changing business conditions) that an employee
must be let go. While employee separation is never easy, approaching
it from a perspective of maximizing employee long-term engagement
unites the employee, the hiring manager, and the recruiter (or HR)
behind a common goal. That is, once it’s clear that an employee does
not have an opportunity to achieve maximum engagement at the cur‐
rent company, everyone involved will realize that she should seek a
better “fit” elsewhere. This approach reduces (but clearly does not
eliminate) the negative feelings associated with staff reduction, and it
helps preserve the long-term relationship between the employee and
the hiring manager. It also frees the hiring manager and others at the
company to help the dismissed employee find a role where her en‐
gagement would be higher by introducing her within their networks.
Finally, just like service outages, hiring mistakes are rich learning op‐
portunities, which are best uncovered by conducting in-depth, blame‐
less postmortems with all those involved in the hiring decision and
sharing the results as widely as possible.
Conclusion
DevOps is an effective method for eliminating unnecessary silos with‐
in organizations. Traditional recruiting approaches fail to identify and
prioritize a common, long-term goal for the candidate, the recruiter,
and the hiring manger. DevOps hiring addresses this by emphasizing
a common goal (employee engagement) and further applying the core
DevOps components of Culture, Automation, Measurement, and
Sharing to recruiting. Although DevOps hiring is almost certainly re‐
quired to identify qualified IT candidates for organizations who’ve
embraced the DevOps philosophy, it can also be effective at finding
candidates in any competitive field.
DevOps Hiring 
| 
9

Acknowledgments
The author is deeply grateful to the following individuals for their
feedback and encouragement: Pete Cheslock, Patrick Debois, Gene
Kim, Kate Matsudaira, Alex Payne, Mike Rembetsy, James Turnbull,
and Elaine Wherry.
10 
| 
DevOps Hiring

About the Author
Dave Zwieback has been managing large-scale, mission-critical in‐
frastructure and teams for 17 years. He is the VP of Engineering at
Next Big Sound. He was previously the Head of Infrastructure at
Knewton, managed UNIX Engineering at D.E. Shaw and Co. and en‐
terprise monitoring tools at Morgan Stanley, and also ran an infra‐
structure architecture consultancy for seven years. Follow Dave
@mindweather or at http://mindweather.com.

