The Mind-Bending Physics 
of String Theory
Course Guidebook
Shamit Kachru
Subtopic
Physics & 
Chemistry
Topic
Science

Copyright © The Teaching Company, 2023
Printed in the United States of America
This book is in copyright. All rights reserved. 
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part 
of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into 
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means 
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), 
without the prior written permission of The Teaching Company.
4840 Westfields Boulevard, Suite 400 
Chantilly, VA 20151‑2299
USA
1-800-832-2412
www.thegreatcourses.com

i
Shamit Kachru
Shamit Kachru is a Professor of Physics at Stanford University, where he has 
also served as the chair of the Physics Department. Additionally, he is the 
director of the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Physics. He earned a PhD in 
Physics from Princeton University, and he coedited the book Strings, Branes 
and Gravity. His research focuses on string theory and quantum field theory 
as well as their application to particle physics, cosmology, and condensed 
matter physics.

ii
About Shamit Kachru .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i
1.	 What Led to String Theory? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
2.	 The Hidden Dimensions of the Universe .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.	 Strings, Branes, and the Standard Model .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.	 Oscillating Strings and Supersymmetry .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.	 How String Theory Explains Black Holes .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.	 How Strings Imply a Holographic Universe .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 60
7.	 The Origin of the Universe .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
8.	 Strings and Inflation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
9.	 The Many Avatars of String Theory  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
10.	Duality: Which String Theory Is Fundamental? .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 103
11.	 Finding Evidence for String Theory .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
12.	Emergence: Can We Test String Theory? .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 124
The Standard Model .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
Table of Contents

1
1
What Led to 
String Theory?
T
o physicists, string theory is the theory 
of everything. It’s the proposition that 
everything from light to matter—and from 
subatomic particles to the Great Pyramid of 
Giza—consists of infinitesimally small, vibrating 
strings. String theory is itself a theoretical 
rubber band that seeks to tie together Albert 
Einstein’s notions of space and time in his 
general theory of relativity with the rules 
of quantum mechanics as outlined by his 
European peers Planck, Bohr, Heisenberg, and 
Schrödinger.

1. What Led to String Theory?
2
The Standard Model of Elementary Particles
Physics has sometimes been called the queen of the sciences. It concerns 
itself with the basic laws of nature—the foundations upon which chemistry 
and biology are built. It’s also been crucial in the development of modern 
mathematics. At the heart of the physicist’s quest to understand nature is 
the attempt to reduce everything to a few simple laws from which the rest 
follow. Albert Einstein’s quest was to develop a single, unified theory capable 
of explaining all of the physical interactions that are seen in nature. String 
theory is humankind’s most ambitious attempt in this direction to date.
Like Russian nesting, or matryoshka, dolls, the components of matter get 
smaller and smaller. The ancient Greeks hypothesized that tiny, indivisible 
constituents—atoms—existed, even if they couldn’t be seen by the naked 
eye. From these tiny atoms, larger structures were assembled. So the trick to 
describing everything, as the ancient Greeks theorized, is to find fundamental 
building blocks out of which everything else is built.
High school chemistry teaches that the basic building blocks of all matter 
are the different flavors of atoms in the periodic table of the elements. 

3
1. What Led to String Theory?
These, in turn, are built from a short list of the elementary particles that were 
discovered in the early 20th century: protons with positive electrical charge and 
electrically neutral neutrons in a tight-knit nucleus, with negatively charged 
electrons orbiting the nucleus. Beginning in the 1930s, physicists built huge 
atom smashers and slowly learned that the proton and the neutron are not 
elementary. By the 1970s, it was discovered that they are composed of more 
fundamental particles, such as quarks, which carry a fractional electric charge.
Beyond the elementary electron are a pair of fatter cousins, the muon and the 
tau particle, which are identical to the electron in every way except that they 
carry a larger mass. The resulting table of elementary particles includes six 
quarks and three electron (or electron-like) leptons. In the standard model, 
three complementary neutrinos round out the leptons.

1. What Led to String Theory?
4
But why do quarks stick together in protons and 
neutrons? Why do electrons orbit the protons in the 
nucleus? And don’t forget the most familiar force of all: 
gravity. Why do things fall? Well, there is another set 
of particles: the force carriers. The photon transmits 
electric forces and light, and the gluons hold quarks 
together in the proton and hold protons and neutrons 
together in the nucleus. Finally, the massive vector 
bosons W and Z round out the picture. Their main 
role is to facilitate nuclear decay. As a real-world 
example, they are responsible for the clicks heard from 
Geiger counters used to measure radioactivity.
There are a few things to note about the standard 
model of elementary particles. First, it has a lot of 
ingredients—a list that starts to rival the periodic table 
itself in complexity! Can all this stuff really be thought 
of as “fundamental”? Second, the standard model 
of elementary particles is missing the graviton—the 
essence of what’s thought to be the most basic force: 
gravity. Why is the graviton not included in the model 
of elementary particles?
The desire to establish a basic list of building blocks in 
a theory of everything led many physicists—starting 
with Einstein—into something of a rabbit hole of grand unification theories. 
Einstein was stymied in his attempt to construct such a theory in a few ways.
First, at the time he lived, scientists simply didn’t know about some of the 
basic interactions between the existing particles or about the replicated family 
structure of similar particles in the modern standard model. In other words, 
Einstein didn’t have a good enough picture of what he was trying to explain.
As for why the standard model is missing the graviton, a highly influential 
way of understanding the behavior of matter and energy that was discovered 
in Einstein’s lifetime was a framework known as quantum mechanics. Gravity 
is thought of as only one of four fundamental forces of nature. Quantum 
mechanics describes the other three. And, as it turns out, getting gravity to 
play well with quantum mechanics is a tricky business.

5
1. What Led to String Theory?
Why is gravity special compared to the other forces? The role of gravity in the 
understanding of elementary particles is special in a few ways. First, in day-
to-day life, even at a particle collider used to study particle physics, gravity 
is so weak that it’s negligible. In the quantum realm of particle colliders, the 
electromagnetic force between two electrons is larger than their gravitational 
attraction by a factor of about 1040. For this reason, gravitational interactions 
are never probed in any interesting way in modern particle colliders.
Feynman Diagrams
There is also another special aspect to the role of gravity in the understanding 
of high-energy particle physics. The quantum interactions between subatomic 
particles are very complicated to understand, so physicists expand them in 
a series of approximations, each one depicted by a suggestive drawing of 
the interactions it represents. These are called Feynman diagrams, after the 
theoretical physicist Richard Feynman, who first demonstrated them.
For example, in a diagram illustrating the relationship of four electrons with 
one photon, the solid and wavy lines in the diagram represent the matter and 
force-carrying particles, respectively. Space runs from left to right while time 
runs upward. In this example, two electrons can scatter off one another by 
exchanging a photon. Keep in mind that the diagram’s lines and vertices are 
shorthand for precise mathematical expressions.

1. What Led to String Theory?
6
There are more involved diagrams, too. A more complete list would include 
one-loop diagrams. In this diagram, multiple electrons are exchanging a 
photon, and a virtual loop of electrons contributes to the exchange.
After decades of work, physicists today know how to evaluate these and even 
more complicated loop diagrams. And they contribute tiny—but precisely 
measurable—contributions to the understanding of electron-electron 
interaction. On the other hand, what happens with gravity? Why is the 
gravitational force between two electrons negligible?
For the case of quantum electrodynamics, the electron-electron scattering 
diagrams have various places where an electron emits or absorbs a photon. 
Each emission or absorption event, or vertex, should be sensitive to the 
electromagnetic charge of the electron. This results in a factor of the electron 
charge, e, being inserted when the diagram is translated into mathematics. 
Feynman diagrams can also be drawn where the electrons exchange gravitons 
instead of photons, and the result is profoundly different.
Newton’s law states that the strength of an object’s gravitational field depends 
on a constant—Newton’s constant—times the mass of the object. Unlike the 
electron charge, e, Newton’s constant is dimensionful: It has the dimension of 
inverse mass squared.

7
1. What Led to String Theory?
In fact, a famous mass scale built just out of fundamental constants of physics 
was discovered by Max Planck, one of the inventors of quantum mechanics. It 
is called the Planck scale, or Planck mass, in his honor. In detail, it is given by
where c is the speed of light, h is the Planck constant of quantum mechanics, 
and G is Newton’s constant.
Newton’s constant is given by the inverse square of the Planck mass. It 
therefore turns out that—to match Newton’s law—in Feynman diagrams 
modeling graviton exchange between two electrons, each vertex should be 
accompanied by a factor of the electron mass divided by the Planck mass.
Finally, Einstein also discovered that energy equals mass times the speed of 
light squared, or E = mc 2. So, in a theory obeying Einstein’s relation, the 
gravitational coupling of a particle is perhaps better thought of as being 
proportional to the particle’s energy divided by the Planck mass. So at each 
vertex in a Feynman diagram involving graviton exchange, a factor of the 
particle energy E divided by the Planck mass should be inserted:
The Planck mass is about 10−8 kilograms, roughly the weight of a grain of 
sand. Typical particle masses and energies—even at today’s biggest and most 
impressive high-energy physics colliders, such as the Large Hadron Collider at 
CERN—are many orders of magnitude below the Planck mass. This leads to 
two important facts:
1	 The gravitational Feynman diagrams contribute a quantitatively tiny 
correction (of no importance) to particle scattering in any collider 
humans have built or can imagine building.

1. What Led to String Theory?
8
2	 But if a collider of sufficiently high energy could be built, the quantum 
strength of the gravitational interactions would grow without bound. 
This is because the gravitational Feynman diagrams contain explicit 
positive factors of the particle energy E in their coupling constants.
Stated otherwise, gravity is negligible in modern quantum scattering 
experiments but incalculably strong in thought experiments about very-high-
energy physics. Technically, the theory of gravity is non-renormalizable, 
which means that there are divergences in Feynman diagram calculations that 
are hard for theorists to tame.
This dual curse led high-energy physicists to neglect the study of gravity 
for most of the 20th century. Then, in the mid-1980s, an idea that could 
potentially unveil the structure underlying the standard model and tame the 
strength of quantum gravity came to the fore.
The Beginnings of String Theory
It is now known that protons and neutrons are bound states of more-
elementary quarks. Physicists had also discovered bound states of quarks other 
than the proton and neutron. Bound configurations of two quarks are known 
as mesons. But it became a problem to explain the complicated zoo of mesons 
that had been discovered. After a complex and rich intellectual history, the 
following picture evolved.
Say you have the particular meson made out of a charm quark (one of the six 
from the table) and its antiparticle. They are secretly bound into a meson by 
exchange of gluons, which are subatomic particles 
that are believed to bind quarks together. If you 
tried to unbind the quarks with an imaginary 
tiny forceps and drag them apart, a dense sheet of 
gluons exchanged between them expands with the 
distance, forming a binding flux tube.
A typical adult human has more than 1028 electrons 
and protons in their body.

9
1. What Led to String Theory?
When the flux tube carries enough energy of its own, it can create another 
pair of quarks, which can bind with the original charmed particles. The result 
is a process where quarks remain confined inside of bound states. Importantly, 
it suggests another, rather intuitive picture of the meson. Viewed this way, the 
meson is an open string stretched between two endpoints (the two quarks in 
the meson). And the string is made of the gluon flux tube.
A flux tube can be thought of as a cylindrical space containing something 
like a magnetic field. Tension is generated by the energy in the tube, which 
can stretch and break open. It’s also natural to imagine, then, closed strings 
that circle around and rejoin themselves instead of ending on some object, 
such as a quark. So, out of the study of meson dynamics came the notion of 
string theory, with open and closed strings as the possible level of structure 
underlying strong interactions.

1. What Led to String Theory?
10
Allowing for the possibility that the gluon flux tubes themselves vibrate and 
wiggle themselves leads to a spectrum of excited mesons. An experimenter 
could use this string model to try to match the phenomenology of mesons 
actually discovered in nature.
During the mid-1970s, another theory—the theory called quantum 
chromodynamics, which is now known to describe the strong interaction 
between quarks connected by gluons—came along to supplant the string 
model. But then an amazing fact was discovered by the French theoretical 
physicist Joël Scherk and the American physicist John Schwarz at the 
California Institute of Technology.
They found that if they included the closed-string loops in addition to 
the open-string mesons, the lowest energy state in the resulting system 
would describe a particle with all of the properties normally ascribed to 
a graviton. Out of a partially successful attempt to describe the rather 
messy phenomenology of mesons, instead a theory developed of possible 
fundamental constituents whose first prediction is that there should be 
gravitons (and quantum gravity) in the world it describes.
The first miracle of string theory isn’t just that it gives rise to a graviton. The 
real miracle is that the string theory analogue of Feynman diagrams—with a 
string replacing the point particle traversing loops in the Feynman diagram—
is manifestly finite. There are no infinities.

11
1. What Led to String Theory?
The singular vertices of the Feynman diagrams are smoothed out. The 
scattered string states are now joined together in a completely smooth 
diagram. In the full quantum theory, this absence of singular vertices 
translates to a finiteness property for the string scattering calculations, 
smoothing out the divergences of naive quantum Einstein gravity.
In intuitive terms, the size of the string is finite, with a string length of 
approximately 100 times the Planck length in common versions of string 
theory—and an associated energy scale. The would-be high-energy divergences 
of quantum gravity get cut off as the energy approaches the string scale. The 
result is a new class of theories of gravity that enjoy nice properties. These 
reduce to agreement with Einstein’s theory when the energies are low compared 
to the Planck scale or when the distances are large compared to the Planck 
length. But they manifest new phenomena at high energy or short distance in 
such a way as to cure the more obvious pathologies of Einstein gravity.
Two Provisos of String Theory
It’s important to mention two provisos. The first is that while string theory 
provides possible sensible theories of quantum gravity, there is no direct 
experimental evidence that string theory is relevant to the world. The nature 
of indirect evidence could be debated. Still, string theory does present an 
interesting theoretical structure that extends the current framework for 
understanding physics.
Second, string theory predicts that there are extra dimensions of space. If you 
think of the plane as representing the familiar three spatial dimensions of 
length, width, and height/depth, then above each point of this familiar space 
is a hidden dimension. It can be shown as a circle. If the circle is small enough, 
you wouldn’t be able to notice it in everyday life—but it would still be there.

1. What Led to String Theory?
12
String theory enriches this picture in a few ways. For one thing, it requires 
many hidden dimensions, not just one. String theory typically predicts the 
existence of 10 space-time dimensions.
How does the theoretical existence of six extra dimensions (in addition to the 
three spatial dimensions plus time) affect anything? These other dimensions 
must be small enough to avoid daily notice. But even so, their existence 
has important implications for subjects ranging from particle physics to 
cosmology to black-hole physics in string theory.
Consider this in the context of particle physics. Suppose you want to make a 
table of the elementary particles that string theory predicts. How would the 
existence of extra dimensions matter?
Imagine a loop of string living in a world with an extra spatial circle. The 
string could make use of the circle in several ways. Most prosaically, it could 
ignore the extra dimensions and just wiggle around or oscillate in the big 
dimensions. Also, it could move with some velocity—either in space or 
around the tiny circle. And there is a qualitatively new thing it can do with 
the circle that it can’t do in three Euclidean dimensions: It can wind.
Just as a rubber band can encircle a door handle any number of times, the 
string has an integer number characterizing how it winds the extra circle. 
This is a simple example in a field of mathematics known as topology, which 
examines geometric properties and spatial relations under such conditions as 
stretching, twisting, crumpling, and bending. Roughly, the strings detect the 
topology of a space in a way that point particles that have no size, shape, or 
structure cannot.
Topology can also give rise to new elementary particles by giving qualitatively 
different string states that are not wiggling around with string-scale energy. 
For instance, in a world with two compact dimensions, you could imagine 
a sphere, a torus, a double torus, and so forth. In these examples, g denotes 
the number of handles, or genus, of the two-dimensional space. There are no 
interesting ways for a string to wind a sphere (the g = 0 case).

13
1. What Led to String Theory?
On the other hand, on the g = 1 surface, known as a torus, or hollow donut, 
there are two integer numbers characterizing the number of times the string 
winds either around the donut hole or around the circular cross section. At 
g = 2, the number of relevant quantum numbers characterizing winding 
strings is 4, and simple induction tells you that there will be 2g such numbers 
for a genus g surface.
Each of these winding numbers corresponds to a conserved quantum number 
in string theory. It is not an exaggeration to say that each is like an electric 
charge the string can carry. Only winding states of string carry the charge. 
And just as the electron is stable because it is the lightest charged particle in 
nature, in string theory the lightest winding mode on a given kind of loop in 
the extra dimensions will be stable.
Reading
Greene, B. The Elegant Universe. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2003.

14
2
The Hidden 
Dimensions of 
the Universe
T
his lecture further explores the notion that 
string theory predicts the existence of 
extra spatial dimensions. The lecture describes 
a surprising fact about strings on a circle and 
introduces some more general geometries that 
are of interest as possible shapes of the hidden 
dimensions. It also returns to the concept of 
open strings and asks where they are in the 
theory.

15
2. The Hidden Dimensions of the Universe
An Extra Dimension Compactified on a Circle
In the simplest case, string theory’s extra dimensions are curled up on a circle 
of radius R. Consider the spectrum of elementary particles in such a theory. 
Each type of elementary particle is just a reflection of an underlying string 
state, where you cannot see with the resolving power needed to resolve the 
tiny string inside the lump of energy.
There are three ways to excite a basic loop of string:
1	 It can move with some momentum. This is like a ball you’ve thrown.
2	 It can oscillate. This is what happens when you pluck a violin string.
3	 It can wind. This is like what you can do with a rubber band on your 
finger, wrapping it many times, more and more tightly.

2. The Hidden Dimensions of the Universe
16
How does each of these processes contribute to the energy of the resulting 
string (or the mass of the particle it represents)?
1	 In addition to motion in the usual spatial dimensions, consider 
momentum around the extra spatial circle of radius R. How does the 
fact that this space is a circle affect things? In quantum mechanics, 
particles—or strings—are represented by wave functions, which let 
you compute the probability that a particle is in a given place at a 
given time. When you consider a wave function of an object on a circle 
instead of in flat space, you need to make sure that the function is 
well defined on the circle. That means when you shift the location all 
the way around the circle, the wave function must come back to the 
same value. This basic mathematics translates in quantum mechanics 
to a statement that the momentum going around the circle has to 
be quantized in units of 1 divided by the circle’s radius, R. The term 
quantized means it can only be an integer multiple of 1/R. Therefore, the 
states carrying momentum around the circle have a momentum and 
carry an energy that goes like 1/R.
2	 On a string of tension set by the string scale, the oscillator modes cost 
an energy given by an integer multiple of the string mass (or the inverse 
string length). That’s independent of R. You should imagine the strings 
as being very tense, so it costs a lot of energy to make them oscillate. The 
oscillator modes would correspond to very massive elementary particles.
3	 If you wind a string of fixed tension around a circle of radius R, the 
energy cost will be the tension times the distance the string traverses. 
Since the distance around a circle of radius R (the circumference) is 
2πR, this gives an energy that is an integer multiple of 2πR in the 
appropriate string units.
Notice that the momentum and winding modes have energies that depend 
suggestively in a precisely inverse way on the radius R. It suggests that there 
may be a duality in string theory where R and 1/R get exchanged and somehow 
strings on a small circle are identical to strings on a very large circle. Note that 
since point particle theories do not have the winding excitations of type 3 in the 
previous list, you can’t wind a point particle on a circle any more than you can 
wind a bead on your finger, so particle theories can’t enjoy such a relationship.

17
2. The Hidden Dimensions of the Universe
The equivalence of two naively distinct physical theories is called a duality, 
and this particular duality—between strings on a circle of radius R and 
strings on a circle of radius 1/R—is called T-duality.
Possible Vacuum Solutions with Six 
Compact Extra Dimensions
So far, you’ve considered extra dimensions in the special case where there is 
one extra dimension compactified on a circle. While this is an interesting 
and instructive case, it is only a toy model, or simplified model, for the more 
general case. What is a more general case?
Assume for now that you’re looking for vacuum (meaning there is nothing 
in it) solutions of the theory—solutions in the absence of any strings or 
particles or energy sources or anything else. Under this assumption, it is 
possible to argue that the equations of motion of string theory require that the 
compact dimensions satisfy the Einstein equations of general relativity, at least 
if the dimensions are big enough. More precisely, if the extra dimensions have 
a size R, then up to corrections in a 1/R expansion, they satisfy the vacuum 
Einstein equations.

2. The Hidden Dimensions of the Universe
18
In Einstein’s theory of gravity, the instantaneous Newtonian force between 
two separated point particles is replaced with a more nuanced notion of 
gravity. In Einstein’s theory, a particle of a given energy creates a curvature, or 
bending of space, proportional to its energy. Other particles then respond to 
its presence by moving in the straightest possible paths, or geodesics, on the 
curved space.
So here, the earth’s closed orbit around the sun can be viewed as a result of 
the straightest-possible motion in a curved geometry, caused by distortion 
from the sun’s enormous mass-energy. Rephrasing this more precisely, in a 
problem in Newton’s mechanics where you study the earth-sun system, the 
basic quantity you keep track of—the dynamical data—is the position of 
the earth relative to the sun. In Einstein’s theory of gravity, instead, the basic 
dynamical data is a metric on space-time. This metric is a function that gives 
the distance between any two points of the space.
A space with a given topology (like Euclidean space) can admit many different 
metrics. Topology is a coarser notion than geometry; the same topology of 
space can have many different distance functions defined on it. Einstein’s 
theory picks out metrics that have special properties, satisfying Einstein’s 
equations. The curvature is one property of such a metric. The basic fact 
that mass or energy sources cause curvature in Einstein gravity also says the 
converse: In the absence of sources, there should be no curvature.
So, the possible vacuum solutions of string theory with six compact extra 
dimensions should be in correspondence with six-dimensional spaces, often 
called manifolds, that admit a metric (or distance function) with vanishing 
curvature.
Curvature comes with different precise measures. A favorite in this context 
is the Ricci curvature, named after 19th-century Italian mathematician 
Gregorio Ricci-Curbastro. Because spaces with vanishing curvature are called 
flat, Ricci-flat six-dimensional manifolds are what you’re after.
It is presently beyond reach to produce a list of all the possible Ricci-flat 
six-dimensional manifolds. At this stage, another simplification will be 
introduced to the already-very-simplified picture. The theories will be 
required to be very symmetric—in fact, supersymmetric.

19
2. The Hidden Dimensions of the Universe
Supersymmetry
Supersymmetry is a way of introducing a spherical-cow model of particle 
physics. For physicists, a spherical-cow model is a model that abstracts away 
certain complications to get at the essence of a phenomenon. 
For instance, in a model launching a cow from a catapult, 
perhaps the most important features of the cow can 
be abstracted into its basic size (a radius) and mass, 
yielding a possible spherical model of a cow.
For the physics you’re after, you don’t need a fully 
realistic model of the world. This is good, because 
you’re not going to get one. A simplification akin 
to the spherical cow is to assume that there 
is a symmetry in the theory known as 
supersymmetry.
What is supersymmetry? First, in quantum 
theories of elementary particles, there are two types of particles: bosons and 
fermions. Bosons are like familiar classical billiard balls: You can have as 
many identical bosons as you want, and they are easy to clump. Fermions, 
on the other hand, are purely quantum beasts. They obey the Pauli exclusion 
principle: Each fermion must occupy a unique quantum state. This rule—
together with the existence of electron spin, a purely quantum phenomenon—
leads to the structure of orbitals of the chemical elements.

2. The Hidden Dimensions of the Universe
20
Importantly, nature has some fundamental particles that are of each type: 
The quarks and leptons are fermions, while the force-carrying particles and 
the Higgs particle are bosons. In terms of the spin quantum number, which 
measures a purely quantum angular momentum of elementary particles, 
bosons have integer spin, while fermions have half-odd-integer spin.
In a supersymmetric world, things are stranger. Each boson has a corresponding 
fermion with exactly the same properties (apart from spin), so they differ in 
their boson/fermion nature. This is not true of the real world. There is no 
bosonic particle like the electron. But you can imagine a world where this 
were true. Such a world is supersymmetric. Supersymmetry is a symmetry that 
extends space-time symmetries like rotation and translations to include a Bose-
Fermi reflection symmetry.
Because this is not true of the real world, the picture in any realistic model 
would have to have a slightly broken supersymmetric “fun house mirror” 
reflecting bosons into fermions. The particles and their reflection through 

21
2. The Hidden Dimensions of the Universe
the supersymmetry transformation aren’t exactly the same in the picture, or 
in nature. They would have to exactly match in any supersymmetric theory 
of nature. For this reason, it is said that if supersymmetry exists, it is a broken 
symmetry.
Theories with unbroken supersymmetry provide beautiful spherical-cow 
models of fundamental physics. This adds one more condition to the 
extradimensional string theory setting. For now, supersymmetric solutions of 
string theory will be considered.
More on the Vacuum Solutions of String Theory
With the addition of supersymmetry to the list of assumptions, there is a 
lot more to say about vacuum solutions of string theory. In fact, assuming 
supersymmetry, the solutions are given by a class of spaces called Calabi-Yau 
manifolds. Eugenio Calabi conjectured in the 1950s that spaces satisfying 
a mild topological condition should admit a Ricci-flat metric and solve 
Einstein’s equations. Shing-Tung Yau proved this while he was at Stanford 
more than 20 years later.
Because the condition Calabi placed on the spaces that bear his name is 
a mild topological one, it is easy to find ways to solve it. In fact, simple 
polynomial equations in many variables are implicitly known to give rise to 
solutions. On the other hand, the proof Yau gave of Calabi’s conjecture is 
implicit, which means that while he knows that the Ricci-flat metric solving 
Einstein’s equations exists on these spaces, he cannot write down the solution.
Finding such Calabi-Yau metrics remains a major challenge in geometry and 
string theory, though there have been significant steps using both analytical 
ideas and numerical methods.
So, string theory predicts the existence of extra dimensions. Under the 
spherical-cow assumption of supersymmetry, the vacuum solutions for such 
dimensions are in correspondence with a class of spaces mathematicians call 
six-dimensional Calabi-Yau spaces. And a mild topological condition suffices 
to determine whether a given space is in fact Calabi-Yau.

2. The Hidden Dimensions of the Universe
22
This simple specification of the data underlying a vacuum solution of string 
theory means that it is easy to write down examples. In fact, there are at least 
500 million topologically distinct examples of such spaces.
So, hundreds of millions of solutions of string theory can be written down 
(implicitly). Each such solution corresponds to a different shape of the extra 
dimensions. Because of the different ways that strings can move in the 
internal dimensions on each shape, the detailed four-dimensional physics 
that arises from string theory is very 
different in distinct Calabi-Yau 
compactifications.
This means that string 
theory gives rise to a range of 
supersymmetric, spherical-cow 
toy models of low-energy 
particle physics. The bumps 
and wiggles in the extra 
dimensions will turn out to 
be of significant physical 
importance in different 
constructions. But there 
is one more qualitative 
ingredient you need to 
understand before moving in 
this direction.
In a theory in the normal three dimensions of space, you can consider many 
types of objects. There are point particles (with no size or structure), but you 
can also imagine strings—like a network of cosmic strings stretching across a 
model universe. Finally, you can imagine membranes: objects with a two-
dimensional surface that can lie flat like a sheet of paper or fluctuate into 
curved two-dimensional shapes.
In 10 dimensions, there are many more possibilities. In addition to points, 
lines, and planes, you can imagine p-dimensional objects, called p-branes, 
which have p spatial dimensions and exist for all time. Joseph Polchinski 
CALABI-YAU MANIFOLD

23
2. The Hidden Dimensions of the Universe
proved in the mid-1990s that 
string theory contains, among its 
excitations, such p-branes for all 
values of p < 10. (For larger values 
of p, it is impossible to fit them 
into the 10-dimensional space-
time.) But Polchinski’s p-branes, 
called Dp-branes for technical 
reasons, have a special additional 
property: Strings can break open 
and end on them. Dp-branes are 
the potential endpoints of strings. 
For instance, here you can see an 
open string stretching between 
two separated 2-branes.
What Lives on a Dp-Brane?
Now you have all of the ingredients you need to start doing some basic physics 
in string theory. You have extra dimensions, with a potentially rich geometry. 
You have closed strings, whose excitations include the graviton, giving rise 
to Einstein gravity. And you have Dp-branes, whose physics includes open 
strings that stretch between a brane and itself or other branes.
There is one last question to answer before you can move on to the physics 
of strings, branes, and extra dimensions: What lives on a Dp-brane? This 
question can be explained more clearly as follows. The case of a D2-brane, 
the p = 2 case of a Dp-brane, can be used for illustration purposes since 
membranes are familiar and exist even in three-dimensional space.
Consider, then, a simple example of a membrane: an infinite straight sheet 
of paper. In what ways can the sheet of paper move? The basic motion it can 
perform (if, say, it lies along the xy plane in space) is to move transversely; 
at a given point on the xy plane, the sheet can fluctuate up or down in the z 
direction.

2. The Hidden Dimensions of the Universe
24
You can think of this possible excitation as parametrized by a scalar field that 
associates a number—the change in the z value of the location of the sheet of 
paper—to each point on the xy plane. You could say that there is a scalar field 
that lives on the membrane, parametrizing its transverse fluctuations.
A familiar example of a scalar field in the real world is the temperature—to 
any point of space you can associate a number, the local temperature. A more 
fundamental example is the Higgs field, which takes a numerical value at each 
point in space. Similarly, the fluctuations in the z location of a membrane 
living on the xy plane give a number for each point on the membrane, and 
hence a scalar field.
Now consider a Dp-brane in string theory. Since it is a p-spatial-dimensional 
object living in 9 spatial dimensions, it will have 9p transverse spatial 
dimensions. As in the thought experiment with a sheet of paper, it will then 
have 9p scalar fields living on its world volume; that is, there is a p-plus-one-
dimensional theory with scalar fields living on the D-brane (the generic term 
for a Dp-brane of any p).
Scalars are conventional classical objects, such as the location in the 
z direction of a sheet of paper. But in a supersymmetric theory, each 
scalar comes with a fermion superpartner. So, on the Dp-branes, in a 
supersymmetric version of string theory, there will also be 9p fermion 
superpartners for the 9p scalar degrees of freedom just described.
Finally, though it doesn’t follow from the qualitative logic just used, Dp-
branes also have force-carrying particles living on their worldvolumes. In the 
simplest case, these particles are analogues of photons.
There is an alternative, more formal way to derive the spectrum of excitations 
of a Dp-brane. Instead of reasoning indirectly as before, the theory of open 
strings that can end on the D-brane can be quantized, much as the open 
string stretching between the two quarks in a meson can be quantized.
The simplest string theories have oriented strings (with an arrow of 
orientation along the line segment giving the string’s spatial slice). One end of 
the string carries a +1 charge under the photon of the brane it ends on. The 
other end carries a −1 charge. The result is that strings between a brane and 

25
2. The Hidden Dimensions of the Universe
itself are electrically neutral (under its photon), because the charges of the two 
ends cancel. But for strings stretching between distinct branes, you end up 
with a particle charged under each of the two photons of the brane theories. 
The rules for extending this logic to stacks of more than two branes involve 
more sophisticated concepts.
The ingredients that have been described can now be mixed and matched. 
In a general string model with Dp-branes present and six dimensions 
compactified on a Calabi-Yau manifold, you might encounter the following 
kind of situation: Just as a rubber band can wrap your finger and a string 
can wind around a circle, a Dp-brane could wrap around p-minus-three 
dimensions of a Calabi-Yau space, leaving its three spatial dimensions 
coincident with the usual (non-compact) three dimensions.
The degrees of freedom that live on this Dp-brane would then live everywhere 
in the observable dimensions. For all intents and purposes, they would appear 
as elementary particles in the world. The force-carrying particles such as 
photons on the Dp-brane could become literal photons in the three-plus-one-
dimensional physics that you see.
Reading
Yau, Shing-Tung, and Steve Nadis. The Shape of Inner Space. New York: Basic 
Books, 2010.

26
3
Strings, Branes, and 
the Standard Model
T
his lecture builds on the picture developed 
in the first few lectures to figure out 
how something like the standard model of 
elementary particles might emerge in the 
framework of string theory. To do this, you 
will first need to develop a slightly better 
understanding of how the standard model of 
particle physics works. Then, you will be able to 
sketch how such a thing might arise.

27
3. Strings, Branes, and the Standard Model
More on Extra Dimensions of Space
You learned some surprising things in the first few lectures. One is that 
modern theories posit that there are extra dimensions of space. The oldest 
such idea (dating to the 1920s) was that maybe space-time is five-dimensional, 
with four dimensions of space and one of time. The extra spatial dimension 
(beyond front/back, up/down, left/right) could live on a circle so small it can’t 
be seen. Explorations of such a theory led to interesting ideas for unifying 
electromagnetism and gravity, but in the end, the framework was not useful 
for making contact with experiments. In fact, it is highly constrained by 
existing data.
In string theory, a modified version of this idea is revived—on steroids! 
The picture you were left with after lecture 2 was that a string world is 
10-dimensional, with nine dimensions of space and one of time. Six of these 
dimensions are curled up on a Calabi-Yau manifold. The theory also has 
objects called Dp-branes: p-dimensional extended objects on which strings 
can break open to end as open strings.
The particles or fields living on a D-brane can be obtained by quantizing the 
open strings that can end there. They give rise to scalar fields that correspond 
to possible fluctuations of the brane position in space-time. If you recall that 
the simplest theories you focus on are supersymmetric, then there are also 
fermion superpartners for these scalar fields. And, importantly, force-carrying 
particles like the photon are also found.
Analogues of electric charges live at the ends of the open 
string, with a positive charge at one end and a negative 
charge at the other. The string is oriented, carrying a 
little arrow. So a string with two ends on one brane gives 
something that is electrically neutral (not charged under 
that brane’s photon). In contrast, a string stretching 
between two distinct branes gives a particle charged under 
the photons living on both branes (with opposite signs and 
charges).
This basic framework will be used to build toy models of 
particle physics. If this is the goal, you should first know 
what the current model of particle physics is.

3. Strings, Branes, and the Standard Model
28
The Standard Model in More Detail
As the table of particles shows, the particles come in two different types:
1	 There are force carriers for the fundamental forces (other than gravity): 
the strong and weak nuclear interactions as well as electromagnetism.
2	 There are charged particles that participate variously in the interactions 
depending on their charges. For instance, just as the neutron is 
electrically neutral, the leptons are neutral to the strong force, and force 
carriers of one force do not carry charge under the others. Quarks do. 
The charged particles are divided into quarks and leptons, depending 
on whether they feel the strong nuclear force. 
If you look in detail at how each particle experiences the various forces, there 
is a weird triplicate structure. For instance, the up (u), charm (c), and top (t) 
quarks feel all forces similarly—as do the electron, muon, and tau lepton. 
It is said that there are three generations of elementary particles, and each 
generation is like a copy of the others, as far as the forces are concerned.

29
3. Strings, Branes, and the Standard Model
This is a good first take on what the standard model of elementary particles 
is. To make further progress, you have to dig more into the details of force-
carrying particles, charges, and so forth. To do this, the notion of a group has 
to be introduced.
A group is a mathematical object. It is a set with various elements and a law 
for composing those elements (i.e., taking two of the elements to produce a 
third). The groups that arise in physics have elements that are symmetries of 
real or abstract spaces.
A simple example of a group is the rotation group. Consider the Euclidean 
plane. You are free to rotate the plane through an angle theta (θ). Each point 
on the plane, except the origin, will move, but the plane as a whole comes 
back to itself after rotation. It is said that rotation through any angle theta 
is a symmetry of the plane. The rotations of the plane form a group. Given 
a rotation through an angle theta and another through an angle phi (ϕ), you 
can imagine composing them. The result is a rotation through an angle θ + ϕ. 
So, given two elements of the group, a third can be produced. This is the 
promised composition law for group elements. And this particular group is 
called U(1).

3. Strings, Branes, and the Standard Model
30
Now, the surprise: The abstract mathematics of groups and symmetries is 
intimately tied to the way the standard model of particle physics is discussed. 
In fact, each of the fundamental forces of particle physics is in correspondence 
with a group of symmetries, with the force-carrying particles being in one-
to-one correspondence with group elements that (taken together) generate the 
whole group through their compositions.
Each of the charged particle species is labeled by just a few numbers, then. 
One is the particle mass. Another is the spin: the intrinsic quantum angular 
momentum carried by each particle. Bosons have integral spin, while fermions 
have half-odd-integral spin.
But also, for each of the forces that exists, each particle carries internal 
quantum numbers. In a quantum-mechanical world, particles are represented 
by quantum wave functions. These internal quantum numbers indicate how 
that particle’s wave function lives in the abstract internal space that is rotated 
by the group of symmetries corresponding to the force-carrying particles.
Formally, it can be said that to each force is associated a group G, and to each 
particle is associated a representation of G—a label indicating how the G 
rotations act on the internal degrees of freedom of the particle is also associated.
This offers a compact recipe for how to specify a model of particle physics. 
You specify a collection of groups G1, G2, and so forth, corresponding to the 
force-generating particles. And you specify a collection of representations 
of these groups, each to be attached to a given species of elementary matter 
particle.
To make this concrete: In the standard 
model, the electron is a spin-1/2 particle that is 
charged under electromagnetism. The group 
associated to electromagnetism is U(1), and the 
representation of the electron can be said to be 
−1 in the following sense: Under an abstract 
rotation of the plane that U(1) acts on by an 
angle θ, the electron wave function rotates by 
an angle −θ. A positively charged particle, like 
the proton, would instead rotate by an angle +θ.

31
3. Strings, Branes, and the Standard Model
The other forces correspond to other groups. Just as you can consider 
rotations of the plane, giving the group U(1), you can consider rotations 
of other abstract, higher-dimensional spaces. It turns out that the groups 
corresponding to the weak and strong interactions can roughly be thought 
of as subsets of the possible rotations that could act on two or three complex 
dimensions.
These are harder to picture than the U(1) rotations of the plane. In any case, 
those relevant rotation groups are called SU(2) and SU(3) for the weak and 
strong interactions, respectively. The result is that physicists sometimes say the 
standard model is based on the group SU(3) × SU(2) × U(1).
A Caricature of the Standard Model
You’ve learned how groups are associated with forces in the standard model 
and how particles are really just representations of those groups. Now you are 
prepared to discover how a caricature of the standard model might emerge in 
string theory.
The first ingredient is that the 10-dimensional string theory must be 
compactified to four dimensions. This is accomplished through Calabi-Yau 
compactification, described in the previous lecture.
The second ingredient is that D-branes that fill the three-dimensional 
space on internal subspaces of the Calabi-Yau manifold must be wrapped. 
For instance, you could imagine D3-branes sitting at points on the 
compactification manifold and filling space-time. In this way, the particles 
and forces living on all the D-brane worldvolumes become the particles and 
forces evident in the world.
You can try to geometrize the groups and representations of the standard 
model in terms of D-branes (maybe wrapping parts of the Calabi-Yau) and 
open strings stretching between them. To do this properly, you need to learn 
several facts about D-branes, starting with ones you already learned: A single 
Dp-brane has a U(1) force living on its worldvolume. Open strings with one 
end on the Dp-brane give rise to particles charged under this U(1).

3. Strings, Branes, and the Standard Model
32
But what if you take multiple coincident branes instead? For instance, 
consider three D-branes that are parallel to one another. How do you think 
about the physics on these things as they approach one another and become 
coincident? Well, an open string ending on one D-brane gets one complex 
degree of freedom that rotates under the U(1) force on that brane. When you 
have an open string ending on three coincident D-branes, it stands to reason 
that its endpoint has three complex internal degrees of freedom.
These can naturally be acted on by a rotation in three-dimensional complex 
space, and the result is that there is a natural SU(3) group arising on the 
three parallel branes. (In fact, the group is the slightly different U(3), which 
contains an extra factor of U(1); this subtlety will matter.) So, the three 
parallel branes naturally have the force-carrying particles of the group SU(3) 
living on them. You can get toy models of “quark flavors” charged under this 
toy strong interaction from endpoints of open strings on this brane stack.

33
3. Strings, Branes, and the Standard Model
Similar reasoning shows that with a stack of just two branes, you could 
naturally find an emergent SU(2) with appropriate representations for the 
standard model particles. (Again, it is really U(2), and the additional U(1) 
factor will matter.)
More generally, a stack of N branes would give rise to a U(N) gauge 
symmetry. The fact that you can try to identify the simplest cases that happen 
when N = 2 or 3 with groups that occur in the standard model is just a happy 
coincidence.
But in trying to examine a possible construction of the standard model from 
branes, you encounter a puzzle: Open strings only have two ends. If you tried 
to make the standard model on stacks (respectively) of three D3-branes, two 
D3-branes, and one D3-brane, giving the SU(3) × SU(2) × U(1) symmetries 
you want, because open strings only have two ends, you could never write 
down particles charged under all three groups. No open string could have 
one end on each of the three brane stacks. But the standard model does 
have particles—such as the up quark—that interact with the force-carrying 
particles of all the forces.
This is where the subtlety of the extra U(1) factors that are present on 
two– and three–D-brane stacks enter in a useful way. Including these extra 
U(1) factors, there are in fact three different U(1) rotations in the problem. 
By taking an appropriate combination of these three rotation groups to be 
identified with the U(1) of the standard model, you can indeed arrange 
that the different sorts of open strings give the desired quark and lepton 
representations.
There are also extra particles not seen in nature yet that arise in the brane 
construction. These can be given a large mass and decoupled from the low-
energy physics (but they would be seen at future colliders).
There is one last qualitative feature of the standard model that should be 
reproduced in this kind of Tinkertoy™ picture with D-branes: the possibility 
of finding multiple copies of particles with basically the same quantum 
numbers. This is like the triplication of the electron in the muon and tau or 
the three generations of quarks. How are you to get multiple copies of light 
particles charged under the force-carrying particles of different brane stacks?

3. Strings, Branes, and the Standard Model
34
This is where the geometry of the extra dimensions can enter to help. While 
all the D-branes involved in this construction need to fill the three-plus-one 
space-time dimensions, they are free to wander on different subspaces of the 
Calabi-Yau space.
Light particles from open strings that stretch between branes can only arise 
from places where the different branes are close together. After all, the energy 
of an open string is proportional to the length of the string. So only short 
strings can give light particles.
How Branes Geometrize the Higgs Mechanism
So, the standard model has a few qualitative ingredients: force-carrying 
particles associated with various groups, matter particles with appropriate 
charges, and a multiplicity of generations of particles with the same charges. 
And there are simple geometric pictures of how these features can potentially 
arise in string theory. Branes also geometrize one of the most recently 
confirmed aspects of the standard model: the Higgs mechanism.
To understand this, let’s revisit the connection 
between forces and symmetries. Consider a 
simple picture with a rotational, 
or U(1), symmetry. You can 
consider this a picture of a 
potential energy landscape 
with the ball moving on 
the potential. You can rotate 
the picture by an arbitrary angle 
around the z-axis without changing 
the picture when the ball is perched 
at the top of the hill. But once 
it rolls down to the valley—
regardless of where it lands—
this rotational symmetry is 
broken. Its position on the rim 
would change under rotation.

35
3. Strings, Branes, and the Standard Model
This is an example of spontaneous symmetry breaking. Although the 
potential function itself is symmetric, the choice of any lowest-energy state 
breaks the symmetry. In the standard model, such symmetry breaking is a 
fundamental ingredient. The symmetry being broken is not a real space-time 
symmetry like rotation invariance but an internal symmetry.
The SU(2) × U(1) symmetry combining the electromagnetic and weak 
interactions into an electroweak symmetry is broken at sufficiently low 
energies in nature to just the U(1) of electromagnetism. So a rotation 
symmetry, not in real space but in the internal space viewed by the quantum 
numbers of the elementary particles, is broken in a way analogous to the 
picture mentioned previously.
The role of the ball in the picture is played by the 
Higgs field—the field associated to the 
Higgs particle. The Higgs field 
rotates under rotations of the 
electroweak symmetry group. 
When it obtains a nonzero 
value (analogous to the 
ball rolling off the origin 
of the plane), it breaks 
the electroweak rotation 
symmetry.
Now consider a string theory setup with two nearly coincident D-branes. The 
symmetry group on each brane is U(1), so the full symmetry in the problem 
is two copies of U(1), which is written as U(1) × U(1). On the other hand, two 
coincident branes have a worldvolume symmetry group U(2) = SU(2) × U(1).
The difference between two coincident branes and two nearby but slightly 
displaced branes is a displacement of one of the branes along the axis 
separating them. This transverse motion of the D-brane is implemented 
by turning on one of the scalar fields on the brane. After all, the scalars 
parametrize the transverse position of the brane. But this motion is precisely a 
brane realization of the Higgs mechanism. As the nonzero value of the scalar 
field is turned on, the symmetry breaks. In this case, however, it is breaking 
from U(2) to U(1) × U(1) instead of from U(1) to nothing. Still, the basic idea 
is the same.

3. Strings, Branes, and the Standard Model
36
There is one important difference to the previous case, which exists because 
of supersymmetry: There is no potential function that tells the D-branes to 
separate or to be coincident. Instead, the Higgs potential for this “separation 
mode” of the branes vanishes.
There is a space of possible vacuum states parametrized by expectation values 
of this Higgs field. Such a condition is common in supersymmetric theories. 
The space of vacuum states itself is an interesting object called the moduli 
space of vacua.
In string theory, it is the geometry of what is going 
on in the extra dimensions that helps scientists 
explain facts about theoretical physics—though 
admittedly in what are toy models.
Another Intriguing Possibility
The existence of models where the standard model particles are confined to 
branes opens up another intriguing possibility. In the real world, humans 
can resolve distances beneath a millimeter with their visual acuity, and 
the best microscopes see far beneath this scale. One way or the other, this 
direct “sight” involves using electromagnetic probes—photons impinging on 
people’s eyes or the like.
Now, imagine that the photon is confined to a brane, and there is a compact 
extra dimension of space transverse to the brane. People can no longer “see” 
there using the photon; it simply is unable to move there, being confined to 
the brane. In this kind of picture, what constrains the physics of the bulk 
space off the brane? For instance, could it be meters across?

37
3. Strings, Branes, and the Standard Model
No. For one thing, gravity is not a force that is known how to localize to 
a brane. As in so many other situations in physics, gravity is the odd force 
out. Even in string theory, gravitational fields exist everywhere that there is 
space-time. This is almost tautologous, since in current thinking, gravity is 
fluctuations of the space-time geometry.
Constraints from the equivalence principle and precision gravitational tests 
can therefore constrain the size of any extra dimensions in a “brane world,” 
where the photon lives on a brane. Amazingly, the strongest constraints today 
suffice to get humans beneath—but not extremely far beneath—a millimeter 
scale for the size of the extra dimensions of space. So, while many string 
theorists would expect that any extra dimensions to be found will be at much 
smaller scales, the conceptual space opened up by brane-world models allows 
many more audacious possibilities.
Reading
Lincoln, Don. “The Standard Model: The Most Successful Theory Ever.” Fermilab 
Today, Nov. 18, 2011. https://www.fnal.gov/pub/today/archive/archive_2011/
today11-11-18_NutshellStandardModelReadMore.html.
Zee, Anthony. Fearful Symmetry. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007.

38
4
Oscillating Strings 
and Supersymmetry
T
his lecture focuses on one of the most 
intrinsically stringy things about string 
theory: the highly excited, wiggly, oscillating 
string states. Strings with no oscillations result 
in the charged particles of the standard model, 
or the graviton. But what about the highly 
excited string states that appear beneath 
them? What can be said about them? And are 
they of any use in physics?

39
4. Oscillating Strings and Supersymmetry
A Taxonomy of String States
In a typical setting in modeling nature, one usually imagines the string length 
and mass scale are a length of 10−30 centimeters and mass of about 1016 GeV. 
For reference, the mass of the proton is about 1 GeV. Since a single oscillation 
present on an excited string costs an order M in energy, only the states with no 
oscillation are relevant in modeling light particles like the electron or graviton. 
Nevertheless, this lecture will focus on excited states.
The first question in any endeavor is taxonomy. The most basic question in 
taxonomy is simply counting how much stuff there is. A familiar example 
is found in biodiversity, where animals are divided into genera, species, and 
so forth. The similar physics question to pursue is this: How many different 
string states are there of a given mass?
Probably, the basic answer to this question doesn’t depend too sensitively on 
the shape or size of the extra dimensions of space. This is because a given 
string state is presumably small. The oscillations are occurring on a very tiny 
string, so it won’t care about the global nature of the space around it—it can’t 
detect the global nature.
So, let’s count string modes in a d-dimensional space. Consider a string 
oscillating in one transverse dimension. Other than the straight ground 
state of string, there is a mode of lowest nonzero frequency as well as modes 
of higher-integer frequencies. The frequencies are quantized in units of the 
inverse length of the string. So, let’s say you have modes with frequencies 
given by 1/L, 2/L, 3/L, … , with L being the length of the string. Keep in mind 
that frequency counts number of oscillations per unit time. To get the right 
units, you should multiply these by the speed of light.
Classically, the oscillations each come with their own amplitude. You 
can pluck the lowest harmonic softly or hard. In classical mechanics, the 
amplitude squared would give the energy that the harmonic determines the 
energy it carries. Quantum mechanics changes this. As shown first by Max 
Planck and Albert Einstein, the excitations at a given frequency are quantized. 
Instead of a continuous amplitude, you get an integer number of quanta at 
that frequency.

4. Oscillating Strings and Supersymmetry
40
Roughly, the amplitude squared counts the number of such quanta. A familiar 
example of this arises in electromagnetism. The classical theory talks about 
the amplitude of an electric or magnetic field. In the quantum theory, the 
energy in the electric field is really carried by a discrete number of quanta of 
light: photons.
Similarly, in the quantum string theory, the different oscillator modes can be 
excited with different numbers of quanta. So, in specifying an excited state of 
a quantum string oscillating in one transverse dimension, you get to choose 
the frequencies at which you are exciting modes and choose the number of 
quanta present at each such frequency.
The data, then, is a set of integers: n1, n2, n3, … , with nk counting the 
number of quanta present in the kth harmonic of the quantum string.
Now, what is the question you want to answer? One straightforward question 
of relevance in physics is this: How many states are there of a given energy 
E? So, let’s search for the answer to this question. How many string states are 
there at energy E for a string oscillating in one transverse dimension?
Both the frequencies and the energy levels can be measured in units of 1/L, the 
inverse string length. So, let’s divide the 1/L and ask the following question: 
How many states have energy N in units of 1/L?
The answer is implicitly found as follows. Given the counting of quanta 
previously, a string state characterized by nk has mass squared calculated as 
the summation of knk: 
For the Nth energy level of the string, then, you get a state for each way of 
writing N as the summation of knk for nonnegative integers nk.

41
4. Oscillating Strings and Supersymmetry
This a famous problem in mathematics—the problem of counting partitions 
of an integer N. Each distinct partition writes N as a number of occurrences 
of 1, of 2, and so forth—parametrized previously by the choices of the nk.
You can easily tabulate the number of partitions of small numbers. For 
instance:
	
^ one can be written as 1,
	
^ two can be written as 2 or 1 + 1,
	
^ three can be written as 3 or 2 + 1 or 1 + 1 + 1,
	
^ four can be written as 4 or 3 + 1 or 2 + 2 or 2 + 1 + 1 or 1 + 1 + 1 + 1. 
So, there’s one partition of 1, two of 2, three of 3, and five of 4.
If you denote by P(N) = number of partitions of N into integers, then you 
can express what was just stated by writing P(1) = 1, P(2) = 2, P(3) = 3, and 
P(4) = 5. But as N gets larger, it quickly becomes unwieldy to determine P(N) 
by direct enumeration of all the ways to partition N. For instance, P(N = 100) 
is about 190 million. You wouldn’t want to try to write down all 190 million 
possibilities for partitioning 100 on a piece of paper!
The correct strategy instead is to try and determine an asymptotic formula 
that approximates P(N) well as N becomes very large. In other words, 
you want an estimate for P(N) such that the difference between the two, 
divided by P(N) itself, becomes really small as N becomes really large. Then, 
fractionally speaking, you have done well in counting partitions, finding 
almost 100% of the possibilities.
This was a central problem in number theory in the early 20th century. 
It was cracked by one of the most famous collaborations in the history of 
mathematics—that between Srinivasa Ramanujan and G. H. Hardy. This 
collaboration inspired a major motion picture starring Jeremy Irons and 
Dev Patel: The Man Who Knew Infinity.

4. Oscillating Strings and Supersymmetry
42
Ramanujan and Hardy
Srinivasa Ramanujan was an Indian mathematician, and G. H. Hardy was an 
eminent analyst at Cambridge University who invited Ramanujan to England 
and tutored him. Their singular achievement was to find a precise asymptotic 
formula for the number of partitions 
of an integer N. Their formula 
says that the number of partitions 
P(N) goes as roughly 1/N times the 
exponential of π times the square 
root of 2N/3:
The formula starts off pretty accurate even for low values. The value of N 
is shown on the x-axis, while the relative error labels the y-axis. The leading 
Hardy-Ramanujan estimate is within 5% of the correct answer for N of 100. 
It is within 0.32% by the time N reaches about 20,000. In fact, they also 
provided a series of correction terms. Including these, their formula converges 
to the more precise answer quickly even for smaller values of N.
Cambridge University was 
the historical home of Isaac 
Newton and Charles Darwin.

43
4. Oscillating Strings and Supersymmetry
The important physics here is that the growth of states is exponential with the 
mass of the string state. This exponential growth in the number of states is called 
the Hagedorn growth of the number of string states. The detailed factors of π 
and such do not matter just yet. Later, when you learn about black holes, similar 
formulas will show up. There, even the numerical factors will be important.
There is one immediate, striking consequence of this formula. It implies 
that something bizarre happens when the theory is “heated up.” To see this, 
let’s recall some basic aspects of the way that thermodynamics and statistical 
mechanics work.
To begin a detour into statistical mechanics, consider a closed system that has 
some set of possible energy states. At each energy level, there will be different 
quantum states. A fundamental postulate of statistical mechanics says that in 
a closed system in thermal equilibrium at temperature T, a state with energy E 
has a probability of occupancy given by a formula of the rough form:
prob(occupancy) ∼ exp(−E/T).
There is an overall factor in front to make sure all probabilities add up to 1; 
the system must be in some quantum state (and, in fact, in precisely one).
In a string theory, the number of quantum states at energy E grows like the 
number at E goes like the exponential of some constant times E, with c some 
calculable constant set by the string energy scale:
number(E) ∼ exp(cE).
Putting these two ideas together, since each of the string states at energy 
E has the same probability of being occupied and there are some number, 
number(E), of them, the probability that the system has in energy E grows 
like the exponential of some constant times E minus energy over temperature:
prob(energy = E) ∼ exp(cE − E/T).

4. Oscillating Strings and Supersymmetry
44
This formula has a very odd feature: At some finite value of the temperature 
where T = 1/c in the formula, the probability distribution becomes non-
normalizable. In other words, no matter what number you put in front, 
you can’t make the probabilities all add up to 1. The probability at higher 
temperatures is ever-growing at extremely high energies. This transition from 
conventional to bizarre thermodynamic behavior that occurs in string theory at 
some temperature set by the string scale is known as the Hagedorn transition.
This doesn’t happen in the textbook cases you might learn about in a physics 
class. There, you are free to heat systems to high temperatures. They might 
melt or combust or whatever else—but surely the formalism of statistical 
mechanics won’t break down. The interpretation of the Hagedorn transition 
depends on context; there are some cases where researchers have a very good 
idea what it means.
Now that you’ve learned about counting string states, let’s start adding some 
nuances to the picture. So far, you encountered free, or noninteracting, 
strings. You were able to excite them to high energy without worrying 
about the possibility that the string state might decay to lower-energy string 
states. But in interacting physical theories, on the other hand, higher-energy 
objects decay to lower-energy ones as allowed by the quantum numbers in 
the problem. For instance, the muon and tau particles will decay quickly to 
electrons in the electroweak theory. That’s why scientists have to work hard to 
produce them in particle colliders.
In string theory, the strength of string interactions controls the splitting and 
joining of strings. It is set by the value of a string coupling constant, g. A factor 
of g is associated with each split of a string into two in the fundamental “pants 
diagram” of string theory.

45
4. Oscillating Strings and Supersymmetry
In general, many of the string states that have been counted at high energy 
may be unstable states in the interacting theory with g > 0 and will decay. 
They will typically decay in a time set by the string scale—so very quickly, 
unless g, the string coupling, is very tiny. But there are crucial exceptions: 
stable states.
Stable States
To figure out which states might be stable in a given theory, it helps to 
remember the electron. The electron is a poster-child example of a particle 
that is (thought to be) exactly stable. Why? There is a simple argument. 
Scientists believe that electric charge is exactly conserved in nature—it 
can’t be created or destroyed. And the electron is the lightest particle that 
carries electric charge. Therefore, an isolated electron can’t. No possible 
decay product could both carry its electric charge and conserve energy in 
the process.
The rich surprise in string theory is that in precisely the spherical-cow 
toy models this course wants to address—string compactifications with 
supersymmetry—the electron has many, many analogues. The reason comes 
back to the supersymmetry. A supersymmetric theory can contain more than 
one supersymmetry. It may have many different symmetry reflections that 
turn different bosons into different fermions.
You can prove that in a supersymmetric theory with a sufficient number of 
supersymmetries, there is a special function Z known as the central charge. 
For a given theory, Z takes as input all possible charges of a given particle 
under the symmetries of the theory. If there are symmetries G1, G2, … , 
Gk, then it will take as input the charges q1, q2, … , qk that a hypothetical 
particle in the theory has under all those symmetries. And it provides a bound 
on the mass that any such particle could have, just based on mathematical 
considerations of supersymmetry. The bound reads something like this:
Z(q1, q2, … , qk) ≤ M.

4. Oscillating Strings and Supersymmetry
46
On the face of it, this may sound confusing and complicated. Why do you 
care about Z, and how are you to use this fact? But there is a simple route 
to use for this formula. Suppose you are studying the theory described 
previously. You identify a particle with charges q1, … , qk and want to 
know whether it is a stable state or will decay. The theory may be one where 
perturbation theory in Feynman diagrams is very complicated. It may not be 
obvious how to answer the question.
However, in a theory with central charge, you are tempted to say the 
following: If the mass M = Z, the state is stable. Such states are called BPS 
states. If M > Z, the state is (very likely to be) unstable. Both statements 
have known caveats. In the first case, the state may have a marginal decay 
to products that have energy also adding up to exactly Z and conserving the 
charges. In the second case, the state may be stable for idiosyncratic reasons 
in the given theory but generically wouldn’t be. But in general, these are very 
good rules to live by when studying supersymmetric theories. And they lead 
to a simple question that has proven immensely fruitful: Can you find and 
count the BPS states in interacting but supersymmetric string theories?
You often can, for another reason. Instead of carefully examining particle 
states one by one in a given theory, you can look for particle states in a 
supersymmetric theory that preserve some of the supersymmetry, instead 
of breaking all of it when you introduce them. It turns out that saturating 
the BPS bound (as a state with M = Z does) is equivalent to preserving some 
fraction of the supersymmetry. And while it can be hard to a priori compute 
masses of a given state, it is often easy to identify particularly symmetric 
classes of states in a quantum theory—including those that preserve some 
amount of supersymmetry.
In a string theory, it turns out that there are often many, many BPS states—
and, by extension, many, many stable charged-particle states. The reason is 
the following. Remember, you just went through the counting of string states 
at a given energy. You studied states consisting of superpositions of many 
modes with different frequencies and amplitudes (or numbers of quanta, in 
the quantum theory).

47
4. Oscillating Strings and Supersymmetry
The picture shown above—and the count that you did—is the one relevant 
for an open string. In an open string, there is no such thing as a mode that 
moves only to the left or only to the right. A wave propagating to the right 
hits the end of the string and bounces back as a left-moving wave.
But you can instead consider closed 
strings, which also oscillate with 
modes of different frequency 
and amplitude. On such a string, 
you could consider both left- and 
right-moving waves. The previous 
considerations—counting partitions 
and so forth—would apply almost 
without modification. (The only 
difference is you could do partition sums 
for both a left- and right-moving energy.)
Returning to the idea of BPS states: It turns out that 
in string theory, the supersymmetries present in space-
time can be associated with supersymmetries present in 
the worldvolume theory of the string itself. And since the string 
worldvolume has left- and right-moving modes, it stands to reason that some 
of the supersymmetries act on left movers (leaving right movers inert) and 
others act on right movers (leaving left movers inert).

4. Oscillating Strings and Supersymmetry
48
That means that there is an easy way to make exactly stable BPS states in 
supersymmetric string theories: You simply take the supersymmetric ground 
state of the string and add either left- or right-moving excitations, but not 
both. The counting of oscillator excitations and energies for chiral (purely 
left- or right-moving) modes on a closed string closely parallels that for the 
modes on a single open string. All that happens in the open string is that you 
can consider left movers to be reflected into right movers at the left boundary 
of the string, and vice versa.
So, you are going to find a Hagedorn degeneracy of BPS states when you 
study simple supersymmetric vacua of string theory. This is a far cry from the 
single stable electron protected by its electric charge.
Reading
Collins, Graham. “Quantum Black Holes Are Tied to D-Branes and Strings.” 
Physics Today 50, no. 3 (1997): 19–22.
Kanigel, Robert. The Man Who Knew Infinity. New York: Washington Square 
Press, 2013.

49
5
How String Theory 
Explains Black Holes
O
ne of the main reasons for excitement 
about string theory is that it is a consistent 
quantum theory of gravity. It’s important to 
have such a theory because there are situations 
in nature where quantum mechanics and 
gravity combine in very confusing ways. This 
lecture addresses one: the black hole.

5. How String Theory Explains Black Holes
50
Gravity and Black Holes
In lecture 2, you learned that Einstein’s theory of gravity—general 
relativity—gives a precise, mathematical description of the way in which a 
massive body “curves up” the space around it. For instance, the sun creates a 
curved spatial geometry. The orbiting earth is just moving in the straightest-
possible path in this geometry.
The sun is an object with a large but finite mass, m, about 1030 kilograms, 
trapped in a large region of space. You can think of it as a sphere with a radius 
of about 400,000 miles. It manages to curve up the space next to it pretty 
well. What would happen if you took a much more massive object of the same 
size, or maybe a much smaller object but with the same mass? Space would 
probably become even more curved up in its vicinity. Fortunately, nature has 
produced such objects.
The sun is held up (against its own attractive gravity) by nuclear reactions 
that take place deep in its core. As time passes, it will burn more and more of 
its nuclear fuel, until finally it runs out. What happens then depends a bit on 
details. For stars that weigh less than about 1.4 times the mass of the sun, it is 
believed that they collapse to form objects known as white dwarf stars. 
WHITE DWARFS LOCATED IN M4

51
5. How String Theory Explains Black Holes
These are highly quantum balls of matter that are held up by the Pauli 
exclusion principle (which says that no two electrons—or other identical 
fermions—can be in the same quantum state). The dominant constituent of 
a white dwarf is a gas of residual electrons remaining from stellar collapse. 
The Pauli repulsion that prevents all these electrons from being in the same 
quantum state (just sitting at the center of the old star) is what holds the white 
dwarf up against gravitational collapse.
For stars that weigh more than 1.4 times the mass of the sun but less than 
about 3 solar masses, a similar fate befalls them. However, the collapse is more 
dramatic, and they manage to squeeze the remaining electrons and protons 
together in the collapse process. What results is a ball of neutrons supported 
by Pauli pressure—also known as a neutron star. Both white dwarf stars 
and neutron stars have been seen in nature. These predictions of Einstein’s 
theory, together with basic quantum mechanics, have been verified. But what 
happens to stars weighing more than about 3 times a solar mass?
Their fate is to become black holes. These are objects so dense and massive 
that, starting at some distance from the object (known as the Schwarzschild 
radius), even light rays can’t escape. The sphere at this distance from the 
center of the object, the Schwarzschild radius, is known as the event horizon. 
If you cross the event horizon of a black hole, you aren’t coming back.
Explaining their curved geometry is difficult, but there is a simple Newtonian 
analogy. Earth has something called an escape velocity. If you throw up a ball 
or a rocket with velocity v, you know it has a kinetic energy (of 1/2 mv2). It also 
has a gravitational potential energy that binds it to the earth (which explains 
the gravitational attraction). If the kinetic energy is large enough, it can 
overcome its gravitational binding to the earth and escape to outer space. This 
happens all the time; it’s what NASA and SpaceX launches do.
To get this high kinetic energy, you need to crank up the velocity of the launch. 
Also, since the gravitational potential binding you to the earth is proportional 
to the earth’s mass, M, the needed velocity gets larger as you try to escape a 
more and more massive object (planet, star, or whatever). You can imagine an 
object so massive (or with such a small radius) that the escape velocity from its 
surface would actually be faster than the speed of light. In fact, it was imagined 
by John Michell, a Cambridge professor, in the late 18th century.

5. How String Theory Explains Black Holes
52
There is now overwhelming evidence that black holes do exist in nature. In 
general relativity, their structure is as shown. The event horizon is as advertised 
previously. Past the horizon, at the core of the black hole, lies a region where 
Einstein’s theory of gravity breaks down. The solution actually predicts 
diverging curvature of space. Any observer would be torn apart by the strong 
gravity long before reaching the final singularity. But once you pass the event 
horizon, your fate is sealed. You will be unavoidably drawn to the singularity.
These are very interesting objects—so interesting that, in fact, for years 
they were not taken seriously as predictions of general relativity. Although 
a black hole solution to Einstein’s theory was written down in 1915 by Karl 
Schwarzschild, it was believed to be a mathematical curiosity.
Significant numbers of people first began to take the existence of these 
objects seriously in the 1960s. That is when astronomers began to see striking 
phenomena associated with other dense, compact objects—neutron stars 
in particular. By 1973, a black hole candidate, Cygnus X-1, was identified. 
It is now widely believed to be a black hole. In addition, it is now believed 
that almost all galaxies—including our own Milky Way galaxy—host 
supermassive black holes in their centers.

53
5. How String Theory Explains Black Holes
String Theory’s Role
What does all this have to do with string theory? A role for string theory 
first emerges when theorists, fascinated by the enigmatic black holes now 
believed to exist, started to explore their formal properties in the 1970s. A 
powerful group of theorists at Cambridge and Princeton began to elucidate 
the properties of black hole solutions of Einstein’s equations. They found a 
few basic facts.
First, a black hole is completely and uniquely characterized by three numbers: 
its mass, electric charge, and angular momentum. This is called the no-hair 
theorem for black holes. It is in striking contrast to other macroscopic objects 
in daily life.
The three numbers characterizing a black hole obey a relationship: A small 
change in the mass M has to be compensated by a small change in the area A 
of the event horizon, the charge Q, and/or the angular momentum J:
dM = κdA + μdQ + ΩdJ.
Also, the area of the event horizon can only ever increase. That’s intuitive, as 
objects can enter the event horizon and increase the mass and event horizon 
radius of the black hole, but nothing can ever leave. So, dA, the change in A, 
is always positive:
dA ≥ 0.
To most people, these may seem like a complicated set of rules with no 
particular familiarity or rhyme or reason. But to physicists, these rules smack 
of another set of very famous laws: the basic laws of thermodynamics that 
govern how heat flows. The most basic version of those laws, stated in terms 
of energy E, entropy S, and temperature T are these equations:
dE = TdS  and  dS ≥ 0.

5. How String Theory Explains Black Holes
54
S, the entropy, is a measure of the disorder of the system. More precisely, it 
counts the number of different configurations the system could have while 
maintaining the same macroscopic properties.
This analogy between black holes and thermodynamics occurred to many 
people. It was written off as a peculiarity of the laws of black holes by all 
except Jacob Bekenstein, who felt that the analogy had some heft to it and 
should indicate something about black holes. His reasoning was as follows.
Consider two different states of the world: In state one, there’s a hot gas and 
a black hole. In state two, the hot gas has been thrown into the black hole, 
leaving just a black hole. In the first state, the hot gas has a lot of entropy. 
Many different states of the constituent molecules that are whizzing around 
inside the box give a gas with the same temperature, pressure, and so forth—
and so give the gas a large entropy. In the second state, the gas is just gone; 
there is only a black hole. So, has the second law of thermodynamics—which 
says that entropy always increases—been violated? The entropy of the 
universe, outside the black hole, seems to have decreased. Can the black hole 
somehow carry the entropy?
This is puzzling because the no-hair theorems suggest that black holes are 
basically unique objects. Bekenstein’s insight was to realize that just as a box 
of gas with fixed macroscopic properties can have many underlying molecular 
states, leading to an entropy, a black hole with fixed mass, charge, and angular 
momentum may have many underlying microstates. In fact, if you identify 
area of an event horizon with an entropy, then you can save the laws of 
thermodynamics. The absorbed box of gas changes the event horizon area—
by increasing the black hole mass—just enough to satisfy the second law.
Entropy Concretely
A box of hot gas has a large entropy. You can think of the entropy concretely 
as follows. The box has some very large number N that’s much greater than 1 
of molecules moving around inside it:
N ≫ 1.

55
5. How String Theory Explains Black Holes
Each can be in any of several different states of motion (for instance, with 
slightly different velocity), while the macroscopic properties of the whole 
collection could remain the same. The different individual properties of the 
molecules characterize microscopic states, or microstates, of the gas, all of 
which correspond to the same macroscopic state, or macrostate.
The entropy S is a property of the macroscopic state, and it precisely measures 
the number of distinct microstates that could explain the same macroscopic 
gas. More precisely, you can think of the entropy as the log of the number of 
microstates:
S = log(microstates).
For a box of gas, this makes sense. Gas has tiny constituents, so it’s not 
surprising that it can be characterized by a large entropy.
But what about a black hole? The black hole solution of Einstein’s field 
equations doesn’t require any knowledge of underlying microscopic 
constituents. In fact, it arises as a solution of general relativity theory without 
making any assumptions about the existence of matter particles that could 

5. How String Theory Explains Black Holes
56
make up the black hole. On the other hand, the solution is, in a basic sense, 
incomplete. It has a singularity at the center and an event horizon that leads 
to mysterious physics.
A reasonable statement would be that any more complete theory of gravity 
should provide some explicit understanding of the microstates (the analogue 
of the individual molecules and their motion) whose collective solution “looks 
like” a black hole. And there should be precisely enough microstates for a 
black hole of horizon area A to give entropy equal to A:
S = A.
Can String Theory Explain the Black Hole Entropy?
The first four lectures introduced a candidate theory underlying Einstein’s 
general relativity: string theory. A natural question is, then: Can string theory 
explain the black hole entropy? For realistic black holes in nature, this question 
remains beyond reach. Nobody knows if there is a solution of string theory 
that correctly describes the world. And, less ambitiously, nobody has sufficient 
theoretical control of string theory descriptions of the neighborhood of a realistic 
black hole to figure out whether the theory somehow captures its microstates.
Note that the second consideration is less ambitious than the first. Physicists 
might be able to locally model a realistic black hole, even if they can’t make 
a complete model of the whole universe. And that’s actually how physics has 
normally progressed. But there is no reason to despair. Let’s return to the 
philosophical tool known as the spherical cow.
The spherical-cow solutions of string theory—supersymmetric solutions—
were introduced previously. These produce imaginary worlds where bosons 
and fermions come in mirror pairs, enjoying all the same properties (except 
for their different bosonic-versus-fermionic nature). These corresponded, 
for instance, to situations where you compactify the 10 dimensions of string 
theory to a four-dimensional flat space-time, with a six-dimensional Calabi-

57
5. How String Theory Explains Black Holes
Yau above each point. Can you make spherical-cow black holes living within 
these spherical-cow toy models of string theory that you could use to explore 
the issue of black hole microstates?
Yes. The key is to realize that among the properties allowed by the black 
hole no-hair theorems is electric charge. In a supersymmetric world with 
suitable analogues of electromagnetism, you can find black hole solutions 
that are not realistic. They carry charge under various toy-world analogues of 
electromagnetism.
You can even find solutions that satisfy a property described in lecture 4. 
They saturate a bound of this form: mass M is greater or equal to Z as a 
function of q1 up to qk, where M is the mass of the object and the qs are its 
electric charges in this toy world that has k different types of photon:
M ≥ Z(q1, … , qk).
Z is the central charge of the supersymmetric theory, and states with M = Z 
are the lightest states in the sector with a given charge. And as such, just like 
the electron in the real world, they are absolutely stable.
Now, these aren’t realistic black holes. The real black holes in nature 
aren’t supersymmetric. If they carried any electric charge, it would be 
quickly neutralized by attracting opposite charge from nearby in space. 
Electromagnetism is a tremendously powerful force compared to gravity. 
Nevertheless, these toy objects do genuinely deserve to be called black holes. 
They have an event horizon, they have a singularity, and they share many 
features of their real-world cousins.
Even better, the ability to construct these supersymmetric states can be used 
in the following clever way. Recall that string theory has two kinds of objects: 
strings and D-branes. Depending on the details of the string compactification 
you consider, this gives two different natural ways to construct charged states. 
In perhaps the simpler way, if there is a circle in the extra dimensions, you can 
simply wrap the string on the circle.

5. How String Theory Explains Black Holes
58
You can make a large number of such wound states by exciting either the 
left- or right-moving oscillator modes of the string, creating waves moving 
exclusively to either the left or the right. Such chiral oscillating strings 
preserve some supersymmetry. They can be used to make (what look like) 
charged particles in the transverse non-compact dimensions of space-time. 
These states saturate a bound of the form M = Z.
A second way to make particles in the extra dimensions is to take some of 
the p-dimensional branes of the theory and wrap them on p-dimensional 
subspaces of the compact Calabi-Yau space above some point in the non-
compact space. The string described previously is an example of this 
with p = 1, but as long as suitable wrappable subspaces exist in the extra 
dimensions, you can also wrap Dp-branes with p > 1 on them. These states 
carry a charge of their own. It intuitively counts “wrapping number” of the 
given (topologically nontrivial) cycle in the Calabi-Yau space.
With either method, you obtain what looks—to an observer in the transverse 
flat space—like a charged particle. It carries some of the many possible 
electric charges of the supersymmetric theory.
But now consider the dials that can be used. As discussed in lecture 3, 
supersymmetric models come with moduli spaces of vacua; that is, they give 
rise to model universes parametrized by expectation values of scalar fields 
determining, for instance, the size and shape of the extra dimensions.
There is actually one preferred such scalar that can play a special role. It is the 
string theory coupling constant g, which controls the strength of interaction 
of strings. You can think of this as the rate at which strings split and join in 
Feynman diagrams. How will this help? You now need to be quantitative 
about two important notions.
First, you have learned that black holes form when there is too much mass in 
too small a region of space. How much mass in how small a region? It turns 
out that the event horizon radius (rS) of a black hole of mass M is given by the 
following formula:

59
5. How String Theory Explains Black Holes
If you compress matter of mass greater than M into a region smaller than this, 
a black hole will form.
Secondly, in string theory, the string coupling constant determines the 
strength of all fundamental interactions coming from the strings, including 
gravity. So, in string theory, Newton’s constant—that is, GN—can be derived 
and satisfies the statement that GN is proportional to g2:
GN ∼ g2.
So, if you take one of your absolutely stable charged objects—made from 
wound oscillating strings or wrapped branes—and crank up the value of the 
string coupling constant, the mass of the object will remain the same, but 
the Newton constant will increase. By doing this, you can bring the object 
inside its own Schwarzschild radius. Because of the magic of supersymmetry 
(and the fact that the object has M = Z), it can’t decay or do anything else 
unpleasant as you turn up the string constant. It has no choice but to persist 
and become a (charged) black hole.
String theorists have found that in many cases, charged black hole entropy 
can be equated to the log of the number of microstates of oscillating wrapped 
branes and strings:
black hole entropy = log(number of microstates oscillating 
wrapped branes and strings).
This counts as a remarkable conceptual success of the theory.
Reading
Susskind, Leonard. The Black Hole War. New York: Little, Brown and 
Company, 2008.

60
6
How Strings Imply a 
Holographic Universe
I
n the previous lecture, you learned that the most 
basic black hole solutions of Einstein’s theory describe 
states where matter has been compressed to an 
enormous density. As a result, it forms an object with 
such intense gravity that even light itself cannot escape. 
More precisely, for a black hole of a certain mass, there 
is a critical radius given by twice Newton’s constant 
times that mass divided by the speed of light squared. 
An event horizon forms at that radius at the center 
of the black hole, and nothing that enters the event 
horizon can ever escape. Interestingly, black holes obey 
laws just like the conventional laws of thermodynamics. 
And that association indicates that to a black hole of 
a given Schwarzschild radius (the radius of the event 
horizon), an entropy given by the area of the event 
horizon should be associated. This lecture helps you 
digest this information.

61
6. How Strings Imply a Holographic Universe
Entropy and Volume
How are the entropies of everyday objects expected to behave? Intuitively, say 
that you have a bunch of small masses (such as atoms or molecules) in a space 
of volume V. Then you’d expect them to have different configurations, where 
each one is exploring a different part of the volume.
It follows from thinking carefully about the fact that each small particle can 
be anywhere in the volume that the entropy S should be expected to scale like 
the volume. In other words, the entropy should be proportional to the volume:
S ∼ V
That means if you double the size of the box while keeping the local physics 
similar, you should expect the entropy to grow by a factor of 2 × 2 × 2, or 8. That 
remains true when you think about quantum systems. For instance, quantum 
mechanics associates elementary particles with an intrinsic spin angular 
momentum, with the electron, for instance, having two possible spin states.
Imagine an array of these 
quantum spins in a lattice 
with the shape of a cube. 
Rows of these spins, with 
spin arrows pointing 
in different directions 
through each location, 
give a crude example of a 
magnetic system in solid-
state physics. Locally, you 
can choose the direction 
of each spin. This gives an 
independent local choice 
for each unit of volume 
that contains a quantum 
spin. That results in an 
entropy that, again, scales 
with the volume.

6. How Strings Imply a Holographic Universe
62
Physical quantities characterizing a system 
that scale with the system size this way 
are called extensive. This is distinct from 
properties that remain fixed as you scale the 
system size, called intensive.
Returning to Black Holes
Black holes are formed out of conventional stuff that just happens to be in 
a state of high density. They have a natural size, given by the Schwarzschild 
radius. You’d then guess a priori that their entropy would scale like the 
volume; that is, the entropy of a black hole should go like the Schwarzschild 
radius to the third power:
SBH ∼ R3.
But this isn’t the case. Instead, according to the laws of black hole mechanics 
discussed in lecture 5, the entropy of a black hole famously goes like the area, 
or the square of the Schwarzschild radius:
SBH ∼ A ∼ R2.
Some of the black holes that are known of in nature are truly enormous. For 
instance, Sagittarius A*, the black hole in the center of our galaxy, has an 
estimated Schwarzschild radius of 12 million kilometers.
The relevant differences in entropy between the two formulas (or especially 
between the exponentials of the entropies, which measure available physical 
states of the system) would be enormous. But—as is often the case with 
good problems in theoretical physics—the problem here isn’t really one of 
a numerical discrepancy. Often, you can understand the basic qualitative 
physics of a system while having a sufficiently hazy grasp of the details that 
precise computation remains elusive.
Entropy is a 
poster child for 
an extensive 
quantity in most 
of physics.

63
6. How Strings Imply a Holographic Universe
What is happening here is much more confusing. At its heart, the reason 
that entropy is extensive is that in a typical physical system, you are allowed 
to excite local degrees of freedom at each point in space. And the number 
of points in space scales like the volume of the region in question. So how 
would you make a physical system in volume V where this wasn’t the case? 
That would mean that somehow even basic facts about how you are free to do 
different things at different points in space (which is deeply tied to the notion 
of locality in physics) would have to be wrong. That’s a conceptual issue 
worthy of deeper understanding.
Let’s approach a striking, modern view of what is happening at the black 
hole horizon through examining a suitable work of art. In a region of space 
near the center of the disc, each triangle is quite large, while as you move 
out toward the boundary of the disc a finite distance away, the number of 
triangles per unit area is growing very rapidly. 
In fact, if the artist were able to draw 
with perfect resolution, one could fit 
infinitely many tiny triangles in each 
fixed unit of area in the picture as 
one approached the boundary.
To change your perspective, you 
need to imagine two things:
1	 Suppose you learned 
that this picture should 
be interpreted as follows: 
Each triangle drawn 
represents an equal unit of 
area. It is just hard to draw so it 
looks that way on the physical disc. 
This would mean that, in a real sense, 
all of the area of the disc would be concentrated 
very close to the boundary. So, while the disc is two-dimensional, a 
one-dimensional slice (with infinitesimal thickness) very close to the 
boundary would contain most of the area. Spaces like this really exist. 
This is a drawing of a spatial slice in something called the three-
dimensional anti–de Sitter space. (The missing dimension is time.)

6. How Strings Imply a Holographic Universe
64
2	 You can make similar mathematical objects (though drawing them is 
harder) also in other space-time dimensions. For now, let’s stick to two 
spatial dimensions and a two-plus-one-dimensional space-time. But the 
concepts all generalize.
Unpacking Anti–De Sitter Space
Willem de Sitter was a Dutch mathematician at the turn of the 20th century. 
Soon after Einstein’s theory of gravity was discovered, de Sitter wrote down 
the simplest solution of the theory in the presence of a positive energy density 
in the vacuum (what today would be called a positive cosmological constant). 
The space de Sitter discovered is called de Sitter space.
But de Sitter’s solution describes a space where there is a positive energy 
density permeating space. What of its evil twin, where instead there is a 
negative energy density permeating space? This is aptly named anti–de Sitter 
space. That’s actually the space-time that has been described previously: the 
simplest solution of Einstein’s theory with a negative cosmological constant 
(though, for simplicity, the two-plus-one-dimensional version has been 
described).
A peculiar property of anti–de Sitter space has been uncovered: Almost all 
of its area lives at the boundary. This indicates that maybe a way of talking 
about physics inside of anti–de Sitter space can be found by formulating a 
description purely on the boundary.
In the three-dimensional space-time you’ve been studying, space-time would 
look like a soup can, with the horizontal slices of the can being space and time 
moving up along the can. The postulate of holography states that Einstein’s 
gravity in anti–de Sitter space in D space-time dimensions can be exactly 
De Sitter space may be the single most important 
solution of Einstein’s theory—because it may 
describe our universe today.

65
6. How Strings Imply a Holographic Universe
reformulated in terms of an ordinary quantum theory of matter and forces, 
without any gravity, in D − 1 dimensions. The D − 1 dimensions live at the 
boundary of the anti–de Sitter space, or the edge of the soup can.
Broadly, you’ve learned about what quantum theories of matter and forces 
look like in modern physics. One chooses a group G to specify the force-
carrying particles and some representations R of G to specify the charges of 
the matter under the forces. The remarkable statement of holography is the 
following: Any theory of quantum gravity in the bulk of anti–de Sitter space 
can contain a huge list of dynamical objects in addition to the gravitational 
field itself, like a list of bulk matter particles and bulk force carriers.
Then there is a dual description, capturing exactly the same physics, in terms 
of a normal quantum theory of matter and forces on the boundary (in one 
dimension less). This theory is specified by some G and choice of matter 
particles. The details of the G and matter particles depend on the details of 

6. How Strings Imply a Holographic Universe
66
the bulk theory of gravity. Both the magnitude of the negative cosmological 
term and the details of which kinds of forces and particles live in the bulk are 
important and are captured by the boundary theory.
How did anyone ever think of this duality? And what does this have to do 
with black holes and their “area law” entropy? Both questions can be answered 
at once: String theory (as interpreted by Juan Maldacena, an Argentinian 
theorist) both provided the duality and related it to black holes.
String theory, you’ll recall, contains not just strings but also D-branes: the 
extended objects (with p spatial dimensions for a Dp-brane) on which open 
strings can end. In a theory of gravity in 10 space-time dimensions, such 
as string theory, there is room for “black objects”—extended objects with 
horizons—of many different dimensionalities. You can have a black hole 
centered at a point whose horizon is then a sphere surrounding that point in 
10 dimensions—so the horizon would be eight-dimensional.
But you can also imagine black objects where the point-like singularity of 
the black hole instead extends along a p spatial-dimensional sheet. Then, the 
horizon would actually be an eight-minus-p-dimensional sphere surrounding 
this extended singularity. These objects are called black branes, or black 
p-branes for a specific value of p.
D-branes have been described as objects that host ends of open strings. 
How is this related to a black hole? The relationship depends on 
the strength of the gravitational field of the D-brane. When the 
string coupling constant—or, equivalently, the 10-dimensional 
analogue of Newton’s constant—is 
small, there is a garden-variety 
D-brane. However, as you 
dial up the strength of the 
Newton constant (or the 
string coupling constant), 
the energy density of the 
D-brane creates a stronger 
and stronger gravitational field. 
Eventually, it forms a curved gravitational 
object with a horizon: the black brane.

67
6. How Strings Imply a Holographic Universe
More precisely, if N D-branes are stacked on top of one another, they carry 
N times as much energy density. So the relevant quantity governing whether 
gravity is strong or weak is a product of the Newton constant and N, or gsN.
Depending on whether gsN is very large or very small, you will obtain a 
gravitational object (a black brane) or a thin D-brane, best understood by 
quantizing the open strings that end on it.
String theorists such as Igor Klebanov noticed the following amazing fact: 
Imagine computing the scattering of strings off a black brane. It turns out 
that it behaves in a remarkably similar way to scattering computed in a certain 
quantum theory of matter and forces (the maximally supersymmetric Yang-
Mills theory).
Maldacena was able to codify this in a precise way in 1998. He conjectured 
that if you looked at the gravitational solution very close to the horizon of 
the D-branes, you would obtain a theory that was dual to the maximally 
supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory. That just happens to be the quantum 
theory that you obtain by quantizing the open strings ending on the branes.
The geometry near the horizon of the D3-brane is in fact a copy of the five-
dimensional anti–de Sitter space (times a sphere to fill up the rest of the 10 
dimensions). Three of the dimensions of anti–de Sitter 5 (AdS5) come from 
the spatial directions along the brane, and one comes from the time direction 
along the brane. The fifth is the radial direction describing moving away from 
the horizon.
Maldacena’s conjecture is an example of holography. It says that quantum 
gravity in AdS5, of the precise form given by string theory in the presence 
of D3-branes, is dual to an ordinary quantum field theory: the maximally 
supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory in three-plus-one dimensions. This 
observation has opened an amazing renaissance in the exploration of both 
quantum gravity and regular quantum theories without gravity. By using the 
duality, you can relate “easy” questions in one side of the duality to “hard” 
questions on the other side.
While you might think that quantum gravity is going to be the hard side 
for most purposes, this is not entirely correct. Many of the most mysterious 
phenomena in nature—from the confinement of quarks in the strong 

6. How Strings Imply a Holographic Universe
68
interactions to the behavior of nuclear matter in the dense core of neutron 
stars—involve strongly coupled quantum theories of matter and force. Using 
the duality, questions about these complicated quantum theories of matter 
and forces can sometimes be mapped to questions in a gravity theory in a 
large, weakly curved space-time. Then, classical Einstein gravity is a good 
approximation. So, classical gravity can be used to answer hard quantum 
questions on the other side.
The duality also clarifies the “area law” entropy of a black hole. For these 
(general) black p-branes, the volume inside the event horizon of the black 
object is a p-plus-one-dimensional volume. But the brane itself—or the 
boundary of the near-horizon AdS geometry—is only p-dimensional. By the 
duality, the entropy of the bulk p-plus-one-dimensional gravitational system 
must be captured by that of an ordinary quantum theory in p dimensions. 
This is the (p-dimensional analogue of the) area law.
But can’t you easily show that this is wrong by taking a volume V of space in 
the gravitational theory and exciting little bits of energy independently in a 
bunch of small hypercubes within this volume? Then you’d be constructing 
states capturing a volume’s worth of entropy.
The flaw with this argument rests in the fact that the theory is a theory 
of gravity. As you try to excite independent degrees of freedom within the 
volume, the energy density quickly becomes large enough that the system 
collapses to form a black hole. And the point where this happens never allows 
you to exhibit more than the area law worth of entropy. This argument 
was made precise by Jacob Bekenstein, who was a master of such thought 
experiments, in the 1970s.
Holography and the Big Bang
In this lecture, you’ve encountered an amazing new thing in physics: an exact 
equivalence between a physical theory in D space-time dimensions and one 
in D − 1 dimensions. The fact that one side is a quantum theory of gravity 
and the other isn’t offers hope of a precise formulation of quantum gravity 
in terms of the better-understood rules of conventional quantum theories of 
matter and forces.

69
6. How Strings Imply a Holographic Universe
On the other hand, the place you’ve started to understand holography is anti–
de Sitter space, which enjoys some very special features. Almost all its volume 
arises at its boundary. It has a natural boundary given by space at infinity. 
These facts don’t generalize. The real world is much closer to flat Euclidean 
space (promoted to Minkowski space by including time) or, even better, to de 
Sitter’s original expanding cosmology. In neither of these cases do physicists 
yet have nearly the kind of control over holography that they do in anti–de 
Sitter spaces. This arena of research has seen fascinating and promising 
developments. A future wave of advancement in quantum gravity will likely 
involve decisive progress on the problem of de Sitter holography.
A typical picture of de Sitter space describes an expanding universe. Running 
the clock backward, this means that in the far past, the universe was very 
small and highly curved. Einstein’s theory has a natural scale built into it: 
the Planck length of about 10−32 centimeters. When the curvature radius 
of the universe approaches this tiny scale or the energy density exceeds the 
comparable measure of energy (which is 1 Planck mass per Planck volume), 
you can anticipate trouble. This is the regime of physics where the big bang 
occurs.
Reading
Klebanov, Igor, and Juan Maldacena. “Solving Quantum Field Theories via 
Curved Spacetimes.” Physics Today 62, no. 1 (2009): 28–33.

70
7
The Origin of 
the Universe
S
tring theory is a potential theory of quantum gravity. 
A new kind of theory to describe quantum gravity is 
needed for several reasons. One good reason is visible if you 
expand various calculations in a power series in Newton’s 
constant. If you scatter gravitons off one another, as in the 
two-to-two graviton scattering process represented by a 
Feynman diagram, then, by dimensional analysis, the result 
has to be proportional to a positive power of the scattering 
energy. This is because each vertex in the diagram—which 
represents a gravitational interaction—is proportional to a 
factor of Newton’s constant, which has dimensions of inverse 
mass squared, or inverse energy squared, in a relativistic 
theory where E = mc2. Therefore, high-energy graviton 
scattering in naive quantum mechanics is divergent. A new 
kind of quantum theory—a sensible quantum theory of 
gravity—is needed to cure these divergences. There is strong 
evidence that string theory provides such a set of theories. 
However, there is another source of puzzles in classical 
gravity or general relativity.

71
7. The Origin of the Universe
Big Bang Cosmology
Recall that the black hole space-time has the following features: There is an 
event horizon that arises at a distance from the black hole center set by the 
scale of the mass that collapsed to form the black hole. There is a singularity 
at the center of the black hole. And as you approach the singularity, the 
curvature of space becomes very large. In practical terms, this means that 
any object sufficiently close to the singularity is torn apart by the diverging 
strength of the gravitational fields.
The singularity is disturbing as a point of principle. The laws of physics 
cannot be evolved past a point in time where an object hits the singularity. 
What happens is simply unknown. However, you could take the following 
attitude: The black hole singularity is cloaked by an event horizon that 
surrounds it. This makes its effects undetectable to an outside observer. So, 
why should they care what happens there? As long as all singularities are 
cloaked by horizons, you need not worry about their effects—unless you are 
unfortunate enough to be on the wrong side of the horizon.
However, in the current best models of physics, there is another place where 
singularities arise and where this same excuse doesn’t obviously work. That is 
in the origin of the universe itself.
The study of the history and dynamics of the large-scale structure of the 
universe is called cosmology. Perhaps the foundational observation of modern 
cosmology—which emerged in the early 20th century—is that the universe is 
expanding. This was discovered through the physics of redshift.
You have likely heard the abrupt change in tone of a siren as an approaching 
ambulance or police car passes you and starts to recede. The sound goes from 
high to low pitched, corresponding to a change in the frequency of the sound 
waves. This is known as a Doppler shift.
A similar phenomenon holds with light waves. Different colors of light 
correspond to electromagnetic waves of different frequencies. Via the 
pneumonic ROYGBIV, you can remember that the lowest-frequency light is 
red, while the highest is violet. There is an electromagnetic analogue of the 

7. The Origin of the Universe
72
Doppler shift: A receding light source shows up with 
a slightly redshifted color (depending on its velocity); 
one that is approaching instead has a corresponding 
blueshift.
In the late 1920s, Edwin Hubble, using the telescope 
at Mount Wilson outside of Los Angeles, found that 
light emitted from distant galaxies seems to have a 
frequency slightly shifted down—redshifted—with 
a magnitude of redshift depending on the distance 
of the galaxy. This admitted a straightforward 
interpretation: The galaxies are moving away from 
earth, with a velocity dependent on their distance.
This is the first foundational observation underlying what is known as big 
bang cosmology. Why “big bang”? Simply run the picture of the expanding 
universe backward. The simplest-possible inference is that the universe 
originated in a state of extremely high energy density at a finite time in the 
past. It “exploded” in a big bang from which expanding space itself emerged.
The Cosmic Microwave Background
This basic picture—that the universe started in a hot, dense state and then 
expanded and cooled—enjoys several pillars of experimental support. The 
first is the redshift observations previously mentioned. A second is the 
observation of historical relic radiation from this hot, dense phase: the cosmic 
microwave background (CMB). The basic physics of the CMB is as follows.
In the early hot, dense phase of the universe, the temperature was so high 
that bound states of electrons and protons—such as hydrogen and other 
more complicated atoms—could not exist. The energy binding the orbiting 
electron to the proton in hydrogen was simply too small to withstand the high 
temperatures. Any bound atoms were instantly broken apart by collisions with 
high-energy particles in the surrounding heat bath.

73
7. The Origin of the Universe
As the universe expanded, it cooled. At a certain point, the temperature fell 
enough that stable hydrogen atoms could form. At this point, the universe in 
bulk became electrically neutral. Because particles of light—photons—scatter 
off charged particles, before this time they bounced around like pinballs, 
scattered by one charge after another. But after this time, surrounded by 
neutral hydrogen gas, they moved in straight lines—more or less without 
disturbance. A lucky few such photons were captured by satellites, radio 
dishes, and other detectors.
Such relic photons are modern remnants of the big bang, traveling straight to 
earth from the time when protons and electrons combined into hydrogen for 
the first time. Amazingly, they were detected unintentionally at Bell Labs in 
1964 by Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson.
The detailed properties of the CMB conform to a model of a hot big bang 
that was cooled by the universe’s expansion. The CMB provides a second 
pillar girding the big bang model. A third support pillar is provided by the 
measured nuclear abundances. Just as you can understand the process by 
which electrons and photons combine to produce hydrogen in the expanding 
universe, you can also understand the process whereby protons and neutrons 
combine to form the nuclei of heavier atoms. They can only form nuclei 
after the temperature becomes sufficiently low that it doesn’t overwhelm the 
nuclear binding energy holding the nucleons together.
COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND

7. The Origin of the Universe
74
It turns out that the light elements—such as hydrogen, helium, and lithium—
were produced by this big bang nucleosynthesis process. The abundances with 
which these elements populate the universe is in good accordance with the 
big bang model. It turns out that the heavier elements were born later in the 
centers of stars or in even more extreme environments, such as those produced 
when neutron stars collide.
The Flatness Problem
So, on the assumption that the big bang model is basically correct, an initial 
singularity is still left to be explained. This singularity was not, in any obvious 
way, cloaked behind a horizon. The initial conditions out of which big bang 
cosmology emerges were, after all, a direct result of what came before—i.e., 
the nature of what banged, why it banged, and how it banged must be hidden 
in the physics of the singularity.
A direct frontal assault on the singularity problem has not proven fruitful. 
Happily, the universe has provided additional strong experimental evidence 
for the nature of some predecessor to the hot big bang. This evidence comes 
from two problems, known colloquially as the horizon and flatness problems. 
Let’s focus on the flatness problem.

75
7. The Origin of the Universe
While curved-space geometry is an intricate subject, you can get some 
basic insight into it by considering the simplest cases: spaces with constant 
curvature (i.e., the same curviness everywhere in the space). In two spatial 
dimensions, the spaces of constant curvature are the sphere (for positive 
curvature), the Euclidean plane (for vanishing curvature), and the saddle (for 
negative curvature). A local way to measure this curvature is to draw a triangle 
(defined by a suitable set of intersections of straightest-possible lines).
It turns out that while the angles inside a triangle add up to the familiar 
180° in flat space, they add up to more in positively curved space and less in 
negatively curved space. And the surfeit or deficit provides a measure of the 
curvature. While Euclidean flat-space geometry is taught in school, it is an 
experimental question whether space is flat or curved. And it turns out that 
the best present experiments find—to within astonishing accuracy—that 
space is flat.

7. The Origin of the Universe
76
The trouble with flat space in expanding cosmology is that it isn’t very stable. 
It is sort of like a pencil standing on its tip. The more precise version of this 
statement is as follows.
Suppose the early universe started with conventional matter in a space that 
was approximately (but not exactly) flat. Then, the expansion of the universe 
itself drove it further away from flatness. A slight positive curvature at early 
times became a huge positive curvature at late times—with the mirror fate 
for negative curvature. This happened, roughly, because the energy density 
in the matter diluted away with the expansion faster than the energy density 
associated with the curvature.
Cosmic Inflation
Present observations place the time of the big bang around 14 billion years ago. 
For the universe to remain flat in appearance so long after the big bang, physicists 
can estimate how exquisitely close to exactly flat it must have been at very early 
times. Expressed in terms of the tuned energy density required to support a flat 
geometry, tunings on the order of 1 part in 1060 are calculated. This problem 
and others suggest that the initial state of the universe must have been very 
finely tuned. The only out is if a robust mechanism that would produce such flat 
geometries more or less regardless of the initial state can be found.
The surface of the earth 
looks flat over small enough 
regions. An idealized model 
of the earth’s surface is as 
flat as a balloon surface if 
the balloon had a radius of 
about 4,000 miles.

77
7. The Origin of the Universe
As it turns out, exactly such a mechanism has been proposed. It is growing 
into a pillar of its own in the modern view of early-universe cosmology. This 
is the idea of cosmic inflation. Suppose the initial state of the universe were 
highly curved. How do you produce a flat space—of the sort that’s roughly 
observed—out of a curved space? An image of an expanding balloon provides 
a hint. As the balloon gets bigger, any portion of fixed area on the balloon 
surface looks closer and closer to flat.
If this trick is going to be used to explain why, to modern cosmologists, 
the entire visible universe looks approximately flat, a pretty significant 
expansion factor on the original (post­–big bang) balloon is going to be 
needed. It is standard to measure such changes in size in e-foldings. The 
size of the universe must have expanded, post­–big bang, by a factor of eN, 
where N is much larger than 1, to adequately explain the flatness. It turns 
out that to solve the flatness problem—and other problems, such as the 
horizon problem—this expansion must have been much more rapid than the 
expansion that Hubble detected with redshifts and that is seen today. And, in 
fact, it must have been accelerating as it proceeded.
In trying to explain such a phase of accelerated expansion using only the 
typical ingredients of fundamental physics—things like quantum fields with 
various potential energy functions—one clever idea has clearly stood out. 
This is the idea underlying cosmic inflation, and it can be explained in a 
few steps.
First, suppose space had a constant positive energy density per unit volume, V. 
Then, it follows from Einstein’s equations that the scale factor describing the 
size of the universe—usually denoted by a as a function of time, or a(t)—
expands as a(t) grows like eHt, or H as determined by the value of the energy:
a(t) ∼ eHt, MP2 × H2 = V.
With typical scales of fundamental physics appearing, V could be as large as 
the string scale, so H could be a very large energy scale, indeed.
What this means (remembering that, in dimensional analysis, time and 
energy have inverse units) is that the universe could potentially expand by 
many, many e-foldings (or factors of e) in even a small fraction of a second. 

7. The Origin of the Universe
78
The important difference between the assumptions here and those that led 
to the flatness problem is that the energy density sourcing the expansion 
remains basically constant as the universe expands. It should not dilute, like 
conventional matter does.
Second, however, this also leads to a problem: There is no graceful way to end 
a phase of expansion with an exactly constant energy density of space. The 
space will inflate forever, or it will need to end by some dramatic process (such 
as quantum tunneling), which is unlikely to preserve the successful resolution 
of the problems that inflation was introduced to solve.
However, as a third point, there is no need for the potential V to be an exactly 
constant energy density of space. Consider instead a scenario that can produce 
close-to-constant energy density. A scalar field called the inflaton is added 
to the content of the physical theory. It has a potential energy function with 
a very flat region. Any part of the universe that starts on this part of the 
potential “thinks” it has an approximately constant energy density V (set by 
the magnitude of the inflaton potential at this plateau). The universe therefore 
exponentially expands. If the scale of the scalar potential is set by high-scale 
fundamental physics, this can offer a natural mechanism for raising large, flat 
regions of the universe.
The current cosmological horizon—the distance that light has traveled since 
the big bang—is about 1028 centimeters in size. The flat regions produced by 
inflation could even be many times larger than that. The beauty of this idea 
is that it uses familiar ingredients—a scalar field, a potential, and gravity—to 
solve the important and challenging flatness problem. But as an extra bonus, 
it also provides a simple potential graceful exit from inflation. This can 
smoothly match onto the conventional big bang cosmology.
The exit from inflation can occur because of the dynamics of the field phi. 
Suppose the inflaton isn’t simply sitting still on its potential, but its value 
slowly evolves in time. It rolls toward the end of the flat plateau. When it 
reaches the end, it quickly “rolls down” to its potential true minimum. This 
causes the universe to naturally exit the phase of exponential expansion. And 
as the inflaton rolls to its minimum, if it enjoys couplings to the particles 
of the standard model, it can naturally decay to standard-model degrees of 

79
7. The Origin of the Universe
freedom. This process—of the inflaton decaying to a hot gas of standard-
model particles—is called reheating by inflationary theorists. Reheating could 
be the initial condition that underlies the hot big bang.
It is important to acknowledge that none of this resolves an even bigger 
question: What came at the start of the universe? Even inflationary 
cosmologies have a cosmic singularity in the distant past, before the time 
when inflation started. The problem of the initial singularity has been further 
hidden by the exponential expansion of space, but it is not solved. Still, 
inflation and the hot big bang provide an attractive potential picture of the 
early history of the universe.
Reading
Guth, Alan. The Inflationary Universe. New York: Basic Books, 1998.
The interface of string theory with cosmology is a 
rich and exciting subject. String theory—or some 
other theory of quantum gravity—is necessary to 
derive a fully trustworthy theory of inflation.

80
8
Strings and Inflation
T
heorems proved in the 1960s show that general relativity 
breaks down at very early times. During these times, it is 
thought that the universe expanded much more rapidly than 
it does today. In fact, it doubled in size every fraction of a 
second until it grew 25 orders of magnitude (or more) in size. 
This cosmic inflation is a leading theory of early-universe 
cosmology. It was supported by a new kind of matter—an 
inflaton field—which very closely mimics a constant energy 
per unit volume, filling all of space. 

This lecture enriches this story—and its connection to string 
theory—in three ways. First, you will encounter another 
amazing cosmological discovery, known as the dark energy. 
Then, you will discover how both the dark energy and early 
universe inflation are sensitive to the full details of a quantum 
theory of gravity, like string theory. Last, you will learn about 
a startling and puzzling picture of the universe that seems 
to emerge from the best ideas that exist about how string 
theory might model universes like ours.

81
8. Strings and Inflation
The Mystery of the Dimming Supernovae
Lecture 5 addressed the fate of “old” stars—stars that 
have burned all their nuclear fuel. Depending 
on their mass, one of a few different things 
happens to such a star. The known stable 
endpoints are white dwarf stars, neutron 
stars, and black holes. These objects 
are very dense. For instance, the sun 
has around 100 times the radius of 
the earth, but a white dwarf star with 
the same mass as the sun is about the 
size of the earth. It is much smaller and 
denser than any possible progenitor star. 
In the process of collapsing from their large, 
youthful size toward their ultimate denser fate, 
many stars give rise to catastrophic events known as 
supernovae.
WHITE DWARF WITH THE SAME MASS AS THE SUN
THE SUN

8. Strings and Inflation
82
Stars are held up against the crush of their own gravity by nuclear fusion. 
When they completely exhaust successive stages of their fuel, this process no 
longer works, and they begin to collapse. A supernova occurs when, as the 
object collapses, its hot and increasingly dense center can ignite previously 
inaccessible nuclear processes. These cause one final runaway stage of nuclear 
fusion. This releases so much energy that there is a titanic explosion. The 
results of such explosions can be seen in the universe today.
This should sound like an incredibly violent and difficult process to model. 
But one class of such events is so standardized in its mechanism and behavior 
that, in fact, people use the light from the resulting explosions as standard 
candles: astronomical objects whose features are so well known that their 
properties can be used to calibrate any peculiarities of the atmosphere 
(including, for instance, giving a precise measurement of its redshift). These 
standard-candle stellar explosions are known as Type Ia supernovae.
Careful studies of large classes of distant Type Ia supernovae in the late 1990s 
revealed that you could find their distance by comparing their brightness 
in the sky to their known absolute luminosity. After all, the amount of light 
reaching you from a distant object will fall as the square of your distance from 
the object. But also, using Hubble’s idea that the redshift of the light measures 
the expansion rate of the universe, you could see how fast the universe was 
expanding at the time the supernova exploded.
Amazingly, combining these measurements revealed that the universe today 
is enjoying an accelerated expansion. This consequence follows from the fact 
that the supernovae at a given redshift are fainter than they’d be in a universe 
where gravity was slowing the expansion of the universe. So, something is 
causing an acceleration of its expansion. And it’s called dark energy.
This is puzzling because you’d expect the gravity of all the normal matter 
in the universe—planets, stars, and gas—to pull together and slow the 
expansion, since it does have that effect in cosmology. But instead, the 
dominant source of energy density at the vast distance scales relevant for 
cosmology today, which is the dark energy, has to be exotic enough to have 
antigravitational effects.

83
8. Strings and Inflation
In fact, Einstein had toyed with including just such an antigravitational 
source in his original general theory of relativity. It was an overall energy 
density for otherwise empty space, also called a cosmological constant. Such a 
constant—with a positive sign, the opposite sign from the one relevant for the 
anti–de Sitter spaces discussed previously—gives rise to something known as 
de Sitter space. This is an exponentially expanding cosmology.
Cosmology in the early 20th century was too crude a science to detect a 
cosmological term. Einstein later set this possible term in his equations to 
zero and called its introduction “my greatest blunder.” In retrospect, the joke 
is on him—it appears that such a term is needed to correctly account for the 
behavior seen in modern precision cosmology. In other words, the observed 
dark energy seems to share the detailed properties of Einstein’s cosmological 
constant. It is nonzero and positive. However, the presence (or even the 
absence) of a cosmological constant brings to the fore a central theoretical 
question: Why is the value of dark energy what it is?
In many cases, understanding the precise value of something is difficult, but 
you can get a good sense for its basic magnitude. In the simplest cases, the 
basic magnitude follows from dimensional analysis—i.e., just making units 
work out right.
There is a natural scale in Einstein’s theory of gravity: the Planck mass. 
The Planck mass, for instance, is what determines the value of Newton’s 
gravitational constant. So, it would be expected that the cosmological term—
or the dark energy—would be given 
by an order of one number in the 
appropriate Planck units. But in fact, 
measured relative to its natural scale 
in Planck units, the dark energy 
that’s seen is roughly 120 orders 
of magnitude too small. That is a 
pretty large error, even for a crude 
approximation. The basic problem 
here is that the vacuum energy can 
receive contributions from physics 
occurring at all possible energy scales.
Origin myths for the 
universe are a feature 
of every human 
culture. It is hard not 
to extrapolate back in 
time and wonder how 
it all began.

8. Strings and Inflation
84
Dark Energy and Inflation
A normal physical process is characterized by a typical size or energy scale of 
the objects involved. For instance, in the standard model, the strong force—
described by quantum chromodynamics (QCD)—exhibits quark confinement 
at a typical energy scale of a few hundred MeV. This is the energy cost it would 
take to break apart a confined meson. At higher energies, around the TeV scale, 
the Higgs boson is believed to develop its nonzero expectation value.
This breaks the electroweak symmetry down to the electromagnetic and weak 
interactions seen today. This is a process of spontaneous symmetry breaking, 
which was described in lecture 3. In QCD and the electroweak symmetry 
breaking, there are potential energies of the scale of (respectively) MeV and 
TeV. These could contribute to a nonzero vacuum energy. There is no reason 
they should cancel.
Such contributions could also occur from physics that appears at the scale 
where the known interactions hypothetically unify, known as the grand 
unification scale, or at the scale where extra spatial dimensions are rolled up 
(“compactified”) in string theory. These are typically much shorter distance 
scales, associated with much higher energies, than the electroweak scale.
But the existing dark energy is not only 120 orders of magnitude smaller 
than the Planck scale; it is also 60 orders of magnitude smaller than the 
electroweak scale. In other words, all contributions to the energy density of 
flat space coming from processes at all energy scales above this must somehow 
conspire to cancel to many, many decimal places.
There is one known class of theories where this can happen naturally, because 
it is forced by a symmetry. This happens in theories with supersymmetry. 
However, supersymmetry cannot be exact beneath the electroweak scale. The 
required superpartners of the known particles are not seen. Supersymmetry 
cannot explain the small vacuum energy or cosmological constant in the 
real world.
A similar, but less dramatic, issue occurs in the models of inflationary 
cosmology discussed in the previous lecture. Recall that these are models 
where an exponential expansion of space is driven by an effective, almost-
vacuum energy density. There’s an inflaton field phi that has a potential with 

85
8. Strings and Inflation
a very flat plateau, and it slowly 
evolves along the flat part of its 
potential energy function. It fools 
the universe into believing that 
there is a large vacuum energy 
driving accelerated expansion. 
This explains why today’s universe 
is so close to being flat. Just as a 
balloon blown up to many times 
its original size has a flatter and 
flatter surface, the same is true of 
the geometry of the universe.
Inflation is thought to occur at very high energy scales—that is, energies much 
higher than the value of today’s dark energy, or even the electroweak scale. But 
even at such high energy scales, any new physics could lead to corrections to 
the shape of the inflaton potential. This is analogous to the way that any new 
physics can, a priori, correct the value of the measured dark energy.
This is puzzling. A notable and necessary feature of the inflaton potential is 
that it must be very flat as a function of the inflaton field phi. This is because 
only a very flat potential mimics a vacuum energy density of empty space (and 
hence drives the hypothesized model of early-universe inflation). Corrections 
to the potential where V of phi is changed to V of phi plus some ΔV of phi 
would generally spoil the desired flatness:
V(ϕ) → V(ϕ) + ΔV(ϕ).
In quantitative terms, the measures of flatness involve products of the 
Planck mass and derivatives of the inflaton potential. This means that even 
corrections to the inflaton potential from quantum gravity—which are 
suppressed by the highest known scale in physics, the Planck mass—can shift 
the features of the inflaton potential in meaningful ways. Inflation requires 
a potential energy that is so flat it’s sensitive to new physics—and corrections 
from quantum gravity or string theory—all the way up to the Planck scale. 
Adding a few Planck-mass particles with the wrong couplings to the inflaton 
field can spoil inflation.

8. Strings and Inflation
86
In both the case of the dark energy and inflationary theory, this provides a 
tremendous opportunity. In many parts of theoretical physics, there is no 
good excuse to talk about quantum gravity or string theory effects. But here, 
discussing the full theory of high-energy physics—including the microscopic 
strings in string theory—is required to capture all the relevant physics.
So, how do you model something like dark energy or inflation in string 
theory? This general subject has been an area of tremendous activity in the 
last 15 to 20 years. An amazing—but tentative—picture of the large-scale 
structure of the universe has emerged.
The Large-Scale Structure of the Universe
Remember that a fundamental role in string theory is played by the need to 
compactify the extra dimensions the theory predicts. In some simple versions, 
above each point in the three-plus-one-dimensional space-time, there are six 
curled-up extra dimensions. In the best-studied models, the theory has exact 
supersymmetry, surviving all the way to low energies. The extra dimensions 
are not fixed in shape or size. As a consequence of the supersymmetry, in 
these toy models, the vacuum energy vanishes.
These are all properties of the vacuum solutions (solutions without extra 
sources of energy and density) that arise from string compactification on 
the Calabi-Yau spaces described previously. A priori, all of the points just 
discussed are problems for making a realistic world model out of string theory. 
They have consequences that are thought to be not true of the real world.
Another problem is that the Calabi-Yau solutions seem to be very nongeneric. 
The theory allows many background fields to be turned on that are absent 
in the Calabi-Yau solutions. In other words, there is no reason for the extra 
dimensions to characterize a vacuum solution; there could be energy sources 
and other stuff that lives in the extra dimensions. Why would nature pick a 
very special solution with no sources? Explorations in the early 2000s revealed 
that perhaps these problems are related.

87
8. Strings and Inflation
The most obvious background sources you could turn on in string theory—
to add background energy density to the Calabi-Yau solutions—are known 
as fluxes. In high school physics, you learn that in Maxwell’s theory of 
electromagnetism, there are both electric (E) and magnetic (B) fields. In the 
presence of such fields, there is an energy density that goes like the square of 
the electric field plus the square of the magnetic field:
H ∼ E2 + B2.
You can characterize a background magnetic field by its flux through various 
regions of the spatial geometry.
In the observed world, background fluxes of the electric or magnetic fields 
would not characterize anything that looks like our world at large scales. 
Among other things, these fields would break the translational and rotational 
invariance of our spatial dimensions. But in a world with extra dimensions, 
fluxes that thread the extra dimensions of space do not break the rotational or 
translational symmetries of “our” dimensions.

8. Strings and Inflation
88
Higher-dimensional string theory contains analogues of the electromagnetic 
field. So, magnetic fluxes (analogous to the ones being discussed) could be 
threading two-dimensional cycles (providing cross-sectional areas) in the 
extra dimensions. But more generally, string theory also contains fluxes that 
can be generated by objects like the Dp-branes described previously. The 
Dp-branes come in flavors of various worldvolume spatial dimension p, and 
correspondingly they give rise to fluxes of fields that are appropriate to thread 
cycles of different dimension embedded in the six extra dimensions of space.
Roughly, the flux a Dp-brane sources must be such that it would naturally 
pierce the higher-dimensional area of a sphere that surrounds the Dp-brane 
in 10-dimensional space-time. When these fluxes of various values of p are 
turned on, the result is a picture of string compactification that has various 
fluxes of background fields (analogous to different magnetic fields of Maxwell 
theory) threading the extra dimension.
You might remember from high school that electric fields are sourced by 
charged particles. Charged particles are not needed in the extra dimensions 
to source the fluxes. A beautiful fact about topology is that in spaces with 
nontrivial-enough features, you can imagine field lines that wind around and 

89
8. Strings and Inflation
produce flux with no charged source particle. On compact dimensions with 
nontrivial topology, you can have fluxes carrying energy density without any 
need for explicit charged source objects. The presence of these fluxes has a few 
interesting consequences:
	
^ The fluxes typically break supersymmetry. That solves one of the 
problems.
	
^ The fluxes typically cost an energy. This energy is minimized for some 
particular shape of the extra dimensions. It fixes their shape, solving 
another problem.
	
^ The minimum of the energy determined by the fluxes is usually 
nonzero. There is a vacuum energy density from the perspective of a 
lower-dimensional observer.
These are all interesting, and somewhat generic, consequences of this more 
modern picture of string theory compactification. But there is one more 
feature that comes along for the ride.
There are many, many choices of possible background fluxes. In fact, for 
simple choices of the space on which one compactifies, the number of choices 
can give astronomical numbers like 10500.
The resulting picture is 
one not of a single-string 
vacuum with broken 
supersymmetry and a 
vacuum energy, but of an 
“energy landscape” with 
many, many possible 
solutions. Perhaps early-
universe inflation can 
even result as the shape 
of the extra dimensions 
“relax” to one of these 
minima.

8. Strings and Inflation
90
To get to the modern picture of the string theory landscape, two more 
qualitative ideas are important.
	
^ When the flux configuration and other effects are such that the vacuum 
energy in a given solution is positive, the resulting vacuum enjoys 
accelerated expansion. In other words, it is a de Sitter space with a 
positive cosmological term.
	
^ In a quantum-mechanical theory, the distinct integer flux choices—
even though they’re discrete—are not disconnected from one another. 
If nothing else, quantum tunneling processes allow you to “jump” the 
value of the flux in a quantum tunneling event.
This picture of a string landscape with many vacua suggests a dramatic picture 
of the large-scale structure of the universe. Different regions in the universe 
may be trapped in different minima of the potential—characterized by 
different choices of the fluxes. Each such pocket universe may manifest what 
look like different low-energy “laws of physics,” determined by the details of 
the vacuum solution governing that region. But on a large scale, quantum 
tunneling processes—which allow the amount of flux to jump on the internal 
dimensions—could connect regions with different amounts of flux.
The result would be a string theory realization 
of theoretical physicist Andrei Linde’s 
picture of eternal inflation. In a simple 
picture, regions of different color manifest 
different low-energy physical laws. 
Each corresponds to a region 
where the extra dimensions 
of space have different 
fluxes, and maybe even 
different topology. Each 
has its own value of 
the vacuum energy. 
All regions with 
positive values 
are exponentially 
expanding 
with time.

91
8. Strings and Inflation
It is hard to see how scientists would verify for certain the existence of other 
“bubbles” beyond our own in such a larger multiverse. It is also hard to 
know how researchers would find the particular configuration of the extra 
dimensions (and the fluxes) that is supposed to correspond to our own world. 
The qualitative picture seems robust, but making its details useful and 
predictive is an extremely challenging problem for the future. Could such a 
picture explain or accommodate the tiny value of the dark energy seen today? 
Only time will tell.
Reading
Susskind, Leonard. The Cosmic Landscape. New York: Little, Brown and 
Company, 2006.

92
9
The Many Avatars 
of String Theory 
T
his lecture addresses the simplest features 
of string theory. You’ve learned from 
the start that string theories live, in some 
natural sense, in 10 dimensions. But where 
does that statement come from? And if there 
is a landscape of string theories in lower 
dimensions, then how many different string 
theories are possible in 10 dimensions? To 
get at these questions, you must consider the 
fundamental string itself.

93
9. The Many Avatars of String Theory 
The Fundamental String
The fundamental string itself a simple 
one-plus-one-dimensional object—a 
circular loop propagating through 
time. The simplest question you can 
ask is this: What would a very thin, 
one-dimensional ant crawling around 
on this cylinder think its world’s 
fundamental particles and interactions 
were? If it were unaware of the larger 
bulk space-time in which the string is 
immersed, what would its one-plus-one-
dimensional world look like?
To answer this question, you need to answer what the spectrum of particles 
and interactions is in the one-plus-one-dimensional quantum theory on the 
string worldsheet. Let’s return also to the world of supersymmetric spherical 
cows and assume the string theory has supersymmetry reflecting bosons (on 
its worldsheet) into fermions. It turns out that with these assumptions, there 
are just a few possible choices.
First, for a string immersed in D space-time dimensions, there will be 
D − 2 transverse spatial fluctuations of the string. (After all, there are D − 1 
spatial dimensions in total, and one of them is along the string itself.) That 
means that there are D − 2 scalar fields that live on the string worldsheet 
and parameterize its transverse fluctuations. Then, supersymmetry says 
there should also be D − 2 fermions—one fermionic partner for each scalar. 
That means that the theory being discussed will consist of D − 2 scalars and 
D − 2 fermions.
What values of D are allowed? Let’s discuss this by doing some physics. The 
ultimate goal will be to take the theory of D − 2 scalars and fermions on 
the string worldsheet, let them fluctuate and quantize their fluctuations, 
and then read off a spectrum of elementary particles in the hypothetical 
D-dimensional world.

9. The Many Avatars of String Theory 
94
A subtlety arises in doing this. In quantum mechanics, the vacuum—the state 
of the quantum system when no particles are present—can itself be rather 
complicated. One way to think about this is that, due to the Heisenberg 
uncertainty principle, there is an energy-time uncertainty relation that says:
where h is Planck’s constant and ћ is Planck’s constant divided by 2π.
Therefore, at short times, a quantum system has quantum jitters—there’s 
energetic motion that comes from virtual vacuum fluctuations. These vacuum 
fluctuations have one important effect: They shift the vacuum energy of the 
system by something known as the zero-point energy. Therefore, the energies 
of the lightest string states depend directly on D.
As you learned previously, quantizing the lightest string modes gives rise to 
a particle with the quantum numbers of a graviton (here, in D space-time 
dimensions). But you need to be careful about this statement. For D = 10, 
including the shift in vacuum energy from quantum jitters, the resulting 
gravitons are exactly massless. They come with the right multiplicity to be the 
graviton of 10-dimensional Einstein gravity. For other values of D, though, 
there’s trouble. There are too many or too few potential graviton components 
to align with Einstein gravity in D dimensions unless D = 10. This is a sign 
of an inconsistency in the string propagation in flat space for other values 
of D. Therefore, you find that D = 10; that is, there must be 10 space-time 
dimensions in a supersymmetric string theory.
This logic is a bit too quick; it is both too refined and too coarse, in different 
ways. It is too coarse because it misses an important subtlety that is required 
in formulating the one-plus-one-dimensional quantum theory on a circle: 
Fermions have nonzero spin. So, to put them on the circle, you have to choose 
something called a spin structure.
This amounts to a choice of whether the fermions are periodic or antiperiodic 
as you go around the circle. There are two different consistent options for how 
you assign signs to the full set of fermions in the theory (or how you do the 
“sum over spin structures,” in technical language). The two resulting theories 
are called the IIA and IIB theories.

95
9. The Many Avatars of String Theory 
Now, a brief digression: In two dimensions, you can imagine a massless particle 
on the string worldsheet that can only move “to the left.” If the particle were 
a massive particle, it would be moving at a speed less than the speed of light. 
An observer moving even faster than that to the left would effectively see this 
particle relative to them as moving to the right. It would therefore have to be a 
particle with both “left- and right-moving” versions, or flavors.
But a massless particle moves at the speed of light. So, given a massless left-
moving particle, you can never switch to a reference frame of an observer 
moving so fast that the particle appears to be moving to the right.
With this in mind, let’s return to the logic that was used in finding 
the supersymmetric type II string theories. The logic was too refined. 
Supersymmetry was required in the theory on the worldsheet. But in a world 
where particles can be purely chiral (i.e., purely left or right moving), you 
can also have supersymmetries that are purely chiral. In other words, the 
mirror reflection of supersymmetry may take every right-moving boson to 
a right-moving fermion partner but could do nothing to the left-moving 
boson modes.
Allowing such supersymmetric but chiral theories, and once again making 
sure the sum over spin structures is consistent, yields a surprise: There are 
two more consistent string theories. Each has eight right-moving bosons 
and fermions, just as in the type II theories (eight for the eight transverse 
fluctuations of a string in 10 space-time dimensions).
But consistency of the sum over spin structures now requires that they have 
16 left-moving fermions. Their worldsheet theories are therefore like those of 
the type II theory but with extra chiral fermions added on. These theories are 
called the heterotic string theories. You can 
think of the heterotic string as a crossbreed 
between the supersymmetric type II theories 
and another theory, the unstable so-called 
bosonic string. The right-moving particles 
look like those of a type II string, while the 
left movers look like those of the (unstable) 
bosonic string.
Heterosis is defined 
by Oxford Languages 
to be “the tendency of 
a crossbred individual 
to show qualities 
superior to those of 
both parents.”

9. The Many Avatars of String Theory 
96
This may seem rather confusing and difficult to remember, but it becomes 
easier when you discover—as string theorists did in the 1980s—that the 
peculiar zoo of 10-dimensional string theories is in precise correspondence 
with another classification of 10-dimensional objects.
Classifying 10-Dimensional Objects
Physicists trying to classify possible supersymmetric theories of the 
fundamental interactions asked in the 1970s and 1980s, “What are all of 
the possible consistent structures containing supersymmetry and Einstein’s 
relativity in flat space-time?” While it was difficult to answer this question 
in four space-time dimensions (and the answer remains unknown to this 
day), they had success in higher dimensions. The answer became simpler 
and simpler as they moved up in dimension. The most basic results of their 
classification were the following.
The highest dimension in which a supergravity theory can exist is 11. A unique 
supersymmetric theory exists there.
In 10 dimensions, there is a slightly richer spectrum of possibilities. In fact, 
there are four candidate theories. Two of them were called type IIA and type 
IIB supergravities, and they differ in the details of their fermion content.
The other two have fewer supersymmetries (or symmetries mapping bosons 
to fermions), but they compensated by enjoying a space-time gauge symmetry 
or a set of space-time force carriers in 10 dimensions. They have, respectively, 
symmetries given by the groups SO(32) and E8 × E8.
SO(3) is a fancy name for the group of rotations of three-dimensional space, 
and SO(2) or U1 is the rotations of the plane. SO(32) can similarly be thought 
of as rotations in an abstract 32-dimensional space, which is not the actual 
physical space-time. E8 is an even more complicated “exceptional group.”
So, there are four consistent string theories built out of supersymmetric 
(worldsheet) strings that live in 10 space-time dimensions. There are also four 
consistent supersymmetric theories of gravity (or supergravity theories, for short) 
in 10 space-time dimensions. It’s not a coincidence that there are four of both.

97
9. The Many Avatars of String Theory 
Remember that in string theory, you can figure out the spectrum of 
elementary particles that emerge at low energies by looking at the least 
energetic fluctuations of the fundamental string. The string modes that 
carry the least energy—the string ground states—correspond to massless 
particles in space-time. And the four supersymmetric string theories turn 
out—certainly not by intentional design—to give rise to precisely the sets of 
particles that characterize the four 10-dimensional supergravity theories. The 
first two theories that were described give rise to the type IIA and type IIB 
supergravities, while the chiral theories mentioned afterward give rise to the 
supergravity theories with half as much supersymmetry but that enjoy space-
time gauge symmetry.
The emergence of the most basic, fundamental supergravity theories as a limit 
of string theory in the 1980s was one of the early hints that string theory 
enjoys deep ties to other areas of theoretical physics.
It is important to emphasize, though, that this does not mean that string 
theory is the same as the supergravity theories mentioned. The supergravity 
theories only “know about” the lightest string modes—just as in Einstein’s 
general relativity there’s a massless graviton but no massive particles. And just 
like Einstein’s gravity theory, the supergravity theories are not renormalizable, 
or their high-energy scattering gives nonsensical results.
All of the more excited modes of the string—with ever-wilder oscillations—
describe particles whose mass is multiples of the string or Planck scale, 
and these particles are invisible to the low-energy supergravity theory. But 
they are crucial in allowing string theory to have the sensible behavior that 
it does at very high energies. Their presence (with the exact degeneracies 
and interactions they enjoy) is the string theory way of curing the non-
renormalizability of supergravity.
This leaves you with a few questions. First, you sort of want a single theory of 
unified interactions. It seems like, instead, you have four different structures 
in 10 dimensions. Is this four different possible sets of laws of physics and you 
have to choose one of them right at the start? Or is something more subtle 
going on?

9. The Many Avatars of String Theory 
98
Secondly, there is a supergravity theory in 11 space-time dimensions, but 
the corresponding string theory wasn’t found. Does this mean that string 
theory—or whatever theoretical structure it is part of—doesn’t even know 
about the 11-dimensional supergravity? Is there something wrong with the 
11-dimensional supergravity theory?
The answer to both of these sets of questions ties to the notion of duality.
Duality
Two structures that look quite different may nevertheless be the same. The 
two different ways of looking at one object can result in rather different views, 
as in the duck-rabbit shown—where, depending on whether you view the two 
protuberances as the beak of a duck or the ears of a rabbit, you can choose to 
see either a duck or a rabbit. Could the objects that you’re seeing be related in 
a similar way?

99
9. The Many Avatars of String Theory 
Let’s first use this viewpoint to address the role of the 11-dimensional 
supergravity in string theory. As you learned in previous lectures, in addition 
to strings, string theories contain D-branes—objects on which open strings 
can end. Each type of D-brane comes with the spatial dimension p of its 
worldvolume (hence, Dp-brane).
The type IIA string theory, in particular, has D-branes that enjoy the p value 
of 0, 2, 4, 6, and 8, while its cousin, type IIB theory, has the branes of p equal 
to 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9. If you consider the type IIA theory in 10-dimensional flat 
space, the only D-brane that can have finite extent—and therefore finite total 
mass—in its simplest flat configuration is the D0-brane, or D-particle. It has 
a mass given simply by the inverse string coupling: the mass of the D0 goes 
like 1 over the string coupling constant:
It turns out that there are actually bound states of multiple D0-branes, 
just as there is a bound state of the electron and the proton in nature. The 
multiple D0-brane bound states have some remarkable properties. The first is 
there is precisely one bound state for each possible number N of D0-branes. 
The second is it is a bound state at threshold. This means that the binding 
energy—the energy that holds the objects together, as compared to the energy 
of N widely separated D0-branes—vanishes. This thing just barely exists as 
a bound state. It follows that for all N, there is a bound state whose mass is 
equivalent to that of N D0-branes, namely given by N over g-string in the 
appropriate units:
These D0-brane bound states are also BPS states; the mass formula just stated 
is exact. That’s a peculiar regularity for a set of bound states. What could 
it mean?

9. The Many Avatars of String Theory 
100
Now, a brief distraction: Consider 11-dimensional supergravity, but instead of 
studying it in 11-dimensional flat space, consider it instead on a space of R9 
flat dimensions times a circle times time:
R9 × S1 × time.
In 11 dimensions, there is a massless graviton (and its supermultiple—the full 
set of states that follow from the graviton by acting with the supersymmetries 
of the theory). If you add a circle of radius R, you can consider versions of the 
graviton that carry momentum around the circle.
Single-valuedness of the quantum wave function of the graviton restricts 
the momentum (and therefore the mass of the resulting object, viewed by 
a 10-dimensional observer) to be quantized in units of inverse radius of the 
circle, 1/R. So, the momentum around the 10th spatial direction of the circle 
can be n/R, where n is 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 and the mass of the resulting nth state 
is n/R:
These graviton momentum modes on the circle are BPS; they preserve some 
supersymmetry, and the mass formula is exact.
Now compare the formula for D0 bound-state masses to the formula for 
graviton momentum mode masses. If you identify the number of D0-branes 
with the number of units of momentum of the graviton and the radius of the 
11-dimensional circle with the string coupling constant into g-string theory, 
for each D0-brane bound state of IIA string theory, there is a correspondingly 
unique graviton momentum mode of 11-dimensional supergravity with 
exactly the same mass (as seen by a 10-dimensional observer):
n = N, R ∼ gs.

101
9. The Many Avatars of String Theory 
This leads to a brave hypothesis: Maybe the IIA string theory at finite 
coupling is equivalent to an 11-dimensional theory on a circle whose radius is 
given by the coupling.
Another way to put this is that 11-dimensional supergravity (and whatever 
completes it as a theory that does not have non-renormalizable high-energy 
scattering) should be thought of as arising from the strong coupling limit of 
type IIA string theory.
This is the simplest example in a “duality web” that connects all of the 
10-dimensional string theories—and 11-dimensional supergravity—to one 
another. The full picture for these simple theories looks something like the 
unifying web you see here. All the spokes of the blob correspond to the 
theories described in this lecture, together with another one called type I 
(which wasn’t described). The blob in the middle is a space of values of scalar 
fields (parametrizing coupling constants or radii in the various duality frames 
of the different theories). For instance, the type I theory that wasn’t described 
was omitted because it is simply the strongly coupled version of one of the 
heterotic theories that was described in 10 dimensions (the one that has 
SO(32) symmetry).

9. The Many Avatars of String Theory 
102
These dualities that relate these different spokes of the web are cousins of the 
T-duality that you encountered previously in the course, which relates string 
theory on a circle of radius R to string theory on a circle of radius 1/R. In fact, a 
more careful version of that statement is that T-duality relates type IIA string 
theory on a circle of radius R to type IIB theory on a circle of radius 1/R. So, 
you have secretly known about some of the connections in the diagram for 
some time.
Reading
Witten, Edward. “Duality, Spacetime and Quantum Mechanics.” Physics 
Today 50, no. 5 (1997): 28–33.

103
10
Duality: Which 
String Theory Is 
Fundamental?
I
n the previous lecture, you discovered that there are a 
handful of naively different supersymmetric theories of 
quantum gravity in 10 and 11 space-time dimensions. This 
might seem to mean that you have a choice to make about 
which theory to explore, the true situation is more subtle and 
wonderful. The distinct theories fit together in a web in such 
a way that if you choose to explore one, you will inevitably 
be led to discovering all the others. They fit together in a 
“web” of theories, related by varying things like the string 
coupling constant or the sizes of compact dimensions. 
The example of this in this lecture will give you a flavor of 
how there can be deep interconnections between facts 
about pure mathematics on the one hand, string theory on 
the other, and conventional physics on a third. And these 
interconnections allow for the dualities that tie the string 
theory together in a web of theories.

10. Duality: Which String Theory Is Fundamental?
104
Relating Theories
In the previous lecture, you learned how to relate the IIA and IIB theories—
they are the same after you reduce on a circle by a T-duality. And you 
discovered how the 11-dimensional theory and the IIA theory are similarly 
related by circle compactification. But how are you to relate the other 
structures—the heterotic theories, with interesting gauge forces parametrized 
by groups like SO(32) or E8 × E8—to theories like the type II theories?
The heterotic theories carry half as much supersymmetry as their type II 
analogues. Theories with different amounts of supersymmetry can’t possibly 
(even secretly, or in a subtle way) be the same. This is where the notion of 
compactification once again comes to the rescue. In making any kind of 
realistic model of string theory, you will have to compactify some (most 
likely six) of the space-time dimensions. So it is very natural to consider 
compactifications where some of the spatial dimensions are curled up on a 
compact shape, usually called a manifold by mathematicians.
While the simplest example of a compact dimension is just a circle—and 
it has higher-dimensional simple analogues, such as the two-dimensional 
torus, which is like a product of two circles—these won’t help with the issue 
at hand. As it turns out, compactification of a supersymmetric theory on a 
circle or a product of circles like a torus can have many important physical 

105
10. Duality: Which String Theory Is Fundamental?
implications, but it does not change the number of supersymmetries—or 
symmetries relating bosons to fermions—that the theory exhibits. So, 
studying compactifications only on circles or on tori won’t allow you to relate 
theories of different amounts of supersymmetry like the type II and heterotic 
theories.
So, then, is there an overall choice you have to make at the start of your 
study of string theory? Happily, the answer is no. The key is that you can 
compactify the extra dimensions in such a way as to break some of the 
supersymmetry, so the low-energy physics—beneath the energy scale where 
you can probe the compact dimensions—appears to have less supersymmetry.
The vacuum solutions—or solutions with no sources of energy density 
present—that allow this are those where string theory is compactified on 
Calabi-Yau manifolds. Such manifolds can be studied using the theory of 
complex variables, and since each complex variable has two real numbers 
hidden in it (its real and imaginary parts), they have an even number of 
dimensions. So, they can exist in 2, 4, 6, or higher dimensions. The case of 
most interest for real-world phenomena would be 6, where they could be used 
to compactify string theory from 10 to the 4 space-time dimensions that are 
observed. But as theoretical tools to allow the exploration of the physics of 
string theory, such cases can be useful in other dimensions as well.
Classifying the Calabi-Yau Manifolds
As was discussed previously, a useful beginning for any science is taxonomy. 
And classifying all of the Calabi-Yau manifolds will help you get a handle on 
all supersymmetric vacuum solutions of string theory. While that is a far cry 
from understanding the real world, it would constitute a first step—a solution 
of an analogue spherical-cow problem.
The first step isn’t difficult. Two-dimensional compact spaces are classified 
by their number of handles, or genus. As vacuum solutions of string theory, 
Calabi-Yau manifolds have to admit a flat metric. You can show without 
much difficulty that the sphere doesn’t (after all, it is round), and similarly 
that surfaces with more than one hole, or genus greater than 1, also don’t. 
This leaves the case of genus 1, the two-dimensional torus. That is the 

10. Duality: Which String Theory Is Fundamental?
106
simplest example of a Calabi-Yau manifold. However, a two-dimensional 
torus can be viewed as a product of two circles, so by the previous lecture, 
it’s not going to break any supersymmetries when it is used to compactify 
a supersymmetric theory. You can’t use it to find a relationship between 
heterotic and type II strings.
So, how about in dimension four, the next case? First, you can dispense 
with the simplest example, the four-dimensional torus. It is again Calabi-
Yau, but not very interesting, being a product of circles. However, now 
there is an interesting example: the first example you’ve encountered of a 
nontrivial Calabi-Yau manifold. It is called the K3 surface—named after 
the mathematicians Ernst Kummer, Erich Kähler, and Kunihiko Kodaira, 
who did some of the most significant research uncovering its existence and 
properties. It’s difficult to picture this space, but some simple things can be 
said about it.
First, it admits a flat metric (so it’s a vacuum solution of the Einstein equations), 
but it is highly nontrivial. In particular, when it’s used to compactify a theory 
to lower dimensions, it breaks some of the supersymmetry of the higher-
dimensional theory.
Next, the flat metric on a K3 surface isn’t unique. Just as a circle comes with a 
parameter (just the size of a radius) and a torus comes with two parameters (its 
shape and size), the K3 surface comes with parameters, which mathematicians 
call moduli, parametrizing its Calabi-Yau metric. In this case, the number of 
parameters is not 1 or 2—it’s 20.
Third, while it is hard to write down an explicit example of a K3 surface in a 
way that makes the flat metric manifest obvious, you can easily write down 
spaces with the right topology, and then the theorem Calabi-Yau guarantees 
that the flat metric has to exist, but it isn’t obvious.
As one simple construction, for instance, you can take four complex variables—
z1, z2, z3, z4—and write a simple quartic equation that has terms like z14 and z24 
and sets the sum of all these terms to zero:
z14 + z24 + z34 + z44 = 0.

107
10. Duality: Which String Theory Is Fundamental?
In this construction, it becomes easy to understand what the 20 parameters 
giving K3 surfaces of slightly different shape are. Most of them simply appear by 
taking that quartic equation, which is a set of degree-four terms, and deforming 
it by other terms like to z14 and z24—you can add z12 × z22. The different ways of 
deforming the equation give you the parameters in the Yau metric.
This is oversimplifying a bit. That is one equation on four complex variables, 
which would leave a six-dimensional manifold. There’s also an overall scaling 
that identifies all points that differ by complex rescaling of the z variables. 
If you identify points on space as equivalent if they can be related by such a 
rescaling, you end up with a four-dimensional K3 surface. A picture of K3, 
obtained by cutting out slices of an equation like the previous one so that you 
can project it in two dimensions, looks like what you see here.

10. Duality: Which String Theory Is Fundamental?
108
Now you are in business. If you compactify, say, the type IIA theory on a K3 
surface, you will find a theory in the remaining six non-compact dimensions 
with the same number of supersymmetries as the heterotic theories. Of 
course, the heterotic theories live in 10 space-time dimensions. But you can 
get simple six-dimensional relatives by reducing them to six dimensions on a 
four-dimensional torus, preserving their supersymmetry.
This gives you two different natural families of supersymmetric theories in 
six dimensions: those you obtain from compactifying the heterotic strings on 
a torus or the type II strings on a Calabi-Yau manifold K3. A bit of counting 
shows that both come in 20-dimensional families. So, they have the same 
amount of supersymmetry and come with the same numbers of parameters, 
or moduli, that you can vary (which show up as scalar fields in the six-
dimensional physics). Are they the same, giving you a duality relating the type 
IIA theory to the heterotic theories?
Unfortunately, there is a problem with this idea. In the classification of 
10-dimensional supergravities, the heterotic theories appear as theories 
with big groups of symmetries, generalizing those of the standard model. 
Remember that such interactions are parametrized by a choice of group, and 
the relevant groups here are the groups SO(32) and E8 × E8. These are groups 
that are much larger than that of the standard model, but they happen to 
contain it as a smaller substructure. So, in particular, their presence means 
that the low-energy physics of heterotic theory exhibits many interesting 
forces generalizing the strong, weak, and electromagnetic forces in nature.
On the other hand, in the early days of string theory, it was proved that the 
type II theories cannot give rise to big symmetries like these. In fact, it was 
even shown that the standard model gauge group, or group of forces in four 
dimensions, can’t arise as the spectrum of fluctuations of a type II string in 
a perturbative framework. This seemed to indicate—to physicists of that 
era—that of the bifurcation of choices between heterotic theories on the one 
hand and type II theories on the other, which seemingly lived in different 
theoretical worlds, the former should be chosen.
This also seems to provide an insuperable obstacle to the goal of unifying the 
heterotic and type II theories via duality. But before giving up on such an 
elegant idea, let’s explore the space of K3 surfaces more thoroughly.

109
10. Duality: Which String Theory Is Fundamental?
Exploring the Space of K3 Surfaces
One interesting thing that can happen as you deform a smooth geometry—
say, taking a K3 surface given by the previous quartic equation and adding a 
quartic perturbation with a larger and larger coefficient—is the following.
Although by Yau’s theorem the space admits a flat metric in the relevant sense 
for Einstein’s equations (Ricci flatness), that still allows for local curvatures 
consistent with the Einstein equations. After all, space-time curvature is 
responsible for the perception of gravity in general relativity. And nothing 
guarantees that these local curvatures cannot grow large. (Examples where 
this happens include the big bang and black holes.) 
Exactly this phenomenon happens in K3 surfaces as 
you move around in their space of parameters. 
At various regions in the space of moduli, 
pinched regions on the K3 surface develop 
that look like conical singularities of the 
sort that are seen here.
It is hard to represent the full geometry of a K3 surface 
(which is four-dimensional) in such a picture that can 
be projected. The regions of high curvature that occur 
in K3 aren’t quite places like in the figure where an 
encircling rubber band could shrink to zero size, 
as would occur in what is seen. Rather, what 
happens in these regions is that a whole two-
dimensional curve within the K3 shrinks.
Strings are only one-dimensional, like rubber bands, and 
you can’t wrap a rubber band or one-dimensional 
object around a shrinking two-dimensional curve. 
But type IIA string theory also has the D-branes 
of various dimensions. In particular, it has a 
D2-brane: a brane with two-dimensional spatial 
extent. Such a two-dimensional object has 
exactly the right property to wrap around a 
shrinking curve. (Think of wrapping a sheet of 
tinfoil around a basketball, for example.)

10. Duality: Which String Theory Is Fundamental?
110
Since the D2-brane has a finite tension (determined by a ratio of the string 
tension and the string coupling), the resulting wrapped object gives rise—in 
the lower-dimensional or six-dimensional view—to an elementary particle 
whose mass is determined by the volume of the wrapped curve that the 
D2-brane is wrapping on the K3 surface. Normally, if the curve had a finite 
size, this would be a very massive particle (because the D2-brane tension is 
very large at finite string coupling). But if this curve shrinks to zero size—as 
it does at a true singularity of K3—then the resulting particle will become 
massless, and it should appear in the low-energy physics as it will to a low-
energy six-dimensional observer.
Now, an interesting set of questions: What are the possible singularities of 
K3 surfaces, and what kinds of elementary particles do the resulting wrapped 
branes give rise to in the low-energy theory that a physicist uses to describe 
what is happening on each singular K3 surface?
Mathematicians have classified the allowed singularities of K3 surfaces. And 
amazingly, they have a classification that precisely lines up with the groups 
of symmetries, or gauge groups—including SO(32) and E8 × E8—that 
can appear in the heterotic string theory when it’s compactified on a four-
dimensional torus. To make the match precise, remember that in a gauge 
theory with charged matter particles (like the standard model), the gauge 
group can be “Higgsed” so that the gauge bosons become massive.
In the match between heterotic and type II theories, the singular K3 surfaces 
correspond to points in the heterotic theory where the corresponding 
symmetry is not Higgsed. And generic smooth K3 surfaces correspond to 
heterotic theories where all the interesting gauge symmetry (apart from a 
handful of photons) has been broken by the Higgs mechanism.
More on Relationships
What you’ve discovered so far in this lecture is that naively, there is a 
disconnect of string theories into two worlds: the world of heterotic strings 
and that of type II strings. The former has less supersymmetry but more 
gauge symmetry.

111
10. Duality: Which String Theory Is Fundamental?
Just accounting for particles coming from perturbative fluctuating strings—the 
things made out of oscillating, winding, moving strings—you can’t possibly 
find type II theories that match the properties of the heterotic theories.
But the type II theories also contain D-branes. Accounting for these—and, 
in particular, for the physics they can give rise to in singular geometries—you 
can, in fact, find a duality that relates type II and heterotic theories.
The two are different faces of the same underlying theoretical structure. If 
you consider a theory arising from one, you necessarily have the other as 
part of your framework. That shows that intricate and deep facts about the 
geometry of manifolds (aspects of what mathematicians call differential 
and algebraic geometry) can play an important part in understanding string 
theory. In fact, this relationship can also be flipped: In richer physical 
circumstances that enjoy less supersymmetry, you can use string theory to 
make striking predictions for differential and algebraic geometry.
You might wonder if you can demonstrate more directly the relationship 
between the type IIA string on K3 and the heterotic string on a torus. As 
was described, the two strings themselves have very different physics on the 
worldsheet: The type IIA string has 8 left- and right-moving bosons as well 
as their superpartners, whereas the heterotic string has a chiral structure. It 
has the same right-moving degrees of freedom as the type IIA string, but its 
left movers involve 8 bosons and a large number of (or, more precisely, 16 
complex) fermions.
If the type IIA string theory is equivalent to the heterotic string theory, then 
since the heterotic string exists as an excitation on one side of the duality 
(namely, in the heterotic theory itself), there has to be some object that looks 
like a heterotic string also on the type IIA side. And in fact, it can be precisely 
identified.
The type IIA theory has p-branes for various values of p, including p = 5. If 
you consider wrapping its p = 5 (or five-plus-one-dimensional) brane over the 
entire K3 surface, then a five-dimensional object wrapping a four-dimensional 
space leaves a one-dimensional object or a string sticking out in the remaining 
six dimensions of space-time. And you can prove—by using detailed facts 
about the geometry of K3—that the degrees of freedom living on the 
remaining string precisely match those of the dual heterotic string.

10. Duality: Which String Theory Is Fundamental?
112
In other words, the heterotic string moving around on a torus—which is the 
basis for a fundamental theory in its own right—can also be viewed as arising 
from studying the dynamics of a complicated excitation in the type IIA theory. 
It’s not related to the fundamental string there. And in fact, the reverse is true: 
The type II string arises as a wrapped 5-brane in the heterotic string theory.
This raises an interesting question: If both the heterotic and type II strings 
arise as complicated excitations in the other, which one is fundamental? 
The lesson for physics—learned also in many other contexts—is that 
“fundamental” is in the eye of the beholder. In some regimes of the parameter 
space (for instance, when the K3 surface is very large and type IIA string 
coupling is weak), it may be easier to understand one description than the 
other (in that case, the type II description). But neither is more fundamental, 
and for other choices of parameters, the other description will be easier to 
understand.
Reading
Kachru, Shamit. “Learning to Count in String Theory.” Simons Foundation 
Presidential Lecture, February 27, 2019. https://www.simonsfoundation.org/
event/learning-to-count-in-string-theory/.

113
11
Finding Evidence 
for String Theory
T
his lecture discusses a highly speculative topic: How 
might string theory make contact with experiment? 
That is, how might evidence be discovered that string 
theory—instead of just being a consistent theoretical 
framework—actually describes the universe? String 
theory is a sophisticated theoretical framework. As it’s 
been described in this course, it can capture physics 
in a variety of dimensions. It encompasses worlds with 
and without supersymmetry. And it seems to exhibit 
a bewildering landscape of different vacua. Given 
all this variety, how can it be decided which aspects 
of the theory are likely to yield clues in experiment? 
Instead of searching for smoking-gun evidence of the 
fundamental strings themselves, this lecture discusses 
more generic signatures: things that string theory 
suggests that could show up in the next generation of 
experiments.

11. Finding Evidence for String Theory
114
Prediction I: There Are Extra Dimensions of Space-Time
The first generic prediction of string theory is that there are extra dimensions 
of space-time. This is, after all, maybe the first and most obvious, direct 
tension between string theory and the standard model—string theories 
naturally live in higher-dimensions, while the physics seen in experiment is 
resolutely in three-plus-one dimensions. However, could it be that there are 
extra dimensions to be found just around the corner in experiment and they 
might be discovered with modern-day experiments? To explore this possibility, 
let’s examine two rather different cases.
In the first, the standard model itself is secretly a higher-dimensional theory. 
In other words, if you were able to view nature with a microscope and see 
a fifth dimension, each of the standard-model particles would actually be a 
particle that was free to move in all four spatial dimensions—that is, they 
could also move around the “tiny circle” hidden above each point of the 
visible space. In this scenario, the standard model itself is intrinsically a five- 
or six- or whatever-dimensional theory. Each of its particles—for instance, 
the electron—has a possible velocity in the fifth dimension as well as the 
(observable) velocity in the visible spatial dimensions.
There is no evidence of such a fifth dimension. The fifth dimension would 
result in a tower of particles called a Kaluza-Klein tower that corresponds to 
each of the particles seen in nature. This is because, for instance, the electron 
could have a momentum of 1/R, 2/R, 3/R, … , “around” the hypothetical fifth 
dimension of radius R. Such cousins of the electron are not seen; they would 
show up in the world as additionally charged particles. You might think that 
perhaps you can interpret the muon or the tau particle that way, but that 
interpretation doesn’t work because the additional modes in the tower that the 
interpretation would require are not seen.
That doesn’t mean that there can’t be a fifth dimension like this. It just means 
that there must be a bound on its radius R. The fifth dimension has to be 
small enough—and the Kaluza-Klein tower of electrons heavy enough—that 
they aren’t produced in modern experiments. In practice, a combination 
of the big collider experiments that can produce new charged particles put 
stringent bounds on such an extra dimension. At the very least, new cousins 
of the electron must have a mass above the TeV scale probed by experiments at 
Fermilab and CERN.

115
11. Finding Evidence for String Theory
In terms of a size of the extra dimensions, this translates into a rough bound 
that any new dimension in which the standard model also lives has to be less 
than about 10−17 centimeters in size. That’s pretty small. There is no especially 
good motivation to think that extra dimensions do exist around (or just below) 
that scale, but it certainly is a question of interest for present-day experiments, 
and in fact, modern collaborations put bounds on such dimensions.
There is another possibility for extra dimensions that is perhaps even more 
intriguing. String theory contains branes, which fill a subset of the spatial 
dimensions. These branes have particles—including both charged particles 
and force-carrying particles—that live purely on the brane worldvolume itself, 
instead of living in the “bulk” of the space-time. These localized particles 
come, for instance, from open strings that end on the brane.
So, consider a model of string theory where the standard model lives on 
D-branes in the extra dimensions. There could be transverse extra dimensions 
where none of the standard-model particles propagate. Since the string scale—
which governs masses of oscillating open strings—
can be as high as roughly the Planck 
mass, there would be no visible 
“fatter” cousins of the electron or 
other charged particles in this kind 
of scenario. So the methods that 
exist for finding extra dimensions 
in the first scenario don’t apply here. 
There is no Kaluza-Klein tower of 
electrons with momentum in the 
fifth dimension.
But not all is lost. One inevitable fact 
about string theory is that the graviton 
comes from the lightest closed-string 
mode. And unlike its open-string cousins, the closed 
string doesn’t need to end on branes. So a closed string—including the 
graviton—can exist anywhere in space-time. If there are extra dimensions of 
size R, there need not be Kaluza-Klein electrons, but there will certainly be 
Kaluza-Klein cousins of the graviton. And their masses will go like the inverse 
radius 1/R.

11. Finding Evidence for String Theory
116
How would these show up in an experiment? 
Conceptually, the easiest way to think about 
this is in terms of the gravitational force itself. 
While Newton’s law applies to well-separated 
masses in the familiar world, it could be 
modified in a higher-dimensional world.
In fact, a good way to think about the Newtonian force (or the electromagnetic 
force) is in terms of an argument due to Carl Friedrich Gauss. Suppose you 
draw lines of gravitational force emanating from the particle as shown below. 
In a flat two-dimensional world, the density of such lines 
would fall off as 1/r a distance r away from the object—
because all of the field lines have to go through 
any surrounding circle, and the circle of radius 
r has circumference that grows with them. 
A similar argument in a world with three 
spatial dimensions shows that the density 
of lines of force falls off as force feels like 
1 over r squared:
This is the origin of the inverse square laws 
of gravity and electromagnetism in the three-
dimensional world.
But suppose that secretly space-time has five dimensions and there is a fourth 
spatial dimension. And say it has radius R. Then, there are two relevant 
regimes where you might probe the strength of gravity: at distances small or 
large compared to r. For particles separated by short distances less than r, the 
field lines don’t even notice that the fifth dimension is compact with a finite 
radius. They will spread out as if they move in flat four-dimensional space. 
And as a result, the field lines and forces will fall as 1 over distance cubed for 
gravity at such short distances:

117
11. Finding Evidence for String Theory
Meanwhile, at longer distances—large compared to the size of the extra 
dimensions—the gravitational field lines will effectively ignore the compact 
dimension. They are too small to matter, relative to the large distance between 
the objects attracting each other via gravity. But there will be Kaluza-Klein 
gravitons—gravitons with momentum in the extra dimension. These can 
also be exchanged between massive objects, and they will contribute small 
corrections to the force that’s normally contributed by the graviton. And in 
fact, the result will then be that the field line density in forces fall off as in an 
inverse square law with small exponential corrections that decay with distance:
It shouldn’t be surprising that the gravitational force between separated objects 
is something that can be probed using precision experiments (though actually 
isolating the gravitational force is challenging because electromagnetic forces 
are so much stronger). You have to be exquisitely careful to electromagnetically 
shield your experiment because even a tiny induced charge can lead to electric 
forces that overwhelm any gravitational contribution.
Regardless, a combination of experiments by today’s careful experimentalists 
constrain any extra dimensions even where only gravity propagates. In units of 
the micron, which is about 1/1,000 of a millimeter, the largest extra dimensions 
are thought to be bounded by about a few microns in size. While this is 
a significant constraint, it is impressive how much weaker the constraints 
become once you confine the standard-model particles to a brane.
Prediction II: There Are Strings
A second generic prediction of string theory—maybe a more obvious one—
is that there are strings. Despite what you might think, this is not a 100% 
universal prediction of string theory. For instance, in the limit of the structure 
known as string theory that is described by 11-dimensional supergravity, there 
are no evident stable string states. Nevertheless, it is fair to say that strings 
are present in a great many of the realistic constructions coming out of string 
theory today. Could directly observing strings be a hope?

11. Finding Evidence for String Theory
118
The main difficulty here is that in most proposed realistic versions of string 
theory, the string scale—or the size of strings—is somewhere around the 
Planck scale (which is 10−32 centimeters), or maybe larger by a factor of 
10 or 100. That is far too small to hope to see in direct experiment in any 
foreseeable future.
Bounds on charged cousins of the standard-model particle place a bound 
on how low you could push the string scale, for the same reasons described 
in discussing Kaluza-Klein modes of charged particles like the electron. So, 
even in a less motivated scenario where the string scale is as low as possible, it 
would be bounded by the TeV scale. Certainly, excited string modes have not 
been seen at the Large Hadron Collider, at least yet.
But there is another avenue for hope. Remember, in learning about early-
universe cosmology, you discovered the fantastic physics of inflation. This 
is a period in the history of the early universe when the energy density was 
dominated by a potential energy for an inflaton field whose potential had 
a peculiar flat shape. The universe inflated as the inflaton rolled down its 
flat potential, and eventually (as it reached its minimum and relaxed to its 
ground state), the inflaton dumped all its energy into the standard-model 
particles. This created the hot big bang. It is interesting to ask whether models 
of inflation can be accommodated in string theory, and if so, what is the 
inflaton field?
Some research in the early 21st century intensely explored classes of models where 
the inflaton is a scalar field parametrizing separation of D-branes in the extra 
dimensions required by string theory. Recall that a scalar field is just a field that 
associates a number to each point in space-time. (In this case, that number is the 
separation of the branes in the extra dimensions above the given point in space.)
In the right circumstances, the potential attracting the branes to one another 
can be suitably mild, resulting in the flat potential required for inflation. This 
potential arises by the combination of the exchange of gravitational and other 
force fields in the extra dimensions. At the end of inflation, the branes crash 
into one another. The resulting collision can result in the release of energy in 
many forms, including in the form of macroscopic strings that stretch across 
the (then-hot-and-dense) universe.

119
11. Finding Evidence for String Theory
It is worth explaining why the strings can form and be macroscopic. This 
happens because at the end of inflation, the field that causes a smooth exit 
from the inflationary phase of cosmic history condenses in a 
potential that looks like a Mexican hat, or sombrero. There 
is a circle of ground states, or lowest-energy states, 
where this field can attain its final value. 
However, nothing says that the scalar field 
will roll to the same lowest-energy state—the 
same point on the rim of the hat—at different 
points in space. In fact, causality prevents that 
from happening instantly in all points in space.
As inflation ends in different parts of the universe, the scalar field will 
generically roll down to different minima in different parts of space. It is a 
subtle exercise—carried out by Tom Kibble in the 1970s—to see that this 
means that in a small part of the universe, the scalar will be forced to live 
“on top of the hill” and carry energy density instead of rolling down to the 
rim. Each region where the scalar encircles the rim once will eventually have 
a cosmic string produced by the resulting energy contained in the scalar 
field. These regions will form strings that will generically be the size of 
the cosmological horizon, or distance light can have traveled at the time of 
inflation, and these strings will expand with the universe as it evolves.

11. Finding Evidence for String Theory
120
All that this mathematical argument means is that, generically, the end of 
brane inflation will produce cosmic superstrings. String theory actually 
contains different flavors of strings. In addition to the fundamental string 
after which string theory is named, there are also D1-branes, which are 
also stringlike objects. Brane inflation can result in the production of both 
fundamental and D-strings, and both are candidate cosmic superstrings that 
could be stretching across the sky.
The idea that there are cosmic strings stretching across the sky may seem 
fanciful. But it is an idea with a long lineage that long predates the study of 
string theory models that exhibit this behavior. In fact, in the early 1990s, one 
of the exciting new ideas in cosmology was that such cosmic strings may have 
been the initial seeds of density fluctuations that eventually collapse into the 
galaxies and clusters of galaxies observed today.
That is no longer believed to be the case—perturbations from cosmic 
inflation have replaced cosmic strings as the leading model of structure 
formation, with much supporting evidence—but the properties and 
observability of string networks were studied intensely at that time. These 
studies were extended and updated by Edmund Copeland, Robert Myers, 
Joseph Polchinski, and others after 2005, when models of inflation based on 
branes became a subject of intense investigation. The upshot of their work is 
that cosmic strings may be visible in a few different ways.
The first discovery method involves imagining the image you’d see of a 
distant light source (a bright star, galaxy, or cluster) if it came to you from 
roughly behind a cosmic string source. 

121
11. Finding Evidence for String Theory
The light going around the string in either direction would be bent by its 
gravitational field, consistent with Einstein’s general relativity. The result 
would be that you would see multiple images of the background source due 
to lensing of the cosmic strings. The search for such images in the cosmic 
background is a fascinating and ongoing activity. Every now and then, a 
rumor of such an object circulates, but unfortunately none have withstood 
scientific scrutiny yet.
A second discovery method involves the detection of gravitational waves emitted 
by the string network. Every so often, as a macroscopic string oscillates back and 
forth, it produces a sharp cusp on its worldvolume. This sharp feature results in 
the emission of significant gravitational wave signatures that could be detected 
by ongoing searches for gravitational waves. The size of this effect scales with 
the tension (μ) of the strings in the string network, with the dimensionless ratio 
of merit being Newton’s constant times the tension of the string:
GNewton × μ.
The tension of any network produced by 
cosmic inflation will depend on the energy 
scale at the end of inflation and therefore 
is tied to another parameter of significant 
microphysical interest. But to date, there 
are only bounds on the scale. No such 
strings have been detected through their 
gravitational wave signatures.

11. Finding Evidence for String Theory
122
Quantum Engineering
So far, the methods you’ve encountered of making contact with string theory 
have followed the traditional path of discovery in physics. An observation of a 
new phenomenon in nature would lead to inference of new microphysics.
In the blossoming era of quantum engineering, there is another exciting 
possibility. A central discovery in string theory has been holography. A bulk 
theory of gravity in D-dimensional space-time can sometimes be equivalently 
described by a normal quantum field theory of matter in forces without 
gravity in D − 1 space-time dimensions. Can researchers turn this around and 
engineer a higher-dimensional theory of gravity by constructing the boundary 
quantum theory directly?
While scientists would see the fundamental quantum mechanical degrees of 
freedom in the lab, the experiments they would perform on these quantum 
bits of information (or qubits) would have their most ready interpretation in 
terms of a dual gravitational theory. This would be direct laboratory evidence 
for the validity of holography and the emergence of an anti–de Sitter space-
time description for suitable strongly coupled quantum matter theories. 
Instead of discovering evidence of quantum gravity in nature, researchers 
would have engineered quantum gravity in the lab.
At present, this remains a pipe dream. The quantum theories that are dual to 
anything that is recognizable as a gravity theory are very peculiar beasts. They 
have many degrees of freedom; they have a spectrum of excitations, or excited 
states, that is very sparse at low energies, so there is very little to see; and they 
have very strong coupling. Making a system with a large number of degrees of 
freedom in the lab is trivial—after all, any tiny slab of metal has Avogadro’s 
number of electrons in it. But arranging these degrees of freedom so that 
they interact strongly with a very sparse spectrum of low-energy excitations 
is a very difficult task. Absent these properties, you will not have produced a 
system whose best description is in terms of higher-dimensional gravity.
Nevertheless, with the impressive advances in quantum control evident in 
modern atomic physics laboratories—significantly motivated by the very 
different goal of building a quantum computer—you can anticipate tentative 
early explorations in this direction in the future.

123
11. Finding Evidence for String Theory
Reading
Arkani-Hamed, Nima, Savas Dimopoulos, and Gia Dvali. “Large Extra 
Dimensions: A New Arena for Particle Physics.” Physics Today 55, no. 2 
(2002): 35–40.
Battersby, Stephen. “Cosmic String: The Search Continues.” New Scientist, 
February 20, 2008. https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg19726441-700-
cosmic-string-the-search-continues/.

124
12
Emergence: Can We 
Test String Theory?
T
his lecture discusses a subtle and controversial topic 
related to string theory. But obtaining a proper 
understanding of this topic also offers insight into many 
other aspects of physics. You will discover why it is true, 
and not at all surprising, that it has been so hard to verify or 
disprove string theory. After all, the fundamental postulate 
of the simplest limits of string theory—that the fundamental 
constituents of matter are made of tiny loops of string—
sounds simple enough. Why can’t scientists just look 
and check?
To make sure it doesn’t sound like this lecture is telling a 
just-so story about string theory, the lecture addresses 
a few other cases in physics where what you see (as an 
observer of long-distance experiments) and what you get 
(as a fundamental underlying theory) are rather different. Of 
course, in all these cases, with the benefit of hindsight, the 
“right” answer for the underlying theory is already known. But 
the analogy should make it clear just how subtle and difficult 
it might be to see the strings underlying string theory.

125
12. Emergence: Can We Test String Theory?
Coulomb’s Law
The underlying cause of possible confusion is that the laws of physics can 
appear to change in form as the distance scale at which they are probed is 
changed. So, consider, for instance, Coulomb’s law, where two charges will 
attract or repel each other with a force proportional to the product of their 
charges divided by the distance squared:
Why does anything change when this simple law is applied to real-world 
systems? There are at least two interrelated reasons.
The first is that macroscopic systems often contain many particles. Then, 
interparticle interactions with many pairs of particles have to be averaged. So, 
for instance, in a plasma (a gas of charged particles)—a bath of positive and 
negative charges interacting in a container—on average, each negatively charged 
particle will be screened at long distances by attracting a few of the positively 
charged particles a little closer to its location. That means that it can be hard 
to figure out what the charges and properties of the basic charge carriers are. 
Their apparent properties can be modified by their tendency to hide themselves 
behind clouds of slightly attracted partners of the opposite charge.
Secondly, quantum mechanics means that even pair-wise interactions between 
charged particles vary in a subtle way with distance. Heisenberg’s uncertainty 
principle says, for instance, that you can’t know both the position and 
momentum of a particle, or you can’t measure energy to arbitrary precision 
over very short times:

12. Emergence: Can We Test String Theory?
126
In quantum mechanics, classical objects are fuzzed out by the Heisenberg 
uncertainty principle. Everything that is not forbidden is compulsory, and 
consistent with the rules of quantum mechanics, the vacuum can “borrow” 
virtual particle pairs for short amounts of time.
In other words, the energy-time uncertainty relationship allows you to borrow 
the energy to create, for instance, a virtual electron-positron pair where the 
two pop out a vacuum and then re-annihilate, and such pairs can contribute 
in appropriate Feynman diagrams that govern the electromagnetic interaction. 
The result is a screening of the interparticle interactions as you move to long 
distances. A real electron will attract the positron in the virtual pair a little bit 
and repel the electron a little bit, thereby slightly screening its charge. This is 
analogous to what happens in plasmas.
As a result, if you scatter electrons off each other, or off positrons at very 
short distances, the effective strength of the electromagnetic interaction 
will vary. This was seen directly in experiments both at the Stanford Linear 
Accelerator Center and CERN, where the effective coupling constant alpha in 
quantum electrodynamics varies, drawing to weaker and weaker values as you 
go long distances before it approaches the value 1/137. Putting both of these 
effects together—the presence of many particles and the existence of vacuum 
fluctuations—can result in profound alterations from what you might naively 
expect from reductionism in the style of the ancient Greeks.

127
12. Emergence: Can We Test String Theory?
The Physics of Metals
A slab of metal is comprised of an array of atoms arranged in a lattice. An 
isolated atom has a caricature as a solar system, where there is a central 
nucleus with protons and neutrons and electrons orbiting the central nucleus. 
In a metal, the nuclei arrange themselves in a regular lattice, but the naively 
bound electrons can roam free across the metal without being closely localized 
to a single nucleus. The mass of a free electron has been measured to high 
accuracy:
me = 9.10938291 × 10−31 kilograms.
You can also measure the force on charge carriers in a metal. One common 
technique to do this sticks the metal on a transverse magnetic field and looks 
at the cyclotron orbits of the electrons caused by their motion in the magnetic 
field. The electrons move in little circular orbits, and the frequency of these 
orbits can be measured. And that measurement determines the effective mass 
of the particle that is moving in the orbit.
The most naive picture would be that the properties of the electron in a 
metal—including its effective mass—would be the same as those of the 
electron in vacuum. But the actual results are much more interesting. It turns 
out that the effective mass of whatever’s present in the metal that’s supposed 
to be an electron can be renormalized by the medium by a factor of up to 
30, depending on the medium, or the detailed properties of the metal. The 
emergent charge carrier, or quasiparticle, shares some of the properties of 
the electron.

12. Emergence: Can We Test String Theory?
128
A heuristic model of what’s going on is as follows: Consider a horse running 
along a dusty trail. A detailed picture with a fine camera would reveal a horse 
and individual dust motes that it’s kicking up. But far away, if the horse is 
running fast, you might instead see a vague object surrounded by a cloud of 
dirt. The moving object seen from far away will have its own effective radius 
(that of the dirt cloud that surrounds the horse) and its own mass (since the 
dust cloud adds some mass to that of the horse). That object might be called a 
quasi-horse, by analogy with quasiparticles—so it is with the dressed electron 
quasiparticles in a metal.
If emergent properties of something as prosaic as an electron in a metal can 
change so drastically, are even more drastic changes possible?
Nuclear Beta Decay
In the early 20th century, nuclear physicists began to experimentally 
characterize the processes that are allowed to interconvert among 
different nuclei characterizing different elements. One of 
the most mysterious was something called nuclear beta 
decay, where a nucleus could emit an energetic electron 
and transform to a different nucleus of approximately 
the same mass. As expertise about the world 
of elementary particles grew, this process 
was later recognized as one in which, for 
instance, a neutron in the nucleus decays to 
a proton, electron, and electron antineutrino. 

129
12. Emergence: Can We Test String Theory?
In a Feynman diagram, this kind of process could be represented by an 
interaction vertex where a neutron comes in and a proton, electron, and 
antineutrino all come out.
When you think about the coupling constant, called the Fermi constant, that 
would characterize such a process, governing the interconversion rate between 
nuclei, a slight problem emerges. In terms of dimensional analysis, you can 
show that because four fermion fields emerge from the vertex, the Fermi 
coupling constant has the dimensions of an inverse mass squared. From the 
prior discussion of the non-renormalizable nature of gravity—where the root 
problem was that Newton’s coupling constant has dimensions of inverse mass 
squared—you can anticipate a problem. And indeed, there is one.
In the Fermi theory, while for a suitable choice of the Fermi coupling a good 
description of nuclear phenomenology is found, a prediction is that as you 
consider higher-energy processes, the rate for proton-neutron scattering will 
diverge as a power of the center of mass energy. Now that does not happen 
in nature. To understand what happens instead, you need to first consider 
electron-proton interactions. Because electrons scatter off protons in nature, 
you might expect that there is a four-fermion interaction with an incoming 
electron and proton and an outgoing electron and proton.
But quantum electrodynamics splits up this would-be analog of the four-
fermion interaction by introducing an intermediate photon. Instead of a 
point-like interaction between two protons and two electrons, a photon 
gets exchanged between an electron and proton, mediating their scattering. 
The force-carrying particle, the photon, changes the behavior of the theory 
at higher energies. There is not a problem with electron-proton scattering 
growing without bound at high energies.

12. Emergence: Can We Test String Theory?
130
Could a similar thing happen for the weak interactions? 
Indeed, it was proposed in the 1950s that secretly the 
nuclear beta decay is mediated by exchange of another 
force-carrying particle. This would predict the existence 
of a new elementary particle: a force-carrying particle 
mediating the so-called weak interactions. Such a particle, 
the W boson—introduced completely by analogy to the 
photon—was later directly seen at experiments in CERN 
in the 1980s.
By measuring the rate of beta decay, you can measure the strength of the four-
fermion coupling between protons, neutrons, electrons, and antineutrinos. 
Dimensional analysis relates this coupling to an inverse mass squared—and 
this mass scale can be identified with the mass of the missing force-carrying 
particle. Indeed, the W boson has the correct mass to be the missing particle 
in this story.
Why can the W boson and its mass be discovered this way, but the same thing 
doesn’t happen with the massless photon? The reason is that the mass scale 
inferred from the Fermi interaction is very high compared to the energy of 
the particles involved in nuclear beta decay. This means that in the Feynman 
diagram describing beta decay, the W boson is a virtual particle that only 
exists for a very short time—a time much shorter than the other time scales 
involved in the beta decay process. If you blink, you can effectively ignore 
the W-boson exchange and see a four-fermion vertex. The only hint of its 
existence is in the mass scale that characterizes the four-fermion term. None 
of this is true in the case of electromagnetic interactions.

131
12. Emergence: Can We Test String Theory?
The Short-Distance Theory of Strong Interactions
The basic constituents of the atom are the electron, proton, and neutron, 
arranged in a solar-system-like model with the electron orbiting a nucleus 
in order to make the atoms that are familiar from chemistry. But particle 
physicists use very-high-energy electrons in particle colliders as “microscopes,” 
scattering them off nuclei to see the protons and neutrons in the nucleus. 
And the results of such experiments show that there is internal structure 
even inside these nucleons. The proton and neutron are each made up of 
three point-like constituents that are now called up and down quarks. The 
quarks attract each other with the strong nuclear interactions. In an opposite 
behavior to what is seen in electromagnetism, where charge was screened at 
long distances, the strong force exhibits anti-screening. It becomes stronger 
and stronger at long distances.
So, the short-distance theory of strong interactions is basically a theory of 
“almost free” quarks. But because of this anti-screening, the strong force 
strongly confines the quarks in proximity to one another as you try to 
separate them. So, at long distances, instead of seeing quarks, you find “strong 
neutral force” neutral objects: the protons, neutrons, and mesons that are seen 
in nature.
Now, suppose you were to try to isolate a free quark. Try as you might, 
you’re going to fail. The flux tube of strong force carriers—or gluons—will 
tie the quarks together, almost like an open string holding its ends together. 
It is this flux tube of gluons that implements the anti-screening of the 
strong interactions, causing a linearly growing strength of the confining 
interaction as you try to separate quarks. This is different from atoms in 

12. Emergence: Can We Test String Theory?
132
electromagnetism, which you can break apart (or ionize). The quarks are 
confined. In this theory, in the short-distance description, you see the 
individual up, charm, top, and so forth, quarks. But at long distances—due 
to anti-screening—you get particles like the protons, neutrons, and mesons of 
quantum chromodynamics (QCD) phenomenology.
Going from the baryons and mesons (made of triplets and pairs of quarks, 
respectively) seen in experiment to the fundamental theory of the strong 
force—QCD—was quite an adventure. It spanned many decades and 
required several Nobel Prize–winning experimental and theoretical 
discoveries to uncover the story.
The Role of Emergence in Physics
This lecture has tried to offer some sense of the role of emergence in physics. 
It plays a key role in condensed-matter physics, where the microscopic 
electrons at short distances manifest in surprising quasiparticles (and even 
more surprising behaviors, such as superconductivity) at long distances. It 
plays a key role in particle physics, where the existence of W bosons at short 
distance (or high energy) gives rise to the striking phenomena of nuclear 
physics, such as nuclear beta decay.

133
12. Emergence: Can We Test String Theory?
And sometimes emergence means that the objects seen at long distances, 
where experiments are conducted, don’t even have a simple relation to the 
basic constituent objects of the theory. This is the case, for instance, in the 
theory of the strong interactions. The fundamental quarks have at best a very 
indirect relationship to the basic objects seen at long distances in experiments.
These examples all illustrate some important, more general features of physics. 
Physics is organized by energy scale or distance. The degrees of freedom best 
for describing the system at short distances (such as electrons or quarks) may 
or may not be those best suited for describing its behavior at long distances 
(such as quasiparticles in a metal or the protons in an atom).
Sometimes the reorganization as you go from short- to long-distance scales 
is quantitative in nature. So, in a metal, the quasiparticle mass differs from 
the electron mass, but it is vaguely recognizable as a “fat electron.” Happily, 
direct high-energy experiments can be done to see the electron, so it can be 
recognized when it’s disguised in quasiparticle form.
Sometimes the reorganization is so complicated that modern mathematics 
had to be imported into theoretical physics to understand it. This was 
the case with the strong interactions, where the relationship between the 
quarks at short distance and the protons, neutrons, and their cousins at 
long distance required physicists to learn about the theory of Lie groups and 
their representations. Fortunately, after many decades, direct high-energy 
experiments could be done to produce the quarks, and hence they could be 
recognized in nucleon form.
In the case of a potential string theory of the real world, direct high-energy 
experiments cannot be done to “see” the strings. In most versions of string 
theory, observing the relevant energy scale to directly see excited strings would 
require a collider many orders of magnitude more powerful than any that can 
be imagined to be built, even in the most optimistic future scenario.
So, while string theory gives all evidence of being a unified theory of 
interactions much like those seen in nature, finding direct evidence for 
strings in the real world may remain a distant hope for the foreseeable future. 
Researchers will have to be really lucky. On the other hand, it would be 
inappropriate and even misleading to conclude these lectures by just saying 

12. Emergence: Can We Test String Theory?
134
string theory awaits confirmation of its fruitfulness from experiment and that 
researchers will need to be lucky to get that confirmation. In pure research, 
the fruitfulness of a research endeavor should be judged by the impact 
its ideas enjoy in neighboring areas. Does it produce insights that inform 
investigations in cognate fields?
With string theory, the past decades have seen this kind of interaction blossom 
with many other areas.
Highlights of String Theory Informing Other Fields
Most clearly, the inspiration from string- and brane-inspired models of extra 
dimensions has reverberated in studies of theoretical particle physics and 
early-universe cosmology.
Two of the best-studied ideas for understanding the so-called hierarchy 
problem of particle physics—the problem of why the Higgs physics of the 
standard model occurs so far beneath the Planck scale of gravity—involve 
physics in extra dimensions. One idea posits that there could be large 
extra dimensions of space and that their size gives a direct mathematical 
explanation of the hierarchy. Another hypothesizes that a slice of anti–de 
Sitter space-time—the hero in the discussion of holography—geometrizes the 
hierarchy and allows it to be understood directly.
In early-universe cosmology, models of inflation based on brane dynamics 
inspired some of the earliest work on understanding the detailed structure of 
so-called non-Gaussianities in the density fluctuations that seeded current-day 
galaxies. These non-Gaussianities, which could have resulted from the detailed 
nature of the inflation potential and could allow the reconstruction of aspects 
of inflationary history, are one holy grail of modern cosmological experiments.
But also—and maybe more surprisingly—string theory has led to tremendous 
developments in modern mathematics. As just one example, the study of string 
theory compactifications on Calabi-Yau manifolds has led to the discovery of 
startling new dualities, generalizing those addressed in prior lectures. These 

135
12. Emergence: Can We Test String Theory?
show, for instance, that strings can sometimes view topologically distinct 
manifolds as being equivalent (as their use in string compactification gives rise 
to completely equivalent, lower-dimensional physics).
This can turn into a powerful computational tool. Computing physical 
quantities in one side of the duality translates into mathematically powerful 
statements in the other side (where the computation is less tractable). This 
strategy applied to the duality known as mirror symmetry has yielded infinite 
series of predictions in enumerative geometry, a subject where mathematicians 
try to give counts of geometric objects having certain special properties.
Finally, there has been a burgeoning desire to connect string descriptions 
of quantum gravity with modern ideas of quantum information theory. 
Recall that holography relates a quantum gravity theory in D dimensions 
to a conventional quantum theory of matter and forces in D − 1 space-
time dimensions. A basic slogan that many researchers have explored is 
that in holography, information about the state of the higher-dimensional 
quantum gravity theory is stored in the lower-dimensional dual in an 
analogue of a “quantum error-correcting code.” The redundancy present in 
the error-correction mechanism is reflected in the precise map that allows 
reconstruction of the gravity state from the dual theory.
All of these connections promise continued fruitful exploration.
Reading
Laughlin, Robert. A Different Universe. New York: Basic Books, 2005.

136
The Standard Model
QUARKS
LEPTONS

137
The Standard Model
GAUGE BOSONS

138
Image Credits
i: Candace Boissy; 2: Getty Images; 22: Andrew J. Hanson/
Wikimedia Commons/CC BY-4.0; 50: NASA and H. Richer 
(University of British Columbia); 63: Roice Nelson/Public Domain; 
73: NASA/WMAP Science Team; 81: TheAstronomyBum/Wikimedia 
Commons/Public Domain; 98: Hathi Trust Digital Library; 
107: Claudio Rocchini/Wikimedia Commons/CC BY-SA 3.0

Notes

Notes

