Major Transitions in Evolution
Anthony Martin, Ph.D.
John Hawks, Ph.D.

PUBLISHED BY:
THE GREAT COURSES
Corporate Headquarters
4840 Westﬁ elds Boulevard, Suite 500
Chantilly, Virginia 20151-2299
Phone: 1-800-832-2412
Fax: 703-378-3819
www.thegreatcourses.com
Copyright © The Teaching Company, 2010
Printed in the United States of America
This book is in copyright. All rights reserved. 
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above,
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form, or by any means 
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), 
without the prior written permission of
The Teaching Company.

i
Anthony Martin, Ph.D. 
Professor of Practice, Department of 
Environmental Studies, Emory University
D
r. Anthony (Tony) Martin was born in 
Terre Haute, Indiana. While growing 
up there, he developed an early interest 
in biology, paleontology, and geology, spending 
much of his time outdoors. His earned his B.S. 
in Geobiology at St. Joseph’s College (Indiana), 
his M.S. in Geology at Miami University, and 
his Ph.D. in Geology at the University of Georgia. Dr. Martin has been at 
Emory University since 1990, where he has taught many classes in geology, 
paleontology, environmental science, and evolutionary biology. While there, 
he has won university-wide awards for his outstanding teaching and has 
often been recognized by student societies for his excellence in teaching. He 
has a special fondness for teaching students outside the classroom and has 
taught students in the ¿ eld in a wide variety of places—such as Georgia, 
the Bahamas, Texas, Arizona, and Australia—and on subjects ranging from 
geology to ecology.
Dr. Martin’s research interests are mainly in ichnology, which is the study 
of modern and fossil traces, such as tracks, trails, burrows, nests, and other 
signs of behavior. Through this research, he can discern how behavior has 
evolved in various lineages of animals through time, such as in trilobites, 
insects, cray¿ sh, ¿ sh, amphibians, reptiles, and dinosaurs. For example, he 
was the codiscoverer of the only known burrowing dinosaur (Oryctodromeus 
cubicularis), found the oldest known dinosaur burrows in the geologic record, 
and named the oldest known fossil cray¿ sh in the Southern Hemisphere 
(Palaeoechinastacus australianus). In recent years, his ¿ eld research has 
been mainly in 4 places—the Georgia coast, the Bahamas, Montana, and 
Australia—though he has done ¿ eldwork in more than 15 countries and more 
than 30 U.S. states.

ii
Dr. Martin is the author of 3 books: Introduction to the Study of Dinosaurs 
(now in its second edition), an undergraduate general-science textbook on 
dinosaurs; Trace Fossils of San Salvador, a ¿ eld guide to the trace fossils of 
the Bahamian island attributed to Columbus’s ¿ rst landfall in the New World; 
and El dinosaurio que excavó su madriguera (The dinosaur that dug its 
burrow), a public-outreach book about the ¿ rst known burrowing dinosaur, 
translated into Spanish. He is currently ¿ nishing a fourth book, titled Life 
Traces of the Georgia Coast, an overview of plant and animal traces of the 
Georgia coastal barrier islands and their applications for interpreting the 
geologic record.
Dr. Martin has also authored more than 30 peer-reviewed papers and book 
chapters, nearly 100 abstracts, and several public-outreach articles. He is a 
much-sought speaker for local venues in Atlanta, as well as at universities, 
natural history museums, and other public venues. He enjoys discussing 
paleontology and other sciences with the popular media and is often 
quoted in science news reports for his opinions on the latest discoveries in 
paleontology.
In terms of hobbies and other pastimes, Dr. Martin is an avid tracker and 
has taken several tracking courses from nationally recognized instructors. He 
also loves travel, hiking, biking, and other activities that get him outside and 
in natural settings. Ŷ

iii
John Hawks, Ph.D. 
Associate Professor of Anthropology
University of Wisconsin–Madison
D
r. John Hawks was born and raised in 
Norton, Kansas. In his youth, he followed 
science but did not seem destined for a 
career in it. At Kansas State University, he studied 
English and French literature, earning a B.A. But 
a chance to teach bone labs inspired him to follow 
through with a dual degree in Anthropology. Making 
the switch to science, he went on to earn his M.S. and Ph.D. in Anthropology 
at the University of Michigan, specializing in Paleoanthropology.
After a postdoctoral fellowship at the University of Utah specializing 
in human genetics, Dr. Hawks joined the faculty of anthropology at the 
University of Wisconsin–Madison. He teaches courses across the whole 
range of students, from freshmen to graduate students. The subjects range 
from large undergraduate introductory courses in biological anthropology to 
more specialized topics in human evolution and anthropological genetics.
Dr. Hawks has been awarded several grants for innovation and use of 
technology in his teaching. His courses have included online collaborative 
writing projects and computer-based laboratory exercises in genetics. He 
has incorporated 3-dimensional imaging technology in his fossil bone labs, 
allowing introductory students to have access to the best-quality research 
data. Dr. Hawks has mentored independent research projects for dozens 
of undergraduates. His graduate students have had notable successes in 
presenting and publishing research and winning grants to support their 
work.
Early in his career, Dr. Hawks focused mainly on fossil and archaeological 
evidence for our evolution. But as the Human Genome Project was 
completed, he became one of the ¿ rst paleoanthropologists to use genetic 

iv
and fossil information together to test hypotheses about human prehistory. 
The genetic record has begun to yield new information about every period of 
human evolution, from our initial divergence from other lineages of apes up 
to the last 10,000 years. Dr. Hawks’s research has examined this entire time 
span; he has published research papers on both the earliest possible human 
ancestors and very recent evolution in historic times. He is truly unique in the 
way he combines traditional study of fossil evidence with new approaches 
from genetics. His ability to draw on both kinds of analysis has led to new 
insights about our recent evolution.
Dr. Hawks’s work on the last segment of our evolutionary history has 
achieved the most impact. He documented the accelerating pace of selection 
pressures on humans living after the advent of agriculture and connected the 
rate of change to the growth of human populations. Along with the modeling 
and analysis of genetic sequences, this study has included the study of Bronze 
Age and later skeletal samples from Europe, East Asia, and Africa. His work 
has taken him around the world to examine skeletal remains of both historic 
and prehistoric populations.
His work on Neandertals has also broken new ground in paleoanthropology. 
His work in theoretical genetics showed the substantial likelihood of 
interbreeding of humans and Neandertals, together with the conditions for 
recognizing Neandertal genes within contemporary populations. These 
predictions were later con¿ rmed by the direct sequencing of DNA from 
ancient Neandertal bones. Together with his students, he is examining the 
function of Neandertal genes and the ways that human populations evolved 
across the last 50,000 years. His work in this area was featured in the National 
Geographic Channel documentary The Neanderthal Code.
Dr. Hawks has become well-known for writing one of the top blogs on 
science, where people can follow his descriptions of the latest science in 
paleoanthropology. His site is visited more than 7000 times a day, and in 
any given month, his blog is read by people in more than 150 countries. He 
travels widely to lecture about human origins, has given hundreds of radio 
and press interviews on the topic, and is a Science Saturday regular for the 
online interview show Bloggingheads.tv. Ŷ

v
Table of Contents
LECTURE GUIDES
INTRODUCTION
Professor Biographies .........................................................................i
Course Scope .....................................................................................1
LECTURE 1
Macroevolution and Major Transitions  ...............................................4
LECTURE 2
Paleontology and Geologic Time ........................................................8
LECTURE 3
Single-Celled Life—Prokaryotes to Eukaryotes................................11
LECTURE 4
Metazoans—The Earliest Multicellular Animals................................14
LECTURE 5
The Development of Skeletons ........................................................17
LECTURE 6
The Rise of Vertebrates ....................................................................20
LECTURE 7
Colonization of the Land ...................................................................23
LECTURE 8
Origins of Insects and of Powered Flight ..........................................26
LECTURE 9
Seed Plants and the First Forests ....................................................29

vi
Table of Contents
LECTURE 10
From Fish to 4-Limbed Animals ........................................................32
LECTURE 11
The Egg Came First—Early Reptile Evolution..................................35
LECTURE 12
The Origins and Successes of the Dinosaurs ..................................39
LECTURE 13
Marine and Flying Reptiles ...............................................................43
LECTURE 14
Birds—The Dinosaurs among Us .....................................................46
LECTURE 15
The First Flowers and Pollinator Coevolution ...................................49
LECTURE 16
Egg to Placenta—Early Mammal Evolution ......................................52
LECTURE 17
From Land to Sea—The Evolution of Whales ..................................55
LECTURE 18
Moving on Up—The First Primates ..................................................58
LECTURE 19
Apes—Swinging Down from the Trees .............................................61
LECTURE 20
From 4 Legs to 2—The Hominin Radiation ......................................64
LECTURE 21
First Humans—Toolmakers and Hunter-Gatherers ..........................67
LECTURE 22
From Homo to sapiens—Talking and Thinking .................................70

vii
Cladograms ......................................................................................80
Timeline ............................................................................................82
Glossary ...........................................................................................94
Bibliography ....................................................................................107
Table of Contents
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
LECTURE 23
Our Accelerating Evolution ...............................................................73
LECTURE 24
ReÀ ections on Major Transitions ......................................................76

viii

1
Scope:
T
his course is intended as an overview of signi¿ cant evolutionary 
transitions in the 4.0 billion-year history of life. The ¿ rst lecture 
introduces students to basic concepts of macroevolution, including the 
factors responsible for signi¿ cant changes in life over the course of geologic 
time: geographic isolation, genetic drift, environmental change, and natural 
selection. One of the best ways to study evolutionary transitions is through 
paleontology (the study of ancient life and fossils), the topic of Lecture 2. 
The second lecture also covers major eras and periods of the geologic time 
scale and explains how radiometric age dating con¿ rms the ages of rocks 
and fossils.
Lecture 3 discusses the evolution of one-celled organisms, delving into the 
two major types of cells (prokaryotes and eukaryotes) and their differences. 
Knowing these distinctions, we explore the likely role of symbiosis in the 
evolution of prokaryotes into eukaryotes and examine the fossil evidence 
for one-celled organisms from about 3.5 to 1.5 billion years ago. Lecture 4 
reviews the early evolution of multicellular animals (metazoans), the fossils 
of which are represented worldwide in rocks from about 600 to 550 million 
years ago. Lecture 5 is about the Cambrian period (545 to 505 million years 
ago) and the next signi¿ cant transition in the evolution of animals: the 
formation of mineralized skeletons. Skeletons were probable evolutionary 
responses to predation but are also linked to the changing chemistry of the 
Cambrian ocean and atmosphere. Lecture 6 explores the evolution of some 
Cambrian invertebrate animals into animals with primitive “backbones” and 
other anatomical innovations, leading to the ¿ rst chordates and vertebrates.
In Lecture 7, we review the evolutionary challenges faced by algae, fungi, 
plants, and animals that adapted to terrestrial environments during the early 
part of the Paleozoic era (about 500 to 350 million years ago). Connected 
to this topic is the early evolution of insects, the most successful group of 
animals today. In Lecture 8, we look at insect origins from the fossil record 
of the Devonian period (410 to 360 million years ago) and examine evidence 
Major Transitions in Evolution

Scope
2
that some insects evolved into the ¿ rst known À ying animals during the 
Carboniferous period (360 to 285 million years ago). The evolution of seed 
plants in the Devonian period resulted in the ¿ rst true forests, the subject 
of Lecture 9. Also during the Devonian period, four-limbed vertebrates 
(tetrapods) evolved from lobe-¿ nned ¿ sh. In Lecture 10, we learn about 
the fossil evidence for this transition, the anatomy of lobe-¿ nned ¿ sh and 
amphibians, and the reÀ ections of their traits in all tetrapods, including 
humans. Later, in the Carboniferous period, egg-laying reptiles evolved from 
amphibians, which allowed tetrapods to live in dry-land environments; this 
topic is discussed in Lecture 11.
Lecture 12 deals with the early evolution of dinosaurs from ancestors 
shared by modern crocodilians and À ying reptiles (pterosaurs), before they 
evolved into the largest land-dwelling carnivores and herbivores of all time. 
In Lecture 13, we study the origins and diversi¿ cation of a wide variety of 
reptiles that swam in the seas and À ew through the air during the Mesozoic 
era (250 to 65 million years ago), including mosasaurs, plesiosaurs, 
icthyosaurs, and pterosaurs. Lecture 14 deals with birds, which evolved from 
theropod dinosaurs during the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods (about 150 
to 65 million years ago). Hence, this lecture emphasizes the evolution of 
feathers and À ight in dinosaurs that proliferated into the diversity of birds 
seen today. On land during the Cretaceous period (145 to 65 million years 
ago), a major transition between non-À owering and À owering plants took 
place that resulted in the coevolution of their pollinators. Lecture 15 takes 
us back to the ¿ rst primitive À owering plants, while also considering how 
pollinating animals (especially insects) must have evolved along with the 
bearers of fruit. Lecture 16 covers the reptiles of the Permian period (285 to 
250 million years ago) that evolved mammalian traits, as well as the fossil 
record for the arrival of the ¿ rst true mammals, about 225 million years ago 
(in the Triassic period). This lecture also offers an overview of the major 
mammal groups. 
The mass extinction that ended the Cretaceous period 65 million years ago 
opened many niches for surviving species of plants and animals, including 
mammals. Among the evolutionary transitions that took place about 50 
million years ago was that of land-dwelling hoofed mammals to marine 
environments, which led to the evolution of modern whales. Lecture 17 

3
explores the fossil evidence for this transition, highlighting anatomical 
features that connect these massive animals with their smaller terrestrial 
ancestors. Just before this time, many kinds of mammals took to the trees, 
developing adaptations to newly evolved fruits, À owers, and leaves. These 
developments resulted in the ¿ rst primates about 60 million years ago, the 
topic of Lecture 18. By about 45 million years ago, some of these primates 
evolved into the ancestors of today’s monkeys and apes. Lecture 19 describes 
these primates, their adaptability, probable social habits, and dispersal to new 
habitats. Lecture 20 deals with the evolution of some ape lineages from 12 
to 7 million years ago, some of which began to walk upright, and describes 
their different sizes, diets, and lifestyles.
The evolutionary path to humanity is the subject of Lecture 21, in which we 
review the ¿ rst stone tools, from 2.6 million years ago, marking a change 
to a human-like social and cognitive system characterized by hunting and 
gathering. Soon, the descendants of these toolmakers spread more widely 
than earlier hominids. Lecture 22 looks at how modern humans, once evolved, 
began to cross Africa about 100,000 years ago, dispersing into Europe and 
Asia and challenging Neandertals, which are now described by the Neandertal 
genome. Lecture 23 covers rapid changes in modern human genes, spurred 
by our high-density agricultural lifestyle and epidemic diseases, as well as 
human impacts on the Earth’s ecology. With this perspective in mind, Lecture 
24 summarizes the common themes of major evolutionary transitions, while 
providing a few examples of how fossils, artifacts, and other evidence help 
us to better understand the history of life. Ŷ

4
Lecture 1: Macroevolution and Major Transitions
Macroevolution and Major Transitions 
Lecture 1
Evolution is both a fact and a theory. We’ve watched these changes 
happen; that’s the fact part. We have an explanation for how it happens; 
that’s the theory part.
E
volution is a good subject for anyone who is interested in looking 
at life and the present through the lens of deep time. “Deep time” 
refers to intervals so vast as to be beyond anything we can directly 
experience in everyday life. We study deep time principally through the 
sciences of geology and paleontology. 
At a simple level, evolution is change over time. Often, evolution is 
divided into microevolution, which refers to change within a species, and 
macroevolution, when one species changes into another. Macroevolution is 
also understood more broadly as larger changes that happened over many 
generations and resulted in major transitions, such as the development of 
a novel means for adapting to a radically new environment. Consider, 
for example, plant seeds or enclosed animal eggs as adaptations to 
air environments.
A list of major evolutionary transitions would include the development of 
eukaryotic cells, multicelled animals, skeletons, life on land, four-legged 
vertebrates, insect À ight and seed plants, enclosed animal eggs, À owering 
plants, pollinating insects, mammals, and live birth. There are also several 
important developments involved in the overall transition from tree-
dwelling primates to humans capable of documenting the fossil record and 
understanding how it relates to evolution. 
As an example of a major transition in evolution, let’s consider marine 
lobsters and freshwater cray¿ sh. They are quite similar in appearance, but all 
species of cray¿ sh live in freshwater environments, while lobsters live only 
in saltwater. In the late 19th century, Thomas Huxley studied the question of 
how these two animals diverged, but he didn’t have knowledge of genetics, 
plate tectonics, or even fossils. In the 21st century, molecular biologists 

5
proposed that cray¿ sh and lobsters diverged from a common ancestor about 
270 million years ago, a time when the continents of the Earth were still 
united. About 180 million years ago, cray¿ sh split into northern and southern 
hemisphere groups; plate tectonic reconstructions show that this timeframe 
correlates with the breakup of the southern continents. In 2008, the fossil of 
a new species of cray¿ sh was discovered, con¿ rming predictions about the 
location and timing of their transition from lobsters.
Both microevolution and macroevolution have been observed many 
times in living populations, in many organisms, and in both natural and 
laboratory settings. For example, speciations have been observed in many 
species of plants and insects. In fact, many evolutionary scientists consider 
macroevolution to be the end result of microevolution. 
If we really want to understand macroevolution, we can’t rely on human 
time. We’ve been around as a species for less than 200,000 years or so. Most 
of the major transitions in evolution occurred in the pre-human past, and 
we must go back to the fossil record for that evidence. With fossils, we’re 
The rise and subsequent fall of the dinosaurs are among the most famous of 
evolutionary transitions, but these major shifts are only two among many.
© Karen Carr Studio.

6
Lecture 1: Macroevolution and Major Transitions
not observing the actual 
processes of macroevolution 
but the products of major 
changes and lineages of 
organisms. 
Among the factors that 
are 
responsible 
for 
the 
macroevolutionary changes 
we will discuss in this course 
are geographic isolation, 
genetic drift, local or global 
environmental change, and 
mass extinctions. The effects of these factors can be summarized by one 
neat little phrase coined by Charles Darwin: natural selection. Of course, our 
understanding of how the Earth, its life, and its environments have changed 
through time has improved immensely since Darwin through such new 
sciences as plate tectonics, developmental biology, ecology, and genetics. Ŷ
macroeveolution: Change from one species to another; more broadly 
understood as larger changes that occurred over many generations and 
resulted in major transitions.
microevolution: Change within a species; more precisely, change in the 
relative proportions of genes over generations within a species.
Cray¿ sh fossils have been used to 
con¿ rm hypotheses about evolution and 
plate tectonics.
© Hemera/Thinkstock.
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading
Levinton, Genetics, Paleontology, and Macroevolution. 
Prothero, Evolution.

7
1. De¿ nitions aside, are the differences between macroevolution and 
microevolution all that sign¿ cant, or are these simply terms that help us 
to better understand gradations in evolution?
2. Other sciences since the time of Darwin and Huxley have improved 
macroevolutionary theory. What are some examples from paleontology, 
geology, and developmental biology during the past year that contributed 
further to macroevolutionary theory? 
    Questions to Consider

8
Lecture 2: Paleontology and Geologic Time
Paleontology and Geologic Time
Lecture 2
To better overcome the challenges of confronting deep time 
when studying evolution, paleontology and geology are the most 
important sciences.
A 
fossil is any evidence of ancient life, meaning 10,000 years old or 
more. Fossils can be placed into three categories. First, body fossils 
are the actual bodily remains of organisms and offer direct evidence 
of ancient life. Next are trace fossils, which show some aspect of behavior 
and offer indirect evidence of ancient life. The third category encompasses 
chemical fossils, which are organic compounds signifying that once-living 
material was present. 
Contained within the geologic record is a de¿ nite ordering of fossils and 
rocks that is consistent, predictable, and useful to an understanding of 
evolution. This ordering of fossils, called biological succession, was the 
result of extinctions and evolution. Since the time of Darwin, geologists and 
paleontologists have used a well-tested method for dating rocks worldwide, 
and much of this dating is based on relative ages of fossils. This technique 
led to the development of the geologic timescale. The broadest time unit in 
a geologic timescale is the eon, followed by the era, period, and epoch. The 
boundaries between these time units are based on worldwide extinctions and 
evolutions of species. 
The eons of geologic time in order from oldest to youngest are Archean, 
Proterozoic, and Phanerozoic. The Phanerozoic is the eon that contains the 
most abundant and easily identi¿ able fossils and encompasses most of the 
major transitions covered in this course. This eon is subdivided into three 
eras: Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Cenozoic, based on mass extinctions recorded 
in the fossil record. Major evolutionary transitions that occurred during the 
Paleozoic era include the development of skeletons and invertebrates and 
vertebrates, the ¿ rst land plants and animals, the ¿ rst forests and À ying 
insects, enclosed eggs in reptiles, and the early evolution of the ancestors 
of mammals. 

9
The Mesozoic (or “middle life”) era is the time of dinosaurs and many other 
large reptiles. Major transitions that occurred during the Mesozoic era include 
the evolution of the dinosaurs and mammals, the evolutionary radiation of 
some reptiles to the seas and skies, the origin 
of birds from dinosaurs, and the coevolution 
of À owering plants with pollinating insects. 
The Cenozoic (or “new life”) era has two 
periods. Major transitions here include the 
evolution of whales from land-dwelling 
mammals; the origin and early evolution of 
primates; the divergence of some apes into a 
lineage that led to our genus, Homo; and the 
evolution of Homo into our species. 
Radiometric age dating is a well-established 
method for dating rocks that is based on the fact that radioactive elements 
decay at constant rates. Decay of what is called a parent element eventually 
results in a ¿ nal stable byproduct, known as the daughter element. Rates of 
decay are then derived from ratios of parent isotopes to daughter isotopes. 
When that ratio reaches one-half for each of them, we call that a half-life. 
Radiometric age dates can be discerned from volcanic ash deposits, lava 
À ows, or other igneous rocks that may be interspersed with sedimentary 
rocks that bear fossils. 
The important thing to remember here is that great spans of time are 
sometimes needed for major transitions to take place. In fact, some 
evolutionary processes may have operated under time spans so vast that we 
have a tough time pinpointing exactly when a major transition took place. Ŷ
Archean: The period of time from 3.8 to 2.5 billion years ago; at least one 
continent began to form and the most primitive single-celled life, such as 
bacteria and prokaryotes, evolved during this time.
Cenozoic: The period of time from 65 million years ago to the present.
Contained within the 
geologic record is a 
de¿ nite ordering of 
fossils and rocks that is 
consistent, predictable, 
and useful to an 
understanding 
of evolution.
    Important Terms

10
Lecture 2: Paleontology and Geologic Time
Mesozoic: The period of time from 251 to 65 million years ago.
Paleozoic: The period of time from 543 to 251 million years ago.
Phanerozoic: The period of time from 543 million years ago to the present.
Proterozoic: The period of time from 2.5 billion to 543 million years ago.
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider
Levin, The Earth through Time.
Stanley, Earth System History. 
1. Given the types of evidence from the fossil record, which do you think 
is more important for ¿ guring out macroevolution: chemical fossils, 
body fossils, or trace fossils? Or is this more of a matter of using “the 
right tool for the right job”? Think about at least three separate instances 
where each type of fossil would serve as the best form of evidence.
2. Think about how relative and absolute age dating are combined to aid 
in our understanding of evolutionary transitions. What if you only had 
one of these tools at your disposal: could you still discern any major 
evolutionary transitions? Explain why or why not.

11
Single-Celled Life—Prokaryotes to Eukaryotes
Lecture 3
What we have observed about life and stable carbon isotopes is that 
living things tend to concentrate carbon-12 relative to carbon-13. This 
means that the ratio should differ noticeably from a ratio of these two 
isotopes in the absence of life. This signature of life shows up distinctly 
in the ratio between the two isotopes. Certain ratios are only caused 
by life.
A
ll life known on Earth today is based on the same macromolecular 
building blocks of genes and proteins. Life begins with prokaryotic 
cells, which include two groups: bacteria and archaea. Prokaryotes 
have the following features: They are small; lack a nucleus or nuclear 
envelope, which means that the chromosomes are scattered throughout the 
cell; lack organelles with membranes; are typically expressed as one-celled 
life; and reproduce asexually. The transition from prokaryotic to eukaryotic 
cells makes possible all life other than bacteria and archaea.
Eukaryotic cells have the following traits: They are larger; have a de¿ nite 
nucleus with a nuclear envelope, which means that the chromosomes are 
enclosed; have complex organelles, such as mitochondria and chloroplasts; 
and reproduce sexually. Because of their primitive traits and smaller sizes, 
prokaryotic cells clearly evolved into larger and more complex eukaryotic 
cells at some time in the geologic past. 
Prokaryotes are considered the most primitive examples of life. They are 
the only organisms we see today that can live in extreme environments with 
very hot, very cold, or very low-oxygen conditions. Prokaryotes are also very 
simple compared to eukaryotic cells in their organization of genetic material, 
as well as their lack of organelles and asexual reproduction. 
Stromatolites are trace fossils of prokaryotes. They are layered structures in 
sedimentary rocks, probably formed by colonies of cyanobacteria. Chemical 
and body fossils offer additional evidence of prokaryotes. Chemical fossils, 
also called biomarkers, are elements or compounds in rocks that indicate the 

12
Lecture 3: Single-Celled Life—Prokaryotes to Eukaryotes
former presence of life. For early life, one of these biomarkers is provided by 
stable carbon isotope ratios. Unfortunately, we don’t have a really good way 
of knowing exactly what types of prokaryotes were responsible for these 
geochemical signatures. 
When do eukaryotic cells appear in the fossil record? Because of plate 
tectonics, weathering, and other earth processes, Precambrian fossils are the 
least likely to be preserved. But we know that such fossil evidence should be 
found in sedimentary rocks that formed in aquatic environments. Estimates 
for the probable evolutionary divergence between prokaryotes and eukaryotes 
range from about 3.9 to 2.2 billion years ago. One mode for the evolution of 
eukaryotes is endosymbiosis, which literally means “living together within.” 
In this instance, the term refers to multiple prokaryotic cells fusing to form 
eukaryotic cells. 
Prokaryotes use asexual means for reproduction, such as binary ¿ ssion 
or gene transfer, while eukaryotes begin with mitosis. In this form of cell 
division, chromosomes containing DNA are duplicated from a parent cell 
into two daughter cells also having an identical number of chromosomes. 
Perhaps about 1.5 billion years ago, another form of cell division, meiosis, 
also evolved in eukaryotic cells. The resulting greater genetic variability in 
eukaryotes enabled them to better adapt to changing environments. 
The evolution of eukaryotes from prokaryotes changed the world—literally. 
The increase in algal abundance caused an increase in oxygen content of the 
oceans and atmosphere from photosynthesis. The earliest fungi evolved about 
1.5 billion years ago; these new eukaryotes ¿ lled a niche as decomposers in 
marine environments. Later on, they would ¿ ll the same role in terrestrial 
environments. Eukaryotic cells capable of movement increasingly organized 
into multicellular colonies and even evolved into multicellular organisms—
the earliest animals. Ŷ
archaea: A group of singled-celled prokaryotes.
bacteria: Prokaryotes that affect human health.
    Important Terms

13
eukaryotic cells: Single-celled organism with the following traits: larger 
in size than prokaryotes; having a de¿ nite nucleus with a nuclear envelope, 
which means that the chromosomes are enclosed; having complex organelles; 
and reproducing sexually
prokaryotic: One-celled organism with the following features: small in size; 
lacking a nucleus or nuclear envelope, which means that the chromosomes 
are scattered throughout the cell; lacking organelles with membranes; and 
reproducing asexually.
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider
1. Eukaryotic cells have some advantages over prokaryotic cells. These 
advantages must have led to their natural selection from prokaryotes 
nearly two billion years ago. Nonetheless, how are some extant 
prokaryotes still better adapted for their respective environments 
than eukaryotes?
2. How could further study of modern stromatolites, such as those in 
Australia, the Bahamas, and Abu Dhabi, give us more insights into their 
importance in the history of life?
Margulis and Dolan, Early Life. 
Rizzotti, Early Evolution.

14
Lecture 4: Metazoans—The Earliest Multicellular Animals
Metazoans—The Earliest Multicellular Animals
Lecture 4
The currently reigning hypothesis for the origin of animals is that the 
¿ rst ones descended from colonial eukaryotes that had À agella, these 
little whip-like appendages that you see in single cells.
T
he more complex cells of eukaryotes set the stage for the evolution 
of multicellular eukaryotes called metazoans. The evolutionary 
transition from single-celled eukaryotes, also known as protozoans, 
had to have happened during the latter part of the Proterozoic eon, between 1 
billion and about 600 million years ago.
The eukaryotic cells of animals are quite different from those of plants. 
For example, animal cells lack chloroplasts, which means they cannot 
manufacture their own food using sunlight. Eukaryotic cells of animals also 
have cell membranes, while plants have stiff cell walls. Thus, animals have 
more plasticity in their growth history.
One way to study the evolution of organisms is by calculating molecular 
phylogenies. These are evolutionary lineages based on genetic differences 
in molecules of modern organisms. DNA and RNA contain genes that are 
inferred to have changed through regularly occurring mutations over the 
course of time. Some of these changes were so regular, in fact, that they are 
referred to as molecular clocks. The overarching principle of a molecular 
clock is that the amount of genetic change, or genetic distance, between two 
organisms corresponds to the amount of time elapsed since they diverged 
from each other. Molecular clocks applied to the divergence of animals from 
single-celled eukaryotes yield dates of about 1 billion years ago.
In estimating the initial evolution of metazoans, an exciting recent 
development comes from chemical fossils. Compounds called “scarrings” 
were found in a sedimentary deposit in Canada dating from about 635 million 
years ago. These document that certain types of sponges lived at that time. 
Sponges or similar animals were probably the ¿ rst metazoans.

15
Metazoans are divided into two main groups based on cellular organization 
and symmetry. The ¿ rst group, Radiata, is represented by radially 
symmetrical animals, such as sponges and true jelly¿ sh. The second group, 
Bilateria, is represented 
by bilaterally symmetrical 
animals, such as humans. 
Bilaterians are believed to 
have evolved from ancestors 
resembling jelly¿ sh. 
Metazoan body and trace 
fossils are most common in 
Precambrian deposits from 
about 580 to 550 million 
years ago. Body fossils 
tell us that most early 
metazoans must have had 
relatively stiff, tough exteriors, although they lacked shells. Some of these 
early organisms include Spriggina, Dickinsonia, Pteridinium, Tribrachidium, 
and Kimberella. Metazoan trace fossils include shallow horizontal burrows, 
surface trails, and scrape marks. The ability to move implies that some of 
these early animals had evolved internal musculature.
All early metazoans (from the Ediacaran period) lived in shallow marine 
environments, and most forms were sedentary and closely associated with 
the sediment bottom. A few mobile forms were moving on or just below the 
sediment surface. They grazed on algal mats or fed on organic material while 
burrowing horizontally underneath the surface.
What caused the seemingly sudden appearance of abundant metazoans in 
the fossil record from about 600 to 550 million years ago? It’s likely that 
these metazoans represent a relatively rapid evolution of animals following 
a long period of global cooling. After this period of glaciation, the onset 
of widespread warm, shallow seas and the breakup of the supercontinent 
Rodinia allowed life to thrive and diversify under new selection pressures. Ŷ
Sponges are some of the oldest multicellular 
eukaryotes, or metazoans.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

16
Lecture 4: Metazoans—The Earliest Multicellular Animals
Bilateria: One of the two main groups of metazoans; represented by 
bilaterally symmetrical animals, such as humans.
metazoans: Multicellular eukaryotes.
molecular phylogenies: Evolutionary lineage based on genetic differences 
in molecules of modern organisms.
Radiata: One of the two main groups of metazoans; represented by radially 
symmetrical animals, such as sponges and true jelly¿ sh.
Fedonkin, The Rise of Animals.
Vickers-Rich and Komarower (editors), The Rise and Fall of the 
Ediacaran Biota.
1. Some of the Ediacaran fossils have traits different from or similar 
to modern animals. Is it possible that some of these fossils represent 
unique “experiments” in evolution, and actually are unrelated to any 
modern organisms? Think about how you could argue either for or 
against this idea.
2. Consider the disagreements between molecular clocks and the fossil 
record for Proterozoic metazoans. What are some explanations for these 
discrepancies, and how could they be reconciled with further research, 
particularly through fossils?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider
    Important Terms

17
The Development of Skeletons
Lecture 5
As we can see from the Burgess Shale fauna, animals had developed 
spikes and plates for protection, and some had these well-developed 
eyes for seeing predators. Predators, in turn, also had eyes for seeing 
prey from afar, and they developed appendages and mouth parts for 
getting past some defenses.
T
he development of skeletons or mineralized tissues in invertebrate 
animals points to some biological factors that might have driven 
a seemingly accelerated evolution of animals just after the 
Ediacaran period. 
One of the most important fossil assemblages from the Cambrian period 
is the Burgess Shale fauna. It has the remains of soft-bodied animals from 
about 505 million years ago, but some of these show evolutionary responses 
to hard-bodied animals. Recent research has offered new insights into how 
these soft-bodied animals evolved in the presence of newly evolved animals 
with minerals in their bodies. For example, the organism Wiwaxia has 
numerous overlapping plates and spikes likely made of hardened organic 
compounds, which it obviously developed to deter predators.
The process by which organisms take elements out of their surrounding 
environments and precipitate them as minerals in their bodies is called 
biomineralization. Probably the most common examples of this process 
are seen in molluscan shells. The mineral calcite is commonly found in 
some algae, in protozoans, and in invertebrate animals today. Calcite also 
contributed to the skeletons of organisms early in the Cambrian period. 
Biomineralization is most commonly expressed in invertebrate animals 
as either calcite or aragonite in their exoskeletons or endoskeletons. In 
vertebrates, biomineralization is usually expressed as apatite in teeth 
and endoskeletons. Common fossils with mineralized parts from the ¿ rst 
100 million years of the Phanerozoic era include those from molluscans, 
brachiopods, corals, arthropods, and echinoderms. 

18
Lecture 5: The Development of Skeletons
The ¿ rst step in the development of biomineralization may have been a 
biochemical response to changing ocean chemistry, that is, an oversaturation 
of the world’s oceans with carbon dioxide and calcium toward the end of the 
Precambrian period. The least energetic way for organisms to process the 
excess calcium and bicarbonate in seawater was to combine them into one 
precipitate, calcium carbonate. Similarly, high amounts of phosphorus and 
phosphates caused organisms to precipitate apatite. 
At the same time or soon after, natural selection was accelerated by the 
evolution of predators. Animals that were favorably selected just happened to 
have mineralized tissues already in place, not from predation but from adapting 
to ocean chemistry. Still, it’s important to note that biomineralization evolved 
multiple times and in separate lineages of animals. Thus, biomineralization 
is an example of convergent evolution, which occurs when different lineages 
of organisms arrive at the same or similar adaptive solutions to selection 
pressures. As predation became more common, organisms that could secrete 
shells or other skeletal protection would have been favorably selected. 
Corals are examples of invertebrate biomineralization, a process that emerged in 
the Phanerozoic era. 
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

19
This brings us to the Red Queen hypothesis, according to which coevolution 
occurs when one cohort—say, the prey—evolves in response to selection 
pressure from a second cohort—the predator. Interestingly, the ordering of 
the two can be switched, which results in selection pressure on both cohorts.
As a result of biomineralization, reefs changed from those that were composed 
of just stromatolites, or sponges, to full-À edged coral reefs, establishing the 
foundations for marine ecosystems that we still see today. By the middle 
Cambrian period, predators had evolved into these ecosystems and were now 
a normal part of the seascape. Ŷ
biomineralization: The process by which organisms take elements out of their 
surrounding environments and precipitate them as minerals in their bodies.
Gould, Wonderful Life.
Mann, Biomineralization. 
Morris, The Crucible of Creation.
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider
1. Predation is often invoked as a major selection pressure that led to 
invertebrate animals developing skeletal tissues late in the Proterozoic 
eon and early in the Paleozoic era, about 550–500 million years ago. Did 
this factor precede or follow the changes in oceanic chemistry necessary 
for these animals to make skeletons in the ¿ rst place, and how would 
you test either hypothesis?
2. Since the Burgess Shale fauna was discovered in Cambrian rocks from 
British Columbia early in the 20th century, similar fossils in Cambrian 
rocks from elsewhere in the world have been found. Do these fossils 
make the Burgess Shale fossil assemblage less or more “special” in an 
evolutionary sense?

20
Lecture 6: The Rise of Vertebrates
The Rise of Vertebrates
Lecture 6
Based on a combination of what we know from fossils and modern 
biology, we now have a much better handle on how echinoderms, 
hemichordates, urochordates, cephalochordates, and craniates—like 
me—all share a fascinating story of evolution since the Precambrian 
that certainly became a lot more detailed in the Cambrian.
T
he fossil Clydagnathus, found in 1983, offers clues to the evolution 
of vertebrates from invertebrates. This fossil had an assemblage of 
conodonts (small tooth-like structures) that was directly associated 
with the impression of a long, thin, eel-like animal that belonged to a 
group called chordates. This group of animals was very successful in its 
evolution starting in the Cambrian period and for more than 300 million 
years afterward.
Chordates have the following important traits: openings or slits at the 
region of the pharynx (often called pharyngeal gill slits); a structure called 
a notochord that runs the length of the animal to support its nerve chord; 
and a dorsally located nerve chord. Vertebrates are chordates, as are some 
invertebrates. 
The “how” for the transition between invertebrates and vertebrates is 
perhaps easiest to answer by simply examining modern animals that have 
the same characteristics we would expect to ¿ nd in fossils representing 
those transitions. Ideally, an animal that’s in between an invertebrate and a 
vertebrate will have some sort of blend of anatomical traits shared between 
invertebrate chordates and primitive vertebrates. 
Some non-chordate invertebrates happen to share a few anatomical traits 
with chordates. These hemichordates also share common characteristics 
with echinoderms, such as star ¿ sh and sea urchins. In turn, both of these 
non-chordates share a common ancestor with chordates. It might be 
dif¿ cult to imagine a sea cucumber or a sand dollar as a distant relative to 
us, but they are.

21
Vertebrate chordates are placed within a group called Craniata. Closely 
related invertebrate animals consist of two groups, Urochordata and 
Cephalochordata. Cephalochordates living today are known as lancelets, 
or amphioxus, and these are regarded as modern examples of immediate 
ancestors to the most primitive vertebrates. Lancelets have a streamlined, 
blade-like body; pharyngeal gill slits; a 
dorsal notochord; muscles arranged in 
myomeres, and a tail that extends past the 
anus; however, they have no mineralized 
tissues. Craniata include vertebrates, and 
most modern vertebrates are descended 
from jawed ¿ sh. As the name implies, 
craniates have heads supported by skulls, 
but these can be composed of either 
cartilage or bone. We see several fossils that serve as excellent examples 
of early chordate and vertebrate evolution. Hicuella is a good candidate for 
a transitional fossil between non-vertebrate chordates and true vertebrates. 
The oldest known vertebrate from the fossil record may be Amylecomingia 
or Hycuekthes.
Molecular clock data suggest that the divergence of chordates from non-
chordates and invertebrates from non-vertebrates happened in the Proterozoic 
eon, between 750 and 800 million years ago. Unfortunately, fossils of the 
descended lineages either were not preserved or haven’t yet been found. 
Other evidence also shows evolutionary linkages between invertebrates 
and vertebrates. For example, the swimming larva of echinoderms and 
hemichordates both live in marine environments and are strikingly similar 
in their overall anatomy and forms; these facts also link them to chordates. 
Molecular clocks can be used to discern genetic similarities among 
echinoderms, hemichordates, and chordates.
To understand the importance of the evolutionary transition from invertebrates 
to vertebrates, think about the extent to which vertebrates have changed the 
world, occupying every environment on Earth, from the deep oceans to the 
high mountains. Consider, too, that vertebrates include all ¿ sh, amphibians, 
birds, and mammals. Ŷ
Some non-chordate 
invertebrates happen to 
share a few anatomical 
traits with chordates.

22
Lecture 6: The Rise of Vertebrates
Chordates: Organisms with the following traits: openings or slits at the 
region of the pharynx, often called pharyngeal gill slits; a structure called 
a notochord that runs the length of the organism to support its nerve chord; 
and a dorsally located nerve chord.
Craniata: A group of vertebrates; as the name implies, craniates have heads 
supported by skulls that are composed of either cartilage or bone.
Ahlberg (editor), Major Events in Early Vertebrate Evolution. 
Benton, Vertebrate Palaeontology.
1. Conodonts existed for more than 250 million years, near the start of 
vertebrate evolution. Speculate on how the evolution of other vertebrate 
lineages may or may not have contributed their extinction during the 
Triassic period. What other factors must be considered?
2. Considerable fossil evidence supports that chordates are evolutionarily 
related to certain non-chordate predecessors. What sort of presently 
undiscovered fossils—either body fossils or trace fossils—do you think 
would further illuminate these connections?
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

23
Colonization of the Land
Lecture 7
Here’s a short summary of what would be needed to make that jump 
to these terrestrial environments: You need to somehow prevent 
dehydration; you also need to be able to tolerate temperature extremes. 
You need to stand up because of greater gravitational challenges; you 
need to spread your gametes and reproduce. Also, in animals, you need 
to be able to take in oxygen without dehydrating.
L
ife in general adapted to terrestrial environments in the early 
Paleozoic era, around 500 to 400 million years ago. This was an 
ecological transition, in which ecosystems moved from marine to 
land environments.
In the early Cambrian world, the Earth’s atmosphere was only about 15% 
oxygen, as opposed to the current 21%. The land surface was barren, with 
withered and eroded sediment rather than soil. The transition from sea to land 
for any form of life in this environment 
would have presented the potential for 
dehydration, temperature extremes, 
and gravitational challenges.
Perhaps the most obvious adaptation 
needed for life on land was the 
prevention of dehydration. Because 
all animal lineages early in the 
Phanerozoic eon evolved originally in 
full marine environments, freshwater 
or air would have presented strong selection pressures. In either environment, 
osmoregulation (the process of internal water regulation) would have 
shifted to block the effects of osmosis in a way to prevent water loss; thus, 
organisms would have had to develop less permeable membranes. 
Temperature is another important factor in the shift from water to land. Water 
retains heat and maintains a narrower range of temperatures than air, which 
Most paleontologists believe 
that arthropods were the 
¿ rst animals to make the 
transition from water to land, 
largely because arthropods 
had tough exoskeletons.

24
Lecture 7: Colonization of the Land
makes body temperatures easier to control in organisms that are adapted to 
aquatic conditions. Organisms would have to develop mechanisms for heat 
retention, such as tough skin.
The third important factor in the move from water to land is greater weight, 
which means greater gravitational challenges. Water gives organisms 
buoyancy, which brings certain advantages in energy demands and 
reproduction. 
But 
getting out of the 
water requires both 
the strength and the 
structural integrity to 
support verticality for 
plants or movement 
for animals.
A major glaciation 
occurred at the end 
of the Ordovician 
period that would 
have lowered sea 
level and exposed 
more 
land 
for 
organisms living in formerly shallow marine areas. These emergent areas 
already had colonies of bacteria and archaeans to provide sustenance 
to newcomers.
The transition of freshwater algae to algae on land probably occurred 475 
to 425 million years ago. Terrestrial fungi called ascomycetes were present 
about 410 million years ago. Lichens, which are symbiotic colonies of algae 
and fungi, probably started about this time, as well. Land plants, otherwise 
known as Embryophyta, likely descended from multicellular algae. 
Most paleontologists believe that arthropods were the ¿ rst animals to make 
the transition from water to land, largely because arthropods had tough 
exoskeletons. They could both hold in water and provide the structural 
support needed for moving out of the water. Arthropods developed book 
Tough exoskeletons enabled animals to make the 
transition from water to land.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

25
lungs, internal respiratory structures, early in the Paleozoic era. Evidence for 
the earliest animals on land comes from both body and trace fossils. Trace 
fossils indicate that some animals may have been on land for at least part of 
their lives before the establishment of land plants.
The earliest terrestrial ecosystems in the Silurian period would have had 
poorly developed soils with almost no organic matter. There might have 
been some fungi and lichens. No plants would have been more than about 3 
feet tall. Animals, mostly arthropods, would have all been invertebrates, and 
most of these arthropods would have been predators. In the next period, the 
Devonian, the addition of insects would change the environment to an even 
greater extent. Ŷ
osmoregulation: The ability of an organism to regulate its internal 
water “budget.”
    Important Term
Gensel, P.G., and Edwards, D. (editors), Plants Invade the Land.
Shear, The Early Development of Terrestrial Ecosystems. 
    Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider
1. Of the adaptations plants and animals have in common that allowed 
them to make the transition from aquatic to terrestrial environments, 
which do you think is the most important, and why?
2. When some aquatic invertebrates made the evolutionary transition to 
land environments, was this transition done more easily from fresh-
water or salt-water environments? What sorts of fossil evidence would 
support either hypothesis?

26
Lecture 8: Origins of Insects and of Powered Flight
Origins of Insects and of Powered Flight
Lecture 8
In short, insects present the curse of plenty to entomologists who study 
them, and they clearly represent an astounding sort of success story in 
terms of their evolution.
A
t the most basic level, insects are arthropods—invertebrate animals 
with jointed legs. Traits that distinguish them from other arthropods 
include a body divided into three parts (head, thorax, and abdomen), 
an exoskeleton, two antennae, and compound eyes. 
The oldest fossil insect, Rhyniognatha hirsti, dates from the early Devonian 
period, about 400 million years ago. It was originally thought to be a land-
dwelling animal, but its later identi¿ cation as an insect placed insects in 
terrestrial environments not too long after the colonization of land by 
other arthropods. Rhyniognatha has also been linked to other winged 
insects, which means that insect À ight may have started much earlier than 
previously supposed.
Insects have been extraordinarily successful from an evolutionary standpoint 
for a number of reasons. For instance, they have high reproduction rates and 
huge numbers of offspring; the combination of these two factors ensures 
high genetic variability in any given population of a species. As a result, 
insects show rapid responses to any sort of selection pressures. 
The group of insects with wings is called Pterygota. The list of orders here 
includes Ephemeroptera (mayÀ ies), Odonata (dragonÀ ies and damselÀ ies), 
Dictyoptera (cockroaches and mantises), Dipterans (À ies and mosquitoes), 
Coleopterans (beetles), Hymenopterans (wasps, bees, and ants), and 
Isopterans (termites). Pterygota can be further divided into the Paleoptera 
and the Neopteric, of which the Paleoptera are the more primitive. This 
group includes mayÀ ies, dragonÀ ies, and damselÀ ies, which were common 
in the Carboniferous period. The most famous dragonÀ y of this period is 
Meganeura, which lived 300 million years ago and had a wingspan of about 
70 centimeters, or close to 2.5 feet.

27
Several hypotheses have been proposed for the evolution of À ight in 
insects. One of these is the surface-skimming hypothesis. According to 
this, water-loving insects, 
perhaps similar to modern 
mayÀ ies or stoneÀ ies, had 
either lobes or some sort 
of modi¿ ed gills on their 
thoraxes that assisted them 
in moving rapidly across 
water surfaces. The selection 
for larger structures that 
became more recognizable 
as wings would have come 
from the ability to evade 
predators or ¿ nd food or 
mates more ef¿ ciently.
Another theory for the 
evolution of insect À ight is 
the gliding hypothesis. According to this, non-aquatic insects with similar 
body parts to the hypothesized skimmers would have been selected because 
of their improved ability to disperse in terrestrial habitats and, again, to avoid 
predators, ¿ nd food, or reproduce. 
The initial À ight appendages of insects must have had muscle connections 
in the thorax. Through advances in modern genetics, we now know that the 
mutations necessary for À ight appendages and associated musculature may 
have been very rapid. The discovery of Hox genes, which code for proteins 
along the axis of an animal, changed our views about how certain appendages 
on insects might have evolved. 
Given that so many insects have aquatic phases in their life cycles, it’s not 
surprising that they have left traces of their activities on stream and lake 
bottoms. One trace fossil found in Massachusetts, from 310 million years 
ago, shows where an insect momentarily landed in mud, with no tracks 
connected to the impression.
DragonÀ ies are among the most primitive of 
À ying insects, of the infraclass Paleoptera.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

28
Lecture 8: Origins of Insects and of Powered Flight
The evolutionary transition of insects and insect À ight had an enormous 
impact on the world, especially terrestrial environments. In fact, it’s not a 
stretch to say that the pollination service performed by insects made possible 
the evolution of primates. Ŷ
arthropods: An invertebrate animal that has a segmented body and jointed 
legs, such as insects and crustaceans. Trilobites were among the most 
successful in the Cambrian period.
Devonian period: The period of time from 416 to 359 million years ago; 
three continents had formed during this time.
Hox genes: Genes that code for proteins along the axis of an animal and are 
often associated with speci¿ c segments.
    Important Terms
Dudley, The Biomechanics of Insect Flight.
Grimaldi and Engel, Evolution of the Insects. 
1. With the scenarios proposed for the evolution of À ight in insects in mind, 
which one do you think is more likely, and what sort of fossil evidence 
would strengthen this hypothesis?
2. Insects are by far the most evolutionarily successful group of animals. 
Why did insects diversify more than other terrestrial arthropods, such as 
arachnids (spiders, scorpions), which originated before insects?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

29
Seed Plants and the First Forests
Lecture 9
Nowadays, we take seeds for granted. We barely think about them, 
whether we’re eating peanuts, spitting them out while eating watermelon, 
or brushing off sesame seeds from our clothes while eating a bagel…. 
All this we consider as part of everyday normal life with seeds, but it 
started in the Devonian period, about 370 million years ago.
A
bout 310 million years ago, extensive forests composed of spore-
bearing and seed-bearing plants grew in swampy environments along 
the west side of the then newly formed Appalachian Mountains. 
Weather conditions along the Appalachians assisted in the formation of broad 
deltas and swamps, with great amounts of organic material produced by plant 
communities. These were the vast coal swamps of the Carboniferous period. 
Most of the plants in these coal-forming forests represented innovations in 
vascular plants known as tracheophytes.
Some spore-bearing plants known as pteridophytes (such as ferns) had 
evolved during the Silurian period, close to 420 million years ago, and 
were common during the Devonian period. One well-known pteridophyte 
is Archaeopteris, which probably formed the ¿ rst true forest. Full-size 
specimens had trunks more than 3 feet wide and grew to heights of 100 feet. 
The roots were likewise massive and extended out and into the soil in ways 
that vascular plants hadn’t done earlier.
The selection advantage to greater height in some vascular plants would 
have been competition for light needed for photosynthesis. Interestingly, as 
tall plants evolved, they would have created more shade, which means that 
understory plants would have been selected for shade tolerance.
Another group of tall pteridophytes in the Devonian and the Carboniferous 
periods were the vascular plants called sphenopsids, which include horsetails 
and lycopods. The most impressive of the fossil horsetails are Calamites, 
which lived during the Carboniferous period and grew to more than 100 feet 
tall, towering over modern horsetails. These plants grew clonally, that is, by 

30
Lecture 9: Seed Plants and the First Forests
spreading shoots of the same individual plant laterally, which enabled them 
to proliferate quickly in terrestrial ecosystems. 
Probably the most far-reaching and novel trait that evolved in tracheophytes 
during this time was the ability to form seeds. Three features had to develop 
from spore-bearing plants in order to make this transition: (1) a seed coat that 
serves as protection against desiccation or other damage; (2) nutrients within 
the seeds, such as starches, oils, or 
proteins; and (3) an embryo—the 
potential new plant that will use the 
nutrients to grow.
In plants, the strategy of using 
spores for reproduction depends on 
happenstance for fertilization, and 
because so much is left to chance, 
spore-bearing plants must release huge numbers of spores into the world. The 
spores also lack any sort of food supply for growth once they’re germinated. 
In contrast, seed plants depend on internal fertilization. 
From the Silurian to the Devonian periods, spores increased in diversity of 
forms and, eventually, to distinct sizes. The larger megaspore, instead of 
being let go, stayed in the parent and was fertilized by a microspore. This 
process, called endospory, is similar to internal fertilization in seed plants. 
Seeds helped some land plants adapt to drier conditions, decreasing the 
need to stay in or close to water sources. Lycopods would have probably 
grown in dense populations and in more swampy or moist environments. 
Pteridosperms, the now extinct transitional group, probably grew as upland 
trees, ¿ lling in drier areas.
Forests changed terrestrial ecosystems on a global scale, altering the 
landscape, the atmosphere, and the weather. The canopies provided by 
forests also gave vertebrates new opportunities to get out of the water and 
start moving around on land. Ŷ
Forests changed terrestrial 
ecosystems on a global scale, 
altering the landscape, the 
atmosphere, and the weather.

31
tracheophytes: A vascular plant that developed during the Carboniferous 
period.
Beerling, Emerald Planet. 
Kenrick and Davis, Fossil Plants. 
    Important Term
1. Given the statement, “the early evolution of forests may have affected 
global climate during the Paleozoic era,” how could this relationship be 
examined critically through fossil evidence other than plants?
2. Consider the major evolutionary advantages of land plants that reproduce 
through closed seeds, rather than through spores. Then why are spore-
bearing plants still around today, despite the evolution of seed-bearing 
plants more than 300 million years ago?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

32
Lecture 10: From Fish to 4-Limbed Animals
From Fish to 4-Limbed Animals
Lecture 10
Experiments [with Hox genes] are better explaining how what were 
originally ¿ sh ¿ ns could later become tetrapod ¿ ns in an evolutionary 
lineage and how such a genetic change could occur relatively quickly. 
After that, natural selection then took its course, and tetrapod limbs 
would’ve been selected favorably under the right circumstances.
I
n this lecture, we look at the transition from bony ¿ sh with lobe-like ¿ ns 
to four-legged vertebrates known as tetrapods. This transition took place 
in the Devonian-Carboniferous periods, assisted by the evolution of 
trees and tall plants that provided shade on the forest À oor. Tetrapod simply 
means “four legs.” It is the group under which all four-legged vertebrates 
are categorized. 
Lobe-¿ nned ¿ sh, also known as sarcopterygian ¿ sh, are only a small minority 
of ¿ sh today, but a good deal of evidence points to them as the ancestors of 
tetrapods. The fossil Tiktaalik provides a beautiful example of the transition 
between lobe-¿ nned ¿ sh and tetrapods.
Early tetrapods and lobe-¿ nned ¿ sh were anatomically much closer than we 
might think. Lobe-¿ nned ¿ sh, so-called because they have four thick, stubby 
¿ ns, are also members of a larger category of ¿ sh called osteichthyans, or 
bony ¿ sh. The tetrapod seems to have started with the sarcopterygian, a 
group whose survivors today include lung¿ sh and coelacanths. As we might 
guess from the name lung¿ sh, lungs developed in lobe-¿ nned ¿ sh, which 
allowed them to stay out of the water for extended periods of time. 
The four lobed ¿ ns of a sarcopterygian ¿ sh are its paired pelvic and pectoral 
¿ ns. These ¿ ns are homologous for pelvic and pectoral ¿ ns on tetrapods, and 
many of the same bones are present, as well. One of the greatest evolutionary 
challenges faced by vertebrates leaving the water was the need to support a 
greater weight in locomotion on land. To meet this challenge, vertebrates 
needed to evolve added structural support in their skeletons. The limbs, for 
example, became lengthened in places, with stronger joints between the 

33
bones and stronger muscles. Additionally, the head had to be able to move 
more freely to facilitate walking and predation; thus, tetrapods had to develop 
a neck.
Body fossils of lobe-¿ nned ¿ sh, such as Eusthenopteron and Panderichthys, 
show numerous transitional traits between these ¿ sh and tetrapods. The 
pectoral ¿ n of Eusthenopteron, for example, has most of the homologous 
bones we might expect to ¿ nd in a tetrapod, such as a humerus, a radius, an 
ulna, carpals, metacarpals, and phalanges. Tiktaalik, mentioned earlier, had a 
À at head and a body with eyes on the top of the skull, ear notches, shoulders 
disconnected from the skull, and probably both lungs and gills. Another 
important tetrapod fossil is Ichthyostega, from 370 to 360 million years ago. 
A good deal of evidence points to the lobe-¿ nned, or sarcopterygian, ¿ sh as the 
ancestors of the tetrapods, or four-legged land animals.
© Karen Carr Studio.

34
Lecture 10: From Fish to 4-Limbed Animals
A spectacular ¿ nd of probable tetrapod tracks shows many trackways from 
multiple animals and measurements indicating an animal that was more 
than 6.5 feet long. Some tracks also have digit impressions showing six to 
seven digits in the feet. These fossil tracks, from 395 million years ago, have 
pushed back the possible timing of the transition to tetrapods. 
The growth of forests in terrestrial ecosystems would have provided new 
habitats and many more food resources for the expansion of tetrapods. By 
the later part of the Devonian period, oxygen content in the atmosphere 
was probably closer to the 21 percent levels we see today. The next step 
for tetrapods was to develop enclosed eggs to ensure reproduction during 
times of drought or in arid environments. With enclosed eggs came other 
adaptations that caused certain lineages of tetrapods to become the ¿ rst 
reptiles during the Carboniferous period, about 320 million years ago. Ŷ
Tetrapod: A four-legged vertebrate; the group includes amphibians, reptiles, 
and mammals.
Clack, Gaining Ground.
Shubin, Your Inner Fish.
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider
1. The evolution of forests likely affected the evolution of tetrapods from 
lobe-¿ nned ¿ sh. How could you test this relationship further with either 
geological or paleontological evidence?
2. Certain anatomical traits had to be favorably selected for lobe-¿ nned 
¿ sh to evolve for movement on land, such as the strong limbs for support 
and a neck that allowed for up-and-down movement of the head. What 
are some other anatomical traits that probably would have helped in this 
transition, but may not have easily fossilized?

35
The Egg Came First—Early Reptile Evolution
Lecture 11
One of the main differences [between reptiles and amphibians] is 
seen in the jaws, as reptiles developed greater biting strength than 
their amphibian ancestors. This evolution was presumably driven 
by their main preyed items, which were these probably very large 
Carboniferous-age insects and other invertebrates.
T
he expansion of forests across Devonian and Carboniferous 
landscapes, along with the diversi¿ cation of insects and tetrapods, 
changed the face of the land radically. Major changes in the 
reproduction of tetrapods came next, reÀ ecting changes that must have 
occurred in their terrestrial environments.
In 1859, the Canadian geologist William Dawson found what is considered 
to be the earliest known reptile, Hylonomus lyelli, inside a fossil tree at the 
Joggins Fossil Cliffs in Nova Scotia. The fossil was found in rocks from the 
late Carboniferous period, dating from 310 million years ago.
The most basic differences between amphibians and reptiles are not 
anatomical but ecological. Amphibians have external fertilization and are 
dependent on water environments throughout their lives. In contrast, reptiles 
have internal fertilization and can lay their eggs and live in a wide range 
of environments. 
In evolutionary classi¿ cations, the group Amniota is de¿ ned as tetrapods 
that share a common ancestor with two groups: Synapsida, which includes 
mammals and mammal-like reptiles, and Sauropsida, which includes all 
other reptiles, such as dinosaurs and birds. The classi¿ cation of vertebrates 
into these evolutionarily related groups, also called clades, changed how we 
name and discuss these animals. Very different groups of tetrapods previously 
placed under separate Linnaean categories actually share a common ancestry 
through their mode of reproduction.

36
Lecture 11: The Egg Came First—Early Reptile Evolution
We can broadly classify the clades of amniotes on the basis of three skull 
types. These are de¿ ned by the number of holes, or temporal fenestrae, 
on the sides of their skulls. A diapsid’s skull has two temporal fenestrae 
on each side, a synapsid has one, and an anapsid has none. Diapsids and 
anapsids are both within Sauropsida; modern-day examples include lizards, 
snakes, alligators, and birds (diapsids) and 
turtles (anapsids). Modern synapsids are 
represented by all mammals. 
A number of anatomical features that 
distinguish amphibians from reptiles are 
in the skull. One of the main differences is 
seen in the jaws, because reptiles developed 
greater biting strength than their amphibian 
ancestors. Other differences in the skeletons of the earliest reptiles reÀ ect the 
fact that they spent most of their time on land. The one trait that truly de¿ nes 
amniotes is their amniotic egg, also known as a cleidoic egg. 
A fossil called Casineria kiddi from the early Carboniferous period 
shows some transitional characteristics between amphibians and reptiles. 
It has ¿ ve digits on both the front and rear feet and limbs that seem 
better adapted for life 
on land. Amniote trace 
fossils from the late 
Carboniferous generally 
show 
impressions 
of 
prominent hard claws 
and ¿ ve digits, evidence 
of scales, and indications 
of 
a 
less 
sprawling 
gait. 
Fossil 
evidence 
indicates amniotes had 
already diverged into 
anapsids, 
synapsids, 
and diapsids by about 
300 million years ago. 
Global cooling and a 
Reptiles, such as turtles, are able to live 
independently of water environments and thus 
have an ecological advantage over amphibians.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.
The most basic 
differences between 
amphibians and reptiles 
are not anatomical 
but ecological.

37
major extinction event about 318 million years ago probably triggered or 
accelerated this evolution. 
The development of enclosed eggs was important in the evolution of 
vertebrates because it opened more options for tetrapods to live their entire 
lives and reproduce on land. Terrestrial environments would have offered 
clear adaptive advantages to any tetrapods that could cut themselves off from 
water bodies. The development of extensive forests just before the evolution 
of amniotic eggs suggests that terrestrial ecosystems were likely a driving 
factor in amniote evolution. Ŷ
Amniota: An evolutionary classi¿ cation encompassing tetrapods that share 
a common ancestor with two groups: Synapsida, consisting of mammals and 
mammal-like reptiles, and Sauropsida, consisting of all other reptiles.
anapsid: A type of amniote with no holes, or temporal fenestrae, on the sides 
of its skull. Turtles are part of this group.
diapsid: A type of amniote with two temporal fenestrae on each side of its 
skull. Modern examples include lizards, snakes, alligators, and birds.
reptile: A tetrapod that ¿ ts the behavioral traits for reptiles, such as internal 
fertilization and the laying of enclosed eggs.
synapsid: A type of amniote with one temporal fenestrae on its skull.
    Important Terms
Carpenter, Dinosaur Eggs, Nests, and Babies. 
Sumida and Martin (editors), Amniote Origins.
    Suggested Reading

38
Lecture 11: The Egg Came First—Early Reptile Evolution
1. Environmental change during the Carboniferous period probably played 
a role in the natural selection of an enclosed amniotic egg in tetrapods. 
Why did live birth in amniotes, seen in some modern reptiles, not evolve 
¿ rst, rather than following the evolution of enclosed eggs?
2. The main behavioral difference between amniotes and their more 
amphibian-like ancestors during the Carboniferous period was that the 
former laid enclosed eggs on land. Besides anatomical differences, what 
other evidence might help discern whether any given body fossil from the 
Carboniferous rocks is an amniote or some closely related non-amniote?
    Questions to Consider

39
The Origins and Successes of the Dinosaurs
Lecture 12
What’s interesting to think about in terms of tetrapod evolution is that 
bipedal locomotion has also evolved multiple times in very different 
lineages, including dinosauromorphs, true dinosaurs, birds, and 
mammals, namely, the hominid line that includes humans.
A
bout 230 to 250 million years ago, in the early to middle Triassic 
period, one lineage of diapsids began evolving the traits now 
associated with the ¿ rst dinosaurs. People often think of dinosaurs as 
being huge, but a large number of dinosaur species ranged from crow-sized 
to human-sized. More than 500 genera of dinosaurs have been identi¿ ed thus 
far, and new genera continue to be found every year. A major revelation in 
the study of dinosaur evolution is the idea that dinosaurs did not really go 
extinct; they are still with us as birds. 
Perhaps the most important development in the evolution of dinosaurs is 
represented by the acetabulum, an open hole in the hip that allowed the 
head of the femur to ¿ t into the hip in a ball-and-socket arrangement. This 
enabled dinosaurs to walk upright or erect, with their legs within a narrow 
plane in the body. Moving upright probably helped with breathing and 
enabled speedier locomotion.
Dinosaurs can be split into two clades, mainly on the basis of their hip 
structures. The saurischian (“lizard hip”) clade includes all theropod 
dinosaurs, such as Allosaurus, Velociraptor, and Tyrannosaurus. The 
ornithischian (“bird hip”) clade includes all ornithopod dinosaurs, such as 
Hadrosaura, Thyreophorans, and Ankylosaurs. For each type, the three bones 
making up the hip are arranged differently.
The split between saurician and ornithischian dinosaurs happened fairly early 
in their evolutionary lineage, probably about 235 million years ago. Both 
types of dinosaurs descended from a clade of amniotes called archosaurs. 
Archosaurs, which are diapsid reptiles, are signi¿ ed by two important traits: 
a hole in the skull in front of the eye and teeth held in sockets. Archosaurs 

40
Lecture 12: The Origins and Successes of the Dinosaurs
included pterosaurs, dinosaurs and their relatives, and some other large 
animals that went extinct by the end of the Triassic period. Dinosauromorphs 
were archosaurs that lived during the Triassic period and are regarded as the 
closest precursors to dinosaurs. 
Lagerpeton comes from the middle Triassic period, about 237 to 228 
million years ago. It was de¿ nitely bipedal; it also had a fourth digit, and its 
corresponding metatarsal bones are longer than the other toes and metatarsals. 
This was a relatively small animal, measuring only a little more than 2 feet 
long. Closer to true dinosaurs is Marasuchus, a fast-moving bipedal animal 
that measured around 4 feet.
Most of the earliest known dinosaurs are saurischians and theropods, 
although a few are primitive ornithischians. Eoraptor is largely accepted as 
the oldest known dinosaur. Both its femur and its ankle were adapted for 
a more erect posture, and its feet had three prominent digits. The earliest 
ornithischian dinosaurs include two signi¿ cant specimens, Pisanosaurus and 
Eocursor parvus. 
Environmental conditions favored the evolution of dinosaurs to huge sizes and 
to domination of the Mesozoic landscape. 
© Karen Carr Studio.

41
Environmental conditions favored the evolution of dinosaurs to huge sizes 
and to domination of the Mesozoic landscape. At the end of the Triassic 
period, a mass extinction took place, probably initiated by the breakup of 
the supercontinent Pangaea, which brought on global warming and the 
extinction of many seed plants. Numerous archosaurs died out, opening up 
ecological niches for dinosaurs. Throughout the remainder of the Mesozoic 
era, dinosaurs occupied every major terrestrial habitat—underground, on the 
ground, and in the trees. Ŷ
acetabulum: An open hole in the hip of dinosaurs that allowed the head of 
the femur to ¿ t into the hip in a ball-and-socket arrangement.
ornithischian: Literally, “bird hip”; one of two clades into which dinosaurs 
are divided; includes all ornithopod dinosaurs, such as Hadrosaura, 
Thyreophorans, and Stegosaurus.
saurischian: Literally, “lizard hip”; one of two clades into which dinosaurs 
are divided. Includes all therapod dinosaurs, such as Allosaurus, Velociraptor, 
and Tyrannosaurus.
Triassic period: The period of time from 251 to 200 million years ago; the 
time when the supercontinent Pangea started to break up into the continents 
we know today.
Fraser and Henderson, Dawn of the Dinosaurs.
Martin, Introduction to the Study of Dinosaurs.
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading

42
Lecture 12: The Origins and Successes of the Dinosaurs
1. The earliest dinosaurs in the late Triassic period were relatively small 
compared to their descendants in the remainder of the Mesozoic. What 
evolutionary factors could have later resulted in the natural selection of 
extreme sizes in some dinosaurs, while other dinosaurs also evolved to 
be as small as some modern songbirds?
2. Dinosaurs share a common ancestor with pterosaurs and crocodiles, but 
both of these groups are not dinosaurs. How did their evolutionary paths 
result in behavioral and anatomical differences between these three 
groups of animals? 
    Questions to Consider

43
Marine and Flying Reptiles
Lecture 13
In these extraordinary fossils from the early Jurassic of Germany, from 
about 190 million years ago, we see baby ichthyosaurs exiting the birth 
canal of the mother ichthyosaur with their tails coming out ¿ rst. This 
behavior is a clear adaptation for living and reproducing in the water, 
as modern whales and dolphins show exactly the same sort of position 
of their young during live birth.
T
he pterosaurs were evolutionary cousins and contemporaries of the 
dinosaurs in the Mesozoic era. Some of the most important Mesozoic 
vertebrate fossil ¿ nds of the 19th century were made by Mary 
Anning, who helped discover the ¿ rst known specimen of the marine reptile 
Ichthyosaurus and the ¿ rst known plesiosaur.
If you recall, the major skull types for amniotes that we discussed in 
previous lectures are synapsid, diapsid, and anapsid. A fourth skull type that 
developed in some marine reptiles, such as ichthyosaurs and plesiosaurs, is a
euryapsid skull. 
Probably the most intriguing marine reptiles from an evolutionary standpoint 
were the ichthyosaurs. They were active eaters of seafood, they had limbs that 
were modi¿ ed into À ippers, and they had streamlined bodies. One species 
of ichthyosaur developed the largest known eyes of any vertebrate, about 
a foot in diameter, presumably an adaptation to reduced light conditions at 
great ocean depths. Ichthyosaurs also had live births, representing the ¿ rst 
instance of this evolution in amniotes.
Plesiosaurs are another famous group of marine reptiles from the Mesozoic 
era. The ¿ ns of plesiosaurs, which look very much like modi¿ ed hands 
and feet, show their relationship to land-dwelling ancestors. Most of these 
animals probably ate ¿ sh and mollusks, and their well-developed ¿ ns meant 
that they were active swimmers. The short-necked plesiosaurs included 
some of the largest and most important predators of the Mesozoic seas. One 
of these was the late Jurassic Liopleurodon, which reached lengths of about 

44
Lecture 13: Marine and Flying Reptiles
30 feet. Competing for seafood in Cretaceous oceans were the awesome 
predators called mosasaurs, some of which were more than 55 feet long. 
Another group of reptiles distantly related to mosasaurs yet also adapted to 
marine environments during the 
Cretaceous period includes snakes. 
The largest sea turtle that ever 
lived, Archelon ischyros, is from 
about 70 million years ago and was 
15 feet long.
Before birds, the world’s skies 
were ¿ lled with a wide variety of 
pterosaurs—more than 100 fossil 
species at last count. Pterosaurs 
were apparently the ¿ rst vertebrates with powered À ight. The oldest 
pterosaur, Eudimorphodon, dates from 210 to 220 million years ago. This 
gull-sized pterosaur had an enormously elongated fourth digit and a novel 
bone in its wrist that helped to support wing membranes for À ight.
An interesting example of convergent evolution in pterosaurs is provided 
by hair-like projections on their skin, which probably served as insulation. 
This hair, along with metabolic needs for sustained À ight, suggests 
that pterosaurs may have evolved warm-bloodedness, or endothermy, 
independently of mammals. Sizes of pterosaurs ranged from the tiny 
Nemicolopterus crypticus, with about a 10-inch wingspan, to the giant 
Quetzalcoatlus, with a wingspan of about 36 feet. A good number of 
pterosaur trackways have been found, showing that these animals walked 
on all fours. 
A mass extinction at the end of the Cretaceous period, probably caused 
by a meteorite impact, wiped out dinosaurs, mosasaurs, pterosaurs, and 
many other animals. Dust kicked up by the impact and smoke from forest 
¿ res would have shut down photosynthesis for several years. Global 
temperatures also would have plummeted. The only organisms that
would have survived such a shock were those of small size with
burrowing abilities. Ŷ
A mass extinction at the end 
of the Cretaceous period, 
probably caused by a meteorite 
impact, wiped out dinosaurs, 
mosasaurs, pterosaurs, and 
many other animals.

45
Everhart, Oceans of Kansas. 
Unwin, The Pterosaurs.
1. Amniotes diversi¿ ed considerably during the Mesozoic era, resulting in 
the evolution of ichthyosaurs, plesiosaurs, mosasaurs, sea turtles, and 
pterosaurs. How did sea-level changes during the Mesozoic era probably 
affect the diversi¿ cation and extinctions of these marine reptiles, and 
what other factors must be considered other than sea level?
2. Pterosaurs were the ¿ rst À ying vertebrates, and probably adapted to a 
wide range of feeding habits. Given any pterosaur body fossils or trace 
fossils, how could you infer their feeding behaviors?
    Questions to Consider
    Suggested Reading

46
Lecture 14: Birds—The Dinosaurs among Us
Birds—The Dinosaurs among Us
Lecture 14
All in all, one could not ask for a much better example of a blend between 
dinosaur and bird than Archaeopteryx. What continually astonishes 
paleontologists about this fossil species is how we’re still learning about 
it more than 150 years after its discovery and following intense study 
and considerable scienti¿ c debate.
T
he evolution of birds differs from that of pterosaurs on the basis of 
two major points: (1) Birds almost certainly evolved from a lineage 
of À ightless theropod 
dinosaurs, and (2) pterosaurs 
went extinct at the end of the 
Cretaceous period, whereas 
birds survived and thrived.
Paleontologists are now quite 
certain that birds descended 
from small theropod dinosaurs 
during the middle to late 
Jurassic period, probably about 
165 to 155 million years ago. 
Archaeopteryx, 
which 
we 
saw in Lecture 1, is about 150 
to 145 million years old. It 
had feathers and a number of 
other traits showing that the 
divergence of theropods into 
avian and non-avian categories 
had already taken place.
At a minimum, birds have (or 
had and later lost) the following 
traits: feathers, a reduction in 
the number and sizes of the 
An Archaeopteryx fossil.
© Karen Carr Studio.

47
vertebrae in their tails, forearms that are far more than 90% the length of their 
humerus, forelimbs that are more than 120% longer than their hind legs, and 
three forward-pointing digits on their feet and one digit pointing backwards. 
The ¿ rst four of these traits are adaptations for À ight. The backward-pointing 
digit is an adaptation for perching on tree branches.
Archaeopteryx had a tail with 21 to 22 vertebrae, which made its tail long for 
a bird but short for a theropod dinosaur. It had a furcula, or wishbone, which 
is found in all birds but only a few 
types of theropods. Its breastbone, or 
sternum, was poorly developed, unlike 
those of À ighted birds. The skull of 
Archaeopteryx had teeth in both jaws, 
which modern birds do not. CAT scans 
done on skull interiors of Archaeopteryx 
have also revealed that it was more bird-brained than reptilian-brained. A 
recent study of growth lines showed that it had a lower calculated growth 
rate than that of a typical bird.
In the late 1990s, paleontologists began to ¿ nd numerous small, feathered 
theropod dinosaurs from the early Cretaceous period. One of the most 
spectacular of these was the theropod Microraptor, which had feathers on all 
four limbs and its tail. The oldest feathered dinosaur is Anchiornis huxleyi, 
dating from 160 to 155 million years ago. Even Velociraptor, a theropod 
from about 70 million years ago, has been shown to have had attachments 
for quills on its arms, similar to what can be seen on the forearms of vultures. 
Feathers, which are basically heavily modi¿ ed scales, ¿ rst evolved in 
theropod dinosaurs before fully À ighted birds evolved. Feathers probably 
developed for insulation and to identify species and potential mates.
Three hypotheses have been proposed for the evolution of À ight. The ¿ rst 
of these is the ground-up hypothesis, which states that small, fast-running 
theropods evolved À ight from the selection of À ight-adapted traits on the 
ground, such as escaping predators and catching prey. The trees-down 
hypothesis states that small theropods were tree climbers that evolved À ight 
¿ rst by gliding, then by À apping their arms. The assisted-running hypothesis 
How would the world be 
different if birds had not 
evolved from dinosaurs? 

48
Lecture 14: Birds—The Dinosaurs among Us
synthesizes aspects of the preceding two and is supported by experiments 
done on living birds. 
How would the world be different if birds had not evolved from dinosaurs? 
Obviously, without songbirds, it would be a lot quieter. We would 
also experience a boom in the populations of À ying insects. Perhaps 
most important, we would not have instruments for seed dispersal of 
À owering  plants. Ŷ
Chiappe, Glori¿ ed Dinosaurs. 
Shipman, Taking Wing.
1. When paleontologists make the statement “birds are dinosaurs,” how 
does it compare to the statement “humans are primates”?
2. Review the three hypotheses for the origin of À ight in feathered 
dinosaurs. Based on both the fossil record and experimental work 
with modern birds, which of the three do you think is most probable, 
and why?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

49
The First Flowers and Pollinator Coevolution
Lecture 15
Although some of the results may seem subtle, the overall impact of 
À owering plants and their pollinators was perhaps no less important 
for the overall future of life on land than, say, the ¿ rst forests had 
been, back when they transformed the atmosphere and the landscapes 
of the planet.
F
lowering plants, known as angiosperms, number about 250,000 
species and account for about 80% of all land plants. The animals 
that pollinate these plants—insects, birds, and even mammals—
are arguably even more diverse. The origins and diversi¿ cation of birds 
overlapped with the origins of À owering plants, which occurred at least 130 
million years ago and was quickly followed by the origins and explosive 
diversi¿ cation of many pollinating insects.
Flowering plants reproduce by using pollen, which contains male sperm. 
Somehow, this pollen must be transported to the female parts of the same 
species of plant, which contains ovules. If the sperm fertilizes the ovules, 
seeds are produced and fruits grow to surround these seeds. 
Flowering plants offer terrestrial animals pollen, nectar, and fruit to entice 
them to lend a hand in plant reproduction. Insects are attracted to plants as 
sites for reproduction, as shelter from predators, and as food. In fact, many 
insects have evolved forms of camouÀ age to better ¿ t in with the visual 
appearance of plants and take advantage of these bene¿ ts.
The production of nectars is interesting because it represents a blatant 
adaptation of plants for attracting insects. Nectars, which consist mostly 
of simple sugars, were easy for the ¿ rst À owering plants to make. For the 
pollinators, these simple sugars supply energy, maximizing their ability to 
À y from À ower to À ower and assist with pollination. 
Some Jurassic gymnosperms called Gnetales are regarded as precursors of 
angiosperms, in part because modern Gnetales have special tissues called 

50
Lecture 15: The First Flowers and Pollinator Coevolution
vessel elements that aid in transporting water in vascular plants. Such 
vessel elements are absent from all other gymnosperms, such as cycads and 
conifers, but they are in angiosperms. However, this shared trait does not 
necessarily represent evolutionary relatedness.
The oldest undoubted angiosperm fossils are from three species of the 
same genus, Archaefructus, dating from about 125 million years ago. 
Interestingly, Archaefructus was a water-dwelling plant and may have 
been related to lilies, which has led to speculation that the early evolution 
of À owering plants may have been in watery environments. One Jurassic 
plant, Schmeissneria, has been proposed as a possible angiosperm ancestor 
or even as an angiosperm 
itself. 
Chemical 
fossils 
called oleananes link with 
angiosperms and suggest 
an even deeper origin for 
À owering 
plants, 
going 
back 
more 
than 
250 
million years.
It might seem surprising that 
À owering plants survived 
the end-Cretaceous mass 
extinction. 
However, 
by 
that time, À owering plants 
had undergone at least 60 
million years of adaptive 
radiation. Further, À owering 
plants 
bene¿ ted 
greatly 
from their mutual alliances 
with virtually all types of 
small terrestrial animals and 
insects that also survived 
the extinction.
The important pollinators 
of today that probably 
Flowering plants, which reproduce using 
pollen, emerged about 130 million years ago.
© Karen Carr Studio.

51
coevolved with the earliest À owering plants include wasps and bees, 
butterÀ ies and moths, beetles, ants, hummingbirds, bats, honey possums, 
and lemurs. Many of these insect pollinators were present during the 
Mesozoic era and become noticeable in the fossil record after À owering 
plants exploded in diversity. The relationship between angiosperms 
and potential pollinators is so close that it’s dif¿ cult to tell whether this 
coevolution was driven ¿ rst by plants or insects. Ŷ
angiosperms: Flowering plant; characterized by enclosed seeds.
pollen: A powder that contains the male gametes of seed plants.
Grimaldi and Engel, Evolution of the Insects.
Taylor, T.N., Taylor, E.L., and Krings, Paleobotany.
1. Non-À owering plants had evolved and thrived for more than 200 million 
years before the origin of À owering plants (angiosperms). Given what 
you know about seed plants and their animal cohorts, what do you 
think may have triggered the initial evolution of angiosperms from their 
gymnosperm ancestors during the Mesozoic era?
2. Many animals, such as certain À ying insects, birds, and mammals, 
likely coevolved with angiosperms during the Cretaceous Period. What 
future fossil ¿ nds do you expect may provide more information about 
this coevolution?
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

52
Lecture 16: Egg to Placenta—Early Mammal Evolution
Egg to Placenta—Early Mammal Evolution
Lecture 16
Better respiration, better digestion, better ability to withstand cold 
temperatures, better sense organs for operating at night, better jaws, 
and better teeth that helped some of them be able to eat a wider variety 
of food items—all those adaptations and exaptations prepared mammals 
to live in nearly every terrestrial habitat, with a bewildering variety of 
forms and behaviors emerging all throughout the last 65 million years.
M
ammal-like reptiles arose from synapsid reptiles in the Permian 
period, about 290 to 250 million years ago. In other words, 
mammals and their ancestors appeared and began to evolve at 
almost the same time and for some of the same reasons as the dinosaurs. 
In fact, at least one Cretaceous mammal, Repenomamus robustus, preyed 
on dinosaurs.
The general characteristics of mammals include hair, mammary glands, 
relatively large brains compared to their body sizes, and long care for their 
offspring. Mammals also have several bones that reÀ ect an evolutionary 
connection to their more reptilian ancestors. The three modern types of 
mammals are monotremes, which are egg-laying mammals; marsupials, 
which have live birth, but their embryonic offspring are nurtured in a pouch 
for an extended time; and eutherians, which are placental mammals.
Mammals are, most basically, synapsids, a group identi¿ ed by a single 
temporal fenestra on each side of the skill. A general trend in early synapsid 
skulls was an enlargement of the temporal fenestrae. This was probably the 
result of selection for larger jaw muscles that attached the bones around the 
holes in the skull. Such jaw muscles enabled chewing food, as opposed to 
swallowing it whole. 
Synapsids in general were the ruling reptiles of the Permian until a mass 
extinction at the end of the period. Among the synapsids that survived this 
mass extinction was a group called therapsids that spread worldwide. 
These animals show a number of traits associated with mammals, such as 

53
differentiated teeth, stronger jaws, modi¿ cations of the jaws to enable better 
hearing, and an upright posture.
One group of therapsids, cynodonts, shows numerous modi¿ cations to their 
jaws that indicate more ef¿ cient chewing. For example, the lower jawbone 
became one solid piece rather than several articulated bones, as we ¿ nd in 
pre-therapsid reptiles. Two of the reptile jawbones moved up to the inner 
ear. Another important shift was the full development of a secondary palate 
in the roof of the mouth, 
enabling these animals 
to eat more food by 
separating breathing tubes 
and feeding cavities.  
As synapsids went from 
the 
more 
sprawling 
posture associated with 
a normal reptile to a 
more upright one, their 
limbs also lengthened, 
tails 
shortened, 
and 
hipbones 
got 
smaller. 
These shifts are thought 
to reÀ ect the energy 
demands 
of 
increased 
brain size, metabolism, and activity, all of which are likely associated with 
endothermy. Endothermy itself may have developed as one adaptation for 
nocturnal activities.
The early Jurassic Morganucodon exhibits the mammalian trait of 
diphyodonty (i.e., teeth are not replaced endlessly if they are lost). This aided 
in improved occlusion and suggests suckling behavior. The most successful 
of Mesozoic mammal groups were multituberculates, which evolved by the 
late Jurassic period and lived through the Eocene epoch of the Cenozoic era. 
Various synapsids and therapsids went extinct at the end of the Permian 
period, leaving only the cynodonts. Thus, ecological niches were likely 
Elephants are the only surviving mammal family 
of the order Proboscidea.
© Comstock/Thinkstock.

54
Lecture 16: Egg to Placenta—Early Mammal Evolution
opened for cynodonts in the early Triassic, which led to adaptations that 
took their lineages down the evolutionary path to mammals. Another 
mass extinction at the end of the Cretaceous period opened niches for 
both mammals and birds in terrestrial ecosystems. This, in turn, promoted 
diversi¿ cation of mammals in the Cenozoic era. Ŷ
endothermy: Physiology in which an organism generates its own internal 
body heat; sometimes called “warm-blooded.”
synapsid: One of three classi¿ cations within the group Amniota; a synapsid’s 
skull has one temporal fenestra. Modern synapsids are represented by 
all mammals.
therapsids: A group of reptiles of the Permian period that show a large 
number of traits associated with mammals, such as differentiated teeth, 
stronger jaws, modi¿ cations of the jaws to enable better hearing, and an 
upright posture.
Kemp, The Origin and Evolution of Mammals. 
Kielan-Jaworowska, Cifelli, and Luo, Mammals from the Age of Dinosaurs.
1. Some important anatomical features distinguished mammals from their 
synapsid reptile ancestors. How did these traits, such as modi¿ cation of 
some jawbones into tiny bones of the inner ear, reÀ ect novel adaptations 
that were shaped by natural selection?
2. Think about how mass extinctions relate to mammalian evolution over 
the past 250 million years. For instance, how did the end-Permian period 
extinction 250 million years ago differ in its effect on mammalian 
evolution from the end-Cretaceous extinction 65 million years ago?
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

55
From Land to Sea—The Evolution of Whales
Lecture 17
This size range that you have in whales is analogous to how dinosaurs 
ranged from the crow-sized Microraptor to long-necked sauropod 
dinosaurs that exceeded 50 tons. Nevertheless, the range of size 
differences in cetaceans is really remarkable, and it’s unique among 
any group of animals.
A
fter the mass extinction at the end of the Cretaceous period, mammals 
began to ¿ ll ecological niches left by dinosaurs, marine reptiles, 
pterosaurs, and many other animals. The biggest and perhaps most 
surprising example of the radiation of mammals was their transition into the 
oceans in the evolution of whales.
For some time, whales were thought to have descended directly from 
mesonychids, which were carnivorous, land-dwelling, hoofed mammals 
that lived during the early Eocene epoch, about 35 to 40 million years ago. 
However, later fossil discoveries, including that of a Pakicetus, placed whales 
in the category of artiodactyls (even-toed, hoofed mammals). Pakicetus had 
middle ear bones that enabled it to hear underwater and an anklebone that 
compares well with those of modern artiodactyls. 
Modern cetaceans retain many vestigial traits and behaviors that reveal 
their evolutionary origins from land-dwelling placental mammals. Hind 
limbs and hipbones are greatly reduced, as in snakes, but are still present. 
Whales also have homologous bones in their front À ippers that match those 
in the forelimbs of other mammals. Perhaps the most overt behavioral trait 
demonstrating the ancestry of whales from land-dwelling mammals is the 
up-and-down motion they have while swimming. This movement reÀ ects the 
same spinal À exion as running in mammals. 
Modern cetaceans are divided into two main groups: odontocetes, or tooth 
whales, and mysticetes, or baleen whales. Tooth whales are mainly predatory, 
while baleen whales strain plankton from the water. Baleen whales, including 

56
Lecture 17: From Land to Sea—The Evolution of Whales
the blue whale, evolved to become the largest animal of all time, measuring 
more than 100 feet long and weighing more than 165 tons. 
The fossil record for the earliest whales and their close relatives is quite 
good. For example, Indohyus, dating from about 48 million years ago, 
was a small hoofed mammal, similar to a deer in form. Indohyus had 
relatively dense bones, which 
would 
have 
helped 
it 
stay 
submerged in water for extended 
periods of time to avoid predators. 
Pakicetus, mentioned earlier, was 
a carnivorous hoofed mammal 
with differentiated teeth, but it was 
likely amphibious. A skeleton of 
Maiacetus, from about 47 million 
years ago, has been found with a fossil fetus inside it. The position of the 
fetus, head downward, indicates that primitive whales may have returned 
to land to give birth.
Genetic tests have shown that whales and artiodactyls were clearly related 
to each other. Similarities in DNA in extant whales show a closer af¿ nity to 
hippopotamuses than to other mammals. Molecular clocks indicate probable 
divergence of whales from their artiodactyl ancestors at about 60 million 
years ago.
The selection of larger brain sizes in dolphins is, of course, correlated with 
more complex intelligence and behavior. Recent experiments on dolphins 
demonstrate that they can recognize themselves in mirrors as individuals. 
Dolphins also use complicated auditory communications, an adaptation that 
is connected to social interactions and cooperation. Studies of fossil dolphins 
and their brain cases have revealed two probable phases in the development 
of dolphin intelligence, at about 39 and 15 million years ago. These 
evolutionary transitions in cetaceans are pertinent to better understanding 
human evolution and how convergent evolution could have occurred through 
natural selection for larger brains in very different animals, one in the sea 
and the other on land. Ŷ
Recent experiments on 
dolphins demonstrate that they 
can recognize themselves in 
mirrors as individuals.

57
    Suggested Reading
Berta and Kovacs, Marine Mammals.
Prothero and Foss (editors), The Evolution of Artiodactyls. 
1. Consider the currently accepted hypothesis for the origin of modern 
whales. What do you regard as the best available evidence from the 
fossil record supporting this hypothesis?
2. Think about the evolutionary factors that resulted in the selection of 
relatively large brain size (and intelligence) in some lineages of whales, 
such as dolphins. How does this represent a type of convergent evolution 
with primate lineages leading to humans, despite their evolution in 
separate environments (marine and terrestrial)?
    Questions to Consider

58
Lecture 18: Moving on Up—The First Primates
Moving on Up—The First Primates
Lecture 18
The anthropoid features that we see today—larger brains, an 
accentuation of the visual sense, a closure of the eye orbit behind it, and 
color vision—those features seem to have originated as a consequence 
of the origin of the anthropoids, not as causes of them. I say that because 
they all originated after the anthropoids originated.
I
n this lecture, we discuss the transition from early primates to 
anthropoids, which include hominoids (living apes and their fossil 
ancestors, as well as humans) and New World monkeys. New World 
monkeys live in the Americas and include tamarinds, marmosets, spider 
monkeys, squirrel monkeys, and others. Old World monkeys live in Europe, 
Africa, and Asia and include baboons, macaques, langurs, and colobus 
monkeys. All of this diversity originated from one ancestor sometime during 
the Eocene epoch.
Georges Cuvier was a prominent French scientist and opponent of 
evolutionary ideas in the early 19th century. However, Cuvier made important 
contributions in the ¿ elds of anatomy and paleontology, including his work in 
the Montmartre gypsum beds. These beds, located in Paris, were composed 
of sedimentary layers dating from the Eocene epoch. Here, Cuvier found a 
fossil primate that he named Adapis, believing it to be some sort of cow-like 
herbivore. Today, we know this fossil was a primate by virtue of its teeth and 
skull. In general, we can place mammals within different classes based on 
their teeth, although with early mammals, this process can be dif¿ cult.
Genetics has also helped to clarify relationships among early mammals. For 
example, we now know that primates are closely related to some kinds of 
small insectivores, such as bats, rodents, dermopterans (À ying lemurs or 
colugos), and tree shrews. 
The diversi¿ cation of early primates and closely related mammals 
occurred rapidly. One example of early primate-like mammals is the group 
plesiadapids. The skeletons of these animals seem to converge on primates, 

59
but their crania are quite 
different from those of 
primates. 
The fossil record of Cuvier’s 
primate, Adapis, is so dense 
in North America that we 
can trace its evolution over 
about 8 million years of the 
Eocene epoch. We can see, 
for example, the gradual 
increase in tooth size, as 
well 
as 
the 
divergence 
in tooth size of three 
different lineages. 
Probably the most famous 
of 
the 
adapids 
to 
be 
discovered so far is the 
fossil 
called 
Darwinius, 
which tells us a number 
of details about adapid 
primates. One particular 
skeleton, nicknamed Ida, 
was identi¿ ed as a juvenile from her tooth development. Her body growth 
rate seems to be very similar to that of living primates.
Another candidate for the ancestor of anthropoids is a primate from the family 
Omomyidae. These animals are similar in their skulls to living tarsiers. In 
contrast, Adapids are similar in their skulls to living lemurs. Both tarsiers 
and lemurs (prosimians) tend to be nocturnal, are insect predators, and are 
generally solitary. Monkeys and apes, however, are different; they’re mostly 
diurnal, eat a mixed diet, and tend to live in complex social groups.
Primate fossils have been found in the Faiyum Depression in Egypt since 
the early 20th century. The species Afradapis, for example, shows many 
convergent features shared by adapoids and anthropoids, particularly in the 
Lemurs, such as the ring-tailed lemur, are 
similar to the extinct primate family of Adapids. 
© Hemera/Thinkstock.

60
Lecture 18: Moving on Up—The First Primates
jawbone. An important anthropoid found in Southeast Asia is Eosimias, 
dating from about 43 million years ago. 
The fossil record of the early anthropoids leads to the hypothesis that they 
originated from a tarsier-like ancestor somewhere in Asia and dispersed into 
Africa relatively quickly. New World monkeys may have traveled to South 
America by À oating on trees or other vegetation down the rivers of Africa. 
Such “rafts” may have had enough resources to keep monkeys alive as they 
crossed what was once a much smaller Atlantic Ocean. Ŷ
anthropoids: A group of primates that includes monkeys, apes, 
and humans.
Beard, The Hunt for the Dawn Monkey.
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider
1. The known early primates were all the size of small monkeys or smaller. 
We still have tiny primates, but they have been joined by large terrestrial 
monkeys, apes and lemurs. Why might recent primates include this 
range of large body sizes that early primates did not have?
2. Primates depend on learning many things from the members of their 
social groups. How might this reliance on learning have affected the 
growth and development of primates? 

61
Apes—Swinging Down from the Trees
Lecture 19
The kinds of characteristics that we used to think were really distinctive 
similarities of humans and apes may have, in many cases, evolved 
in parallel. But there are other characteristics of the apes, including 
their long life history, their behavioral complexity, and their dental 
adaptations, that are true links to humans and to more ancient apes.
O
ld World monkeys are the closest relatives of the apes, but living 
apes share a number of features that Old World monkeys don’t have. 
Many of these features are related to locomotion; others are related 
to dental characteristics and life history characteristics, such as a long rate 
of maturation and a relatively long lifespan. The group to which living apes, 
their fossil relatives, and living humans belong is the hominoids. 
A cladogram places the origins of all living great apes and humans at about 
10 to 13 million years ago. Gibbons, which are called lesser apes, diverged 
substantially earlier than the great apes, about 16 to 20 million years ago. 
That divergence represents the common ancestor of all living hominoids. 
Cercopithecoids, the Old World monkeys, diverged from our lineage 22 to 
26 million years ago. Humans and chimps shared an ancestor about 4 to 7 
million years ago; gorillas and humans, about 6 to 9 million years ago; and 
orangutans and humans, about 10 to 13 million years ago. 
The Miocene period, in which apes diversi¿ ed, was a different world than 
the one we live in today. The weather was substantially warmer and milder, 
and forests covered most of the tropical and temperate world. The biomes of 
east and central Africa were not separated to the extent that they are today; 
thus, ape habitat was dispersed across most of the Old World.  In addition, 
the seas that once separated Asia from Africa and Europe from Asia were 
shrinking, allowing primates to disperse and diversify. 
The earliest ape for which we have good fossil evidence is Proconsul, which 
lived between 22 and 16 million years ago. Proconsul was a quadruped with 
a pronograde posture, meaning that its back was horizontal when it was 

62
Lecture 19: Apes—Swinging Down from the Trees
walking. It had the thick-enameled teeth of apes, developed for grinding rather 
than scissoring. Another early primate from east Africa was Morotopithecus. 
It had a lumbar spine that was stiff and vertical, suggesting that it was more 
of a climber than a runner. Kenyapithecus, from about 14 million years ago, 
has a dental pattern that is similar to that seen in living apes, making it a 
good candidate for being 
the ¿ rst ape to disperse out 
of Africa.
Dryopithecus, 
from 
13 
million years ago, lived 
in Europe. European apes 
probably ate as many kinds 
of foods as today’s apes 
do. 
During 
the 
middle 
to late Miocene, the Old 
World monkeys evolved 
two distinct branches based 
on diet. The colobines 
specialized in eating leaves 
and developed a complex 
stomach to enable them to digest leaves in coordination with microbes. The 
cercopithecines ate fruits and hard seeds. The advantage that these monkeys 
had over the apes was their short birth intervals; thus, over the course of the 
late Miocene, the smaller apes begin to decline.
Among the outstanding problems in ape evolution is the issue of locomotor 
diversity. Why did some apes become specialized toward quadrupedal 
movement, while others became specialized toward climbing and hanging 
from branches? The fossil Ardipithecus, from 5.5 to 4.3 million years ago, 
gives us some evidence about locomotion. From the bones of its hands, we 
know that it was not a knuckle-walker, and it carried its spine more vertically 
than most of the great apes do today. This ape may represent a close relative 
of the ancestor of hominids and, later, humans. Ŷ
Among the outstanding questions in ape 
evolution is why some apes evolved toward 
walking and others toward climbing.
© Jupiterimages/Photos.com/Thinkstock.

63
Taylor, Not a Chimp. 
Walker and Shipman, The Ape in the Tree. 
1. Why might it be that the giant Gigantopithecus in south China, which 
survived at least until 300,000 years ago, persisted so long when almost 
all the other Miocene apes became extinct before 5 million years ago? 
2. Apes have long life histories, with very slow potential for population 
growth. Yet they were very successful at colonizing Europe and Asia 
during the Miocene. How much of their success do you think was 
attributable to their environments, and how much to their behavioral and 
anatomical adaptations?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

64
Lecture 20: From 4 Legs to 2—The Hominin Radiation
From 4 Legs to 2—The Hominin Radiation
Lecture 20
That commitment to an obligate form of bipedality means that you’re 
compromised in many respects. The ¿ rst compromise to strike us was 
the increased risk of predation. Just the fact that now you’re out on 
your own—you might look a little bigger to a predator because you’re 
taller—but if you stray a little bit far from the trees … you’re at extreme 
risk of one of those predators getting you. 
R
ecall that the hominids are the branch of primates that are closely 
related to humans and more distantly related to any of the living apes. 
Our branch originated between 4 and 7 million years ago. Hominids 
lived only in Africa up until 2 million years ago. 
Ardipithecus, which we saw in the last lecture, had some characteristics that 
suggest it is either a possible ancestor of the hominids or a close relative to 
our common ancestor with chimps and gorillas. Key among those features 
are the teeth, particularly its canine teeth. Canine teeth allow carnivores to 
eat meat, but when they are displayed, they can also serve as a threatening 
signal. This tells us that late Miocene apes, such as Ardipithecus, may have 
had a social organization 
and 
may 
have 
been 
communicating a bit like 
we do and a bit differently 
from living great apes. 
The most well known of 
the bipedal primates is 
the gibbon. Gibbons have 
extraordinarily long arms, 
and they’re especially good 
at swinging in trees, but 
when they’re on the ground, 
these long arms are almost 
useless. When a gibbon is 
Early hominids used their canine teeth for 
eating meat and for threat displays.
© Jupiterimages/Photos.com/Thinkstock.

65
on the ground, it runs bipedally, using its arms to balance itself. Humans 
today exhibit what is called obligate bipedality, which involves many 
elements in our skeletons. The fossil that 
most clearly demonstrates the differences 
here is Lucy, who lived about 3.2 million 
years ago. Lucy was probably around 15 
to 20 years old, stood 3.3 feet tall, and 
weighed about 80 pounds. She is small 
compared to living humans, but her bones 
align with ours in the characteristics that 
show bipedal locomotion.
Several features of hominin bones show 
adaptations to bipedality, including a 
curvature of the hipbone. This shape 
keeps the body upright when we’re 
standing on one foot, as we do with every step we take. The curved 
hipbone also ensures that we move forward as we walk. Other anatomical 
adaptations for bipedality include an enlargement of the gluteus maximus 
muscle, a tibia that comes straight up from the foot, and an angulation at 
the knee that enables the hip joint to remain to the side of the body when 
standing on one leg.
Trace hominin fossils are relatively rate, but among the most famous 
are the footprint trails from a site in Tanzania, dating to about 3.6 
million years ago. These clearly show two individuals walking 
side by side, and their spacing suggests that the larger hominin 
may have been walking more slowly so that the smaller one could
keep up.
The ¿ rst australopithecine fossil found was from a cave called Taung in 
South Africa. It is part of the face and jaw of a young child, together with 
the natural cast of the inside of the child’s skull. The development of the 
teeth here is much more human-like than that of chimpanzees. The talon 
marks of the eagle that originally ate this juvenile primate are evident on 
its skull.
Several features of 
hominin bones show 
adaptations to bipedality, 
including a curvature of 
the hipbone. This shape 
keeps the body upright 
when we’re standing on 
one foot, as we do with 
every step we take. 

66
Lecture 20: From 4 Legs to 2—The Hominin Radiation
Over the course of several million years, hominins evolved into many 
different types. There were probably more than 7 or 8 species of hominins 
that fell into different niches based on their diet. The relatively large molars, 
along with isotopic studies of bones, tell us that early hominins ate nuts, 
some parts of grass, and insects. Ŷ
hominin: Clade of primates that includes all species more closely related to 
humans than to other primates. Includes Homo and Australopithecus. 
obligate bipedality: The anatomical requirement to walk only on the lower 
limbs; a de¿ ning trait for classi¿ cation as a human.
Gibbons. The First Human: The Race to Discover Our Earliest Ancestors.
Johanson and Wong. Lucy’s Legacy.
1. Primates that spend a lot of time on the ground tend to have larger groups 
than those that stay in the trees. How can this affect our understanding 
of the origin of bipedality in our lineage? 
2. Humans have colonized almost all habitats on Earth, but many required 
the advanced cultural skills of Homo. What part did bipedality play in our 
success as a colonizing species, and why do you think Australopithecus 
had trouble leaving Africa?
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

67
First Humans—Toolmakers and Hunter-Gatherers
Lecture 21
It’s quite possible that the success of our lineage might have had to do 
as much with our immune system as it did with the kinds of stone tools 
we could make or the brain size that we’ve got—or all of these things 
might have worked together, so that in order to evolve a bigger brain 
size, you ¿ rst had to conquer the diseases that were holding you down.
B
etween 1.5 and 2 million years ago, at least three species of humans 
lived in various parts of Africa. One of these species is Homo erectus, 
which was probably our ancestor. The others are Homo habilis and 
one of the robust australopithecines. 
The Olduvai Gorge is one of the most well-known hominin fossil sites, 
dating from about 1.9 million years ago. Oldowan technology (technology 
that hearkens from this area) consists of pebbles that have been struck 
hard with another rock to produce sharp-edged À akes that could be used 
for cutting. Rocks could also be used to smash bones in order to get to the 
marrow inside. Archaeological research has shown that hominins may have 
preferred certain types of raw material for their tools and carried such stones 
with them as they traveled. 
One possible candidate for the toolmaker in the Olduvai Gorge, known as 
Olduvai Hominid 7, became the basis of the species Homo habilis. It is 
substantially advanced over australopithecines in at least two ways: Its thick 
¿ ngertips indicate that it could apply more force to grip an object strongly, 
and its brain was about 25% larger than that of any australopithecine.
A skull of Australopithecus from 2.8 million years ago shows a relatively 
small brain size, a sloping face, and a nose that doesn’t project outward 
from the face. In contrast, a Homo habilis skull from 1.65 million years ago 
shows a larger brain, a more vertical face, and smaller teeth. It also has more 
development in a region of the brain called Broca’s area that corresponds to 
language production in modern humans.

68
Lecture 21: First Humans—Toolmakers and Hunter-Gatherers
The earliest stone tools are 2.6 million years old and are known to have 
been used to process meat. What we don’t know, however, is who these 
early 
toolmakers 
were. 
Nevertheless, 
the 
shift 
to a higher-quality diet 
that 
probably 
included 
meat 
had 
an 
inÀ uence 
on the evolution of our 
jaws and can be traced in 
our genetics. A gene that 
expresses a protein in the 
muscle of the jaw is active 
in all other primates but not 
humans, suggesting that our 
jaw muscles were reduced 
to a substantial degree. 
Such “pseudogenes” also 
appear in red blood cells 
and may be related to 
immunity to different types 
of pathogens.
One 
of 
the 
most 
important 
aspects 
of 
our lineage compared to 
Australopithecus is the size 
of our bodies. The ¿ rst 
evidence of a large body 
adaptation in Homo is seen in skeleton WT 15000, the Nariokotome boy. It’s 
about 1.6 million years old, but at age 10 or 11, this boy stood about 5 feet, 3 
inches tall. As an adult, he might have been closer to 5 feet, 10 inches. Such 
height would have enabled this human to travel farther away from water 
sources to forage without getting dehydrated.
Another consequence of larger bodies is that the pelvis remained short, 
but babies became larger, making the birth process more dif¿ cult in 
humans than in other primates. One of the ways that humans have adapted 
Greater height is a human adaptation that 
allows travel by foot over longer distances.
© Goodshoot/Thinkstock.

69
to the birth process is by delaying the growth of our brains until after
we’re born. 
A cranium from Dmanisi, in Georgia, reveals that cooperation may have 
been evolving in early humans. This skull is from an older individual who 
lost all of his or her teeth, which means that this person would have required 
help in getting food. That signal of culture will be key to our next transition 
to modern humans. Ŷ
pseudogenes: Nonfunctional remains of a formerly functional gene.
Zimmer, Smithsonian Intimate Guide to Human Origins. 
1. Humans have a tremendous reliance on our ability to make and use 
tools. What other kinds of animals depend so strongly on manipulating 
objects aside from their own bodies? 
2. Australopithecines were successful for up to 4 million years, but 
disappeared from the fossil record sometime after 1.5 million years ago. 
Why might this be? 
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

70
Lecture 22: From Homo to sapiens—Talking and Thinking
From Homo to sapiens—Talking and Thinking
Lecture 22
It’s these early aspects of symbolic behavior that seem so persuasive 
to us when we think about what it means to be human. They don’t 
approach in scale some of the later evidences of artistic behavior that 
we have, but they show us that the spark is there. There’s something 
about these populations of people that’s different from the humans that 
came earlier—that’s modern in some way.
W
hen we talk about humans, behavioral complexity, and technology, 
one of the ¿ rst things that comes to mind is ¿ re. When did humans 
conquer ¿ re and begin to control it? The earliest evidence we have 
of human-inÀ uenced ¿ re is about 1.4 to 1.5 million years old. We also have 
evidence, dating from about 1 million years ago on an island called Flores, 
that humans could cross substantial bodies of water. Did they have boats?
The earliest stone tools were probably not made by people who had language. 
The larynx of Australopithecus was con¿ gured very much like the larynx 
of chimpanzees, which means that there were vocal sacs to help resonate 
sound, but it is not the kind of larynx that humans have today. However, the 
hyoid and middle ear bones of early Homo show some evidence that it might 
have had language-like communication.
A gene called FOXP2 helps to establish the pattern of brain development 
in mammals and may support language in humans. This gene exhibits two 
differences in modern humans relative to in other mammals, and these 
differences have also been found in Neandertals. 
The Neandertals lived primarily in Europe, about 150,000 to 30,000 years 
ago. From DNA recovered from two Neandertal individuals, we have 
learned that Neandertals had one of the O blood types shared by modern 
humans. They also probably had red hair. Like modern humans, Neandertals 
from different places were genetically similar. Originally, Neandertals were 
thought to be a distinct population that emerged in parallel with humans but 
in a different part of the world. However, recent genetic studies have shown 

71
that Neandertal genes are similar enough to the genes of some living people 
to be able to say that they contributed some of their genes to us.
Interesting differences arise in looking at Neandertals and humans in terms 
of lifestyles and strategies for subsistence. For example, Neandertal bones 
are thicker than ours and 
curved, which means that 
Neandertals were adapted to 
more stresses in locomotion 
than we are. One of the 
most important aspects of 
Neandertal biology is the 
extent to which we ¿ nd their 
bones with healed injuries. 
This suggests that they were 
not foragers but hunters who 
used risky and sometimes 
unsuccessful tactics.
A site in Spain shows that 
Neandertals collected shells, 
painted them, and strung 
them from necklaces. They 
also used chunks of pigment to color on their skin. This kind of symbolic 
behavior tells us that they were behaviorally very human-like. Similar 
symbolic behaviors emerged in Africa around the same time. 
The fossil remains of humans in Africa after about 200,000 years ago show 
features that we recognize today in living human populations. The brain had 
moved forward and the face moved under it. These people had a forehead 
instead of a brow ridge, and the back of the skull was rounded instead of 
angled. Such changes may relate to the development of the brain. 
By 90,000 years ago, modern humans emerged out of Africa into the 
Near East, where they may have interacted and exchanged genes with 
Neandertals. After 60,000 years ago, humans of African origin began to 
The FOXP2 gene offers clues about when 
human ancestors developed the brain 
capacity for language.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

72
Lecture 22: From Homo to sapiens—Talking and Thinking
disperse throughout the world. They initially spread across South Asia and, 
later, into Europe. 
We don’t really know why humans were ultimately successful and 
Neandertals weren’t. Perhaps the answer lies in their technology, their 
strategies for hunting, their ability to use resources, or in something we can’t 
see in the archaeological record, such as disease. Such questions present 
topics for future exploration. Ŷ
Guthrie, The Nature of Paleolithic Art. 
Klein, The Dawn of Human Culture.
1. In what ways was the disappearance of the Neandertals like historical 
cases where human populations have come into contact? Are there ways 
that such historical cases were very different? 
2. Language is unique to humans, and it is highly specialized. Can you 
imagine what precursors to today’s human languages may have been 
like? What features of today’s languages might they have had?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

73
Our Accelerating Evolution
Lecture 23
That’s a pace of genetic change that’s unprecedented in our evolution. 
If we look at the differences between humans and chimpanzees in years, 
that’s about 10 million years. … But if we look in terms of mutations 
that have been selected that have some advantage in populations, 
the number that occurred between humans and chimpanzees is 
relatively small compared to the big number that happens in the last 
40,000 years.
I
n this lecture, we look at the ways in which our species, Homo sapiens, 
has changed our society and ecology in the last 10,000 years. These 
changes are primarily associated with the invention of agriculture and the 
resulting massive increase in human population. Among the consequences 
of those developments has been the relatively rapid evolution of many 
characteristics within our species.
The glaciers of the last Ice Age began to recede about 18,000 years ago, 
and temperatures began to reach their current levels about 10,000 years 
ago. Since that time, human populations have grown dramatically, and 
our species has experienced numerous genetic and physical changes. For 
example, in the Bronze Age, human skulls had a relatively thick brow 
ridge, but that shape is rare in living human populations in Europe. Further, 
over the past 10,000 years in Europe, the size of the brain has shrunk by 
about 100 cubic centimeters in both males and females and the thickness of 
the skull has declined.
Genetic changes give us some idea of the ways in which humans adapt to the 
ecologies they themselves are changing. Consider, for example, the gene that 
corresponds to the production of lactase, a digestive enzyme that helps us 
break down lactose, which occurs naturally in milk. In most mammals, this 
gene is deactivated after weaning because they will never again have access 
to milk. However, some of our ancestors  carried a new copy of the lactase 
gene that remained active throughout adulthood. This mutation can be traced 
to populations from the areas where dairy animals became important after 

74
Lecture 23: Our Accelerating Evolution
the invention of agriculture. Interestingly, we can also tell that the mutations 
for lactase persistence occurred relatively recently, around 8,000 years ago. 
One of the basic factors driving such evolutionary changes is a signi¿ cant 
increase in the human population. From the Pleistocene epoch to the present, 
the world population has grown from perhaps 1 million to 6.5 billion. This 
population explosion can be traced in various ways in the archaeological 
record. Evidence of an increase in the tortoise population, for example, 
tells us that these animals experienced increased predation from humans. 
Of course, the spread of humans also drove megafaunal animals, such as 
mammoths and mastodons, to extinction.
The rise of cities is another direct sign of ecological change imposed 
by humans, and this development had a signi¿ cant inÀ uence on human 
pathogens. Diseases that couldn’t get a foothold in a low-density hunter-
gatherer population could move as epidemics through humans living in 
cities. Certain genetic adaptations developed in response to these epidemic 
diseases, such as those that help us resist particular types of malaria.
Adaptation can be a response to a disease, such as mosquito-borne malaria.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

75
Hundreds of genes have changed over the last 40,000 years, with such 
changes intensifying in the last 10,000 years. This pace of genetic change 
is unprecedented in our evolution. The differences between humans and 
chimpanzees in years is about 10 million, but the number of mutations that 
occurred between humans and chimpanzees is relatively small compared to 
the number that occurred in the last 40,000 years. That small slice of time 
takes up as much as a quarter to a third of our adaptive evolution. Further, 
we’re imposing rapid selection on many kinds of animals and plants, just as 
we have created the circumstances for this selection on ourselves. It’s a great 
evolutionary transition in the history of life, one that is centered on what it 
means to be a modern living human. Ŷ
megafaunal: Large animals of a particular region or time.
Cochran and Harpending, The 10,000 Year Explosion. 
McNeill, Plagues and Peoples. 
Mithen, After the Ice. 
1. A challenge in studying recent human evolution is assessing how human 
behavior might have been affected by selection. How might our social 
environments have been changing people during the last 10,000 years? 
2. Will culture and technology begin to replace our biological evolution?
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

76
Lecture 24: ReÀ ections on Major Transitions
ReÀ ections on Major Transitions
Lecture 24
What keeps me going … is that these new fossils provide us with new 
insights in evolution and how evolution is … going to evolve.
T
his lecture brings together the perspectives of the two professors for 
this course—the “deep time” view of the geologist-paleontologist 
and the paleoanthropologist’s approach of working backward from 
the present.
Among the areas of interest in both ¿ elds are the genetic exchanges that must 
have taken place between early prokaryotes, which gave rise to mutualisms 
in terms of the development of eukaryotes. At the same time, eukaryotes 
developed nucleated cells and chromosomes enclosing DNA—genetic 
defenses that enabled them to resist further encroachment. 
One transition not covered in this course was the evolution of grasses 
and grasslands in the Cretaceous period, which affected primates and 
numerous other animals. The discovery that dinosaurs were eating grasses 
at the end of the Cretaceous period was a surprise, because grasses were 
thought to have originated later, in the Eocene epoch. The increase in 
grasslands created new habitats for terrestrial primates and restrictions on 
the habitats of arboreal primates. Ultimately, grasslands were the niche that
hominids invaded.
Ecological changes in the early part of the history of life—and today—are 
massively important. Again, we take grasslands for granted as a biome, 
but there was a time when they didn’t exist. Such ecologies are made by 
organisms, and when we think of applying what we understand about those 
processes to the present, the implications are far-reaching. 
When we consider evolution in the present and the role of humans in 
changing evolution, we naturally think about the domestication of plants 
and animals. Dogs, for example, exhibit tremendous diversity in sizes, 
colors, shapes, temperaments, and skills, all of which have been selected 

77
in the last several hundred years. Some plants and animals that humans 
have introduced into ecologies have become invasive, spreading rapidly 
and damaging ecosystems.
Another topic we touched on in the course is coevolution, the development of 
a mutualism between two organisms. Ants, for example, have domesticated 
fungus, which they tend in specialized chambers. Ants are also eusocial 
insects, meaning that they have a differentiation or caste system. It’s mind-
Stromatolites are among the most ancient fossils on Earth.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

78
Lecture 24: ReÀ ections on Major Transitions
boggling to think about how different castes within a species are selected 
and how that selection affects other aspects of their lives.
Social organization is, of course, extremely important in primate evolution. 
Using what we know from the past, what can we say about the future of 
primate evolution? One study in New 
England has shown that some traits are 
different among people who tend to have 
more children. That’s an example of 
natural selection in ongoing populations in 
industrialized countries.
We should think about human evolution 
not in terms of stages that we’ve gone 
through but as a series of branches of 
different kinds of related organisms that 
have each undergone their own history. 
Both paleoanthropology and paleontology 
apply an interdisciplinary approach to the 
study of evolution, bringing in genetics 
and other sciences, to reconstruct those histories. The ¿ eld of evolution has 
itself evolved rapidly in the past 40 years and will continue to do so as our 
understanding of its major transitions deepens. Ŷ
Wade (editor), The New York Times Book of Fossils and Evolution. 
Zimmer, Evolution.
1. Think about how the evolution of grasslands represents another major 
transitional event in the history of life. How did this evolution affect the 
evolution of many organisms, including humans?
Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider
We should think about 
human evolution not 
in terms of stages that 
we’ve gone through but 
as a series of branches 
of different kinds of 
related organisms that 
have each undergone 
their own history.

79
2. Evolution is an ongoing process, and will continue as long as life exists 
on Earth. How could the microevolution observed in organisms today 
result in their macroevolution, especially with changing environments 
as a factor?

80
Cladograms
Life
Life-Cladogram
Bacteria
Animalia
Bilateria
Deuterostoma
Arthropoda
Crustacea
CHORDATA
Hemichordata
Echinodermata
Insecta
Arachnida
Lophotrochozoa
Bryophyta
Pteridophyta
Spermatophyta
Cycadophyta
Magnoliophyta
(Angiosperms)
Conifera (Pinophyta)
Radiata
Embryophyta
Charophyta
Fungi
Plantae
Archaea
Eukaryota

81
Chordata-Cladogram
Chordata
Craniata-Vertebrata-Gnathostoma
Cephalochordata
Osteichthyes
Sarcopterygian
Dipnoi
Amphibia
Diapsida
Archosauromorpha
Anapsida
Chondrichthyes
Actinopterygian
Tetrapoda
Amniota
Synapsida-Therapsida
Lepidosauromorpha
Urochordata
Dinosauria
Ornithischia 
Pterosauria
Saurischia
Aves
Ceratosauria
Herrerasauridae
Monotremata
Rodentia
Insectivora
Carnivora
Cetacea
(Non-Cetacea)
Artiodactyla
Perissodactyla
Marsupialia
Eutheria
Primates
Tarsii
Catarrhini
Platyrrhini
Cercopithecus
Strepsirrhini
Hominidae
Hylobates
Mammalia

82
Timeline
Timeline
Eons, Eras, Periods, and Epochs
4.6 billion years ago (bya) ..............Earth forms.
3.8–2.5 bya ......................................Archean eon.
2.5-0.543 bya ..................................Proterozoic eon.
0.543 bya–present ...........................Phanerozoic eon.
543–251 million years ago (mya) ...Paleozoic era.
543–488 mya ...................................Cambrian period.
488–444 mya ...................................Ordovician period.
444–416 mya ...................................Silurian period.
416–359 mya ...................................Devonian period.
359–318 mya ...................................Mississippian, or Early 
Carboniferous, period.
318–299 mya ...................................Pennsylvanian, or Late 
Carboniferous, period.
299–251 mya ...................................Permian period.
251–200 mya ...................................Triassic period.
200–145 mya ...................................Jurassic period.
251–65 mya .....................................Mesozoic era.

83
145–65 mya .....................................Cretaceous period.
65 mya–present ...............................Cenozoic era.
65–55 mya .......................................Paleocene epoch.
65–23 mya .......................................Paleogene period.
55–34 mya .......................................Eocene epoch.
34–23 mya .......................................Oligocene epoch.
23–5 mya .........................................Miocene epoch.
23 mya–present ...............................Neogene period.
5–1.8 mya ........................................Pliocene epoch.
1.8 mya–11,000 years ago ...............Pleistocene epoch.
11,000 years ago–present ................Holocene epoch.
Evolutionary Milestones
4.0 bya ............................................. Oldest known evidence of life, 
from stable carbon isotopes).
3.7 bya ............................................. Prokaryote presence, from stable 
carbon isotopes (Greenland).
3.5 bya ............................................. Photoautotrophs in abundance, 
indicated by trace fossils of 
stromatolites (Australia).
3.4–3.2 bya ......................................Prokaryote body fossils in chert 
(South Africa and Australia).

84
Timeline
2.7 bya ............................................. Eukaryote presence, from 
steranes  (fossil steroids).
2.1 bya .............................................Fossil algae (probable eukaryotes).
2.0 bya ............................................. Molecular clocks predict ¿ rst 
metazoans at this time.
1.7 bya ............................................. Acritrachs (organic-walled 
microfossils), resembling 
some eukaryotes.
1.5 bya .............................................Eukaryote fossils (Australia).
635 mya ........................................... Oldest evidence for metazoans from 
biomarkers (sterols), Canada.
580 mya ...........................................Metazoan embryos, China.
580–550 mya ...................................Ediacaran biota, presumed metazoan 
body fossils and trace fossils from 
South Australia, Siberia (Russia), 
Newfoundland (Canada), Namibia, 
South China, England, and California 
and North Carolina (USA).
550 mya ........................................... Cloudina, skeletonized fossil 
with drillholes in it (probable 
evidence of predation).
543 mya ........................................... Fossil burrow Treptichnus pedum, 
marks the start of the Phanerozoic eon 
and the beginning of deeper burrowing.
540–530 mya ................................... “Small shelly fossils,” a wide 
range of fossils with uncertain 

85
af¿ nities, composed of calcite, 
silica, and phosphatic minerals.
530 mya ........................................... “Cambrian explosion,” the abrupt 
increase of mineralized fossils in the 
geologic record, including molluscans, 
arthropods, echinoderms, and many 
other animals; Yunnanozoon lividum, 
oldest known chordate (China).
525 mya ...........................................Oldest known trilobites.
513 mya ...........................................Oldest known conodonts 
(considered vertebrates).
510 mya ...........................................Anomalocaris, the largest known 
predator of the Cambrian period; 
coincided with trilobite parts 
in large fecal pellets; Pikaia, 
primitive chordate (Canada).
490 mya ........................................... Oldest known fossil arthropod 
trackways on land, Cambrian-
Ordovician (Canada).
450 mya ........................................... Oldest known fossil arthropod burrows 
in soils, Ordovician (Pennsylvania).
430–420 mya ...................................Molecular clock dates 
estimated for ¿ rst insects.
428 mya ...........................................Oldest known arthropod body 
fossil on land, Pneumodesmus 
newmani, a probable myriapod, 
Late Silurian (U.K.).

86
Timeline
425 mya ...........................................Cooksonia, primitive nonvascular 
land plant in Early Silurian (U.K., 
Canada, and Australia). 
420 mya ...........................................Baragwanathia longifolia, 
oldest known vascular plant.
410 mya ...........................................Fossils of ascomycetes (land fungi), 
Late Silurian (Sweden); oldest 
known lycopods (club mosses, 
quillworts), Late Silurian.
400 mya ...........................................Aglaophyton major, nonvascular 
land plant; Rhynia gwynne-vaughanii 
and Asteroxylon mackiei, primitive 
vascular plants in Early Devonian 
(Scotland); oldest known insect (and 
probably winged insect) Rhyniognatha 
hirsti, Early Devonian (Scotland).
395 mya ...........................................Oldest fossil tetrapod tracks, 
Devonian (Poland).
385 mya ...........................................Lobe-¿ nned ¿ sh Eusthenopteron, 
Devonian (Canada).
380 mya ...........................................Lobe-¿ nned ¿ sh Panderichthys, 
Devonian (Latvia).
375 mya ...........................................The “¿ shapod” Tiktaalik, 
Devonian (Canada).
370 mya ...........................................Oldest known pteridosperms 
(“seed ferns”), Devonian.
365 mya ........................................... Primitive tetrapods Acanthostega 
and Icthyostega (Greenland).

87
359–299 mya ...................................Carboniferous period, the time 
of the ¿ rst true forests.
340 mya ........................................... Possibly the oldest known 
amniotes, Casineria kiddi, Early 
Carboniferous (Scotland).
330 mya ........................................... Oldest undoubted amniote, 
Westlothiana, Late 
Carboniferous (Scotland).
325 mya ........................................... Previously “oldest” À ying insect, Early 
Carboniferous (Czech Republic).
315–310 mya ...................................Oldest known amniote fossil tracks, 
Late Carboniferous (various locations).
312 mya ...........................................Paleothyris acadiana, a primitive 
amniote, Late Carboniferous 
(Nova Scotia); Hylonomus lyelli, 
another primitive amniote, Late 
Carboniferous (Nova Scotia).
310 mya ...........................................Oldest known impression (trace fossil) 
of a À ying insect, Late Carboniferous 
(Massachusetts); Archaeothyris À orensis 
and Clepsydrops collettii, oldest known 
synapsids, Carboniferous (Nova Scotia).
290–272 mya ...................................Dimetrodon, various species, large sail-
backed synapsid, Early Permian (USA).
275 mya ...........................................Tetraceratops, oldest known 
therapsid, Early Permian (Texas).
265 mya ...........................................Oldest known fossil beetles, 
Early Permian (Russia).

88
Timeline
250 mya ...........................................Thrinaxodon, oldest known cynodonts, 
Late Permian (South Africa).
245 mya ...........................................Oldest known ichthyosaurs, Early 
Triassic (various places).
245–237 mya ...................................Dinosauromorph tracks, Early-
Middle Triassic (various locations).
237–228 mya ...................................Bipedal dinosauromorphs, 
Lagerpeton and Marasuchus, 
Middle Triassic (Argentina).
228 mya ...........................................Oldest dinosaur, Eoraptor 
lunensis, Late Triassic (Argentina); 
Early therapod dinosaur 
Herrerasaurus ischigualastensis, 
Late Triassic (Argentina).
220(?) mya ......................................Oldest ornithiscian dinosaur, 
Pisanosaurus mertii, from the 
Late Triassic of Argentina.
220 mya ...........................................Oldest known fossil À ies, Late Triassic 
(Kyrgyzistan); Adelobasileus, oldest 
known mammal, Late Triassic (Texas).
215 mya ........................................... Theropod dinosaur Tawa hallae, 
Late Triassic (New Mexico).
210 mya ...........................................Ornithiscian dinosaur Eocursor 
parvus, Late Triassic (South Africa).
210–200 mya ...................................Thomasia, oldest multituberculate 
mammal, Late Triassic 
(Germany, France).

89
200 mya ...........................................Eudimorphodon, oldest known 
pterosaur, Late Triassic (Italy); 
molecular clocks indicate 
divergence between gymnosperms 
and angiosperms, Late Triassic; 
Sinoconodon, primitive mammal, 
Early Jurassic (China); oldest 
known plesiosaurs, Late Triassic 
(U.K., Germany); Gnetales, 
gymnosperms that share traits with 
À owering plants (various places).
200–175 mya ...................................Megazostrodon, primitive mammal, 
Early Jurassic (South Africa).
170 mya ........................................... Oldest known fossil wasps, 
Middle Jurassic (Mongolia).
160 mya ........................................... Brachyceran À ies that look adapted 
for À owers, Late Jurassic (China).
160–155 mya ................................... Anchiornis huxleyi, oldest feathered 
dinosaur, Middle Jurassic (China).
150–145 mya ................................... Archaeopteryx lithographica, oldest 
known bird, Late Jurassic (Germany).
130–125 mya ................................... Eomaia, oldest known eutherian 
(placental) mammal, Early 
Cretaceous (China).
125 mya ........................................... Archaefructus, oldest known 
À owering plant, Early Cretaceous 
(China); oldest lepidopterans, 
Early Cretaceous (Lebanon).

90
Timeline
125–120 mya ................................... Confuciusornis, oldest beaked 
bird, Early Cretaceous (China).
125–112 mya ................................... Repenomamus, the dinosaur-eating 
mammal, Early Cretaceous (China).
120 mya ...........................................Kryoryctes, oldest known 
monotreme (Australia).
115 mya ........................................... Oldest freshwater cray¿ sh in 
Southern Hemisphere.
110 mya ........................................... Deinonychus antirrhopus, theropod 
dinosaur with bird-like traits, 
Early Cretaceous (USA).
110–105 mya ................................... Oldest known marsupials, various 
species, Early Cretaceous (USA).
110–95 mya .....................................Oldest known mosasaurs, 
Early-Late Cretaceous.
105 mya ........................................... Bouliachelys suteri, oldest known sea 
turtle, Early Cretaceous (Australia).
100 mya ........................................... Melittosphex burmensis, oldest 
bee, Late Cretaceous (Burma).
94–98 mya ....................................... Oldest known snakes, Eupodophis 
descouensi, Late Cretaceous (Lebanon); 
Haasiophis terrasanctus and 
Pachyrhachis problematicus (Israel).
60 mya ............................................. Molecular clocks indicate split of ¿ rst 
whales from artiodactyl ancestors.
55 mya .............................................First true primates.

91
53 mya .............................................Pakicetus, primitive whale, 
Eocene (Pakistan).
50 mya .............................................Ambulocetus, primitive whale, 
Eocene (Pakistan).
48 mya .............................................Indohyus, whale-like relative, 
Eocene (Pakistan).
47 mya .............................................Rodhocetus, primitive whale, Eocene 
(Pakistan); Maiacetus, primitive 
whale, Eocene (Pakistan); Darwinius 
masillae, primitive primate.
45 mya .............................................Eosimias sinensis, early 
monkey-like primate.
35 mya .............................................Basilosaurus, primitive 
whale, Eocene (USA). 
32 mya ............................................. Aegyptopithecus zeuxis, 
possible ancestor to apes and 
Old World monkeys.
26 mya .............................................Monkeys in South America.
25 mya .............................................Ape and Old World monkey 
lineages diverge.
20 mya .............................................Proconsul africanus, an early ape.
12 mya ............................................. Dryopithecus fontani, possible 
ancestor to African apes and humans.
6–4 mya ...........................................Divergence of human and 
chimpanzee lineages.

92
Timeline
4.4 mya ............................................ Ardipithecus ramidus, early 
hominin ancestor or relative.
4.2 mya ............................................Australopithecus anamensis, 
early hominin.
3.6 mya ............................................Laetoli footprints, 
Australopithecus afarensis.
3.2 mya ............................................Lucy skeleton.
2.8 mya ............................................Taung skull, Australopithecus africanus.
2.6 mya ............................................First stone tools.
2.5 mya ............................................ Loss of MYH6 functional gene 
(jaw muscle reduction).
1.9 mya ............................................Malapa skeletons, 
Australopithecus sediba.
1.8 mya ............................................Dmanisi fossil skeletons.
1.6 mya ............................................Nariokotome skeleton.
1.5 mya ............................................First Acheulean tools.
190,000 ya .......................................First skeletal remains of 
modern humans, Ethiopia.
100,000 ya .......................................Early projectile points, 
human-altered shells.
60,000 ya .........................................Ostrich eggshell beads, 
personal ornamentation.

93
50,000 ya ......................................... Modern humans disperse through 
southern Asia, Australia.
30,000 ya .........................................Last Neandertals, earliest cave art.
18,000 ya .........................................Last Glacial Maximum.
10,000 ya .........................................Earliest agriculture, domestication.
10,000--5,000 ya .............................Falciparum malaria appeared.
8,000 ya ...........................................European lactase persistence mutation.
6,000 ya ...........................................Neolithic in central Europe.
200 ya ..............................................Beginning of Industrial Era.

94
Glossary
Glossary
absolute age dating: Quantifying the age of geologic materials through 
radiometric dating or other methods. (See radioactive isotopes.) 
Acheulean: A stone tool industry dominated by hand axe production, from 
1.5  to 300,000 years ago.
acritarch: General term for organic microfossils from the Archean and 
Proterozoic eons; most are regarded as the remains of single-celled 
eukaryotes, such as algae.
adaptive radiation: Evolution of a variety of traits (and new species) within 
a lineage in response to selection pressures, genetic variation, and de¿ nition 
of ecological niches. (See ecological niche, speciation.)
allele: One alternate form of a gene.
amniote: A four-limbed vertebrate (tetrapod) that reproduces through internal 
fertilization and enclosed eggs or live birth; includes reptiles, dinosaurs, 
birds, and mammals.
amphibian: General term for a four-limbed vertebrate (tetrapod) 
that reproduces through external fertilization in aquatic or otherwise 
moist environments.
angiosperm: Flowering plant that reproduces through use of male and 
female parts in a À ower. (See gymnosperm.)
anthropoid: Primates, including all apes, monkeys, and humans but 
excluding prosimians. 
archaea: Single-celled prokaryotes; they differ from bacteria through 
their unique metabolisms and biochemical traits shared with eukaryotes. 
(See bacteria.)

95
archaeology: Study of past humans through their material artifacts. 
(See paleontology.)
arthropod: Invertebrate animal with jointed legs and chitinous exoskeletons; 
includes crustaceans, insects, arachnids, and many other groups.
artifact: Something made by people, often tools. The artifactual record is 
generally associated with the species Homo. (See trace fossil.)
autotroph: Organism that produces its own food, whether through 
chemosynthesis or photosynthesis. (See photoautotroph.)
bacteria: Single-celled prokaryotes that differ from archaea. (See archaea.)
bilateria: Animals with a bilateral symmetry, including all but sponges, 
comb jellies, and cnidarians (corals, hydrozoans, true jellies).
biological succession: Geological principle discovered in the 19th century 
by geologists that fossils in vertical sequences of strata show a de¿ nite and 
predictable order, caused by evolution and extinctions. (See strata.)
biomarker: Organic compound preserved in the geologic record indicating 
a biological origin. (See chemical fossil.)
biomineralization: The organismal formation of mineralized tissues, such 
as calcite, aragonite, silica, and apatite.
body fossil: Anatomical remains of an organism in the geologic record. (See 
trace fossil and chemical fossil.) 
camouÀ age: Form of visual mimicry, an adaptation used by animals to 
prevent predation. (See mimicry.) 
cercopithecoid: An Old World monkey. 
chemical fossil: Elements or compounds in the geologic record that are the 
direct result of an organism. (See biomarker.)

96
Glossary
chitin: Polysaccharide formed in arthropods and some other organisms for 
strengthening an exoskeleton.
chloroplasts: Organelles used in photoautotrophs for photosynthesis. 
(See photoautotroph).
choanocyte: Collared cell with À agella in sponges. (See choanoÀ agellate.)
choanoÀ agellate: Single-celled eukaryote; closely resembles collared cells 
in sponges. (See choanocyte.)
chordate: Animal with a notochord, dorsally located aorta, and pharyngeal 
gill pouches (“slits”). (See vertebrate.)
clade: Group of organisms that share a common ancestor or an organism 
and all of its descendants. Classifying life in terms of clades (cladistics) 
is a tool for focusing more directly on shared inheritable traits. Cladistics 
is now favored by biologists and paleontologists in place of the Linnean 
classi¿ cation hierarchy (kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, 
species). However, in practice (and in this course), the bottom two Linnean 
taxa (genus, species) are often equivalent to, and themselves used as, clades. 
(See cladogram.)
cladogram: Diagram showing evolutionary relationships between organisms 
within and between clades; also known as a phylogenetic chart. (See clade.)
cleidoic egg: Enclosed egg in amniotes that consists minimally of amnion, 
allantois, chorion, a yolk sac, and an outer covering (shell).
coevolution: Process in which organisms may exert selection pressures on 
one another, such as through predator-prey relations or mutualism.
contact: Surface separating two distinctive rock bodies, such as strata.
convergent evolution: Evolution in which similar selection pressures 
exerted on unrelated organisms have resulted in similar adaptations, e.g., 
dolphins and ichthyosaurs.

97
coprolite: Fossilized feces; a type of trace fossil.
developmental biology: Study of how an organism develops during its 
lifetime; also known as embryology.
diphydonty: Condition in mammals in which only one set of replacement 
teeth follows an earlier set of teeth.
diploid: Cell containing two sets of chromosomes; typical of somatic 
(body) cells.
ecological niche: Role of an organism in an ecosystem, which often reÀ ects 
its adaptations to that ecosystem.
ecology: Study of interactions between non-living materials and organisms.
ectothermy: Physiology in which an organism derives heat from the 
surrounding environment; sometimes called “cold-blooded.”
Ediacaran: Term applied to a Proterozoic fossil assemblage from the 
Ediacara Hills of South Australia; also used for the last geologic period of 
the Proterozoic eon.
encephalization quotient: Ratio of the brain to body mass, which provides 
a way of comparing the brains of animals with different body sizes. 
endoskeleton: Internal skeleton, characteristic of all vertebrates and a few 
invertebrates, such as echinoderms.
endospory: Reproductive process in spore-bearing plants (pteridophytes), 
in which megaspores (female gametes) are fertilized by microspores (male 
gametes) within the sporangium of a sporophyte parent; seen as a precursor 
to the evolution of seed plants (spermatophytes).
endosymbiosis: Hypothesis for the evolution of prokaryotic cells into 
eukaryotic cells, in which smaller prokaryotes within larger prokaryotes 
evolved to become organelles and serve other functions within a single cell.

98
Glossary
endothermy: Physiology in which an organism generates its own internal 
body heat; sometimes called “warm-blooded.”
entomology: The study of insects, including their evolution and ecology.
environmental change: Global or otherwise large-scale À uctuations in 
environments through time, such as global cooling or warming.
eon: Largest unit of geologic time, such as the Archean, Proterozoic, and 
Phanerozoic eons.
epoch: Geologic time unit, subdivision of a period, such as the Paleocene or 
Eocene epoch.
era: Geologic time unit, subdivision of an eon, such as Paleozoic 
or Mesozoic.
eukaryote: Organism with a de¿ nite cell membrane, genetic material 
enclosed within a nuclear envelope, and complex organelles; can be either 
unicellular or multicellular. (See prokaryote.)
exaptation: Happenstance of an organism having a favorable trait already in 
place before a different selection pressure is applied ; sometimes erroneously 
called a “pre-adaptation.”
exoskeleton: External skeleton in which most soft-part anatomy is protected; 
characteristic of most invertebrates that produce mineralized tissues. 
(See endoskeleton.)
gamete: Reproductive cell (such as sperm or egg), consisting of haploid 
number of chromosomes .
gene: Sequence of DNA on a chromosome that codes for a trait in 
an organism.
gene (allele) frequency: The proportion of one allele relative to other alleles 
in a population.

99
gene recombination: The exchange of DNA sequences between two copies 
of a chromosome that may occur when gametes are produced. 
genetic drift: Random change in gene frequency, often due to small 
population size or the founder effect.
genetic map: An account of the locations of genes and DNA sequence 
markers on chromosomes. 
genetics: Study of genes, their changes in populations over time, and 
differences in genes between different species.
genome: All the genetic material in an organism’s complement 
of chromosomes. 
geographic isolation: Separation of different populations of a species by 
geographic barriers, such as mountains, rivers, or seaways, that prevent them 
from exchanging genes.
geology: Study of Earth processes and history.
gymnosperm: Seed-bearing plant that does not enclose its seeds in a fruit, 
thus having “naked seeds.” (See angiosperm.)
haploid: Cell containing a single set of chromosomes; typical of reproductive 
cells (gametes).
hemimetabolous: Incomplete metamorphosis in growth (ontogeny) of 
insects, with major stages of: egg Æ nymph Æ adult.
heterospory: Condition in spore-bearing plants (pteridophytes) that have 
large-sized spores (megaspores) and small-sized spores (microspores); these 
correspond to female and male gametes, respectively. (See endospory.)
heterotroph: Organism that derives its food from external sources, 
such as through decomposing, herbivory, scavenging, or predation. 
(See autotroph.)

100
Glossary
hexapod: Six-legged arthropod, including insects and collembolans 
(springtails).
holometabolous: Complete metamorphosis in growth (ontogeny) of insects, 
with major stages of: egg Æ larva Æ pupa Æ adult.
hominin: Clade of primates that includes all species more closely related to 
humans than to other primates. Includes Homo and Australopithecus. 
hominoid: Primates, including living and fossil apes and humans but 
excluding monkeys. 
homology: A trait that is shared between two clades because they both 
inherited it from their common ancestor. 
Hox gene: An important kind of toolkit gene, shared by all bilaterians, 
involved in segmenting bodies during embryonic development along the 
midline axis. 
ichnology: Study of organismal traces, such as tracks, trails, burrows, feces, 
and nests. (See trace fossil.)
igneous (rock): Rock formed by crystallization from molten rock.
insect: Six-legged arthropod (hexapod) with a respiratory system and other 
traits distinct from closely related hexapods, such as springtails.
invertebrate: Animal that does not have a de¿ nite mineralized backbone. 
(See vertebrate.)
isotonic: Physiological adaptation of an organism in which it maintains the 
same solute concentration in its body as water outside its body, helping to 
cancel out osmotic pressure.
isotope: An alternate form of an element. (See stable isotopes or 
radioactive isotopes.) 

101
iterative evolution: Similar trait reappearing in different species within 
a lineage as a result of similar factors in natural selection and/or the same 
genes coding for the trait.
lichen: Symbiotic organism comprised of fungi and algae that mutually 
bene¿ t one another.
macroevolution: Change in gene frequency of a species over time that 
results in speciation.
mammal: Synapsid characterized by inner ear bones derived from 
modi¿ cation of jaw bones in therapsids, as well as mammary glands, hair, 
and other traits.
marsupial: Mammal that gives live birth but to an underdeveloped embryo, 
which completes its embryonic growth in a pouch.
mass extinction: A sudden extinction of a signi¿ cant number of organisms, 
such as that which occurred at the end of the Permian and Cretaceous 
periods; marked in the geologic record by an abrupt end to the fossils of 
many unrelated lineages.
megaspore: Larger spore corresponding to the male gamete in a pteridophyte 
with heterospory.
meiosis: 
Cell 
division 
from 
diploid 
cells 
into 
haploid 
cells, 
producing gametes.
metamorphic (rock): Rock altered from another rock through heat 
or pressure.
metazoan: Animal; multicellular eukaryote that can have major changes in 
its form throughout its ontogeny.
microevolution: Change in the gene frequency of a species over more than 
one generation.

102
Glossary
microspore: Smaller spore corresponding to the female gamete in a 
pteridophyte with heterospory.
mimicry: Protective adaptation in which one organism imitates another 
organism through similar appearance, sounds, smells, or other means. 
(See camouÀ age.)
mitosis: Cell division of haploid cells into identical haploid cells.
molecular clocks: Method that uses rates of molecular change in a lineage 
and ages of fossil representatives of that lineage to calculate divergence 
times for two or more related taxa.
molecular phylogeny: Reconstruction of the evolutionary history of a 
lineage on the basis of molecular (genetic) homology.
monotreme: Modern clade of mammals characterized by egg laying.
mutation: A change to a DNA sequence, which may or may not have 
functional effects.
mycorrhizae: Fungal symbionts that live around and in the roots of land 
plants, providing plants with added amounts of phosphorus and nitrogen 
while gaining carbohydrates from the plant.
natural selection: Charles Darwin’s mechanism of evolutionary change, 
in which organisms survive and reproduce more because they possess 
particular variations, causing those variations to be more common in the 
next generation. 
notochord: Stiffened structure along the dorsal anatomy of an animal; one 
of the key traits of a chordate.
nucleic acid: DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) or RNA (ribonucleic acid), 
which are responsible for transfer and replication of genetic material.

103
Oldowan: The ¿ rst stone tool industry, based on simple cores and À akes, 
beginning around 2.6 million years ago. 
ontogeny: Growth history of an organism, which sometimes reÀ ects ancestral 
traits and, hence, evolutionary history.
osmoregulation: Balance of solutes maintained in an organism relative to 
solutes outside of its body. (See isotonic, osmosis.)
osmosis: Movement of water through a semipermeable membrane from 
an area of greater concentration to one of lesser concentration. (See 
isotonic, osmoregulation.)
ovule: Female part of a plant.
paleoenvironment: The ancient environment represented by a paleontological 
or archaeological site, as reconstructed by faunal or À oral remains, ancient 
soil structure, or water À ow characteristics. 
paleogeography: Study of ancient landscapes and con¿ gurations of 
continents and oceans; often expressed through paleogeographic maps.
paleontology: Study of ancient life, with “ancient” generally referring to 
more than 10,000 years ago. (See archaeology .)
period: Geologic time unit; subdivision of era.
pharyngeal gill pouches (“slits”): Anatomical feature present in 
all chordates.
photoautotroph: 
An 
organism 
that 
produces 
its 
own 
food 
through photosynthesis.
plate tectonics: Geologic process in which cool, rigid lithospheric plates 
move above a hot, plastically À owing asthenosphere; results in continental 
movement, formation and destruction of oceanic crust, mountain building, 
and volcanism.

104
Glossary
pollen: Reproductive part of gymnosperm or angiosperm containing sperm.
pollination: Process by which pollen is introduced to the female part of a 
plant, often facilitated by animal surrogates, such as insects, birds, or bats.
Precambrian: General term applied to Earth history before the start of the 
Cambrian period, or about 4.5 billion to 545 million years ago.
primate: A member of the order of mammals that includes apes, monkeys, 
lemurs, tarsiers, and humans. 
prokaryote: Single-celled organism characterized by small size, dispersed 
genetic material (no nuclear envelope), and no complex organelles. 
(See eukaryote.)
prosimian: A non-anthropoid primate; includes two distinct clades: the 
strepsirrhine primates and tarsiers. 
pteridophyte: Spore-bearing land plant, such as ferns and their relatives. 
(See sporangium, spore.)
radiata: Animals with a radial symmetry, such as sponges, comb jellies, true 
jellies, corals, and hydrozoans. (See bilateria.)
radioactive isotopes: Unstable elements that undergo radioactive decay; 
known rates of decay and ratios of these (“parent element”) to a stable end 
member (“daughter element”)  can be then used to calculate ages of geologic 
materials. (See absolute age dating.)
Red Queen hypothesis: Hypothesis in evolution that predators and prey 
coevolve in response to selection pressures exerted by one another, resulting 
in an evolutionary “arms race”; inspired by a character in Lewis Carroll’s 
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland. (See coevolution.)
relative age dating: Methods for determining relative ages of rocks; most 
readily done through application of biological succession. (See absolute 
age dating.)

105
sedimentary (rock): Rock formed through the cementation of previously 
eroded rocks or precipitation from an aqueous solution.
seed: Enclosed reproductive part of plant that consists of an embryo, seed 
coat, and nutrients. (See spore.)
snowball Earth: Slang term applied to a continuous span of nearly 100 
million years during the Proterozoic eon in which global temperatures 
were unusually low; this condition probably affected the early evolution of 
metazoans and other organisms.
speciation: Descent of one or more new species from an ancestral species; 
can result in adaptive radiation.
sporangia (sporangium): Spore-bearing structures in a fungus or plant.
spore: Reproductive structure in a fungus or plant that disperses easily 
(through wind or water); has very little to no stored food for the reproductive 
cell. (See pteridophyte, seed.)
stable isotopes: Elements that do not undergo radioactive decay but 
have different atomic masses, such as carbon-12 and carbon-13 or 
oxygen-16 and oxygen-18. Used as chemical fossils to reconstruct diet or 
paleoenvironment.
stoma (stomata): Pores surrounded by specialized cells in the leaves of land 
plants; they regulate respiration and prevent water loss.
strata (stratum): Layers of sedimentary rock.
stromatolite: Layered sedimentary structure formed by trapping and binding 
of sediment in a bacterial or algal colony; trace fossil.
tetrapod: Four-limbed vertebrate, descended from lobe-¿ nned ¿ sh.

106
Glossary
therapsid: Synapsid reptiles that lived from the Permian through the Triassic 
periods; considered to be immediate ancestors of mammals because of their 
mammal-like traits.
trace fossil: Indirect evidence of ancient life formed as a result of behavior, 
such as tracks, burrows, tooth marks, or feces. (See body fossil, ichnology.)
transitional fossil: Popular term applied to a body fossil that shows a blend 
of traits between two lineages, such as Archaeopteryx, with its dinosaurian 
and avian traits. The term is considered unnecessary by most evolutionary 
scientists because every fossil represents a transition between generations. 
uniformitarianism: Principle in geology, ¿ rst de¿ ned by Charles Lyell in 
the 19th century, that most Earth processes and their products observed today 
are comparable to those of the geologic past.
vertebrate: Chordate that has additional mineralized tissue supporting its 
notochord (“backbone”).
zooanthellae: Symbiotic algae that live within tissues of corals; responsible 
for giving corals oxygen needed for their growth while corals provide the 
algae with living space.

107
Bibliography
Ahlberg, P. E., ed. Major Events in Early Vertebrate Evolution: Palaeontology, 
Phylogeny, Genetics, and Development. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2001. 
In 23 chapters, a wide variety of researchers from different realms of 
evolutionary science—such as paleontology, genetics, and developmental 
biology—lend their perspectives to unraveling milestones in early vertebrate 
evolution, beginning with the transition of invertebrates to chordates and 
from lobe-¿ nned ¿ sh to tetrapods.
Beard, Christopher. The Hunt for the Dawn Monkey: Unearthing the Origins 
of Monkeys, Apes, and Humans. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2006. Beard relates the research on early primates from Cuvier to his 
own discovery of Eosimias, the oldest known anthropoid primate. A good 
description of the ways in which ¿ eld paleontology progressed in different 
parts of the world. 
Beerling, D. Emerald Planet: How Plants Changed Earth’s History. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2008. The author takes the viewpoint that land 
plants have not only evolved in response to changing environments but have 
also played a role in altering environments over the course of geologic time. 
Similar to Kendrick and Davis’s book, this one covers the evolution of plants 
in more or less chronological order but looks more at major events in Earth 
history related to plants. 
Benton, M. J. Vertebrate Palaeontology (3rd ed.). New York: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2005. This book is meant as an advanced undergraduate text for 
paleontology students interested in the fossil record of vertebrates, but the 
¿ rst chapter also serves as an effective summary of current hypotheses on 
the origin of vertebrates from invertebrates.
Berta, A., J. L. Sumich, and K. M. Kovacs. Marine Mammals: Evolutionary 
Biology. New York: Academic Press, 2006. Although this book includes 
marine mammals other than cetaceans, one chapter nonetheless gives a 
concise assessment of the evolution of cetaceans. Explanations of more 

108
Bibliography
general concepts related to the anatomical and behavioral adaptations of 
sea-dwelling mammals assist in understanding how they could have evolved 
from land-dwelling mammals.
Carpenter, K. Dinosaur Eggs, Nests, and Babies. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1999. This book is primarily about the fossil evidence 
related to dinosaur reproduction, but it also contains a good deal of 
information about amniote eggs in general, including a chapter that considers 
the origin of the enclosed amniotic egg.
Chiappe, L. M. Glori¿ ed Dinosaurs: The Origin and Early Evolution 
of Birds. New York: Wiley-Blackwell, 2005. Chiappe, one of the top 
researchers on fossil birds from the Mesozoic era, provides a concise, well-
illustrated, and up-to-date assessment of the fossil evidence supporting the 
evolutionary transition of birds from theropod dinosaurs and their subsequent 
evolutionary history.
Clack, J. A. Gaining Ground: The Origin and Evolution of Tetrapods. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2002. Clack has spent most of her 
career researching the origin and evolution of early tetrapods from lobe-¿ nned 
¿ sh. Thus, her coverage of this topic stems from a personal perspective but is 
¿ lled with her knowledge and experience in the study of Devonian tetrapod 
fossils and how these relate to the evolution of four-limbed vertebrates on land. 
Cochran, Gregory, and Henry Harpending. The 10,000 Year Explosion: 
How Civilization Accelerated Human Evolution. New York: Basic Books, 
2009. Cochran and Harpending explore the genetics of recent human 
evolution, documenting the rapid natural selection following the invention 
of agriculture.
Dudley, R. The Biomechanics of Insect Flight: Form, Function, Evolution. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2002. Dudley provides a broad but 
detailed look at the major selection factors associated with the evolution 
of insect À ight, such as non-winged ancestors, aerodynamics, energetics, 
diversi¿ cation, and pollination. He even considers the future of insect 
À ight, an example of how evolutionary theory can be applied to predict 
upcoming trends.

109
Everhart, M. J. Oceans of Kansas: A Natural History of the Western Interior 
Sea. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2005. Filled with personal 
insights gained from decades of ¿ eld work and study of fossil specimens, 
Everhart’s book enthusiastically paints a picture of marine life during the 
late Cretaceous in the area of what we now call Kansas, with emphasis on 
the marine and À ying reptiles of that region and time.
Fedonkin, M., J. G. Gehling, K. Grey, G. M. Narbonne, and P. Vickers-
Rich. The Rise of Animals: Evolution and Diversi¿ cation of the Kingdom 
Animalia. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2007. Up-to-
date coverage of the latest research on the origin of Precambrian animals 
and other life, written with lively text and well illustrated. These experienced 
and well-traveled authors summarize the fossil record for Ediacaran animals 
throughout the world, while also supplying a primer on the ¿ rst 4 billion 
years of Earth history.
Fraser, N., and D. Henderson. Dawn of the Dinosaurs: Life in the Triassic. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2009. This book is about more than 
just the early evolution of dinosaurs; it also discusses many of the plants, 
other animals, and environments throughout the Triassic world. Fraser and 
Henderson work collaboratively as scientist and artist, respectively, to re-
create Triassic landscapes that share recognizable elements with modern 
ones, while setting the stage for the remainder of the Mesozoic era, also 
known as the “age of dinosaurs.”
Gensel, P. G., and D. Edwards, eds. Plants Invade the Land: Evolutionary and 
Environmental Perspectives. New York: Columbia University Press, 2001. 
Twenty-six paleontologists and geologists cover, in 13 chapters, the probable 
evolutionary pathways and ecological consequences of plants adapting to 
terrestrial environments from the Ordovician through the Devonian periods.
Gibbons, Ann. The First Human: The Race to Discover Our Earliest 
Ancestors. Garden City, NY: Anchor, 2008. An able reporter, Gibbons goes 
on scene with the teams ¿ nding the earliest known hominins. Her story 
shows the excitement accompanying the announcements of the fossils and 
the conÀ icts between these teams as they argue about their interpretations. A 
great portrait of the science of early human evolution. 

110
Bibliography
Gould, S. J. Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History. 
New York: W.W. Norton, 1989. Through its description and commentary on 
the Burgess Shale fauna, this book introduces us to what animals looked like 
before skeletons became more common after the Cambrian period. Although 
the book is now outdated in some respects and some of its factual information 
has since been corrected, Gould, using his engaging and informed prose, pulls 
in readers to marvel with him at the amazing biological diversity represented 
by this fossil assemblage.
Grimaldi, D. A., and M. S. Engel. Evolution of the Insects. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2005. A comprehensive volume on the fossil 
record of insects by two paleoentolomogists who made many of the primary 
discoveries discussed here. The text is augmented by many illustrations 
of fossil insects, including photographs of exquisitely preserved insects in 
amber from the Mesozoic and Cenozoic eras. The book also deals with the 
origin and evolution of the various insect groups associated with pollination 
during the later part of the Mesozoic era, such as hymenopterans (wasps, 
bees, and ants), coleopterans (beetles), dipterans (À ies), and lepidopterans 
(moths and butterÀ ies).
Guthrie, R. Dale. The Nature of Paleolithic Art. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2006. A favorite of one of the professors. Guthrie is 
an archaeologist who has spent years getting into the minds of ancient 
hunters—replicating their techniques and thinking about their relationships 
with animals. He has used this knowledge to interpret ancient art. The 
book is richly illustrated by Guthrie’s own drawings reproducing these 
ancient artworks. 
Johanson, Donald, and Kate Wong. Lucy’s Legacy: The Quest for Human 
Origins. New York: Three Rivers Press, 2010. Johanson has been a leader 
in paleoanthropology for nearly 40 years. In this book, he describes the 
important fossil discoveries of the last 15 years, from his team’s return to 
Ethiopia to the exciting ¿ nds from Dmanisi, Georgia.  
Kemp, T. S. The Origin and Evolution of Mammals. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2005. A detailed account of the synapsid-reptile ancestors 
of mammals, the anatomical and physiological changes that took place in 

111
the transition between these reptiles and mammals, and the important clues 
provided by living mammals about their evolutionary lineage.
Kenrick, P., and P. Davis. Fossil Plants. Washington, DC: Smithsonian 
Books, 2004. A succinct introduction to paleobotany, with chapters arranged 
in order of geologic time and covering bacteria, fungi, algae, lichens, and 
land plants. For those who might not have much background in botany, the 
glossary of this book is especially helpful for understanding material in this 
course related to the macroevolution of land plants. 
Kielan-Jaworowska, Z., R. F. Cifelli, and Z.-X. Luo. Mammals from the 
Age of Dinosaurs: Origins, Evolution, and Structure. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2006. Overview of Mesozoic mammals, including the 
factors that likely led to their evolution from non-mammalian synapsids 
in the Triassic period, their subsequent diversi¿ cation into many groups of 
mammals, and the locations where their fossils have been found.
Klein, Richard G. The Dawn of Human Culture. New York: Wiley, 2002. 
Klein specializes in the archaeology of African sites from around the time 
of the origin of modern human populations. He explores the question: What 
made these Africans succeed and spread throughout the world?
Levin, H. The Earth through Time (9th ed.). New York: Wiley-Blackwell, 
2009. This textbook, intended for undergraduate students, provides an 
introduction to historical geology, including an overview of plate tectonics, 
relative age dating, absolute age dating, and the fossil record. Evolution and 
extinctions are placed in the context of shifting continents and À uctuating sea 
levels, giving a large-scale perspective on the occurrence of natural selection 
in the geologic past.
Levinton, J. S. Genetics, Paleontology, and Macroevolution. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2001. This book shows how genetics, 
paleontology, and developmental biology can be integrated to better discern 
the patterns and processes of macroevolution. Levinton also notes that 
many of the original concepts outlined by Darwin (adaptations, variations 
in form, and selection in populations) can be explored further through this 
updated information.

112
Bibliography
Mann, S. Biomineralization: Principles and Concepts in Bioinorganic 
Materials Chemistry. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001. This book 
is meant more for advanced undergraduate or graduate education, rather 
than a general audience. Nevertheless, it effectively explains the chemistry 
and biochemistry of the secretion of minerals in organisms’ exoskeletons 
or endoskeletons, the types of minerals formed, and the relationship of 
biomineralization to evolutionary processes.
Margulis, L., and M. Dolan. Early Life: Evolution on the Precambrian Earth 
(2nd ed.). Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett Learning, 2002. The primary 
author of this book (Margulis) originated the endosymbiotic hypothesis as 
an explanation for the evolution of eukaryotes from prokaryotes; hence, she 
is a most appropriate authority for an examination of Precambrian microbial 
evolution. This updated edition of the 1984 book includes new information 
relevant to the evolution of single-celled organisms.
Martin, A. J. Introduction to the Study of Dinosaurs. New York: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2006. This book, intended as a textbook for undergraduate 
non-science majors, gives an overview of dinosaurs and their evolution 
throughout the Mesozoic era. It also includes an extensive chapter about 
their early evolution from non-dinosaur reptiles during the Triassic period.
McNeill, William H. Plagues and Peoples. Garden City, NY: Anchor, 1977. 
McNeill’s book is a true classic. Many of the ideas have been updated in the 
intervening years, but nobody has done a better job of putting together the 
story of disease and its effects on history. 
Mithen, Steven. After the Ice: A Global Human History, 20,000í5000 BC. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006. Mithen gives an account of 
the archaeology that shows hunter-gatherers in the wake of the last glaciation, 
at the dawn of the development of agriculture. He weaves different parts 
of the world together into a story about the changes in societies with this 
new lifestyle. 
Morris, S. C. The Crucible of Creation: The Burgess Shale and the Rise 
of Animals. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999. Morris, a foremost 

113
researcher on the Burgess Shale fauna, takes us several steps further than 
Gould with his assessment of this fossil assemblage and the insights it 
provides into the evolution of animals before, during, and after the Cambrian 
period. Morris also adds information about other Cambrian fossil assemblages 
comparable to those of the Burgess Shale, while critiquing some of Gould’s 
views on the latter.
Prothero, D. R. Evolution: What the Fossils Say and Why It Matters. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2007. Prothero provides a comprehensive 
look at examples of fossils that best illustrate evolutionary transitions in 
animals. Through well-organized, clear explanations of the evidence for 
macroevolution, as well as his inclusion of numerous images of transitional 
fossils, he also directly addresses and refutes most of the standard arguments 
leveled against macroevolutionary theory.
———, and S. E. Foss, eds. The Evolution of Artiodactyls. Baltimore, MD: 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 2007. Various researchers discuss the fossil 
record for the evolutionarily related group of hoofed mammals known as 
artiodactyls, including whales. Speci¿ cally, the authors of the third chapter 
(Jonathon Geisler and others) explain the evolutionary connections between 
land-dwelling artiodactyls and whales, as indicated by shared traits in the 
comparative anatomy of fossil whales and modern artiodactyls.
Rizzotti, M. Early Evolution: From the Appearance of the First Cell to the 
First Modern Organisms. Basel, Switzerland: Birkhäuser, 2000. Rizzotti, 
through his review of the traits of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, asks 
important questions about the evolution of single-celled organisms and how 
their evolution eventually led to the evolution of multicelled organisms.
Shear, W. M. “The Early Development of Terrestrial Ecosystems.” In H. 
Gee, ed., Shaking the Tree: Readings from Nature in the History of Life, pp. 
169–183. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000. An overview of the 
evolutionary factors that made possible the transition of life from aquatic 
to terrestrial environments in the ¿ rst half of the Paleozoic era and the life 
forms that were among the earliest colonizers of these ecosystems.

114
Bibliography
Shipman, P. Taking Wing: Archaeopteryx and the Evolution of Bird Flight. 
New York: Simon & Schuster, 1999. This book is a little outdated in some 
of its content, considering how many transitional fossils of feathered 
dinosaurs and Mesozoic birds have been found since 1999. Nonetheless, 
it is still worth reading for Shipman’s clearly written and well-researched 
summary of what was known about Archaeopteryx—the ¿ rst known 
bird from the late Jurassic—and how paleontologists have studied its 
connection to the evolution of À ight in this lineage of what we now see as 
“modern dinosaurs.”
Shubin, N. Your Inner Fish: A Journey into the 3.5 Billion–Year History of the 
Human Body. New York: Pantheon, 2008. In what is arguably one of the best 
paleontology books written for a general audience in recent years, Shubin 
explores, through easily understood explanations, concepts, and analogies, 
the anatomical and genetic evidence for the evolution of our species from 
lobe-¿ nned ¿ sh and their tetrapod descendants.
Stanley, S. M. Earth System History (3rd ed.). New York: W.H. Freeman, 
2008. Stanley’s textbook is intended for undergraduate historical geology 
classes, but it emphasizes the relationship of biological evolution to 
changes in ecological and geological systems through time. One of the most 
important concepts put forth in this book is the idea that some organisms 
also altered their environments, thus affecting the course of evolution in 
unrelated lineages.
Sumida, S. S., and K. L. M. Martin, eds. Amniote Origins: Completing the 
Transition to Land. New York: Academic Press, 1997. Although this volume 
is now dated and has been succeeded by many important fossil discoveries 
since its publication, its 24 authors cover the most important concepts related 
to the transition of water-dwelling tetrapods to fully terrestrial lifestyles. 
Physiology, behavior, anatomy, biogeography, ecological change through 
time, and other factors are connected to the fossil record of early amniotes.
Taylor, Jeremy. Not a Chimp: The Hunt to Find the Genes That Make Us 
Human. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. Taylor, a BBC science 
editor, explores the science of genetics and psychology to ¿ nd what we think 

115
makes humans different from chimpanzees. The book puts behavior into the 
context of biology. 
Taylor, T. N., E. L. Taylor, and M. Krings. Paleobotany: The Biology and 
Evolution of Fossil Plants (2nd ed.). New York: Academic Press, New 
York, 2009. At 1,230 pages, this book is obviously a much more ambitious 
coverage of paleobotany than the previously recommended book by Kenrick 
and Davis. However, readers can focus on the excellent, comprehensive 
section dealing with the early evolution of À owering plants, starting at 
page 873.
Unwin, D. The Pterosaurs: From Deep Time. Harlow, UK: Pi Press, 2006. 
Unwin is one of the world’s leading researchers of pterosaurs—À ying 
reptiles of the Mesozoic era. Hence, few authors could cover this topic as 
thoroughly yet without overwhelming a reader interested in the evolution 
of the ¿ rst À ying vertebrates. The illustrations (many in color), which bring 
these animals back to life in the reader’s imagination, are an added bonus to 
the text.
Vickers-Rich, P., and P. Komarower, eds. The Rise and Fall of the Ediacaran 
Biota. Special Publication 268. London: Geological Society of London, 2009. 
This book is a compilation of articles by the top researchers on Precambrian 
metazoans and their geological context, giving readers the latest hypotheses 
concerning Proterozoic climate, plate tectonics, and enigmatic Ediacaran 
fossils. Although intended more for specialists in Precambrian paleontology, 
it is a good follow-up for those wanting more details after reading The Rise 
of Animals (Fedonkin, et al.).
Wade, N., ed. The New York Times Book of Fossils and Evolution. New 
York: Globe Pequot, 2001. An anthology of news stories published in The 
New York Times “Science Times” section that largely dealt with then-newly 
discovered evolutionary transitions indicated by the fossil record, from 
Precambrian animals to humans. Readers may enjoy comparing what were 
“the latest” discoveries as of 2000 to what we now know—through this 
course and current events—effectively showing how paleontology, like all 
sciences, also “evolves.”

116
Bibliography
Walker, Alan, and Pat Shipman. The Ape in the Tree: An Intellectual and 
Natural History of Proconsul. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard 
University Press, 2005. The book’s title refers to an exceptional ¿ nd of a 
fossil ape inside a fossil tree. Walker and Shipman give a lively history of the 
personalities who dug up the fossil evidence of Miocene apes. 
Zimmer, C. Evolution: The Triumph of an Idea. New York: Harper Collins, 
2002. Zimmer, one of the most well regarded popular science writers, 
gives an excellent overview of the history and concepts of evolutionary 
theory through his lucid writing and illustrations. This book was written to 
accompany the eight-part PBS series with the same name and augments the 
fossil record with other major sources of evidence for evolutionary theory.
———. Smithsonian Intimate Guide to Human Origins. New York: Harper 
Paperbacks, 2007. Zimmer’s book is a well-illustrated, broad overview of 
human evolution, covering the whole time span. 
Web Sites
American Geological Institute: Evolution and the Fossil Record. http://www.
agiweb.org/news/evolution/datingfossilrecord.html.
University of California Museum of Paleontology. http://www.ucmp.
berkeley.edu/.
University of California Museum of Paleontology: Understanding Evolution. 
http://evolution.berkeley.edu/.
The Virtual Fossil Museum: Fossils across Geological Time and Evolution. 
http://www.fossilmuseum.net/

Notes

Notes

