History 
Topic
Medieval History
Subtopic
Professor Philip Daileader
The College of William & Mary
Course Guidebook
How the Crusades 
Changed History

PUBLISHED BY:
THE GREAT COURSES
Corporate Headquarters
4840 Westﬁ elds Boulevard, Suite 500
Chantilly, Virginia 20151-2299
Phone: 1-800-832-2412
Fax: 703-378-3819
www.thegreatcourses.com
Copyright © The Teaching Company, 2013
Printed in the United States of America
This book is in copyright. All rights reserved. 
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above,
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form, or by any means 
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), 
without the prior written permission of
The Teaching Company.

i
Philip Daileader, Ph.D.
Associate Professor, Lyon G. Tyler 
Department of History
The College of William & Mary
P
rofessor Philip Daileader is an Associate 
Professor in the Lyon G. Tyler Department of 
History at The College of William & Mary, 
where he served as Department Chair from 2008 
to 2011. He received his B.A. in History from The 
Johns Hopkins University and his M.A. and Ph.D. in History from Harvard 
University. At William & Mary, he has held a University Professorship in 
Teaching Excellence; he also has received an Alumni Fellowship Award in 
Teaching and a Phi Beta Kappa Society Award for Excellence in Teaching 
(Alpha Chapter of Virginia). Before that, Professor Daileader was a four-
time winner of the Harvard University Certiﬁ cate of Distinction in Teaching. 
He also has taught at The University of Alabama and at the State University 
of New York at New Paltz. In 2012, The Princeton Review named him one 
of the 300 best professors in the United States.
Professor Daileader’s research focuses on the social, cultural, and religious 
history of Mediterranean Europe. He is the author of True Citizens: Violence, 
Memory, and Identity in the Medieval Community of Perpignan (1162–
1397) (translated into French in 2004) and coeditor of French Historians, 
1900–2000: New Historical Writing in Twentieth-Century France. He has 
published articles in North American and European journals, including 
Archivum historiae pontiﬁ ciae, the Journal of Medieval History, Imago 
Temporis: Medium Aevum, and Speculum. Professor Daileader is ﬁ nishing a 
book whose working title is Valencian Apocalyptic: Saint Vincent Ferrer (c. 
1350–1419), His World and Life. 
 Professor Daileader’s other Great Courses include Early Middle Ages, High 
Middle Ages, and Late Middle Ages. ■

iiii
Table of Contents
LECTURE GUIDES
INTRODUCTION
Professor Biography ............................................................................i
Course Scope .....................................................................................1
LECTURE 1
What Were the Crusades? .................................................................3
LECTURE 2
Before the Crusades—Deep Background ........................................10
LECTURE 3
Before the Crusades—Immediate Circumstances ...........................18
LECTURE 4
The First Crusade and Conquest of Jerusalem ................................25
LECTURE 5
The Rise of the Templars ..................................................................33
LECTURE 6
Defending the Crusader States, 1099–1144 ....................................40
LECTURE 7
The Second Crusade—False Steps and Failure ..............................47
LECTURE 8
Saladin—General and Sultan ...........................................................54
LECTURE 9
The Third Crusade—We Three Kings ..............................................61
LECTURE 10
The Fourth Crusade—Conquest of Constantinople .........................68

Table of Contents
iii
iii
LECTURE 11
Crusades in Spain ............................................................................75
LECTURE 12
The Northern Crusades ....................................................................82
LECTURE 13
The Children’s and Albigensian Crusades ........................................89
LECTURE 14
Fifth and Sixth Crusades—Tragedy and Oddity ...............................96
LECTURE 15
Louis IX—The Crusader Saint ........................................................103
LECTURE 16
The Hohenstaufen and Shepherds’ Crusades ...............................110
LECTURE 17
The Fall—1291 ...............................................................................117
LECTURE 18
The Crusades and Their Critics ......................................................124
LECTURE 19
War and Travel—The Experience of Crusading .............................131
LECTURE 20
Life in the Crusader East ................................................................139
LECTURE 21
Cultural Contact and Exchange ......................................................147
LECTURE 22
Crusade and Mission ......................................................................154
LECTURE 23
The Crusades and the Course of History, Part 1 ............................161

Table of Contents
iviv
Table of Contents
LECTURE 24
The Crusades and the Course of History, Part 2 ............................168
MAPS
 
The End of the Christian Empire ............................................175
 
The Reign of Bassle II ............................................................176
 
Arrival of the Seljuk Turks .......................................................177
 
1099: The March to Jerusalem ...............................................178
 
The First Crusade: Advance to Antioch ..................................178
 
The People’s Crusade ............................................................179
 
The Crusader States, c. 1100 .................................................180
 
The Aftermath of Hattin ..........................................................181
 
The Rise of Saladin ................................................................182
 
The “Splinter Empress,” 1214 ................................................183
 
The Crusade of Louis IX .........................................................184
Bibliography ....................................................................................185
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL

1
Scope:
F
ew images of the Middle Ages are as enduring as that of the crusader 
knight traveling to the Holy Land. Yet the origins, nature, and 
consequences of the crusades remain lively topics of debate. What 
motivated people of every social status, from kings and nobles to peasants 
and hermits, to take part in the crusades? What was it like to go on a crusade 
and to live in a crusader society? Why and how did Europe suddenly 
intrude so forcefully in the affairs of the two established powerhouses of 
the Mediterranean, the Byzantine Empire and the House of Islam? How did 
the crusades shape the internal development of the medieval West, and how 
did the crusades affect East–West relations? Crusades to the Holy Land are 
the central focus of this course, but we will also examine the crusades in all 
their geographical manifestations. From Spain to the Baltics, the successes, 
failures, and unintended consequences of the crusading movement played a 
crucial role in determining the future shape and identity of Europe.
The course begins by examining the novel combination of holy war and 
pilgrimage embodied in the crusades, along with the crusading indulgence, 
a spiritual beneﬁ t that most likely did not exist before the First Crusade. 
We then explore the background and context of the First Crusade, launched 
in November 1095, in order to show why there were any crusades at all. 
From there, we move on to examine the narrative history of crusading 
between the launching of the First Crusade and the fall of the Christian 
kingdom of Jerusalem in 1291. These narrative lectures cover the crusader 
conquest of Jerusalem in 1099; the struggle between Richard Lionheart and 
Saladin during the Third Crusade; the crusader conquest of Constantinople, 
capital of the Byzantine Empire, during the Fourth Crusade; and the failed 
crusading expeditions of King Louis IX (later, Saint Louis) in the later 13th
century. As we will see, the startling success of the First Crusade initiated 
two centuries of crusading in the Holy Land, but subsequent crusades 
tended to be ineffectual at best and, at least for the crusaders themselves, 
occasionally disastrous. Crusading to the Holy Land rightly holds a central 
place in any account of the medieval crusades, but these narrative lectures 
How the Crusades Changed History

Scope
2
will also examine how crusading spread all along Christendom’s frontiers in 
the Middle Ages and then to Christendom’s interior. 
Following this narrative examination of the crusades, we then address 
various questions and issues that pertain to crusading. What was it like to 
travel and to ﬁ ght on a crusade? Did crusading hinder or facilitate cultural 
exchange between the Islamic world and medieval Europe? And, perhaps 
most importantly, what was the legacy of the crusades? To what extent and 
how did they change history? 
The crusades changed medieval Europe and the Near East in many ways: 
through the European conquest of Jerusalem and the temporary establishment 
of Crusader States in Syria and Palestine and through the permanent conquest 
of Islamic Spain and of pagan lands in eastern Europe. But the crusading 
movement proved hard to control, as was evident during the famous 
Children’s Crusade of 1212 and the less well-known Shepherds’ Crusades of 
1251 and 1320. Crusaders sometimes put crusades to purposes far removed 
from the interests of those who summoned them. Most importantly, the 
crusades’ longest-lasting consequences were unintended and self-defeating 
ones that affected the internal history of medieval and postmedieval Europe 
as much as Eurasian geopolitics. ■

3
What Were the Crusades?
Lecture 1
O
f all the words associated with the Middle Ages, the term “crusade” 
is perhaps uniquely double-edged. It can be laudatory or pejorative, 
depending on the speaker, denoting either selﬂ ess devotion to a 
worthwhile cause or tragically misguided action. Whether the crusades 
deserve admiration or opprobrium is a matter for individuals to decide for 
themselves. Our goals in this course are to understand the crusades and 
to assess their consequences. We will ﬁ rst trace a narrative history of the 
crusades from 1095 until 1291. Then, toward the end of the course, we will 
look at thematic topics, such as the experience of crusading and cultural 
contact during the crusades, to answer the question of how the crusades 
changed history.
Deﬁ ning “Crusade”

A medieval crusade, which must (or at least ought to) be summoned 
by a pope, combined holy war and pilgrimage. 

A crusade was a holy war in the sense that it was fought on behalf of 
a faith. Those who died in battle were martyrs; their willingness to 
sacriﬁ ce their lives atoned for their sins and merited their salvation. 

A crusade was a pilgrimage in the sense that crusaders went on long 
journeys after making a public vow announcing their intentions. 
Crusaders received all the material and spiritual beneﬁ ts that 
pilgrims enjoyed and carried the traditional emblems of the pilgrim. 
Plenary Indulgences

Crusaders also received a beneﬁ t that went beyond what other 
pilgrims or holy warriors received: plenary indulgences, that is, the 
remission of all temporal penalties and punishment due to sin. 

Penitents who felt contrition for their sins and confessed their sins 
to a proper confessor escaped eternal damnation but still faced 

4
Lecture 1: What Were the Crusades?
temporal punishment, meaning penance performed in this world. 
Temporal punishment also meant time spent in purgatory in the 
next world. 

The doctrine of purgatory stipulates that some souls do not 
immediately enter heaven or hell after bodily death. Instead, they 
experience a purifying punishment that prepares them for their 
eventual and inevitable entrance into heaven. That punishment is 
severe, but unlike hell, it is not eternal; it lasts for a period of time 
determined by God.

Certain passages in the Bible seem to indicate that something 
other than immediate damnation happens to sinners after death and 
that sins can be, in some sense, forgiven after death. Theologians 
pondered these passages and, over the course of nearly a 
millennium, worked them into a coherent theology. 
o Saint Augustine of Hippo (d. 430) proposed that the souls of 
those who had committed relatively minor sins did not go to 
hell. Instead, they experienced purgatorial punishment after 
death and then entered heaven. 
o At times, Augustine stressed that he was not sure about the 
existence or nature of this purgatorial punishment; he also 
sometimes added that, if purgatory did exist, only a few souls 
experienced it, with most going to hell or heaven immediately 
after bodily death. 

During the 12th and 13th centuries, as crusading became more 
commonplace, theologians further developed the doctrine of 
purgatory. They spoke of it as a place not just for those who 
committed minor sins but for those who had committed major sins, 
confessed them, and then for some reason—such as sudden death—
failed to do sufﬁ cient penance to atone for those sins. They also 
spoke of purgatory as a place through which many, perhaps most, 
souls would pass before entering heaven. 

5

Purgatory was to be feared, and earthly penance offered a way to 
avoid it. But there were no precise equivalences between time spent 
doing earthly penance and time spent in purgatory. Even sinners 
who completed all earthly penances assigned to them still faced 
the possibility and fear of purgatorial punishment, which might last 
until the end of the world and the Last Judgment.

Before the First Crusade, popes and other ecclesiastics sometimes 
remitted earthly penance; that is, they relieved individuals of the 
need to perform penances assigned to them, usually in return for the 
penitent’s performing some sort of service. 
o Remission of penance was not controversial. After all, human 
beings, having assigned the penance in the ﬁ rst place, could 
remit it. 
o The plenary indulgence, though, remitted all temporal penalties 
due to sin—it took the place both of earthly penance and 
afterworldy purgatory. 

Crusaders—and for a long time only crusaders—received plenary 
indulgences, which seem to have come into being alongside the 
crusades themselves. The question of who ﬁ rst thought of the idea 
of plenary indulgences remains controversial. 
o It’s possible that the idea of indulgences originated with lower-
level crusade preachers. It would have been unusual for a pope 
to make a theological innovation as daring as the indulgence. 
o Pope Urban II seems to have intended the First Crusade to serve 
simply as a traditional form of remission of penance—the act 
of going on crusade took care of all earthly penance. Low-level 
preachers, though, were looking to gain recruits; they had an 
incentive to sweeten the pot by making increasingly generous 
offers to listeners. 
The Emergence of Crusading

What seems true of indulgences is also true of crusading: It was not 
the invention of Pope Urban II but emerged out of actual practice. 

6
Lecture 1: What Were the Crusades?
The fusion of holy war and pilgrimage appears to have occurred in 
the months following Pope Urban II’s sermon, although what he 
seems to have envisioned was more holy war than pilgrimage.
o The pope wanted a smallish army of perhaps a few thousand 
individuals to come to the assistance of Eastern Christians living 
in Asia Minor (modern-day Turkey), Syria, and Palestine. 
o What he got instead was an enormous movement of perhaps 
100,000 individuals who traveled eastward but were more intent 
on conquering Jerusalem than on assisting Eastern Christians.
o Those who answered the pope’s call understood that they 
were to go east, and they associated eastward movement with 
pilgrimage and Jerusalem. They seem to have concluded that 
the expedition must therefore be some sort of pilgrimage. The 
crusade, in that sense, fused papal plans and the expectations 
of the faithful.

It took at least a century for these various elements to coalesce; it 
has been suggested that crusading, as deﬁ ned above, did not really 
exist in a recognizable form until the time of the Third Crusade in 
the 1180s. 
The Emergence of Pilgrimage

Both pilgrimage and holy war predated crusading itself but followed 
different historical trajectories within Christianity. Pilgrimage 
emerged early and quickly became commonplace, despite the 
misgivings of church fathers, such as Saint Augustine, who 
emphasized that travel per se makes no one’s salvation more likely. 

But Augustine’s suspicion was not enough to hold back the 
enthusiasm for travel. Already in the 3rd century A.D., when to call 
oneself a Christian was still illegal in the Roman Empire, pilgrims 
traveled to the Holy Land; by the early 4th century, a pilgrimage 
industry of sorts existed there. 

7

The appeals of pilgrimage were many. Pilgrims enjoyed practical 
beneﬁ ts, including the right to expect hospitality from other 
Christians and immunity from tolls, lawsuit, arrest, and other 
judicial actions. Pilgrims and their property came under the 
protection of the church; an attack against either was tantamount to 
an attack on the clergy and ecclesiastical property.

Pilgrimage had a devotional component, as well. Seeing for oneself 
the places mentioned in the New Testament where Jesus lived, 
preached, and died would increase the fervency of one’s own faith. 

From the 7th century onward, pilgrimage also developed an 
increasingly important penitential component. Irish monks 
traveling throughout Europe introduced the practice of ordering 
sinners to make long pilgrimages as acts of penance for especially 
serious sins. 

Further, pilgrimages had an acquisitive component: Going on 
pilgrimage made it easier to acquire relics and, perhaps, the 
protection of the holy person who had touched the relic or from 
whose body it was taken.
The Emergence of Holy War 

Holy war emerged much more slowly than pilgrimage within 
Christianity, which for many centuries, continued to bear the 
imprint of its paciﬁ st origins.

With the conversion of the Roman emperor Constantine in the 
early 4th century, a Christian emperor came to rule over an empire 
with a strong military tradition. When Christians became rulers, 
theologians slowly started to rethink Christianity’s previous and 
uncompromising hostility toward warfare of all sorts. 

Saint Augustine was of decisive inﬂ uence on this issue. He deplored 
Rome’s wars of conquest and the necessity of any warfare in the 
world, but he accepted the notion of just war. The just war must 
be declared by a legitimate ruler and fought for a just cause. War 

8
Lecture 1: What Were the Crusades?
must be the only feasible 
means of achieving the 
just cause, and the just war 
must be fought without any 
ulterior motive. 

A just war was not a holy 
war, and Augustine himself 
never suggested that any 
warfare could be considered 
holy. 
Nonetheless, 
by 
accepting the notion that 
some 
wars 
were 
just, 
Augustine helped clear the 
way for the later notion that 
some wars were holy. Such 
was the weight of paciﬁ st 
tradition that more than four 
centuries elapsed between 
Augustine’s acceptance of 
just war and the legitimation 
of holy war. 

The combination of holy 
war and pilgrimage was 
somewhat problematic. Pilgrims were supposed to travel unarmed, 
while holy warriors by deﬁ nition ought to be armed. Crusaders 
traveled armed, and in that respect, they resembled holy warriors 
more than pilgrims. Yet holy war and pilgrimage were, on another 
level, complementary. 
o A problem facing pilgrims was the possibility that they would 
die en route, before they had done enough to fulﬁ ll their 
penance and merit their spiritual rewards. 
o A problem facing holy warriors was the possibility that they 
might not die; those who failed to fall in battle were not martyrs. 
The writings of the church father 
Saint Augustine on both purgatory 
and the idea of a just war contributed 
to the medieval understanding of 
“crusade.”
© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock.

9
o Crusaders, as pilgrims and holy warriors, received beneﬁ ts if 
they lived and beneﬁ ts if they died. In that sense, pilgrimage and 
holy war worked well together. Their fusion created a “win-win” 
situation, helping to explain the popularity of the crusades.
Brundage, Medieval Canon Law and the Crusader.
Housley, Contesting the Crusades.
Madden, ed., Crusades: The Illustrated History.
Riley-Smith, The Crusades: A History. 
Runciman, A History of the Crusades.
Setton, ed., A History of the Crusades. 
Sivan, “Modern Arab Historiography of the Crusades.” 
Tyerman, God’s War. 
1. If world leaders were to listen to this course, would their newfound 
understanding of the complexity of the crusades cause them to be 
more careful when drawing parallels between medieval events and the 
present? Or are simpliﬁ ed and polemical depictions of the crusades so 
useful that there is little hope of ever chasing them away? 
2. Is this course fair to the crusades and to all parties involved, and what 
would “fair” mean in this context?
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

10
Lecture 2: Before the Crusades—Deep Background
Before the Crusades—Deep Background
Lecture 2
I
n the ﬁ rst lecture, we saw that a crusade combined holy war and pilgrimage 
and that crusaders received, in addition to the beneﬁ ts of participation in 
those endeavors, plenary indulgences. We also saw that it took about a 
century after the First Crusade for crusading to become a distinct, well-deﬁ ned 
phenomenon. Not until the late 12th century did speciﬁ c Latin terms for 
“crusade” and “crusader” come into existence. In this lecture and in the next 
one, we will examine why there were any medieval crusades at all. Speciﬁ cally, 
we will look at how both long- and short-term historical developments led 
Pope Urban II to launch the First Crusade in November 1095.
Extent of Byzantine Rule

What historians call the Byzantine Empire was simply a continuation 
of the eastern half of the Roman Empire, which remained standing 
even when the western half disintegrated in the 4th and 5th centuries. 
In general, the eastern end of the Mediterranean, with its substantial 
urban and commercial life, was much more important to the 
Byzantines than the west. 

The one exception to this lack of concern with the west came in the 
6th century with the Byzantine conquest of southern and central Italy. 
As a result of that conquest, the papacy fell under Byzantine sway; 
popes-elect could not be consecrated and take up their papal duties 
until the Byzantine emperor or his local ofﬁ cial gave his approval. 

The territory of the Byzantine Empire might include, at any given 
moment, southeastern Europe and the Balkan peninsula; Asia Minor; 
the eastern end of the Mediterranean reaching into Mesopotamia, or 
modern Iraq; and Egypt and North Africa. Although the boundaries 
of the Byzantine Empire constantly shifted, they roughly coincided 
with the boundaries of the eastern Roman Empire. 

11

The Byzantine Empire had changed from the Roman Empire over 
time. Even before the Arab eruption of the 7th and 8th centuries, 
Greek had replaced Latin as the language of Byzantine government, 
and it had become the sole language of Byzantine high culture. 
Although the Byzantines ruled over many different ethnic groups, 
crusaders referred to Byzantines as Greeks. The emergence of 
the Arabs out of Arabia and the birth of Islam would drive the 
Byzantine East and Latin West even further apart.
Conquests of the Arabs and Jihad

Shortly after the death of Muhammad in 632, the Arabs embarked 
on a century of remarkable expansion and conquest. That expansion 
came at the expense of the Persian Empire and western India, the 
Byzantine Empire (which lost Jerusalem in 637 and Egypt by the 
end of 646), and western kingdoms that had succeeded the Roman 
Empire. Despite its territorial losses, the Byzantine Empire survived. 

The Arabs established themselves as a ruling class through a vast 
swath of territory stretching from the Atlantic to the Himalayas, but 
they soon began to adopt the sedentary lifestyles and commercial 
sophistication of their new lands. Arabs also began to absorb those 
lands’ philosophical and scientiﬁ c traditions. 
o Part of this process of acculturation involved legal codiﬁ cation, 
and beginning in roughly the middle of the 8th century, Islamic 
scholars began to work out theories of jihad. These theories 
were intended to serve as a blueprint for the future, although 
their main function was to explain the recent past.
o The word jihad (“struggle” or “striving”) and its variants 
are used in different ways at different points in the Koran. In 
the ﬁ rst half of the 9th century, Suﬁ  mystics seized on these 
differences and began to formulate the notion that there were 
two types of jihad: the greater jihad (personal spiritual striving) 
and the lesser jihad (military struggle against unbelievers). 

Islamic jurists elaborated on scattered militarist passages in the 
Koran, creating rules according to which jihad should be carried 

12
Lecture 2: Before the Crusades—Deep Background
out. According to the jurists’ conception of jihad, the world should 
mirror, as far as possible, the perfect unity of the single God. 

Before that goal was reached, the world had two parts: one ruled 
by Muslims in accordance with Islamic teachings (the House of 
Islam) and one ruled by non-Muslims (the House of War). It was 
the collective obligation of all Muslims to bring the non-Muslim 
world within the House of Islam. Until that ﬁ nal subjugation was 
achieved, Muslims were to be in a perpetual state of war.

Although the jihad of these jurists was a holy war, its goals were 
more political than religious. It aimed at political domination but 
not the eradication of all other religions. Pagans had to convert to 
Islam or be executed. But Christians and Jews were given more 
tolerance because they were peoples of the book. They were 
allowed to practice their own religions as long as they did not try to 
convert Muslims and paid a special tax as a sign of their submission 
to Islamic rule.
Rivalries in the House of Islam

By the time Islamic jurists had developed their theories, the age of 
truly massive Arab expansion was over, having just about reached 
its possible geographical limits. The conquests extended far to the 
east and west but not so far north or south. 

In theory, the House of Islam should have remained bent on 
additional conquests, but in practice, local Arab rulers began to 
act in ways indistinguishable from their non-Muslim neighbors, 
ﬁ ghting intermittently along their borders and taking advantage of 
opportunities when they arose. Later, diplomatic relations with non-
Muslims normalized.

Eighth-century juristic conceptions of jihad became more or less 
obsolete, and as circumstances changed, Islamic jurists tried to 
bring the theory into line with reality by adding to the House of 
Islam and the House of War a third option: the House of Peace. This 
realm included states that were not under Muslim rule but were 

13
nonetheless exempt from attack, provided that they paid tribute to 
the House of Islam.

Even as relations between the House of Islam and its neighbors 
were normalizing, lands conquered by the Arabs splintered into 
different polities, sometimes with different religious allegiances. 
Between 750 and 800, Islamic Spain, Morocco, and Tunisia each 
threw off the political control of the caliphs of Baghdad, and local 
Muslim dynasties made themselves independent. 
o Religiously, the main divide concerned the legitimacy of 
different lines of caliphs who were Muhammad’s successors. 
In contrast to Shi’a Muslims, Sunni Muslims did not (and still 
do not) accept the legitimacy of Ali (d. 661), Muhammad’s 
son-in-law.
o This disagreement resulted in the emergence of rival 
caliphates. The Abbasid caliphs of Baghdad were Sunni, but 
in the 10th century, a rival line of Fatimid Shi’a caliphs arose 
in North Africa. 

These internal rivalries created opportunities for the Byzantine 
Empire to recoup much of its lost territory. By 1025, its boundaries 
once again extended from the Danube to the Euphrates. They would 
also create opportunities for crusaders. 
The Byzantine Empire and the Latin West

The Arab expansion of the 7th and 8th centuries helped to widen 
the already growing divide between the Byzantine Empire and 
the Latin West. In the 7th and early 8th centuries, the papacy still 
acknowledged Byzantine imperial overlordship and expected 
Byzantine protection. But Arab success left the Byzantine Empire 
ﬁ ghting for its own survival and forced to focus on the defense of 
Constantinople. Popes felt neglected and increasingly saw little 
value in remaining within the Byzantine orbit.

Matters came to a head in the late 710s, when the Byzantine 
emperor faced another Arab assault on Constantinople. Thinking 

14
Lecture 2: Before the Crusades—Deep Background
that perhaps the Christian veneration of religious images had 
descended into idolatry and angered God to the point of allowing 
Islam to defeat Christianity, the emperor ordered a policy of 
iconoclasm, the destruction of religious icons.

For Byzantine emperors to make theological and liturgical 
determinations was nothing new, but on this occasion, the papacy 
refused to enforce the imperial policy of iconoclasm in churches 
under papal control. The papacy then followed this act of deﬁ ance 
with one of self-liberation: Around the middle of the 8th century, 
popes-elect stopped awaiting Byzantine permission to undergo 
consecration and take up their papal duties. 

This split was a political rather than a religious one, but the liberated 
papacy now needed new allies and protectors. It looked for those 
protectors to the north. In 754, a pope made the ﬁ rst-ever papal visit 
north of the Alps.
The Great Schism

The papacy’s 8th-century pivot toward continental Europe was an 
essential precondition to the crusades, but much transpired between 
that pivot and 1095 that also made the crusades possible or, at least, 
shaped how they played out. Three changes especially are relevant. 
o First, the question of whether medieval Europe would 
constitute a single empire, like the Byzantine Empire, or 
consist of multiple independent kingdoms was settled for the 
next 1,000 years, although perhaps not once and for all. 
o Second, the papacy achieved an unprecedented level of 
freedom from secular control and became an autonomous 
political power in its own right. 
o Third, 
the 
Byzantine 
Empire 
and 
the 
Latin 
West 
continued to drift apart as their political division became a 
religious division.

15

In 1095, Europe consisted of independent kingdoms. The Holy 
Roman Emperor ruled Germany, the kingdom of Burgundy in east-
central France, and northern Italy, but he had no authority over 
France, much less England or Spain.

As for papal autonomy, until the middle of the 11th century, the 
papacy remained substantially under the control of the Holy 
Roman Emperor. In 1059, however, the papacy managed to free 
itself from secular control of papal elections. It then became 
increasingly assertive. Popes began excommunicating kings and 
even emperors with some frequency. At the Council of Clermont 
in 1095, Pope Urban II, in addition to launching the First Crusade, 
excommunicated the king of France.

As for Byzantine–Western relations, by the middle of the 11th 
century, Christianity within the Byzantine Empire and Christianity 
within the medieval West differed on a number of issues, including 
the use of leavened versus unleavened bread at mass, the acceptance 
After 1059, the College of Cardinals elected popes, freeing the papacy from the 
control of the Holy Roman Emperor. 
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

16
Lecture 2: Before the Crusades—Deep Background
of married priests, and the question of the correct wording for the 
Nicaean Creed, the deﬁ nitive statement of Christian faith.
o In 1054, the pope sent representatives to Constantinople 
to sort out these differences. Negotiations turned into 
recrimination and accusation. On July 16, 1054, the papal 
representative entered the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople 
and excommunicated the patriarch of Constantinople and his 
chief supporters. The patriarch then summoned a synod and 
excommunicated the pope. 
o That these mutual excommunications would lead to a break 
between the Orthodox and Catholic churches that has lasted 
for almost 1,000 years is apparent only in hindsight. No one in 
1054 paid too much attention to the Great Schism. Nonetheless, 
in excommunicating each other, the pope and the patriarch of 
Constantinople had further separated the Byzantine East from 
the European West. 
Bachrach, Religion and the Conduct of War, c. 300–c. 1215. 
Bartlett, The Making of Europe.
Bonner, Jihad in Islamic History.
1. Christian polemicists of the Middle Ages juxtaposed the peaceful spread 
of their own religion during its ﬁ rst few centuries of existence with 
the Arab conquests of the 7th century. Does a recognition that the post-
Constantine spread of Christianity often followed in the wake of military 
conquest and that the process of Islamization took many centuries in 
lands conquered by the Arabs undermine that juxtaposition? 
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

17
2. At what point in history did contemporaries come to recognize that the 
schism between the Roman Catholic and Greek Orthodox churches 
was going to continue indeﬁ nitely? Should we expect to see the two 
churches reunify during the next 1,000 years?

18
Lecture 3: Before the Crusades—Immediate Circumstances
Before the Crusades—Immediate Circumstances
Lecture 3
I
n the last lecture, we examined the deep background to the crusades. 
Recently converted to Islam, the Arabs upended geopolitics from Spain 
to India through their conquests of the 7th and 8th centuries. By the 11th
century, though, the House of Islam, the Byzantine Empire, and the medieval 
West had reached a sort of rough territorial equilibrium. Between the middle 
of the 11th century and the First Crusade, a series of events complicated and 
destabilized relations among all three. Those events led the Byzantines to 
call on the West for assistance, which in turn, led Pope Urban II to launch the 
First Crusade. In this lecture, we will examine the immediate circumstances 
that led to Urban’s call. 
Turkish Ascendance

Since the early 9th century, modest numbers of Turks—central Asian 
nomads—had entered the lands of the House of Islam. Some came 
unwillingly as prisoners of war or purchased slaves; some came 
willingly as hired soldiers. The Abbasid caliphs organized Turks 
into regiments of personal bodyguards, known as Mamluks. Local 
Arab leaders, too, created Turkish military units. 

This modest migration gave way to a much broader migration, in 
which entire Turkish tribes moved into the lands of the Abbasid 
caliphate. Eventually, the Turks were in a position to take power 
from the Abbasid caliphs, and they did so. In 1055, the chief of the 
Seljuk Turks entered Baghdad and received the title of sultan from 
the caliph; the Seljuk sultan quickly assumed power in Baghdad, 
and the caliphs become religious ﬁ gureheads. 

Westward migration brought the Turks to the western boundaries 
of Abbasid territory and then beyond. Between 1070 and 1079, 
the Sunni Seljuks took Syria and most of Palestine from the Shi’a 
Fatimids. In 1071, the Turks defeated the Byzantine army at the 
Battle of Manzikert and took the Byzantine emperor prisoner. The 

19
victory opened up Asia Minor to Turkish raids; refugees streamed 
out of Asia Minor toward Constantinople.

Although military victories against the Fatimids and the Byzantines 
were impressive, the Turkish sultan of Baghdad hardly ruled over 
a uniﬁ ed empire. By the late 11th century, the sultan and caliph 
of Baghdad had little ability to control the military governors of 
various provinces and towns. The situation in the Fatimid caliphate 
was similar. The caliph in Cairo had effectively lost his power to 
the chief military ofﬁ cer, the vizier of Egypt, and viziers found it 
almost impossible to control local ofﬁ cials. 

In 1092, the Seljuk sultan of Baghdad died, just one month after 
his most important ofﬁ cial had also died. Then the Abbasid caliph, 
the Fatimid caliph, and the vizier of Egypt all happened to die in 
1094. The result of these deaths in quick succession was even more 
internal turmoil for the Turks.
Deterioration in the Byzantine Empire

From the Byzantine perspective, the situation was deteriorating. 
The Byzantines had been losing territory since the 1020s, and 
their losses accelerated in the 1070s. The location of the Byzantine 
Empire at the crossroads of Europe, Africa, and Asia left the empire 
with extensive frontiers that, when all pressured at once, were 
difﬁ cult to maintain. 

The Turks’ capture of the Byzantine emperor in 1071 triggered 
a series of coups and usurpations that ended when the Byzantine 
General Alexius Comnenus seized the throne in 1081; he would 
rule until his death in 1118. 
o Alexius, although a usurper, used standard Byzantine practice 
to deal with his empire’s collapsing frontiers: First, always 
make an alliance with whoever is located just behind the 
enemy, and second, hire anyone—regardless of religion or 
ethnicity—to ﬁ ght for the Byzantine cause. 

20
Lecture 3: Before the Crusades—Immediate Circumstances
o Alexius managed to defeat the Normans in 1085 and the 
Pechenegs, nomads from the steppe lands north of the Black 
Sea, in 1091.

By 1092, the situation along the Byzantine Empire’s western 
frontier had stabilized, but in Asia Minor, the situation was 
deteriorating once again. 
o In 1081, Alexius had made an alliance with the Turkish 
commander Suleiman. Alexius agreed to recognize Suleiman’s 
authority in Asia Minor on the condition that Suleiman not 
permit Turkish raids beyond a certain point and that he rule on 
behalf of the Byzantine Empire. Suleiman accepted the deal, 
acquired the important city of Nicaea, became sultan of the 
Turkish state of Rum, and proved a fairly loyal ally.
o But Suleiman died in battle in 1085, and those who succeeded 
him in Nicaea and Antioch did not think of themselves as owing 
anything to the Byzantine Empire. They began to expand at the 
expense of the Byzantines.

As the situation in Asia Minor worsened for the Byzantine Empire, 
Alexius I looked for outside assistance. He sent ambassadors to 
Pope Urban II in March 1095, who asked the pope to organize 
an expedition to ﬁ ght against the Turks. The Byzantines and the 
Westerners were fellow Christians, and they ought to stand together 
against the Muslim foe. Further, such cooperation might help to end 
the schism between Byzantine Christians and the papacy.
Urban’s Call 

On November 27, 1095, the ﬁ nal day of a council held at Clermont, 
Urban II closed out the council with a sermon. So many clerics and 
laymen attended that this speech had to be given outdoors. Urban II 
called upon his listeners to come to the aid of Christians in the East. 
o The response, likely choreographed in advance, was immediate. 
The crowd began to shout “Deus lo volt,” “God wills it”; 
people began to cut garments into the shape of crosses and to 
place these crosses on their shoulders in imitation of Christ. 

21
o Urban II appointed a bishop, Adhemar of Le Puy, as head of 
the crusade. 

Urban spent the next few months in France, preaching the crusade 
and writing letters to various places and groups urging them to take 
part in the expedition. In 1096, Urban II ﬁ xed August 15, 1096, 
as the departure date for the crusaders, who were to rendezvous 
at Constantinople. French bishops also sent clerics around the 
countryside, urging people to take up the cross, and freelancing 
eccentrics decide to preach the crusade, as well. 

One of the most enduring questions in history concerns when and 
how the conquest of Jerusalem became the First Crusade’s primary 
focus. It would appear that Alexius’s ambassadors mentioned the 
possibility of the expedition going to Jerusalem at the Council of 
Piacenza in March 1095, and surviving accounts all have Pope 
Most likely, it was neither Urban II nor Alexius I who established Jerusalem 
as the objective of the First Crusade but local preachers and the crusaders 
themselves.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

22
Lecture 3: Before the Crusades—Immediate Circumstances
Urban II speaking of Jerusalem in his sermon at the Council 
of Clermont. 
o However, the accounts of Urban II’s speech were all written 
after the First Crusade was over, and there is a possibility that 
chroniclers were reading the crusade’s outcome back into its 
origins when they reconstructed Urban’s speech. 
o Further, it’s doubtful that Alexius I deﬁ ned the crusade’s 
primary goal as the capture of Jerusalem. From the Byzantine 
point of view, Jerusalem had not been a Byzantine possession 
for more than 400 years, and it was of no strategic signiﬁ cance; 
getting back Asia Minor, especially Nicaea and Antioch, was 
far more pressing. 
o Although Urban II may have relished the thought of a Christian 
conquest of Jerusalem, the capture of Jerusalem would not do 
much to win Byzantine goodwill and heal the schism with the 
Byzantine Christians. If it was not Urban II who put Jerusalem 
at the heart of the First Crusade, then it might have been local 
preachers or, perhaps, the crusaders themselves.
Answering the Call

Regardless of who put Jerusalem at the center of the First Crusade, 
it seems clear that some crusaders answered the call for reasons 
that had little to do with the Great Schism, Byzantine territorial 
integrity, or anything else that concerned the crusade’s originators. 

The beneﬁ ts of pilgrimage to Jerusalem, holy war, and indulgences 
motivated crusaders, but there were other motives, too. Some 
crusaders went because they were required to follow their lords. 
Some went because family members were going. Some crusaders 
saw the expedition as a means of improving their personal fortunes. 
Among rank-and-ﬁ le knightly crusaders, spiritual considerations 
were probably paramount.

23

Going on crusade was an enormously expensive undertaking. 
Knights and higher-ranking nobles spent the time before their 
departure selling and mortgaging property and borrowing heavily. 
o Perhaps the chief appeal of the crusades to these knights and 
nobles was that the expedition offered them the opportunity to 
do what they had been trained to do: to wage war—and to do so 
in a manner that beneﬁ ted rather than threatened their salvation.
o For a century before the First Crusade, ecclesiastics had been 
struggling to pacify knights, whose belligerence was the source 
of the nobility’s wealth. Against armored men ﬁ ghting on 
horseback, peasants, townspeople, and ecclesiastics could do 
little other than to give the knights whatever they demanded. 
Sometimes, knightly demands took the form of pillage; 
sometimes, knights imposed rights of lordship over peasants 
and others. 

To limit knightly violence, ecclesiastics had introduced, around 
the year 1000, the Peace and Truce of God movement, which then 
spread across much of Europe. 
o The Peace of God exempted certain categories of people 
from the violence of knights. It forbade knights to rob clerics 
or to invade churches; it forbade nobles to seize peasants or 
their animals, to beat peasants or their animals, to burn down 
peasant houses, and so on. It offered similar protection to 
widows, virgins, and orphans. 
o The Truce of God limited the times when knights could ﬁ ght: 
they could not attack anyone from the beginning of Lent to 
the end of Easter or on Sundays. During the course of the 11th 
century, the scope of the truce was extended; knights were 
not to assault anyone around Pentecost or Christmas or from 
Friday to Sunday. 

For enforcement, bishops and abbots relied on oaths sworn by all 
knights of each diocese, and to give some force to these oaths, the 
bishops invoked the power of saints’ relics. The relics served as a 

24
Lecture 3: Before the Crusades—Immediate Circumstances
reminder that if knights refused to swear to the Peace and Truce of 
God, or if they did swear to it and then relapsed into bad behavior, 
the saints and holy individuals connected with the relics would 
punish them.

Despite the sometimes remarkable effect the presence of relics had 
on knights, the Peace and Truce of God was a ﬂ awed instrument. 
Over time, as the memories of the relics faded, knights tended 
to revert to violence. From the knights’ point of view, the Peace 
and Truce of God was a nattering list of dos and don’ts; it offered 
nothing positive to them. Crusading, on the other hand, offered 
knights an opportunity to ﬁ ght for a good cause—an opportunity 
many could not pass up.
Lock, The Routledge Companion to the Crusades. 
Riley-Smith, ed., The Oxford Illustrated History of the Crusades. 
1. Can you think of other historical instances wherein large-scale 
migrations by entire ethnic groups, such as the Turkish migration, 
constituted the ﬁ rst link in a chain of events that had massive geopolitical 
consequences? 
2. The First Crusade was launched in the hope that military cooperation 
would pave the way for the end of the religious schism between Rome 
and the Byzantines. Was that hope doomed from the outset?
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

25
The First Crusade and Conquest of Jerusalem
Lecture 4
I
n the last lecture, we saw how Turkish migration and expansion during 
the 11th century triggered the First Crusade. The Turks, who had 
converted to Sunni Islam by the time of the First Crusade, expanded 
at the expense of the Sunni Abbasids, the Shi’a Fatimid caliphate, and the 
Christian Byzantine Empire. Byzantine territorial losses in Asia Minor 
caused the emperor Alexius I to request military assistance from the pope, 
who responded with the First Crusade. To some extent, the First Crusade did 
what the pope and Byzantine emperor wanted it to do; in many ways, though, 
it did not. In this lecture, we will examine the course and consequences of 
the First Crusade.
The Popular Crusade

The response to Urban II’s call, repeated at a local level by 
authorized and unauthorized preachers, was enormous. Perhaps 
some 100,000 Europeans joined the First Crusade. But the First 
Crusade did not consist of a single expedition. Rather, it was a 
series of loosely coordinated waves that left Europe over the space 
of several years. 

The great majority of those who went on the First Crusade were not 
knights or warriors. They were the populous: peasants and some 
craftsmen, often led by minor nobles and by the popular preacher 
and ascetic Peter the Hermit. Historians refer to these opening 
waves as the People’s or Popular Crusade. 

Urban II’s call for a military expedition to the East and to Jerusalem 
had triggered millenarian and apocalyptic expectations. 
o In the folklore of medieval Europe, various apocalyptic 
prophecies circulated. One such prophecy stated that before the 
coming of the Antichrist and the end of the world, a Christian 
king, called the Emperor of the Last Days, would rule in the 
East. The Antichrist would kill the Emperor of the Last Days, 

26
Lecture 4: The First Crusade and Conquest of Jerusalem
and that, in turn, would lead to the Second Coming of Jesus, 
who would kill the Antichrist before the Last Judgment. 
o Islamic rule in Jerusalem and the East seemed to preclude 
the apocalypse. But the calling of the First Crusade and the 
expectation 
that 
it 
would 
take 
back 
Jerusalem suggested 
that 
perhaps 
the 
time had come for 
the 
emergence 
of 
the Emperor of the 
Last Days. 
o According to some 
apocalyptic scenarios, 
the 
death 
of 
the 
Antichrist 
would 
usher in a 1,000-year 
period when the good 
and the just enjoyed 
the same happiness 
and 
freedom 
from 
hunger, labor, illness, 
and death that Adam 
and Eve had enjoyed in paradise. In this scenario, the conquest of 
Jerusalem would lead to a world in which the populous enjoyed 
everything that it did not have and, absent the apocalypse, would 
never have.

Another common apocalyptic expectation was that before the 
Second Coming of Jesus, all unbelievers would convert to 
Christianity. That belief had consequences for Europe’s Jews. 
If Jews were allowed to persist in Judaism, then the conquest of 
Jerusalem would be in vain. Jewish existence would delay the 
coming of the millennium—the 1,000 years of paradise. 
The emotional pull of Jerusalem, 
the appeal of pilgrimage, and the 
indulgence attracted both the populous 
and knights and higher-ranking nobles 
to embark on the First Crusade.
© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock.

27
o For this reason, some of the bands included in the First Crusade 
attacked Jewish communities before departing Europe, 
demanding that Jews convert or die at the crusaders’ hands.
o Their work done, these bands of popular crusaders then 
followed others that had already set out on the long overland 
march to Constantinople and Jerusalem.
The Trek to Constantinople

The ﬁ rst bands of the Popular Crusade departed the Rhine River 
Valley in the middle of April 1096, but Urban II had set August 1096 
as the departure date. The ﬁ rst band passed through the kingdom 
of Hungary mostly without incident; it arrived at Belgrade, on the 
Byzantine-Hungarian frontier, in late May or early June 1096. 

The Byzantines were not expecting anyone so early; they were 
not expecting the crusaders to travel overland through Belgrade; 
and they were not expecting several thousand individuals of, at 
best, modest economic means. Supplies ran short. The crusaders 
began to forage—or to pillage—Hungarian and Byzantine 
territory. Skirmishes broke out, pitting the crusaders against 
Byzantine border guards and local peasants and townspeople. 
The Byzantines restored order by assigning guards to escort the 
crusaders to Constantinople. 

The ﬁ rst band reached Constantinople relatively intact, but 
subsequent bands, traveling in the summer of 1096, were not so 
lucky. As the various groups composing the Popular Crusade traveled 
across Hungarian and Byzantine territory, supplies became harder to 
come by, and local residents became increasingly resentful. Fighting 
between crusaders, on the one hand, and Hungarians and Byzantines, 
on the other hand, became more common and more serious. 

When the last band of the Popular Crusade reached the frontier 
between Germany and Hungary and requested permission to enter, 
the Magyar king denied it. When the crusaders tried to force their 
way across the border, Hungarian troops destroyed them. 

28
Lecture 4: The First Crusade and Conquest of Jerusalem

The surviving members of the Popular Crusade mustered at 
Constantinople late in the summer of 1096. They crossed the 
Bosphorus Strait, entered Asia Minor, and raided Turkish territory. 
The Turks annihilated them in October 1096, with only a few 
survivors scrambling back to Constantinople. 

The result of the Popular Crusade was to sow mistrust between 
crusaders and Byzantines. Further, it showed that crusades, once 
summoned, were difﬁ cult to control. Crusaders devised and followed 
agendas different from those who had called them into being.
The Barons’ Crusade

In December 1096, two months after the end of the Popular 
Crusade, another band of crusaders arrived at Constantinople. This 
band was more in keeping with what Alexius I Comnenus and 
Urban II had expected. 

This group was led by Hugh of Vermandois, the brother of the king 
of France. Alexius asked Hugh to swear an oath promising to return 
to the Byzantine emperor any formerly Byzantine territory that the 
crusaders might capture. Alexius then transported the crusaders to 
the sliver of territory that the Byzantines still held on the other side 
of the Bosphorus. Likely, Alexius moved Hugh there to keep him 
and his followers separate from the other crusaders as they arrived, 
lest the crusaders join forces and oppose him. 

Late in 1096 and early in 1097, other bands of crusaders arrived 
at Constantinople, each headed by nobles who were often of some 
standing. Alexius greeted each band and leader as he had greeted 
Hugh of Vermandois. He gave them gifts but also asked that each 
leader swear an oath to return to the Byzantines any formerly 
Byzantine territory they captured. Some leaders objected to the 
oath, but Alexius cut off their food supplies and starved them 
into agreement.

Finally, at the end of April 1097, this Barons’ Crusade marched 
toward the Turkish frontier. Survivors of the Popular Crusade 

29
accompanied it, as did Byzantine troops. Emperor Alexius followed 
behind the crusaders, organizing supplies and logistics.
The Siege of Antioch

The crusaders reached Nicaea and besieged it in May 1097; it fell 
the next month, after Alexius convinced the Muslim defenders to 
surrender to him rather than the crusaders. The crusaders were 
angered by the Byzantine deception, and the distrust between the 
two groups deepened, but they had not yet reached the breaking 
point, and crusader optimism remained high.

From June through October 1097, the crusaders fought their way 
across Asia Minor, concerned not so much with taking and holding 
formerly Byzantine territory as with reaching Antioch, a large city 
at the northeastern corner of the Mediterranean. 

In October, the crusaders, still accompanied by Byzantine troops 
and with Alexius continuing to shadow them from the rear, 
besieged Antioch, but the siege dragged on for many months. 
Some crusaders deserted and returned to Europe. In February 
1098, the Byzantine general Tatikios and his troops abandoned 
the siege. 

The Norman crusader Bohemond, a former foe of Alexius I, 
exploited the situation, letting it be known that he, too, was 
contemplating leaving the siege unless the crusaders agreed 
to allow him to keep Antioch after it fell. The crusaders’ oath to 
Alexius no longer mattered because the Byzantines, through the 
ﬂ ight of Tatikios, had broken faith with the crusaders.

Not all of Bohemond’s fellow crusaders were persuaded by his 
argument, but by May 1098, their situation was desperate. A 
relieving army was on the way to break the siege. The crusaders 
had to get inside Antioch’s protective walls, and Bohemond found a 
way to do so: He made contact with a defender who agreed to allow 
the crusaders into Antioch. 

30
Lecture 4: The First Crusade and Conquest of Jerusalem

Before allowing his fellow crusaders inside the city walls, 
Bohemond reiterated his demand to keep Antioch. Except for 
Raymond of Saint-Gilles, the count of Toulouse, the last holdouts 
among the crusaders relented, although they made Bohemond 
promise that he would return Antioch to the Byzantine emperor if 
the emperor came in person to ask for it. 

On June 3, 1098, Bohemond and the crusaders entered the city, 
massacred most of those who were still alive inside, and within a 
few days, found themselves besieged by the relieving army. The 
crusaders were now trapped in a city that had just experienced an 
eight-month siege at their own hands. Hope for a Byzantine rescue 
quickly dissipated; Alexius later claimed that deserting crusaders 
told him that the crusade had already been destroyed, and there was 
no one left to rescue.

While besieged and starving in Antioch, many crusaders’ spirits 
were lifted by an unusual incident: the alleged discovery of the 
Holy Lance, used to pierce Jesus’s side during the Cruciﬁ xion. 
Bolstered by this ﬁ nd, on June 28, 1098, the crusaders sallied 
forth from Antioch and attacked the besieging army, which broke 
ranks and ﬂ ed.
The Capture of Jerusalem

After their harrowing experience, the crusaders remained in 
Antioch until January 1099. During that time, they invited Alexius 
I to come and take possession of the city, but Alexius didn’t reply 
until April 1099, by which time most of the crusaders were on 
their way to Jerusalem and Bohemond’s possession of Antioch 
was secure. 

By January 1099, it seemed doubtful that the crusade would ever 
resume its march southward toward Jerusalem. Finally, their numbers 
shrunk, with no Byzantine help, and without Bohemond, the remaining 
crusaders left Antioch and made a beeline for Jerusalem. 

31

On June 7, 1099, the crusaders arrived within sight of Jerusalem, 
whose governor had expelled its Christian inhabitants to protect 
against treachery and to stretch its food supplies. 
o As they besieged the city, the crusaders learned that a Fatimid 
army had been dispatched to save Jerusalem. 
o On July 15, 1099, before that army reached Jerusalem, the 
crusaders breached its walls and took the city, massacring 
perhaps some 3,000 of its inhabitants. 

The First Crusade was, in a sense, a success—the crusaders had 
captured Nicaea, Antioch, and Jerusalem—but it was a messy 
success. The Popular Crusade began with massacres of Jews 
in Germany and ended in defeat. And the First Crusade did not 
improve Byzantine-Western relations; if anything, it added new 
grievances that drove the two groups further apart.
Bull, Knightly Piety and the Lay Response to the First Crusade. 
Chazan, European Jewry and the First Crusade. 
France, Victory in the East. 
Frankopan, The First Crusade. 
Kedar, “The Massacre of 15 July 1099 in the Historiography of the 
Crusades.” 
Rubenstein, Armies of Heaven. 
———, “Crusaders and Cannibals.”
Suggested Reading

32
Lecture 4: The First Crusade and Conquest of Jerusalem
1. If Pope Urban II had lived long enough to hear of the fall of Jerusalem 
and the end of the First Crusade, what might his retrospective evaluation 
of the First Crusade have been?
2. Given that the numbering system used for crusades (First, Second, 
Third, and so on) is misleading and almost entirely capricious, would 
historians be better off abandoning it, or would doing so create more 
problems than it would solve?
Questions to Consider

33
The Rise of the Templars
Lecture 5
I
n our last lecture, we saw how the First Crusade culminated in the 
crusader conquest of Jerusalem in July 1099. It was, from the crusader 
point of view, a notable achievement. However, the First Crusade also 
generated some new problems. Europeans called the lands that the First 
Crusade conquered Outremer, “the land beyond the sea.” Now the former 
crusaders had to secure these lands, defend them, and hold on to Jerusalem, 
which was no easy matter. Indeed, the difﬁ culty of policing and defending 
the Crusader States gave rise to one of the great institutional innovations to 
arise from the First Crusade and its aftermath: the foundation of the Order of 
the Temple, also known as the Templars.
Emergence of the Templars

The Templar Order arose from the disordered and dangerous 
conditions within the Crusader States following the First Crusade. 
o Pilgrims traveling to the Holy Land found that the First 
Crusade and the establishment of the Crusader States had not 
made pilgrimage appreciably easier than it had been before the 
First Crusade. Crusader control of rural areas through which 
pilgrims passed was shaky. 
o The borders of the kingdom of Jerusalem, which contained 
the most important pilgrimage destinations, were porous, and 
the city itself was close to the eastern edge of the kingdom’s 
borders. It was easy for raiders and brigands to come across 
the frontier, attack parties of pilgrims, and escape before any 
response could be made.
o In 1106 and 1107, a Russian abbot named Daniel made a 
pilgrimage to the Holy Land. His largish party of pilgrims did 
not encounter any difﬁ culties, but Daniel recognized that he was 
one of the lucky ones, and he gave a grim account of what befell 
other pilgrims. 

34
Lecture 5: The Rise of the Templars

In 1119, a small group of knights in Jerusalem organized themselves 
for the accompaniment and protection of pilgrims. Their leader was 
a knight named Hugh. He and his fellow knights formed the nucleus 
of what would become the Templars. 

The king of Jerusalem welcomed the assistance of these knights 
and allowed Hugh and his followers to establish their headquarters 
at the Al-Aqsa Mosque, located on the Temple Mount; hence, they 
came to be called the Order of the Temple and their members, 
the Templars. 

Although the Templars originated as an “escort service,” their role 
soon grew beyond traveling with and defending Christian pilgrims 
in the Crusader States. Already in the 1130s, the Templars were 
providing general military service. At some point, the oath the 
Templars took on joining the order came to include a vow in which 
the Templar swore to protect the kingdom of Jerusalem and, if 
possible, to conquer more land for it. 
Growth of the Order

For about the ﬁ rst decade of its existence, the Templar Order was 
not a recognized order at all but more of a local confraternity of 
knights. It had difﬁ culty ﬁ nding recruits and support beyond that 
which the king of Jerusalem provided. 

The Templars acquired an important and inﬂ uential champion in 
the monk Bernard of Clairvaux, who extolled the virtues of the 
Templars in his 1128 treatise In Praise of the New Knighthood. 

Thanks in part to Bernard’s intervention on their behalf, the 
Templars received formal papal approval as a new religious order at 
the Council of Troyes in 1129. That council also approved the ﬁ rst 
version of the Rule of the Templars. 

A series of papal bulls between 1139 and 1145 further deﬁ ned the 
Templars and gave them certain privileges. These bulls named 
the Templars as defenders of Catholic Christianity against its 

35
enemies and remitted the sins of all Templars as recompense for 
their service. 

These papal bulls also gave the Templars a great deal of autonomy. 
The head of the Templars, the Grand Master, answered only to the 
pope, not to any other ecclesiastical authority or to any secular 
authority. To preserve the order’s independence, Templars were 
forbidden to be vassals of any lord other than the pope.

The Templars, and military orders more generally, took the First 
Crusade’s fusion of warfare and piety one step further by creating 
a group of people who were both monks and knights. Like knights, 
Templars traveled and fought; like monks, they took vows, lived 
communally, and followed a written rule. 

The Templars belonged both to medieval Europe’s monkish 
spiritual elite and to its knightly social and military elite. A sign of 
the combination’s popularity is the fact that during the 12th and 13th 
centuries, other military orders emerged, including the Knights of 
Saint Lazarus and the Hospitallers. 
Financial Resources of the Military Orders

The number of Templar and Hospitaller knights who served in the 
Crusader States was never very large (probably 600 Templars in 
Outremer), but the military orders were more important than their 
numbers would suggest. The Templars and Hospitallers drew on 
the resources of the medieval West in a way that the rulers of the 
Crusader States could not. 
o Because the kings of Jerusalem did not have extensive 
landholdings in Europe, the best they could do was to plead for 
assistance when they needed it. 
o In contrast, the Templars and Hospitallers amassed a large 
network of properties and religious houses in Europe, whose 
revenues and manpower could be used to sustain their activities 
in the East. 

36
Lecture 5: The Rise of the Templars

The Templars, with their many widely scattered houses, also became 
an important provider of ﬁ nancial services in medieval Europe. 
People deposited money and valuables with the Templars, which 
they could withdraw later from a Templar house located elsewhere. 
The Templars increased 
the ﬁ nancial resources at 
their disposal by using 
their eastern connections to 
acquire relics, which they 
then put on tour in the West 
as part of fund drives. 

The 
Templars’ 
and 
Hospitallers’ 
ﬁ nancial 
resources were especially 
important because nobles 
who settled in the Crusader 
States frequently could not 
make a go of it. Either their 
lineages died out through 
natural causes or warfare, 
or they simply went broke, 
unable to maintain their 
castles and lordships. The 
kings of Jerusalem and the 
heads of the Crusader States were often in no position ﬁ nancially to 
take over failing castles and lordships, but the military orders could 
and did take them over and kept them functioning. 
Military Orders in the Field

The military orders also provided the Crusader States with something 
resembling a standing army that could be mobilized quickly.
o Assembling an army of vassals through a feudal levy was 
always difﬁ cult. One problem with granting landed ﬁ efs to 
vassals in return for military service was that the remuneration 
was entirely front-loaded while the work was back-loaded. 
To attract patrons and donations, 
the Templars built some of the most 
impressive churches in the medieval 
West.
© Hemera/Thinkstock.

37
Once the vassal had use of the ﬁ ef, he had little incentive to 
serve well. 
o Vassals had a habit of answering calls for service grudgingly, 
showing up late and bringing less equipment and fewer 
knights than they should have. Sometimes, vassals never 
showed up at all.
o Mustering 
a 
contingent 
of 
monk-knights 
who 
lived 
communally, whose rule demanded and inculcated obedience, 
and who did not hold ﬁ efs was far easier than mustering a 
feudal levy.

Further, the Templars and Hospitallers, as monk-knights stationed 
more or less permanently in the East, were far more disciplined in 
the ﬁ eld and more experienced in ﬁ ghting Arabs and Turks than 
were armies of newly arrived crusaders.
o This experience came at a high cost. In the 1130s, when the 
Templars were still relatively new, all three engagements in 
which they are known to have been involved resulted in heavy 
Templar losses. 
o But the Templars learned from these experiences and put their 
knowledge into writing, updating the Templar Rule for the 
beneﬁ t of new members. As a result, the Templar Rule became 
an operational military manual, as well as a religious rule. It 
established procedures for marching, foraging outside of camp, 
responding to alarms, and so on.

Both crusaders and their enemies came to appreciate the Templars’ 
importance. For example, during the Second Crusade, when French 
crusaders botched a march through a mountain pass and suffered 
heavy losses, the French king realized that he was out of his 
element and put the Templars in charge of the rest of the march. 
Saladin, the Kurdish sultan of Egypt, made it his policy to execute 
all captured Templars rather than ransoming them because they 
were too dangerous to be released.

38
Lecture 5: The Rise of the Templars
Problems with the Military Orders

As crucial as the military orders were to the defense of the 
Crusader States, they also posed problems. First, the Templars 
and the Hospitallers were rivals. They vied for the same pool of 
recruits and donors and invariably came down on opposite sides 
of any issue. In 1168, for example, when the king of Jerusalem 
decided to invade Egypt, the Hospitallers agreed to take part, but 
the Templars simply refused. 

The independence of the Templars and Hospitallers was also 
an issue. Local bishops and clergy, in the Crusader States and 
in Europe, resented the fact that the Templars and Hospitallers 
had their own churches, received donations, and performed fee-
generating services, such as burials, that siphoned off money that 
might have gone to parish clergy and bishops. 

Even more seriously, kings of Jerusalem could not command 
the Templars or the Hospitallers; each military order was free to 
pursue its own policies, including foreign and military policy, 
and each did so. At times, the military orders made truces with 
Muslims even as crusades were being launched; at other times, 
they refused to observe truces made by kings of Jerusalem or 
leaders of the crusades, which made coordinating the defense of 
Jerusalem difﬁ cult. 
o Conﬂ icts between kings of Jerusalem and the Templars 
sometimes took a violent turn. In 1166, a Templar garrison 
surrendered a fortress to Muslims even though the king of 
Jerusalem was on his way to provide relief; the king hanged 12 
of the Templars who surrendered. 
o In 1173, for reasons that still are not clear, some Templars 
murdered a Muslim envoy traveling to Jerusalem under a royal 
promise of safe conduct. The king, furious, ordered the Templars 
to hand over the culprits for punishment. When the Grand 
Master of the Templars refused, a standoff ensued, until the king 
managed to seize the culprits himself and imprison them. 

39
o Yet even the king of Jerusalem who had hanged and punished 
Templars also entrusted them with the defense of castles, 
recognizing that he could not do without them.

The Templars and other military orders introduced a new element 
into medieval religious life and proved important to the defense 
of the Crusader States. At the same time, the rivalry between the 
Templars and Hospitallers was a problem for the Crusader States, 
as was each order’s independence. And as we will see, the Crusader 
States already had enough problems. 
Barber, The New Knighthood.
Forey, The Military Orders from the Twelfth to the Early Fourteenth 
Centuries. 
Seward, The Monks of War.
1. Was the creation of the Templars and other military orders a good 
or a bad idea and why? How would one deﬁ ne “good” or “bad” in 
this context?
2. What accounts for the continued modern fascination with the Templars? 
How has fascination with the Templars ﬁ gured into American history, 
especially the history of the American South?
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

40
Lecture 6: Defending the Crusader States, 1099–1144
Defending the Crusader States, 1099–1144
Lecture 6
I
n this lecture, we will examine the early history of the four Crusader 
States that emerged from the First Crusade. An understanding of the 
Crusader States is essential to the history of the crusades because, after 
the First Crusade, every eastern crusade was launched, directly or indirectly, 
in response to losses suffered by the Crusader States. Indeed, if the Crusader 
States had been strong enough to stand on their own, there might not have 
been any eastern crusades beyond the First. By the 1140s, though, the 
precariousness of the Crusader States became evident. In 1144, one of the 
four Crusader States would be overrun. That, in turn, would lead to the 
launching of the Second Crusade.
Emergence of the Crusader States

After the crusaders captured Jerusalem in July 1099 and repulsed 
a counterattack by an Egyptian Fatimid army south of Jerusalem, 
most crusaders went back to Europe. As a result, the Crusader 
States immediately faced a severe shortage of manpower. Those 
who remained—called Franks by contemporary Arabs—numbered 
far less than the indigenous population and tended to live in the 
cities of Jerusalem, Acre, and Tyre.

The First Crusade gave rise to four Crusader States: the principality 
of Antioch, the kingdom of Jerusalem, and the counties of 
Edessa and Tripoli. 

The county of Edessa, founded by Baldwin of Boulogne in 
March 1098, was the northernmost of the four Crusader States. 
Geographically, it differed from the other three in that it extended 
hundreds of miles inland, across the Euphrates and Tigris rivers. 
The other three Crusader States hugged the coastline of the 
eastern Mediterranean. 

41

The county of Tripoli, wedged between the principality of Antioch 
to its north and the kingdom of Jerusalem to its south, was the 
creation of Raymond of Saint-Gilles after he passed up rulership of 
the kingdom of Jerusalem. 

Coordinating the defensive activities of these four states was never 
easy. Sometimes, the king of Jerusalem was the feudal lord of the 
rulers of the other three states, and sometimes, he was not; in any 
event, much depended on personalities and calculations of personal 
interest. Coordinating defensive activities within each state, 
particularly when substantial ﬁ efs were involved, was sometimes 
just as difﬁ cult.

In the two decades following the conquest of Jerusalem, the Franks 
captured various coastal ports bypassed on the march to Jerusalem. 
In this, they were assisted by Italian naval forces from Genoa, Pisa, 
and Venice. Italian city-states played a more pronounced role in 
conquests after the First Crusade when they saw that the conquests 
opened up new commercial opportunities. 
o In return for their assistance, Genoa, Pisa, and Venice demanded 
and received their own waterfront quarters in conquered cities, 
within which they enjoyed great autonomy. 
o The Italian merchant ﬂ eets connected the Crusader States 
to Europe. Although the crusaders had marched through the 
Seljuk sultanate of Rum, most of Asia Minor remained under 
Turkish control. The Crusader States had no secure land route 
to Constantinople.

For about a decade after the conquest of Jerusalem, Frankish 
policy toward defeated populations was the same as it had been 
during the crusade itself: massacre and annihilation. For towns that 
surrendered, all Muslim inhabitants had to convert or leave. That 
policy changed beginning with the Frankish conquest of Sidon in 
1110. By then, the Franks were more concerned with keeping the 
local population in place than with eliminating it. 

42
Lecture 6: Defending the Crusader States, 1099–1144

Another adjustment the Franks made to their new circumstances 
involved a willingness to ally with local Muslim rulers. 
o The perilous situation of the Crusader States made such 
alliances appealing. Local Arab and Turkish governors seeking 
a counterweight to the Seljuk sultan of Baghdad found these 
alliances useful, as well. 
o Allying with local Muslim rulers was something of a mixed 
blessing for the Franks, though, because these alliances 
sometimes brought Crusader States into conﬂ ict with one 
another. In 1108, Edessa and Antioch brieﬂ y went to war 
because each had allied with a different Muslim ruler, and their 
respective Muslim allies had gone to war. 
Reinforcing the Crusader States

The alliances with Muslim rulers were all the more important 
because the ﬁ rst European attempts to reinforce the Crusader States 
met with disaster. 

In 1100, enthused at the news of Jerusalem’s conquest, more 
crusaders set out for the East, many of them Normans from Italy. 
Poorly organized, the crusaders traveled to Constantinople. In what 
was by now a familiar scene, they pillaged the outskirts of the city 
and fought against the troops of the Byzantine emperor, who cut off 
their food supplies in order to subdue them. 

Raymond of Saint-Gilles, who happened to be in Constantinople at 
the moment, helped to quell the disturbances and offered to lead the 
Norman crusaders, joined by recent French and German arrivals, 
on a march to Jerusalem that might open a permanent land route 
between the Crusader States and Constantinople.
o The Norman crusaders would not hear of it. Their fellow 
Norman, Bohemond, had been captured by Muslims in 1100, 
and they insisted that they must ﬁ nd and free him. Raymond 
of Saint-Gilles agreed to lead the crusaders into Asia Minor on 
their quest. 

43
o These crusaders managed to capture Ankara in 1101 and 
handed it over to the Byzantines. After that, they followed an 
erratic path across Asia Minor, ran out of supplies, and found 
themselves cut to pieces by Turkish attacks. 
o A few survivors, including Raymond of Saint-Gilles, managed 
to make it to the Black Sea, where the Byzantines rescued 
them, but most did not escape, and two other bands of crusaders 
that followed in 1101 met similar fates. The defeat of these 
crusaders boosted Muslim morale. 
Crusade against the Byzantine Empire

In 1103, Bohemond, prince of Antioch, was released from captivity. 
In 1104, he appointed his nephew Tancred as regent and returned 
to Europe, arriving in Italy in January 1105. There, Bohemond 
informed the pope that another crusade was needed; the ultimate 
goal would be Jerusalem, but along the way, the crusade should 
conquer the Byzantine Empire. 

Pope Paschal II formally launched this crusade at the Council of 
Poitiers in 1106, although historians do not give this crusade, or 
embarrassing crusades more generally, a number. 

In a letter he wrote to Paschal II just before the crusade set out, 
Bohemond mentioned that it would end the Great Schism between 
the Eastern and Western churches. Those whom Bohemond 
recruited, though, seem to have thought that the crusade was 
focused on Jerusalem.

Bohemond’s crusade against the Byzantine Empire went badly 
for him. He returned to the Balkans, where he had fought the 
Byzantines in the 1080s, but Byzantine troops encircled his 
own. Bohemond surrendered in 1108 and recognized Byzantine 
overlordship of Antioch. Humiliated, he never returned to Antioch 
and died in Italy in 1111. 

44
Lecture 6: Defending the Crusader States, 1099–1144

Tancred, serving as regent in Antioch, refused to accept the terms 
to which Bohemond had agreed. The problem of Antioch remained 
a sticking point between the Byzantines and the Franks for several 
more decades. It would not be until the 1130s and 1140s that the 
Byzantines made good on their claims to Antioch. 
Muslim Response to the First Crusade

All four Crusader States faced the threat of an Islamic counterattack, 
but that threat developed more slowly than we might expect. 
Medieval Western chroniclers hailed the conquest of Jerusalem as 
an event of world-historical signiﬁ cance, but Muslim chroniclers 
were rather indifferent to it, and many believed that it was the 
Byzantines who had captured Jerusalem. 
o One exception to Muslim indifference and misunderstanding can 
be found in the writing of a Sunni religious scholar in Damascus, 
‘Ali ibn Tahir al-Sulami. In 1105, in his Kitab al-Jihad, al-Sulami 
argued that the crusaders were part of a Christian jihad coming 
from the West that had aimed at the conquest of Jerusalem and at 
helping Eastern Christians in general. 
o Al-Sulami claimed that the success of this Western jihad 
revealed the moral and political decay of Islam, but he argued 
that with cooperation among Muslims, the future triumph of 
Islam over Christianity was guaranteed. 
o In Aleppo, Damascus, and Baghdad, refugees from conquered 
regions also agitated for the launching of a jihad.

But organizing a concerted effort against the Franks proved to 
be difﬁ cult. In the early 1110s, the Seljuk sultan of Baghdad 
entrusted the organization of a counterattack to the emir of Mosul, 
named Mawdud, but Mawdud was refused entry to Aleppo and 
was assassinated in Damascus. Later, the allied Muslim forces of 
Damascus and Aleppo, together with the Christian forces of the 
kingdom of Jerusalem, Edessa, and Antioch, defeated the Seljuk 
sultan’s army at the Battle of Tel-Danith in 1115.

45

Alliances sometimes shifted quickly. In 1119, Damascus and 
Aleppo fought against the forces of Christian Antioch, their former 
ally, at the Battle of the Field of Blood. 

More successful in defeating the Franks and exploiting victory was 
Imad ad-Din Zengi. Zengi ﬁ rst made a name for himself in 1126 
when the Abbasid caliph tried to liberate himself from the control 
of the sultan of Baghdad. Zengi led the sultan’s forces to victory 
against the caliph’s, but his tactfulness in victory made him a 
favorite of both the caliph and the sultan. 
o In 1127, the sultan and the caliph agreed to make Zengi the 
governor of Mosul. From 1127 to 1130, through force and the 
threat of force, Zengi brought northern Syria and such towns as 
Aleppo, Homs, and Shayzar under his control. 
o But in the 1130s, Zengi became embroiled in a civil war in 
Baghdad and then made several unsuccessful attempts to 
capture Damascus, which remained allied with the kingdom 
of Jerusalem.
o In 1143, both the Byzantine emperor and the king of Jerusalem 
died, and with the empire and kingdom bogged down in issues 
of succession, Zengi acted. He attacked a fellow Muslim, the 
ruler of Diyarbekir, who had recently made an alliance with the 
count of Edessa. 
o The count honored that alliance and led his army out of 
Edessa and down the Euphrates River. Zengi then moved on 
Edessa instead, besieging it at the end of November 1144. On 
Christmas Eve 1144, Zengi breached the walls of Edessa; his 
soldiers massacred the Western men and enslaved the Western 
women and children still inside. Edessa was, for all intents and 
purposes, lost to the crusaders.
o The caliph of Baghdad heaped honorary titles on Zengi, but 
Zengi did not follow up the conquest of Edessa with any 
signiﬁ cant action against other Crusader States, and he was 

46
Lecture 6: Defending the Crusader States, 1099–1144
murdered in September 1146. Still, the loss of Edessa sent 
shockwaves through the medieval West and touched off fears 
that Jerusalem might be next. 
Dajani-Shakeel, “A Reassessment of Some Medieval and Modern 
Assessments of the Counter-Crusade.” 
Edbury and Rowe, William of Tyre. 
Marshall, Warfare in the Latin East, 1192–1291.
1. Is it surprising that, following the First Crusade, crusaders quickly 
became embroiled in local politics, alliances, and wars among Muslim 
rulers?
2. The ﬁ rst Crusader State fell in the 1140s; the last, in the 1290s. Which is 
more surprising: the longevity of these states, or the fact that they could 
not last? If their longevity, does that tell us more about the Crusader 
States themselves or about their neighbors?
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

47
The Second Crusade—False Steps and Failure
Lecture 7
A
t the end of our last lecture, we saw that Zengi had captured Edessa 
in December 1144, effectively reducing the number of Crusader 
States from four to three. The result of the loss of Edessa was the 
launching of the Second Crusade. Like the First Crusade, the Second was 
launched in response to geopolitical developments in the Near East, and in 
several respects, it self-consciously modeled itself on the First Crusade. In 
many other respects, however, the Second Crusade differed from the First, 
perhaps most importantly in that it ended in failure. In this lecture, we will 
examine how and why the Second Crusade went so awry.
Launching the Second Crusade

On December 1, 1145, Pope Eugenius III issued a bull calling 
on French nobles and the French king to take up the cross. On 
Christmas Day, King Louis VII of France announced his intention to 
go on crusade. Other French nobles, however, were unenthusiastic 
at the prospect. Further, it was not clear whether Louis VII was 
taking up the cross in response to the pope’s call or trying to launch 
his own crusade. 

The man who saved the Second Crusade from collapsing before it 
ever got going was Bernard of Clairvaux, who made the cause of 
the Second Crusade his own. 
o Bernard interceded in order to make certain that proper 
procedure was followed. Pope Eugenius issued a slightly 
modiﬁ ed version of his crusading bull on March 1, 1146, and 
at the end of that month, Louis VII took up the cross, this time 
unambiguously in response to the pope’s call. Bernard also 
used his considerable oratorical powers to persuade French 
nobles to join Louis VII. 
o Bernard’s enthusiasm for the Second Crusade seems to have 
caused him to go beyond Eugenius’s wishes and plans. He later 

48
Lecture 7: The Second Crusade—False Steps and Failure
threw himself into preaching the crusade and even traveled to 
Germany to recruit the king and Holy Roman Emperor. 

The Second Crusade beneﬁ ted from knowledge of what had 
happened during the First. Jews arranged for protection from local 
authorities, and both the French and German kings notiﬁ ed the king 
of Hungary and the Byzantine emperor that crusaders would be 
passing through their territories so that provisions could be made 
available. The Germans and French also staggered their departures 
to enable stores to be replenished after one group passed through 
each region.
Early Difﬁ culties

Despite this planning, the Second Crusade encountered some of 
the same problems as the First Crusade: Supplies ran short, and 
relations with the Byzantines deteriorated. 

The Byzantine emperor at the moment, Manuel, had not asked for 
the crusade, or any expedition, to be sent east, much less for the 
crusaders to rendezvous at Constantinople. When supplies ran short 
during the march to Constantinople, crusaders pillaged, fought 
against Byzantine troops, and were murdered by enraged locals. 
o Odo of Deuil, a French chronicler of the Second Crusade, 
expressed shock at Byzantine clergy who held puriﬁ cation 
ceremonies for altars where Western clerics had celebrated 
mass and even rebaptized crusaders who married Byzantine 
women. These practices suggested to Odo that the Byzantines 
ought not to be considered Christians at all.
o Odo was not the only crusader thinking that way. Before the 
crusaders reached Constantinople, they learned that Emperor 
Manuel had prepared for their arrival by making a truce with 
the Seljuk sultan of Rum, the most important Muslim ruler 
in Asia Minor. Manuel did not want to have to deal with the 
crusaders and the Turks at the same time, but the crusaders 
took the truce as an act of betrayal. 

49
o In a replay of the First Crusade, the Byzantine emperor 
demanded that the crusade’s leaders swear oaths to him and 
backed up these demands by cutting off food supplies. 
o Angered by their treatment by the Byzantines, the French 
crusaders contemplated an attack on Constantinople itself. 
Some members of the crusade argued that such an attack would 
be justiﬁ ed under the circumstances. Others argued that they 
could not attack a Christian city, and for the moment, this side 
won out.

Although the German crusaders reached Constantinople in 
September 1147 and the French about a month later, the two groups 
failed to coordinate. The Germans left Constantinople and began to 
march through Turkish Asia Minor without awaiting the arrival of 
the French; they had guides provided by the Byzantine emperor but 
no Byzantine troops accompanying them. 
o Reaching Byzantine Nicaea, the Germans split into two 
contingents. One contingent, under the command of crusade 
chronicler Bishop Otto of Freising and containing most of 
the noncombatants, marched along the Mediterranean coast, 
staying in Byzantine territory as long as possible. 
o The other contingent, led by Holy Roman Emperor Conrad 
III, tried to ﬁ ght its way across Asia Minor but suffered a 
heavy defeat at the hands of the Seljuk Turks in October 
1147 and scurried back to Nicaea. The second contingent 
ﬁ nally disintegrated in February 1148 without reaching the 
Crusader States.

The French reached Nicaea in November 1147. The recently 
defeated and wounded Conrad, who was in Nicaea, advised against 
trying to ﬁ ght through the heart of Asia Minor. Thus, the French and 
remaining Germans decided to follow the Mediterranean coastline, 
trailing after the German noncombatants under Otto of Freising. 

50
Lecture 7: The Second Crusade—False Steps and Failure

The march went slowly. Although 
the crusaders were in ostensibly 
friendly territory, Turkish raids 
were common, as were clashes 
with 
the 
local 
population 
infuriated by crusader foraging. 
A much-reduced force ﬁ nally 
reached Antalya, still some 200 
miles short of the Crusader 
States, in January 1148. 

In Antalya, Louis VII and most 
of the French nobles decided 
to forgo the rest of the march 
and, instead, hired boats to sail 
them directly to the Crusader 
States; they left in March 1148. 
Those crusaders who could not 
afford passage were left to try to 
make the overland march. Some 
survived the march to Antioch, 
straggling in during the late 
spring of 1148, but most did not.
The Siege of Damascus

Louis VII reached Antioch in March 1148 and tried to decide what 
to do next with what was left of his forces. He did not lack for 
suggestions; each of the heads of the Crusader States had ideas: 
the recapture of Edessa; the capture of some Tripolitan castles; 
an attack on Nur ad-Din, Zengi’s son, at Aleppo; or assistance in 
Jerusalem. Louis decided to go to Jerusalem. 

After several weeks touring the sights of the Holy Land, Louis 
VII and Conrad III held an assembly at Acre on June 24, 1148, to 
decide their next move. None of the heads of Antioch, Edessa, or 
Tripoli attended, although the king of Jerusalem, the patriarch of 
Bernard of Clairvaux convinced 
the Holy Roman Emperor 
Conrad III to join the Second 
Crusade by preaching a sermon 
on Conrad’s odds of going to 
heaven if he did not take up the 
cross.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

51
Jerusalem, and the Grand Master of the Templars were present. The 
decision of the assembly was to attack Damascus. 

Damascus had usually been an ally of the kingdom of Jerusalem, 
which makes the decision to attack there hard to explain. The 
crusaders and the Franks may have feared that Damascus would 
come under Nur ad-Din’s control if they did not capture it ﬁ rst. 
Whatever the reason, the crusader army set out from Galilee for 
Damascus in the middle of July 1148. On July 24, it reached the 
gardens and orchards on the western side of the city.

Faced with an unexpected crusader attack, the governor of 
Damascus reluctantly called upon Nur ad-Din and Saif ad-Din, the 
emir of Mosul, for help. 

The crusader siege of Damascus was a debacle. The crusaders 
were too few to surround the city. The orchards and gardens on the 
western side provided much-needed shade, and water was available 
there, but they also provided cover for defenders, who raided 
from Damascus. 
o After three days, the crusaders moved to the eastern side of the 
city, which was relatively open and barren. There, they did not 
have to worry about the defenders’ raids as much, but there was 
little shade or water. 
o The crusaders learned that Nur ad-Din was coming, and internal 
bickering set in. Nobles who were residents of the Crusader 
States wanted Damascus, once captured, to go to one of their 
own; Louis VII and Conrad III wanted Damascus to go to a 
fellow crusader. Local crusaders, realizing what the crusaders’ 
eventual plans for Damascus were, began to complain that the 
entire expedition had been a bad idea. 
o On July 28, 1148, the ﬁ fth day after it had begun, the siege of 
Damascus was abandoned. The crusaders and the army of the 
kingdom of Jerusalem retreated. 

52
Lecture 7: The Second Crusade—False Steps and Failure
Aftermath of the Second Crusade

The abortive siege was the effective end of the Second Crusade. 
Conrad III and Louis VII spent some time in the Holy Land but 
more as pilgrims than as crusaders; by the summer of 1149, both 
had left. They had reached Jerusalem, as a crusader should, but they 
had accomplished nothing. Edessa was still lost, Nur ad-Din had 
not been weakened, and Damascus had been antagonized. 

Otto of Freising took comfort in the fact that although it had 
done nothing to help the Crusader States, at least the crusade had 
furthered the salvation of souls by resulting in so many Christian 
casualties and martyrs. 

Others attributed the outcome to the sinfulness of humanity or to the 
inscrutable will of God. Some, seeing the failure as a judgment of 
God, blamed Bernard of Clairvaux himself. French chroniclers and 
probably Louis VII blamed the Franks who lived in the Crusader 
States and the Byzantines for their lack of support.

Following the Second Crusade, the condition of the Crusader States 
worsened. The division of Zengi’s lands between Nur ad-Din, who 
got Aleppo and western territory, and Saif ad-Din, who got Mosul 
and eastern territory, meant that Nur ad-Din could stay out of the 
internal politics of Baghdad and focus on the Crusader States. 
o Between 1149 and 1154, Nur ad-Din killed the prince of 
Antioch in battle, captured and blinded the titular count of 
Edessa, and gained control of Damascus with the support of 
the Damascene population. With Aleppo and Damascus under 
Nur ad-Din’s control, the Crusader States were starting to face 
the possibility of encirclement. 
o Nur ad-Din suffered an incapacitating illness in 1157, which 
relieved some of the pressure on the Crusader States; though he 
survived until 1174, his abilities seem to have been diminished. 
But the weakened Nur ad-Din would not live forever, and 
whoever came after him might prove to be an even more 
formidable threat.

53

The Second Crusade raised high expectations and then dashed 
them. It not only failed to measure up to the First Crusade, but it 
was, in many ways, counterproductive. And subsequent crusades to 
the East would more closely approximate the futility of the Second 
Crusade than the success of the First.
Constable, Crusaders and Crusading in the Twelfth Century. 
Phillips, The Second Crusade. 
1. Would it have been preferable if the Second Crusade had tried to retake 
Edessa rather than Damascus? Were there better targets available than 
Edessa or Damascus?
2. What does the relatively long gap between the First and Second Crusades 
tell us about crusaders’ motivations and crusading more generally?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

54
Lecture 8: Saladin—General and Sultan
Saladin—General and Sultan
Lecture 8
I
n the last lecture, we examined the Second Crusade. Launched in 
response to the fall of Edessa to Zengi, it made no attempt to recapture 
Edessa, failed to capture Damascus, and brought no discernible 
improvement to the situation of the Crusader States. Further, its failures 
discouraged potential crusaders from taking up the cross again. Indeed, some 
40 years passed between the Second Crusade and the next major expedition 
to the East, the Third Crusade, which was itself launched in response to the 
fall of Jerusalem to Saladin. In this lecture, we will consider Saladin, his rise 
to power, and his reconquest of Jerusalem. 
Saladin’s Path to Egypt

Both Arab biographers and medieval Western authors portrayed 
Saladin as honest, generous, and merciful. But not everyone in 
the Islamic world admired Saladin, who could also be vengeful 
and calculating. And the Franks of Outremer, and Europeans more 
generally, had reason to fear his focus on jihad. From the moment 
Saladin came to power, he proclaimed that his goal was to retake 
Jerusalem and drive the Franks into the sea. 

Saladin was a Kurd, not an Arab or a Turk; both he and his father 
were in Nur ad-Din’s service. In 1165, Saladin was in Damascus, 
serving as chief of police. But it wasn’t in Damascus that Saladin 
began his ascent to world-historical importance; it was, improbably, 
in Egypt.

Although the years following the Second Crusade saw a number 
of setbacks for the kingdom of Jerusalem, they did see one notable 
success: In 1153, the kingdom of Jerusalem captured Ascalon, the 
last foothold of the Egyptian Fatimid caliphate in Palestine. Its 
capture opened the door to the Sinai Peninsula and to Egypt itself. 

55
o The loss of Ascalon plunged the Egyptian government into 
chaos; the vizier of Egypt and the Fatimid caliph turned on 
each other, and there followed a dizzying series of coups 
and assassinations. 
o The Fatimid caliphate looked as though it was about to 
collapse, and the rich prize of Egypt seemed to be up for the 
taking. In 1160, Egypt began paying the kingdom of Jerusalem 
tribute to forestall a Frankish attack.

During the 1160s, both the kingdom of Jerusalem and Nur ad-Din 
vied to gain control of Egypt. 
o In 1163, when the kingdom of Jerusalem invaded Egypt 
because it had fallen behind on its tribute payments, Nur ad-Din 
dispatched an army to Egypt under the leadership of a general 
named Shirkuh; accompanying Shirkuh on this expedition was 
his nephew Saladin. 
o Shirkuh succeeded in restoring to power a former Egyptian 
vizier named Shawar, but Shawar double-crossed Shirkuh and 
Nur ad-Din. Restored to power, Shawar allied himself with the 
Franks and made himself independent of Nur ad-Din. Shirkuh 
and the Franks had to withdraw from Egypt.

In 1166 and 1167, both Nur ad-Din and the kingdom of Jerusalem 
intervened in Egypt again. Nur ad-Din dispatched Shirkuh, Saladin, 
and his army to Egypt; Shawar called on the kingdom of Jerusalem 
for help, and Shirkuh was forced to retreat. In the aftermath of this 
round of interventions, Egypt agreed to pay tribute to the kingdom 
of Jerusalem and even allowed the Franks to station a garrison in 
Cairo. It looked as though Egypt was on its way to becoming a 
protectorate of the kingdom of Jerusalem.
Appointment as Vizier

But in 1168 and 1169, the situation in Egypt changed dramatically, 
to the detriment of the kingdom of Jerusalem and to the advantage 
of Saladin. The kingdom of Jerusalem and the Byzantine Empire, 

56
Lecture 8: Saladin—General and Sultan
whose relations in the 1150s and 1160s had improved considerably, 
agreed to attack Egypt. 

In October 1168, the kingdom of Jerusalem invaded Egypt with the 
assistance of a newly arrived band of French crusaders but without 
the Byzantines. Invading before the Byzantines arrived would cut 
them out from the distribution of loot.

Shawar called on Nur ad-Din, who dispatched Shirkuh and Saladin 
yet again to invade Egypt. Faced with stronger-than-expected 
resistance and the arrival of 
Nur ad-Din’s army, the Franks 
and crusaders withdrew from 
Egypt in early 1169. Shirkuh 
and Saladin captured Shawar 
and killed him. The Fatimid 
caliph appointed Shirkuh as 
vizier of Egypt, and then, when 
he died in March 1169, Saladin 
was appointed. In 1169, the 
Byzantines and the kingdom of 
Jerusalem sent a joint expedition 
to Egypt, but they failed to 
dislodge 
Saladin 
from 
his 
new position.

Saladin’s appointment as vizier 
of Egypt was a large step 
upward, but it also left him 
in a precarious situation. He 
was a Sunni Kurd who headed 
an army of occupation sent by Nur ad-Din, but Saladin had been 
appointed as vizier of Egypt by the Shi’a Fatimid caliph. Such a 
situation was not necessarily survivable, and Saladin had to put 
down an Egyptian revolt. 
o Saladin’s relations with Nur ad-Din were coolly friendly; 
Saladin sent monetary payments to Nur ad-Din and proclaimed 
Because Saladin’s rise to 
power was so unexpected, little 
is known of his youth or his 
activities before he was about 30 
years old, when he ﬁ rst started 
to garner attention.
© Sailko/Wikimedia Commons/ CC BY-SA 3.0.

57
his loyalty to him, but Nur ad-Din could not be quite sure of 
Saladin’s intentions. 
o Still, when Saladin asked Nur ad-Din to allow Saladin’s 
relatives to join him in Egypt, Nur ad-Din allowed it. 

In 1171, Nur ad-Din put Saladin to the test. He and the Abbasid caliph 
of Baghdad demanded that Saladin forbid any mention of the Fatimid 
caliph during prayers said in Egyptian mosques; instead, such prayers 
should mention only the Sunni Abbasid caliph. In effect, Nur ad-Din 
was asking Saladin to abolish the Fatimid caliphate, which Saladin 
did. When the Fatimid caliph died of natural causes in 1171, Saladin 
made certain that he had no successor. 
Successor to Nur ad-Din

When Nur ad-Din ﬁ nally died in 1174, Saladin moved quickly to 
position himself as Nur ad-Din’s successor; he peacefully occupied 
Damascus that same year and secured the Abbasid caliph’s 
recognition as overlord of Egypt and southern Syria. In 1176, 
Saladin even married Nur ad-Din’s widow. 

However, Nur ad-Din had a lone son, named as-Salih. Saladin 
claimed that he was only interested in securing as-Salih’s rights, but 
as-Salih did not see it that way, and neither did Nur ad-Din’s relatives, 
members of the Zengid dynasty, who still controlled Aleppo and 
Mosul. They saw Saladin as an upstart usurper to be resisted. 

As a result, Saladin spent the dozen years following Nur ad-Din’s 
death focused on gaining control of Aleppo, Mosul, and other places 
still under Zengid control. He claimed that he could not launch a 
full-scale attack on the Franks until he had gained control of all the 
territory that had once belonged to Nur ad-Din.

Even as he survived several assassination attempts, Saladin 
managed to grind down his Zengid rivals. As-Salih died of natural 
causes in 1181, which deprived the Zengid dynasty of a rallying 

58
Lecture 8: Saladin—General and Sultan
point. In 1183, Saladin gained control of Aleppo, and in 1186, he 
forced the Zengid ruler of Mosul to accept his overlordship. 
Invasion of Jerusalem

Also in 1186, Saladin fell seriously ill. He survived the illness, but 
the experience highlighted his mortality. With Zengid resistance 
ﬁ nally tamped down, Saladin decided to attack the kingdom of 
Jerusalem in 1187.

The time was propitious for an attack. The Byzantine army had 
suffered a catastrophic defeat against the Seljuk Turks in 1176 and 
was in no shape to provide assistance. Further, in 1174, the 13-year-
old Baldwin IV had become king of Jerusalem. He suffered from 
leprosy; the disease debilitated him, and during his lifetime and 
after his death in 1185, ﬁ erce factional struggles over control of the 
royal government dominated the kingdom. 

Although Saladin’s invasion of 1187 may have been the fruition 
of a long-held plan, Saladin used the actions of a Frankish noble 
named Reynald of Châtillon as his pretext. 
o Reynald had remained in the Holy Land after the Second 
Crusade and become an irritant to the Byzantines and the 
Crusader States. After his imprisonment by Muslims for almost 
16 years, Reynald had relocated to the southern part of the 
kingdom of Jerusalem, but he refused to abide by the various 
truces between the kingdom and Saladin.
o Instead, Reynald raided across the frontier and began a campaign 
of piracy in the Red Sea against pilgrims going to Mecca; he 
raided Arabia itself in the early 1180s. These raids were deeply 
embarrassing to Saladin, who was still struggling with the 
Zengids. Saladin demanded that king of Jerusalem assert control 
over Reynald, but these demands came to nothing. 

Saladin and his army, perhaps 30,000 soldiers strong, crossed the 
Dog River and entered Frankish territory on June 30, 1187. The 

59
kingdom of Jerusalem called upon every able-bodied Frankish male 
to assist in repelling the invasion. 

The kingdom of Jerusalem’s army advanced toward Saladin’s army, 
which had besieged the town of Tiberias, but the Franks had not 
yet decided on a plan. They initially chose to ﬁ nd a good defensive 
location and wait for the siege of Tiberias to run its course. But 
on July 3, 1187, King Guy of Jerusalem announced that the army 
should advance on Tiberias.

That evening, their water supplies depleted, the Franks camped out 
on a pair of hills known as the Horns of Hattin. When they awoke 
the next day, they were surrounded by Saladin’s army. The heat and 
thirst caused the army of the Franks to disintegrate. As the day wore 
on, Saladin’s army advanced up the hills, pressing in more closely 
on the Franks, who ﬁ nally surrendered. Saladin captured the king 
of Jerusalem, the Grand Master of the Templars, and Reynald of 
Châtillon; he killed the last of these three with his own hands.

Tiberias surrendered a few days later, as did Acre. During the next 
few weeks, other towns surrendered, often without having been 
attacked or besieged. By the end of August, south of Tripoli, the 
Franks held only Tyre, Ascalon, Gaza, a few isolated castles, and 
Jerusalem itself. 

In September, Ascalon and Gaza fell, and Jerusalem sent 
ambassadors to Saladin, ready to discuss terms of surrender. 
When no agreement could be reached, Saladin began a siege on 
September 20, 1187. On September 29, he breached the city’s walls. 
He offered generous terms to the Christian residents of Jerusalem 
and restrained his troop from pillaging the refugees. On October 2, 
1187, Saladin entered Jerusalem, ending 88 years of Christian rule.

Saladin spent the rest of 1187 mopping up in the kingdom of 
Jerusalem. Late in the year, he besieged Tyre, the last remaining 
Christian city in Outremer, and demanded its surrender, but Tyre 
refused, and in early January 1188, Saladin raised his siege. This 

60
Lecture 8: Saladin—General and Sultan
was a crucial mistake for Saladin. Tyre gave the Franks one last 
toehold; with a little help, they might be able to recover what they 
had lost in the East—and help was going to arrive. 
Eddé, Saladin.
Hamilton, The Leper King and His Heirs.
Jackson and Lyons, Saladin: The Politics of the Holy War.
1. Saddam Hussein, the late ruler of Iraq, likened himself to Saladin. Why 
was that comparison ironic?
2. Can you think of other historical instances in which a military foe, such 
as Saladin, came to be an admired and iconic ﬁ gure among those whom 
he had fought? What does the posthumous Western lionizing of Saladin 
tell us about medieval Europe? Did Westerners lionize Saladin because 
of his qualities or because the act of lionizing him fulﬁ lled some need or 
purpose within medieval Europe itself?
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

61
The Third Crusade—We Three Kings
Lecture 9
A
s we saw in the last lecture, Saladin, having gained control of both 
Egypt and Syria, went on to conquer Jerusalem in October 1187 
and very nearly eliminated the kingdom of Jerusalem. The loss of 
Jerusalem triggered the Third Crusade, which brought three Western monarchs 
to the East and pitted two of the most famous ﬁ gures of the Middle Ages, 
Saladin and King Richard Lionheart of England, against each other. In this 
lecture, we will examine the course and consequences of the Third Crusade.
Launching the Third Crusade

By the end of 1187, the only major town in the kingdom of 
Jerusalem still holding out against Saladin was Tyre. Leading 
its defense was a relatively new arrival, Conrad of Montferrat, a 
Westerner from an important noble family. Conrad had urged 
Tyre to resist Saladin. Given that King Guy of Jerusalem was still 
Saladin’s prisoner, Conrad may have thought that he could parlay 
leadership of Tyre into a kingship for himself.

News of the fall of Jerusalem reached the West within a couple of 
weeks. Pope Urban III died on October 20, 1187, just a few days 
after hearing about the fall. His successor, Pope Gregory VIII, 
issued a new crusading bull, apparently at the end of October 1187. 
But Gregory himself died in December 1187, leaving most of the 
organizing to his successor, Pope Clement III.

The recent loss of Jerusalem brought about the greatest royal 
response to any crusading call. Two kings had led the Second 
Crusade. Three kings would lead the Third Crusade: those of 
Germany, France, and England. These rulers could mobilize 
resources on a scale beyond that of other nobles, but their rivalries, 
especially that between France and England, complicated the 
launching of the crusade.

62
Lecture 9: The Third Crusade—We Three Kings

Ultimately, Easter 1189 was set as the departure date. Philip II 
Augustus, the king of France, was not much of a warrior and had 
little enthusiasm for the crusade, but popular pressure pushed him 
into taking up the cross. Henry II, the king of England, was a bit old 
to be going on crusade and, in fact, died before the departure date. 
But his son and heir, Richard Lionheart, had taken up the cross 
enthusiastically after learning of the fall of Jerusalem.

The problem of how to ﬁ nance crusades was always a pressing one. 
For the Third Crusade, both the French and English kings levied a 
10 percent tax on all income and movable property. The only ones 
exempt from the so-called Saladin tithe were those who were actually 
going on crusade. Tax dodging and protests were rampant, but the tax 
raised some funds and set an important precedent for the future.
The German Advance

Although mutual distrust caused the kings of France and England to 
take up the cross together, they coordinated their activities, and they 
would campaign together. The king of Germany, though, Frederick 
Barbarossa, struck out on his own in May 1189. 

Frederick followed the overland route taken by the Second Crusade 
and much of the First Crusade; his initial goal was to reach 
Constantinople. His march, like those of his predecessors, was 
plagued by conﬂ icts between himself and his crusaders, on the one 
hand, and the Byzantine Empire, on the other. Some of this trouble 
was the result of provisioning difﬁ culties, but some was due to a 
change in the Byzantine Empire itself.
o From 1081 until 1180, the Byzantine Empire had known only 
three emperors: Alexius I Comnenus, John, and Manuel. But 
Manuel had been unpopular, and his successor was murdered in 
1183. The last emperor from the Comnenus dynasty was then 
killed in 1185 and was replaced by Emperor Isaac Angelus.
o Isaac Angelus, who had come to power in unsettled 
circumstances, had enough problems without having to deal with 
German crusaders. Bracing himself for the uninvited crusaders’ 

63
arrival, Isaac made a truce with Saladin and seemingly made a 
secret agreement to slow down the German crusaders. 

Word of the truce reached Frederick Barbarossa, who seized the town 
of Philippopolis (now Plovdiv, in Bulgaria). Isaac then imprisoned 
Frederick Barbarossa’s ambassadors. Frederick called on his son in 
Germany to secure papal approval for a crusade against the Byzantine 
Empire. No such crusade took place, if only because Isaac caved in 
and gave Frederick what he wanted: the release of his ambassadors 
and passage to Asia Minor. The deterioration in Byzantine-German 
relations was, for the Byzantines, an ominous development.

Frederick Barbarossa reached Asia Minor in March 1190, but 
in June, he drowned while trying to ford a river. His crusade 
disintegrated after its leader’s death. The expedition had done 
nothing to improve the kingdom of Jerusalem’s fortunes or to set 
Saladin back.
Developments in the Crusader States

As Frederick Barbarossa was making his fatal journey eastward, 
the situation in the Crusader States changed dramatically and 
improbably. In July 1188, even before Frederick had set out, Saladin 
released two of his captives: the Grand Master of the Templars and 
King Guy of Jerusalem. 
o Before setting them free, Saladin required his captives to swear 
oaths promising to return to Europe and never come back to 
the East. 
o Saladin may have expected—even hoped—that they would 
break their oaths. The return of two proven incompetents 
to leadership positions among his enemies could not have 
displeased him. At the very least, their reappearance in the 
kingdom of Jerusalem would sow discord, which it did.

When King Guy and what followers he could muster attempted to 
enter Tyre, he was refused entrance. Conrad of Montferrat argued 
that Guy had forfeited his right to the kingship through his failures 

64
Lecture 9: The Third Crusade—We Three Kings
and his collaboration with Saladin. King Guy and his followers 
eventually gave up and instead besieged Acre in August 1189.

Saladin led his troops to Acre in September 1189, but he could 
not dislodge King Guy. He and his army settled down to besiege 
the king, who was, in turn, besieging Acre. The Franks were not 
numerous enough to cut Acre off entirely from the outside world, 
but neither were Saladin’s troops numerous enough to cut off the 
Franks, who began to receive a steady stream of reinforcements.

The siege of Acre dragged on through the rest of 1189, through the 
whole of 1190, and well into 1191. Finally, the French king, Philip 
II Augustus, arrived in April 1191 and Richard Lionheart arrived in 
June. Acre surrendered on July 
12, 1191.
o The crusaders agreed to 
let the Muslim inhabitants 
and defenders of Acre 
leave, except for about 
3,000, who would be kept 
as hostages to guarantee 
that Saladin lived up to 
his promises: to return the 
relic of the True Cross he 
had captured at Hattin, to 
return Christian prisoners, 
and to pay the crusaders 
200,000 gold marks.
o Shortly after the fall of 
Acre, 
the 
French 
and 
English kings helped to 
broker a new arrangement 
between King Guy and 
Conrad 
of 
Montferrat. 
Upon Guy’s death, Conrad 
of 
Montferrat 
would 
Richard Lionheart spent as much 
time negotiating with Saladin as 
he did ﬁ ghting against him, and 
the two seem to have delighted in 
making gestures of respect and 
generosity toward each other.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

65
succeed Guy as heir, although Conrad was assassinated less 
than a year later and never got the chance. 

After helping to broker this deal between Guy and Conrad, the 
French king decided that he had done enough. Philip II headed back 
to Europe on July 31, 1191, leaving the Third Crusade under the 
leadership of Richard Lionheart. 
Aftermath of the Siege

Following the fall of Acre to the crusaders, Saladin’s already tenuous 
hold over his followers grew even shakier. Richard Lionheart’s 
defeat of Saladin in a battle just north of Arsuf in September 1191 
compounded the humiliation occasioned by the fall of Acre. Given 
Saladin’s advancing age, his followers began to position themselves 
to take advantage of the ﬂ uid situation his death would create. 

The crusaders began recapturing coastal towns lost to Saladin not 
long before, and by the end of May 1192, the Third Crusade had 
retaken almost the whole of the Palestinian coast. As he recaptured 
the coastline, Richard Lionheart made various offers to Saladin 
regarding a long-term truce to follow the end of the Third Crusade. 

In January 1192 and again in June 1192, Richard got within sight of 
Jerusalem, but he never besieged it, apparently believing that even 
if he took it, the Franks would not be able to hold onto it while 
Saladin remained ruler of Egypt and Syria. 

Back in Europe, Philip II was taking advantage of Richard 
Lionheart’s absence and pressing French claims to English-ruled 
territory. That put pressure on Richard to wrap up the crusade and 
return to Europe. 
o Finally, in September 1192, Saladin and Richard agreed to 
terms that recognized the territorial status quo: Christians 
were to keep all the coastal towns they had captured except for 
Ascalon, which was to be razed to the ground so that neither 
Muslim nor Christian might control it. 

66
Lecture 9: The Third Crusade—We Three Kings
o Saladin guaranteed that Christian pilgrims could freely visit 
Jerusalem and the other holy places of Palestine, but Jerusalem 
was to remain under Muslim rule. With the signing of the treaty 
in September 1192, the Third Crusade came to an end.

It was an ambiguous ending for all parties. The kingdom of 
Jerusalem had survived, but it no longer included Jerusalem; 
henceforth, Acre would be its chief city. Saladin, so close to 
complete victory in 1187 and 1188, had lost some of what he had 
won, and he had to make concessions regarding Jerusalem to bring 
the war to an end. 
o Saladin died less than a year later. He had designated his eldest 
son, al-Afdal, as his successor, but once Saladin was dead, his 
followers openly refused to serve al-Afdal. 
o Saladin’s empire fragmented into numerous city-states and 
small kingdoms ruled by various members of the Ayyubid 
family, while members of the Zengid dynasty tried to 
reestablish themselves. Squabbles within the Ayyubid family 
and with the Zengids meant that there would not be another 
concerted effort to overrun the kingdom of Jerusalem again 
until the middle of the 13th century. 

In 1195, there was another coup in the Byzantine Empire; the 
emperor Isaac Angelus was overthrown and blinded by his brother 
Alexius III Angelus. Because Isaac’s daughter Irene was married 
to Philip of Swabia, brother of King Henry VI of Germany, the 
German king attempted to organize a crusade against the Byzantine 
Empire. The pope dissuaded him from attacking Constantinople, 
but at some point, the string of near-misses for the Byzantines 
would come to an end.

The Third Crusade checked the advance of Saladin but failed to 
recapture Jerusalem, resulting in a state of permanent crisis. During 
the next century, crusades to the East became more frequent; 
indeed, less than a decade elapsed between the end of the Third 
Crusade and the ﬁ rst attempts to launch the Fourth. 

67
Eddé, Saladin.
Gillingham, Richard I. 
Jackson and Lyons, Saladin: The Politics of the Holy War.
1. Was Richard Lionheart right not to make any attempt to capture 
Jerusalem?
2. Does the Third Crusade mark a signiﬁ cant turning point—or even the
signiﬁ cant turning point—in crusading’s history with regard to methods 
and objectives?
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

68
Lecture 10: The Fourth Crusade—Conquest of Constantinople
The Fourth Crusade—Conquest of Constantinople
Lecture 10
I
n the last lecture, we examined the Third Crusade, which restored much 
of the kingdom of Jerusalem’s territory but failed to take Jerusalem itself. 
As a result, not much time elapsed between the Third and the Fourth 
Crusades, which ended with a conquest even more remarkable than the First 
Crusade’s capture of Jerusalem—but a conquest that was controversial then 
and remains controversial even today. In this lecture, we will see where the 
Fourth Crusade went and what it did to generate so much controversy.
Pope Innocent III’s First Call

Pope Innocent III was elected in 1198 and issued his ﬁ rst crusading 
bull later that year. He called upon cities, nobles, bishops, and other 
ecclesiastical ofﬁ cials to raise a crusading army by March 1199 and 
to provide enough ﬁ nancial support to ﬁ eld that army for two years. 
Curiously, Innocent III did not address kings in his crusading bull, 
perhaps because crusades under royal leadership had not fared as 
well as the First Crusade, in which no kings had participated.

March 1199 came and went without any signiﬁ cant response to 
Innocent’s call. Finally, in November 1199, a number of French 
nobles took up the cross. The Fourth Crusade, like the First 
Crusade, would consist of various loosely allied contingents, each 
headed by a noble. 

By the summer of 1200, a substantial crusading army was, at long 
last, talking shape. The French barons appointed six of their own 
to make arrangements for transporting the crusaders across the 
Mediterranean, and the six ambassadors chose to go to Venice. 
Their plan was to sail directly across the Mediterranean, following 
the lead of Richard Lionheart and Philip II Augustus during the 
Third Crusade and, thereby, avoiding the overland march that had 
proved fatal to Frederick Barbarossa and so difﬁ cult for crusaders 
before him. 

69

Arriving in Venice in February 1201, the French barons struck a 
deal with the doge, Enrico Dandolo. The Venetians agreed to build 
enough shipping to transport 33,000 crusaders, including 4,500 
knights and their horses, and to have the shipping ready no later 
than June 1202. The crusaders were to muster at Venice by April 
1202 and pay the Venetians 85,000 silver marks. Venice agreed to 
provide, without charge, 50 additional galleys, provided that Venice 
was allowed to keep half of whatever the crusade conquered. 

At some point, the barons and the doge agreed that the Fourth 
Crusade would be an expedition against Egypt, although they did 
not announce this fact to their fellow crusaders until the expedition 
was underway. Gaining control of Egypt would make a later attempt 
to take Jerusalem more feasible. 

After the successful conclusion of the negotiations, one of the 
barons, Count Thibaut of Champagne, died, and the other barons 
decided to recruit a single leader for the expedition. They chose 
Boniface of Montferrat, the brother of Conrad Montferrat, who had 
led the defense of Tyre against Saladin.
Expedition to Zadar

Crusaders straggled into Venice throughout the summer of 1202, 
well past the departure date, and Boniface of Montferrat himself 
did not show up until August 1202. Even worse, the crusaders, 
numbering perhaps 11,000, did not have enough money to pay the 
Venetians, and without payment, the Venetians would not transport 
them anywhere. 

The Venetians agreed to allow the crusaders to postpone payment if 
they would help to conquer the Croatian port town of Zadar, which 
had thrown off Venetian rule in 1186 and come under the rule of the 
king of Hungary. The leaders of the Fourth Crusade agreed to take 
part in the expedition against Zadar, although apparently with some 
trepidation. In September 1202, large numbers of Venetians took up 
the cross themselves, including the aged and blind Enrico Dandolo, 
who would personally lead the Venetians. 

70
Lecture 10: The Fourth Crusade—Conquest of Constantinople

In October 1202, the Fourth Crusade headed for Zadar. When 
Innocent III learned of the expedition, he issued a papal letter 
forbidding the crusade to attack Zadar and threatening to 
excommunicate any crusader who did so. Some crusaders held 
back from the siege, but others went ahead, and Zadar fell in late 
November 1202. 

The Fourth Crusade wintered in Zadar, joined by Boniface of 
Montferrat. During the winter layover, Innocent agreed to lift the 
sentences of the crusaders who were not Venetians, provided that 
they attack no more Christian cities and return Zadar. Boniface kept 
news of these papal commands from the crusaders and asked the 
pope for further clariﬁ cation.
Diversion to Constantinople

When the Fourth Crusade left Zadar in April 1203, it was not 
headed to Egypt but to Constantinople. Who made the decision to 
send the Fourth Crusade to Constantinople and when that decision 
was made have been enduring controversies. 

Before the Fourth Crusade left Venice, a member of the Byzantine 
imperial family had arrived in Europe. He was Alexius Angelus, 
known as Alexius the Younger, the son of the deposed and blinded 
Byzantine emperor Isaac II Angelus. Alexius the Younger was in 
Europe looking for assistance for his deposed father. 

While the crusaders were wintering at Zadar, Alexius the Younger 
joined them. He promised the crusaders Byzantine assistance if 
they would help to restore his deposed father to the throne and to 
overthrow Alexius III. He also promised to end the schism between 
the Byzantine church and the papacy, to pay the crusaders 200,000 
silver marks, to pay for provisions, and to contribute an army of 
10,000 Byzantines to take part in the crusade.

The decision to divert to Constantinople probably had Venetian 
support; the Venetians controlled the ﬂ eet transporting the crusaders 
and would expect commercial beneﬁ ts if the crusade engineered a 

71
regime change in Constantinople. It’s also likely that the decision 
had German and French support. Innocent III was not involved in 
the decision, nor were many members of the Fourth Crusade.

On June 24, 1203, the Fourth Crusade arrived at Constantinople. 
The crusaders displayed Alexius the Younger to the city’s defenders 
and called upon the city’s inhabitants to restore Isaac II Angelus 
to the throne. Constantinople did not obey the crusaders’ orders at 
ﬁ rst, but after the crusaders set a ﬁ re in July 1203, Alexius III ﬂ ed 
the city, and Isaac II was released from prison and recognized as 
emperor.
Second Attack on Constantinople

The Fourth Crusade had accomplished its mission, but Isaac 
II and Alexius the Younger (now co-emperor Alexius IV) fell 
behind on their payments to the crusaders. Further, the residents of 
Constantinople resented making any payments to the crusaders at 
all, and they resented the fact that Western crusaders had propped 
Alexius IV and Isaac II on the throne. 

As the crusaders and co-emperors bickered, another huge ﬁ re broke 
out in Constantinople. Westerners living in the city moved into the 
crusaders’ camp, fearing that the Greeks would massacre them in a 
riot.

Matters came to a head in January 1204. Riots broke out in 
Constantinople, and a son-in-law of the former emperor Alexius 
III Angelus invaded the imperial palace. His name was Alexius 
Murtzuphlus; he killed both Isaac II and Alexius IV and proclaimed 
himself to be Alexius V. His refused to honor any agreement his 
predecessors had made with the crusaders, who prepared to attack 
Constantinople again.

Before attacking, the crusaders made some decisions about how to 
proceed if they succeeded in capturing the capital. A committee of 
six Venetian and six French crusaders would elect a new emperor. 
The crusaders also agreed that they would remain in the Byzantine 

72
Lecture 10: The Fourth Crusade—Conquest of Constantinople
Empire for one year after the fall of Constantinople to help the next 
emperor establish his rule. This would push back the continuation 
of the crusade to the East even further.

Between April 13 and 15, the crusaders took Constantinople by 
force and sacked it, essentially ending the Fourth Crusade. Some 
individuals and small groups made their way farther east, but the 
leaders of the Fourth Crusade convinced papal representatives to 
release the crusaders from their vows, and in the months and years 
to come, most crusaders remained in the Byzantine Empire to 
conquer more territory. 

The Venetians engineered the election of Count Baldwin IX of 
Flanders as ruler, who took the title emperor of Romania. The 
Venetians also arranged for the installation of a Venetian as a Latin 
patriarch of Constantinople. Boniface of Montferrat, although 
disappointed that he did not become emperor, became ruler of the 
kingdom of Thessalonika, and much of Byzantine Greece and the 
Byzantine Balkans came under the rule of various French nobles.
In April 1204, after some initial and unsuccessful attempts, crusaders did 
something that had not been accomplished in the city’s nine-century-long 
history: They took Constantinople by force and sacked it.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

73
Aftermath of the Fourth Crusade

The conquest of Constantinople and much of the Byzantine Empire 
was a signiﬁ cant accomplishment but also a hollow one in many 
respects. The ﬁ rst Latin emperor, Baldwin, was captured in 1205 
ﬁ ghting the Bulgars and never heard from again. Succeeding Latin 
emperors were often broke and resorted to various measures, some 
smacking of desperation, to ﬁ nd money.

Despite its signiﬁ cant losses, the Byzantine Empire did not collapse 
in 1204 or at any point in the 13th century. Instead, Byzantine 
successor states sprang up at the far western and eastern ends of the 
empire, all claiming to be the true Byzantine Empire and mounting 
counterattacks against the Latin Empire of Romania. By 1237, that 
empire had been reduced to the city of Constantinople itself.
o From the 1230s onward, the Greek successor states and the 
Bulgars spent much of their time ﬁ ghting to determine who 
would have the honor of trying to take Constantinople. 
o The eventual winner was the Empire of Nicaea, which captured 
Constantinople in 1261 and reestablished it as the capital of 
the Byzantine Empire, although substantial parts of Greece 
remained under Western European rule into the 15th century.

The Fourth Crusade did not end the schism between Orthodox and 
Catholic Christianity. Byzantine Christians refused to recognize 
the Latin patriarch of Constantinople and refused to adopt Western 
religious rites. Instead, a Greek patriarch established himself in 
exile at Nicaea, and Greeks continued to follow their customary 
liturgical practices. 
o If anything, the experience of conquest and the attempts to 
impose the Latin liturgy made matters even worse. 
o An agreement in 1274 to recognize papal authority and 
end the schism was repudiated in 1282, and the patriarch of 
Constantinople was restored as head of the Byzantine church.

74
Lecture 10: The Fourth Crusade—Conquest of Constantinople

The establishment of the Latin Empire of Constantinople and of 
other states in what had been Byzantine Europe did not help the 
kingdom of Jerusalem. Even though these Western-ruled regimes 
were perhaps more favorably inclined toward the kingdom 
of Jerusalem than the Byzantine Empire had been, they were 
too hard-pressed and too concerned with their own survival to 
offer assistance. 

The Fourth Crusade never made it to the eastern Mediterranean and 
never did battle against anyone other than fellow Christians. The 
conquest of Constantinople was an unprecedented military success, 
but it exacerbated ethnic and religious antagonisms between 
Byzantines and Europeans. 
Angold, The Fourth Crusade.
Laiou, ed., Urbs capta.
Madden, Enrico Dandolo and the Rise of Venice.
Phillips, The Fourth Crusade and the Sack of Constantinople. 
Queller and Madden, The Fourth Crusade and the Conquest of 
Constantinople.
1. Which was more important in leading to the crusader conquest of 
Constantinople: long-term crusading trends or historical accidents that 
occurred during the Fourth Crusade?
2. What would Pope Urban II have thought of the Fourth Crusade?
    Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

75
Crusades in Spain
Lecture 11
I
n our last lecture, we examined the Fourth Crusade, which led to the 
conquest of Constantinople and much of the Byzantine Empire. 
Well before the Fourth Crusade, though, there had been crusades that 
had nothing to do with Jerusalem: crusades in Spain, for example, and in 
central and eastern Europe. In this lecture and the next, we will examine 
the geographical expansion of crusading from the 12th century onward, 
beginning with crusading in Spain.
The Iberian Peninsula

At the time of the First Crusade and for some time afterward, most 
of the Iberian Peninsula’s inhabitants were Muslims and Arabic 
speakers. The peninsula was divided into a smallish Christian 
north and a larger Islamic south. The Christian north included such 
kingdoms as Castile, Navarre, Leon, and Aragon. The Islamic south 
was divided into a few dozen small kingdoms and city-states known 
as taifas. 
o This division had not always been the case. Until 1031, all 
of Islamic Spain, or al-Andalus, had been ruled by a single 
ofﬁ cial, the caliph of Cordoba. 
o During the course of the 11th century, and thanks to the collapse 
of the caliphate of Cordoba, the balance of power shifted 
between the Christian north and the Islamic south. Christian 
kings exacted tribute payments from taifas and occasionally 
conquered them. 
o For the most part, though, pragmatism rather than religious 
considerations governed relations between the two regions. 

The extension of crusading to Spain required minimal theoretical 
adjustment. Warfare in Spain, just as in Outremer, pitted Christians 
against Muslims, and crusaders justiﬁ ed conquest of the Iberian 

76
Lecture 11: Crusades in Spain
Peninsula as they justiﬁ ed the conquest of Jerusalem, namely, as 
an act of reconquest. Arabs had taken Jerusalem from the Christian 
Byzantine Empire in the 7th century, and they had taken much of the 
Iberian Peninsula from its Christian rulers in the 8th. 

Not all modern scholars accept the term “Reconquista” to describe 
what happened in Spain. They point out that many hundreds of 
years had elapsed since the Arab and Berber conquest of Spain. 
Al-Andalus’s Muslim majority experienced the Reconquista as 
a foreign conquest. Further, the medieval concept of a Christian 
Reconquista was, as we will see, slow to develop, but because the 
idea was increasingly embraced by rulers of the Christian north, we 
will use the term “Reconquista” while acknowledging that it is not 
universally accepted.
The Elevation of War in Spain

The process of elevating wars in Spain to the status of crusades 
began during the First Crusade. Already in 1096, Pope Urban II 
ordered Spaniards who had taken crusading vows not to take part in 
the expedition to the East. Instead, those Spaniards should remain 
in Spain and help to rebuild and defend the recently captured town 
of Tarragona. If they did so, they would receive the same spiritual 
beneﬁ ts as those who went to Jerusalem. Urban’s ruling established 
a rough equivalence between warfare in Spain and warfare in the 
Holy Land.

Urban II’s successor recognized offensive expeditions in Spain 
as crusades and granted full crusading privileges to those who 
participated. In the 1110s, popes recognized expeditions to 
recapture the Balearic Islands and Zaragoza as crusades. The First 
Lateran Council of 1123 stated as a general principle that ﬁ ghting 
against Muslims in Spain was just as meritorious as ﬁ ghting against 
them in the Holy Land. 

Crusading in Spain differed from crusading in the Holy Land 
largely because in Spain, crusading was grafted onto a preexisting 
movement of royally directed territorial expansion. As a result, 

77
Spanish kings enjoyed a greater degree of control over crusades 
than did kings of Jerusalem, who were themselves products of the 
crusades. Spanish kings 
had some control over 
the inﬂ ux of foreign 
crusaders and over their 
national military orders, 
such as the Calatrava 
and Santiago.

Elevating wars in Spain 
to the status of crusades 
caused some problems 
for both Spain and the 
kingdom of Jerusalem. 
Foreign crusaders, most 
of whom had never seen a Muslim before, and Spaniards, who lived 
in close contact with them, disagreed about how these wars ought 
to be conducted. 
o The discrepancy between Spanish attitudes and those of 
foreigners is evident when one compares the Spanish hero El 
Cid with the French hero Roland. 
o In The Poem of the Cid, El Cid’s attitude toward ﬁ ghting is 
utterly pragmatic. He will ﬁ ght anyone, Muslim or Christian, 
because that is how he earns his bread.
o In contrast, in the almost entirely ﬁ ctional Old French epic 
poem The Song of Roland, Roland ﬁ ghts not because it is his 
job but to prove a point: that the Muslims are in the wrong and 
the Christians are in the right.
o These differing attitudes manifested themselves during 
campaigns. French crusaders joined Spanish troops at Toledo 
in 1212 but soon had a falling out over whether the crusaders 
should ﬁ rst attack the Jews of Toledo and, later, whether 
captured Muslims should be executed. When the Spaniards 
For El Cid, the national hero of Spain, 
war was a job; he worked for, and fought 
against, both Muslims and Christians.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

78
Lecture 11: Crusades in Spain
would not permit execution, most of the French crusaders left 
in disgust.

The elevation of Spanish wars to the status of crusades hurt the 
kingdom of Jerusalem because Spain siphoned off crusaders who 
otherwise might have gone east. Getting to Spain was much less 
costly than getting to Jerusalem, and the chances of surviving 
and winning were better in Spain than in the East. To bolster the 
kingdom of Jerusalem, popes sometimes stripped Spanish wars of 
their crusading status. 
Consequences of the Reconquista

As a result of the Reconquista, Christian rulers came to rule 
over Western Europe’s most ethnically diverse population, with 
substantial numbers of Christians, Muslims, and Jews. In Christian 
Spain, Muslims and Jews were the king’s property, called “serfs of 
the royal treasury.” This status was expensive for Muslims and Jews, 
because Spanish kings taxed them heavily, but it also brought them 
protection; an injury done to them was a crime against royal property.

A desire not to antagonize the subject Muslim population 
sometimes brought Spanish kings into conﬂ ict with the rest of 
Christian Europe. In 1311, the church Council of Vienne prohibited 
the public Muslim call to prayer in all Christian lands, including 
Christian Spain. But kings and Spanish nobles sometimes ignored 
the prohibition or negotiated compromises with individual Muslim 
communities. Spain was, in fact, relatively late to expel its non-
Christian population. 

Even so, we cannot describe the situation in medieval Spain as a 
period of peaceful coexistence. One major difference between Spain 
and the Crusader States involved rebellions by subject populations. 
o In the East, rebellions were rare and small scale, with Muslims 
under Frankish rule actively resisting only during periods of 
Turkish and Arab invasion.

79
o Spain, however, saw many massive Muslim revolts in the 
1240s through the 1270s, revolts that ended with Christian 
victory and the partial expulsion of local Muslim populations. 
o Over the course of the 14th and 15th centuries, such 
expulsions and Christian settlement turned most of Spain 
into a predominantly Christian and predominantly Romance-
speaking part of Europe, although with important regional and 
local variations.

A second major difference between Spain and the Crusader States 
concerns what one might call lifestyle. In the Crusader States, 
attempts to regulate contact between Christians and Muslims were 
few and seemingly inconsequential. In Spain, however, both royal 
and municipal law regulated, in great detail and over the course 
of centuries, contact between Christians, on the one hand, and 
Muslims and Jews, on the other hand. 

One of the more unsettling aspects of the Christian Reconquista 
was the fact that, in medieval Spain, war bred tolerance and peace 
bred intolerance. 
o In the 11th through 13th centuries, when the Reconquista was 
at its most active and its outcome in doubt, tolerance for non-
Christians was high because Christian kings could ill afford to 
antagonize any of their subjects. 
o But by the end of the 13th century, the Reconquista had come 
to a halt that lasted until the late 15th century. Without a threat 
pushing Christian kings and others toward an accommodation 
of their non-Christian subjects, Spain slowly became less 
tolerant of those populations. Total Christian victory in 
1492 brought, not long afterward, total expulsion of Jews 
and Muslims. 
End of the Reconquista

The rulers who brought the Spanish Reconquista to an end were 
Ferdinand, king of Aragon, and his wife, Isabella, queen of Castile. 

80
Lecture 11: Crusades in Spain
Isabella’s piety and domestic pressures on both monarchs favored 
conquest of the smallish Muslim kingdom of Granada in the second 
half of the 15th century. 

For ﬁ nancing, Ferdinand and Isabella turned to the church, which 
issued indulgences in support of their enterprise. Those indulgences 
were not used to recruit crusaders but to generate revenue to pay for 
the war. The campaign against Granada began in 1482; the city of 
Granada fell in November 1491, and Ferdinand took possession of 
it in 1492.

The Christian conquest of Granada touched off excited speculation 
about the event’s broader signiﬁ cance. Some Christian authors 
suggested it signaled that the ﬁ nal triumph of Christianity over 
Islam was at hand. Ferdinand would lead Christian armies eastward 
and recapture Jerusalem. All Muslims would convert to Christianity. 
Perhaps the end of the world was near.
o To some extent, Ferdinand himself got caught up in the 
exuberance that followed his capture of Granada. In 1497, 
a Castilian army captured a North African port and then the 
town of Mers el-Kebir in 1505. In 1509, a large Castilian army 
landed in North Africa and began to push eastward toward 
Egypt and Jerusalem. By 1510, the army had captured Tripoli 
and was preparing to attack Tunis.
o However, Ferdinand seems never to have fully committed 
himself to the idea that he was the one to take back Jerusalem. 
He did not accompany his armies in North Africa and, in 1511, 
pulled most of them out for an expedition to Italy, deciding to 
prioritize European internal politics over crusading. 

Following the conquest of Granada, the land of three religions—
Christianity, Islam, and Judaism—became the land of one religion, 
beginning with an expulsion of Jews from the Iberian Peninsula 
in 1492. In 1502, Ferdinand and Isabella ordered the expulsion 
of Muslims from Castile (including Granada), and in 1525–1526, 
Muslims were expelled from the kingdom of Aragon.

81

The Christian Reconquista likely would have happened even if 
there had never been any crusades. Nonetheless, the introduction 
of crusading to Spain shaped the Reconquista, which resulted in 
a major religious and cultural reshaping of the Iberian Peninsula. 
It also shaped crusading itself by giving potential crusaders more 
options from which to choose and making crusading more diffuse.
O’Callaghan, Reconquest and Crusade in Medieval Spain.
Powell, ed., Muslims under Latin Rule, 1100–1300. 
1. In recent decades, interest in medieval Spanish history among U.S. 
historians has increased markedly, while interest in medieval English 
history has lessened almost as markedly. Why is that so, and is it a 
good, bad, or neutral development? Does the history of remarkably 
multicultural medieval Spain hold any instructive lessons for residents 
of the United States? Or are the differences between medieval Spain and 
the modern United States so great that any attempt to draw lessons or 
parallels between the two is bound to be misleading?
2. In Spain, expulsions of Jews and Muslims followed the successful 
completion of the Reconquista, while in the 20th century, much ethnic 
cleansing occurred not after military victory had been achieved but 
during times of war. Why has that been so?
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

82
Lecture 12: The Northern Crusades
The Northern Crusades
Lecture 12
I
n our last lecture, we saw how crusading came to Spain within a 
few decades of the First Crusade. Crusading contributed to the 
transformation of the Iberian Peninsula from a predominantly Arab-
speaking and Muslim part of Europe, which it was in the 11th century, to one 
that was predominantly Romance-speaking and Christian. Not too long after 
crusading spread to the Iberian Peninsula, it spread to other frontier regions, 
as well, speciﬁ cally, to central and northeastern Europe. These northern 
crusades will be the focus of this lecture. 
Northern versus Mediterranean Crusades

To some extent, the northern crusades shared much in common 
with Spanish crusades. In both cases, crusading was grafted onto 
a preexisting movement of expansion. Crusading furthered the 
expansion and helped to give it a new focus. In eastern and central 
Europe, as in Spain, crusading fueled long-term geopolitical and 
ethnic transformation.

But there were also important differences between the northern 
crusades and their Mediterranean counterparts. 
o In Spain and Outremer, Christians encountered monotheistic 
peoples who were more urbanized than the crusaders 
themselves were. Muslims’ knowledge of science and ancient 
philosophy was greater than the Christians’ own, and Islamic 
economies were more commercialized and complex than those 
of the Christians. 
o The northern crusades pitted crusaders not against Muslims 
but against pagan Slavs and Balts. These pagans of central 
and eastern Europe were divided into many different tribes 
that shared a common lifestyle that was rural, agricultural, and 
pastoral rather than urban. The pagans were also illiterate. 

83
o Toward these pagans, crusaders felt not just a sense of 
religious superiority but also a broader cultural and intellectual 
superiority. That sense of crusader cultural and intellectual 
superiority, combined with the relative dispersion of the many 
different pagan tribes, would mean that the northern crusades 
would be a long, grinding, and brutal affair.
The Wendish Crusade

When the northern crusades began, the frontier between Christian 
and pagan Europe largely followed the Elbe River, which today 
runs through eastern Germany. There were Christian kingdoms to 
the east of the Elbe, most notably Catholic Poland and Orthodox 
Russia, but other polities, such as Lithuania, were still pagan, as 
were numerous tribes.

In 1147, a crusade against the pagan Wends, a tribe living just to 
the east of the Elbe River, was launched. The crusade was initially 
authorized by Bernard of Clairvaux in response to the request of a 
group of Saxon nobles. Bernard’s declaration that the Wends “shall 
either be converted or wiped out” set the tone for the northern 
crusades. The goal was not just to take territory but to immediately 
convert the subjugated pagans or, failing that, to destroy them. 

The ensuing Wendish Crusade was a failure. Ethnic splits emerged 
between Saxon nobles and Danes, and divisions arose among the 
Saxons themselves. Those who received tribute from the Wends did 
not want to see the pagans conquered and converted and, indeed, 
tipped off the Wends about the crusade. There were also splits 
between crusaders who saw the expedition as a chance to plunder 
and those who emphasized conversion.

The Wendish Crusade lasted only a few weeks; it captured some 
Wendish forts and baptized some Wendish leaders, but those leaders 
renounced their baptisms as soon as the crusaders left. However, by 
the end of the 12th century, the Wends had indeed been conquered 
by Saxons and Danes, and their permanent Christianization 
had begun. 

84
Lecture 12: The Northern Crusades
The Baltic Crusades

From the lands of the Wends, the northern crusades then 
jumped several hundred miles east-northeast to Livonia, in what is 
today Latvia. 
o German merchants and missionaries had been active in the 
Baltic region for decades before the launching of the Baltic 
Crusades at the end of the 12th century, but the missionaries did 
not have much success there. 
o Popes issued bulls calling for crusaders to go to the Baltics in 
1171 and again in the 1190s. The calls were ignored at ﬁ rst; 
when a crusading army 
ﬁ nally went to Livonia in 
1198, led by a missionary 
bishop, it was defeated by 
the indigenous Livonians, 
and the bishop was killed.

In 1199, the appointment of a 
new bishop for Livonia, Albert, 
invigorated the northern crusades. 
Between his appointment and 
his death in 1229, Albert led 
annual crusades into Livonia 
and founded a military order for 
the region, the Livonian Sword 
Brethren. He and his crusaders 
subdued the Livonians and then 
led the Livonians and other Baltic 
allies into Estonia, conquering 
much of it while the Danes 
conquered other parts. 

When 
Bishop 
Albert 
died, 
Livonia fell into the hands of the 
Livonian Sword Brethren, but 
within a decade, that order had 
The Teutonic Knights had 
been founded during the Third 
Crusade in the Crusader States, 
and their headquarters remained 
there until 1291.
© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock.

85
been absorbed by another military order: the Order of the Hospital 
of Saint Mary of the Germans of Jerusalem, better known as the 
Teutonic Knights. 

Before taking over the Livonian Sword Brethren and Livonia, the 
Teutonic Knights had shown territorial ambition in central Europe, 
but they had been expelled from Hungary in 1225. Then, an 
opportunity opened up for the Teutonic Knights in pagan Prussia, 
located between the land conquered following the Wendish Crusade 
and Baltic Livonia. 
o In 1225, Polish missionaries and nobles operating in Prussia 
called on the Teutonic Knights to assist the Poles against 
the Prussians. The king of Germany and Holy Roman 
Emperor, Frederick II Hohenstaufen, wanted to bring Prussia 
within a German rather than a Polish orbit; he declared that 
the Teutonic Knights could keep whatever territory they 
conquered in Prussia. 
o From about 1230 onward, Prussia, rather than Baltic Livonia 
and Estonia, was the main theater for the northern crusades, 
and by 1300, the Teutonic Knights had conquered it. 
o Substantial German emigration and settlement followed the 
conquest. The local Prussian population, like the Wends, was 
slowly Germanized. Thanks to their absorption of Livonia and 
conquest of Prussia, the Teutonic Knights were now rulers of 
a sizable state, answerable only to the king of Germany and 
the pope. 

In 1245, the pope made a remarkable concession to the Teutonic 
Knights: He granted full indulgences to anyone who went to ﬁ ght 
in Prussia or elsewhere at the request of the Teutonic Knights, 
even if there had been no formal papal proclamation or public 
preaching of a crusade. In effect, this concession established 
a perpetual crusade in central and eastern Europe for the next 
two centuries. 

86
Lecture 12: The Northern Crusades
Setbacks for the Teutonic Knights

For all their successes, the northern crusades and the Teutonic 
Knights encountered setbacks. For instance, they captured the 
Russian principality of Pskov in 1240 but then were defeated 
in 1242 by the Russian prince Alexander Nevsky and the forces 
of Novgorod. 

The Teutonic Knights were also victims of their own success: 
Central and eastern Europe began to run out of pagans against 
whom the Teutonic Knights and the crusaders who joined them 
from the West could ﬁ ght. 
o When the ruler of Lithuania converted to Christianity in 
1386, there were no longer any pagan polities left in that 
part of the world, and the Teutonic Knights’ reason for 
existence disappeared. 
o Increasingly, the Teutonic Knights found themselves ﬁ ghting 
for territory against Catholic Poles, which was unseemly for 
a military order. The Poles inﬂ icted a defeat on the Teutonic 
Order at the Battle of Tannenberg in 1410, from which the 
Teutonic Knights never fully recovered. 

Meanwhile, even the Germans who settled in Prussia came to see 
the Teutonic Knights’ methods of rule as heavy-handed. The result 
was a series of rebellions in Prussia, not by newly conquered pagans 
but by Christian nobles and towns determined to defend their local 
lands and their privileges against the Teutonic Knights. 
o Prussian towns and nobles banded together in defensive 
leagues, such as the Prussian League of 1440. When the 
Teutonic Knights ordered the league to disband, it refused and 
sought Polish support, offering to hand Prussia over to Poland. 
o In the ensuing war, Poland defeated the Teutonic Knights, 
absorbing part of Prussia and forcing the Teutonic Knights to 
accept Polish overlordship of the rest. 

87

The Teutonic Knights of Prussia ﬁ nally disbanded in 1525, when 
the Grand Master and many of the knights became Lutherans. The 
Teutonic Knights of Livonia limped on until 1562, when they, too, 
ﬁ nally disbanded.
Brutality of the Northern Crusades

The account of a missionary, Henry of Livonia, written in the 1220s, 
gives us a good sense of the brutality of the ﬁ rst three decades of 
the Baltic Crusades. Henry tells of continual and almost habitual 
massacres and shows why this sort of brutality was both endemic 
and possible.

In the northern crusades, crusaders had a lopsided technological 
and military superiority vis-à-vis their enemies that crusaders did 
not have in Spain or the Holy Land. The residents of the Baltic 
region had not seen stone castles held together with mortar and 
were unfamiliar with the crusaders’ metal armor, weapons, and 
siege equipment.

Another reason for the harshness of the Baltic Crusades was that 
as crusaders moved into regions farther from the German frontier, 
they encountered peoples who were more alien to them in language 
and custom than even the Wends had been. This unfamiliarity 
made it easier to treat conquered peoples severely, and it cut both 
ways: Baltic peoples strenuously resisted Christianization, washing 
themselves down to eliminate the taint of baptism.

Another factor in making the northern crusades so bloody was the 
ability of crusaders to ﬁ nd enthusiastic allies among some pagan 
groups, such as the Letts, who saw the coming of the crusaders as 
an opportunity for revenge against their rivals. In the Holy Land, 
the Crusader States sometimes found allies in such places as 
Damascus, but these alliances were not tactical and not fueled by a 
strong sense of ethnic grievance.

One ﬁ nal reason for the harshness of the northern crusades was the 
especially intense ethnic rivalries among the crusaders themselves. 

88
Lecture 12: The Northern Crusades
In the Baltics, Germans, Danes, and Swedes were all interested 
in carving out areas under their own control. Henry of Livonia 
recounts how a Danish expedition encountered an Estonian who 
refused baptism on the grounds that he had already been baptized 
by a German missionary, whereupon the Danes hanged him to 
let others know that they were no longer to accept baptism from 
German missionaries. 

German and more general Christian expansion into eastern Europe 
did not begin with the northern crusades, but crusading facilitated 
expansion and gave it a distinctive cast. From the outset and 
throughout, conversion and crusade went hand in hand in the 
north. Crusaders possessed substantial technological and military 
superiority, were imbued with a strong sense of cultural superiority, 
and were able to exploit preexisting ethnic rivalries, which enabled 
them to achieve the goal that Bernard of Clairvaux had set: 
eradicating paganism in this part of the world. 
Christiansen, The Northern Crusades. 
Rowell, Lithuania Ascending.
Urban. The Teutonic Knights.
1. Why are the northern crusades so little known today?
2. The prolonged and bloody northern crusades were fought in some 
regions that would also be where some of the 20th century’s worst 
violence occurred and that one historian has characterized as Europe’s 
“Bloodlands.” Is that a coincidence? Have the reasons why wars fought 
in eastern and northeastern Europe tended to be exceptionally bloody, 
even by the standards of the Middle Ages and the 20th century, changed 
over time? Or is there some long-enduring, structural reason for 
this violence?
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

89
The Children’s and Albigensian Crusades
Lecture 13
T
he opening of crusading theaters in Spain and northern and central 
Europe diverted manpower and energy away from the eastern 
crusades, but the Third and Fourth Crusades’ inability to take back 
Jerusalem meant that motivation for eastern crusading was still high. As 
a result, the 13th century saw a number of expeditions to the East, while 
the expansion of crusading into new theaters far removed from Jerusalem 
continued. In this lecture, we will examine the movement of crusading in 
the early 13th century from Europe’s frontiers to its heartland with the 
Albigensian Crusade, fought in southern France. We will also examine an 
odd crusade that sprang up as the Albigensian Crusade was being fought: the 
Children’s Crusade of 1212.
Catharism

The term “Albigensian” is derived from the southern French town 
of Albi. The Albigensian Crusade was a war against Cathar heretics 
and against non-Cathars who protected their Cathar neighbors. 

In general, the Cathars were religious dualists. They believed that 
good and evil, God and Satan, were coeternal and equally powerful, 
locked in perpetual equilibrium. The material world had been 
created by someone other than God, perhaps even by Satan, and it 
was evil; the spiritual world alone was good. 

In the 12th century, Catharism achieved a remarkable level of 
organizational structure in southern France and parts of Italy. 
Cathars even engaged in public disputations with Catholics, during 
which each argued for the truth of their religious beliefs and the 
efﬁ cacy of their rituals.
Crusading against the Cathars

Before the launching of the Albigensian Crusade in the ﬁ rst decade 
of the 13th century, Catholic preachers had missionized against 

90
Lecture 13: The Children’s and Albigensian Crusades
Cathars in southern France but with little effect. Over the course 
of the 12th century, preachers and popes came to regard southern 
French nobles as the reason for this failure. The local nobility 
sheltered Cathars and prevented others from moving against the 
heretics, lest the social peace be disturbed. 

On several occasions between 1204 and 1207, Pope Innocent III 
invited King Philip II Augustus of France to lead a crusade against 
the Cathars and their defenders in southern France. The French king 
declined these invitations. Then, in January 1208, a papal legate 
was assassinated after leaving a meeting with Count Raymond VI 
of Toulouse. Suspicion fell on the count and on the Cathars more 
generally. In March 1208, Innocent again called on Philip Augustus to 
lead a crusade against the south of France, and Philip again declined. 

Finally, in October 1208, Innocent bypassed the French king and 
addressed himself directly to the nobility of northern France. He 
called on northern French nobles to take up the cross against the 
count of Toulouse, all supporters of heresy in the region, and the 
heretics themselves. He promised that the crusaders could keep any 
lands they conquered while crusading.

In the spring of 1209, northern French crusaders, together with 
some Germans, made their way south. Faced with the northern 
invasion, Count Raymond VI of Toulouse apologized to the papacy 
for not having taken a harder line against the Cathars in the past. He 
even took up the cross and joined the crusade against himself. 

In July 1209, the crusaders besieged the town of Béziers, broke 
through its defenses, and killed a large number of inhabitants 
without really knowing whether the victims were Cathars or not. By 
the end of the summer, the Albigensian Crusade had almost entirely 
dispossessed the lord of Béziers, giving his lands to a crusader 
named Simon of Montfort, who became the de facto head of the 
crusade from 1209 onward. 

91

In August 1209, Raymond VI of Toulouse parted ways with the 
crusaders and was excommunicated. Simon of Montfort was 
ambitious to make more gains in southern France, and his primary 
target was the count of Toulouse. But then the Spanish king of 
Aragon, Peter, intervened against the Albigensian Crusade in 1213. 
o Peter was also lord of Montpellier in southern France and 
anxious that the northern invasion might cost him the town. 
In 1212, King Peter was fresh off a Spanish crusader victory. 
The next year, he found himself in southern France, ﬁ ghting 
not alongside crusaders but against them; he died in 1213 at the 
Battle of Muret. 
o In 1215, the Fourth Lateran Council declared that Count 
Raymond VI of Toulouse was a heretic, that all his lands were 
forfeit, and that they 
should be given to Simon 
of Montfort. Simon was 
still trying to make good 
his claims on the land 
when he died in battle in 
1218, while Raymond 
lived on.
The End of the Albigensian Crusade

By 
the 
time 
Simon 
of 
Montfort 
died, 
the 
Albigensian 
Crusade 
was 
in its 10th year, and it would 
continue for another decade; 
it did not end until 1229. 
Because the north and south 
of France were so physically 
close, crusaders often spent 
very little time on campaign 
before claiming that they had done enough to merit their indulgence 
and returning home. The result was a remarkable turnover in the 
ranks of the crusade. 
Under King Louis VIII, the French 
monarchy ﬁ nally became involved 
in the Albigensian Crusade on a 
signiﬁ cant scale and would be the 
true winner of the crusade.
© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock.

92
Lecture 13: The Children’s and Albigensian Crusades

The Albigensian Crusade did not eradicate Catharism from southern 
France; the sect remained active for perhaps a century after the 
end of the crusade. However, the crusade deprived Cathars of the 
protection of the southern French nobility, which was the true loser 
of the conﬂ ict. The true winner was the French monarchy, which 
had not even participated initially. 
o In 1223, Philip II Augustus died and his son came to the throne 
as Louis VIII. At that time, it looked as though the count of 
Toulouse might succeed in fending off the Albigensian Crusade. 
In 1224, Simon of Montfort’s heir gave up and surrendered his 
territorial claims to the king of France.
o At that point, the French monarchy ﬁ nally intervened on 
a signiﬁ cant scale. In 1226, King Louis VIII led a royal 
crusading expedition to the south. Although the king died of 
natural causes while on that expedition, it helped to turn the 
tide, and more royal crusades followed in 1227 and 1228. 
o Finally, in 1229, Count Raymond VII of Toulouse gave up the 
ﬁ ght. He agreed to indemnify the crusaders, and he also agreed 
that, upon his death, his lands should pass to his daughter, who 
in turn, was obliged to marry a member of the French royal 
family. The result was the de facto annexation of much of 
southern France by the French crown.
The Children’s Crusade

The Children’s Crusade originated in the region around Chartres, 
in northern France. Factors that seem to have triggered it included 
disappointment with the outcome of the Fourth Crusade, the 
preaching of the Albigensian Crusade, and an order of Pope 
Innocent III to hold religious processions in France. The Children’s 
Crusade seems to have originated in those processions.

In the spring of 1212, processions consisting primarily of youths 
appeared in the region around Chartres. The youths carried religious 
symbols, and they called upon God to uphold Christendom and to 

93
return to it the True Cross, that is, the fragment of the True Cross 
captured by Saladin at the Battle of the Horns of Hattin. 

“Youth” (peuri), in this context, seems to have meant young people 
between the ages of perhaps 6 and 14. Some of the youths were 
speciﬁ cally identiﬁ ed as shepherds, and some of the French pueri 
came to follow one Stephen of Cloyes, likely a shepherd himself.

Stephen and his followers made their way to the town of Saint-
Denis near Paris, perhaps aiming to exhort King Philip II Augustus 
to lead a crusade to Jerusalem. The king ordered the youths to 
disperse in late June. Some of them did so, but others began to 
march east, toward the Rhine River Valley. 

Along the way, disturbances broke out between lay residents of the 
places through which the youths passed and the local clergy; it seems 
that the residents supported the pueri and the clerics did not. Clerical 
chroniclers were uniformly hostile to the Children’s Crusade.

Reaching Germany in July 1212 and traveling up the Rhine River, 
the bands of French youths picked up German fellow-travelers. As 
it traveled through Germany, the expedition increasingly took on 
the trappings of a crusade, with vows and crosses worn on clothing. 
It also acquired an explicit destination: It was going to deliver 
Jerusalem into Christian hands through miraculous means. 

The bands of the Children’s Crusade reached Genoa in August 
1212, where a local resident estimated its numbers at 7,000. At 
Genoa, the crusaders could not pay for shipping to take them to 
Jerusalem. Some crusaders seem to have tried their luck at other 
ports but with the same results. As a result, by the end of 1212, the 
Children’s Crusade had ﬁ zzled out. 
Dissimilar Crusades

The Children’s Crusade, like the Popular Crusade of 1096, testiﬁ es 
to the appeal of Jerusalem and crusading to those who were neither 

94
Lecture 13: The Children’s and Albigensian Crusades
knights nor clerics. But the differences between the Children’s 
Crusade and the Popular Crusade are striking. 

First, the Children’s Crusade was considerably more peaceful than 
the Popular Crusade. Medieval chroniclers make no mention of its 
participants bearing arms. Further, there were no attacks against 
Jewish communities during the Children’s Crusade, which seemed 
to lack the millenarian overtones of the Popular Crusade.

Second, the Popular Crusade was not a standalone enterprise. Its 
leadership was knightly, and if its participants had not been so eager 
to rush off, then the Popular Crusade and the Barons’ Crusade would 
have made up a single expedition led by the barons. In contrast, the 
Children’s Crusade was a standalone enterprise; its leadership was 
not knightly; and it encountered overt clerical hostility. 
o The lack of knightly participation and the presence of clerical 
hostility are both explicable because the Children’s Crusade 
was, in a sense, a rebuke of what crusading had become and of 
those responsible for its failures. 
o The disaster of the Second Crusade, the inability of the 
Third Crusade to take back Jerusalem, the Fourth Crusade’s 
disinterest in taking back Jerusalem—these were signs that 
crusading was on the wrong track and of divine disfavor. 
o If the failings of nobles and clergy were keeping the crusades 
from victory, then perhaps God might choose to accomplish 
his goals through those whose station in life was humbler and 
whose age made them innocent. 

While the Albigensian Crusade transformed the shape of France, 
the Children’s Crusade had no such long-term consequences. 
Despite the oddity of its composition, the Children’s Crusade was, 
in some ways, the more traditional because its goal was Jerusalem. 
Within two decades of the Children’s Crusade, two new major 
eastern crusades would take place. 

95
Dickson, The Children’s Crusade.
Hamilton, Crusaders, Cathars, and the Holy Places. 
Pegg, A Most Holy War. 
Sumption, The Albigensian Crusade.
1. Why does the Children’s Crusade, which was rather brief and 
inconsequential, continue to fascinate even today?
2. Do crusades against heretics and their defenders, such as the Albigensian 
Crusade, represent a logical extension and growth of crusading or a 
deviation from crusading’s initial purpose?
Important Terms
Questions to Consider

96
Lecture 14: Fifth and Sixth Crusades—Tragedy and Oddity
Fifth and Sixth Crusades—Tragedy and Oddity
Lecture 14
I
n our last lecture, we examined the Albigensian Crusade, fought 
in southern France against heretics and their protectors, and the 
Children’s Crusade, a youthful expedition that ﬁ zzled after only a 
few months. In this lecture, we turn to two other crusades of the early 
13th century, the Fifth and Sixth Crusades. Both went to the eastern 
Mediterranean; beyond that, though, they could scarcely be more 
different. The Fifth Crusade was badly defeated in a way that no eastern 
crusade had been before. The Sixth Crusade resulted in the recovery of 
Jerusalem with almost no ﬁ ghting, but the recovery was short-lived, and 
it occurred under such peculiar circumstances that even in Europe, not 
everyone considered it to be a success.
Start of the Fifth Crusade

In 1213, Pope Innocent III called for a new eastern crusade, 
tried to impose an economic embargo on the Islamic world, 
and took steps to maximize the amount of manpower available 
for this Fifth Crusade. In 1215, the Fourth Lateran Council set 
the departure date for the crusade as June 1217. The council 
also imposed a clerical tax to defray the crusade’s expenses. 
Crusaders were to depart from the southern Italian port of 
Brindisi and the Sicilian port of Messina. The crusade would 
muster at Acre; its target was Egypt. 

Innocent III did not live to see the Fifth Crusade’s departure from 
Europe; he died in 1216. But the preaching that had been done since 
1213 and the organizational work carried out at the Fourth Lateran 
Council in 1215 bore fruit and garnered a good response. 
o King John Lackland of England took up the cross in 1215, 
perhaps for the protection it gave him from a baronial 
rebellion in England. However, King John never actually went 
on crusade.

97
o The king of Germany and future Holy Roman Emperor 
Frederick II Hohenstaufen also took up the cross. Indeed, the 
pope seems to have expected him to lead the crusade. 

As usual, the crusaders did not follow instructions well. They were 
slow to depart, left from unauthorized ports, and were sometimes 
quick to return home. Like the Albigensian Crusade, the Fifth 
Crusade was marked by the constant comings and goings of 
crusaders. Not until May 1218 had enough crusaders mustered at 
Acre for serious action to be taken. 

By the end of May, the Fifth Crusade had arrived in Egypt and 
besieged the port town of Damietta. Although crusaders expected 
the leadership of Frederick II Hohenstaufen, the German king 
never showed up. He dispatched some German troops to assist the 
crusaders in 1220 and 1221, but his absence left the crusade without 
a clear leader. 
o At the siege of Damietta, the crusaders chose as their leader 
John of Brienne, king of Jerusalem—a title he held even 
though his kingdom no longer included Jerusalem and had 
Acre as its capital. 
o In September 1218, the pope’s legate arrived: Pelagius of 
Albano. Pelagius had control of the funds that the papacy had 
raised and, to some extent, took over control of the crusade.
Dissension in Damietta

The year 1218 was a good time to be attacking Egypt. As the 
crusaders were besieging Damietta, a nephew of Saladin named al-
Kamil became sultan of Egypt. His younger brother, al-Mu’azzam, 
ruled Damascus and Syrian territory; relations between the two 
were not good. 
o Al-Kamil feared al-Mu’azzam and other Ayyubid rivals even 
more than he feared the crusaders. And he was far from certain 
about the willingness of Egyptians to ﬁ ght on his behalf. 

98
Lecture 14: Fifth and Sixth Crusades—Tragedy and Oddity
o As a result, starting in 1219, al-Kamil made several generous 
offers to the crusaders. If they would agree to leave Egypt, al-
Kamil would give them Jerusalem and pay to have the city’s 
defenses restored. He would also give the crusaders all the 
formerly Frankish castles and territory west of the Jordan River 
and return the fragment of the True Cross lost at the Battle of 
Hattin. 

John of Brienne wanted to accept al-Kamil’s offers, but Pelagius of 
Albano refused, with some good reasons. It was not entirely clear 
that al-Kamil had the authority to hand over Jerusalem, and there 
was no offer of territory to serve as a buffer between a restored 
kingdom of Jerusalem and Egypt. Under the inﬂ uence of Pelagius, 
the crusaders rejected al-Kamil’s offers.

Damietta fell to the Fifth Crusade in November 1219, after a siege 
of about a year and half. It was a promising if hard-won start. 
But the Fifth Crusade remained at Damietta through the whole of 
1220, paralyzed by internal dissension. The crusaders squabbled 
about the distribution of loot, and the leadership squabbled over 
the possession of Damietta. In July 1221, the Fifth Crusade ﬁ nally 
started to make its way up the Nile River toward Cairo.
Campaigning in the Nile Delta

Campaigning in the Nile delta proved to be difﬁ cult. The Nile River 
itself provided a seemingly easy way for crusaders to get supplies 
from Damietta, but crossing the delta’s many tributaries and canals 
was difﬁ cult. The crusaders had to get to Cairo quickly because the 
annual ﬂ ooding of the Nile would begin in August. 

The long delay between the crusaders’ conquest of Damietta 
and their march on Cairo gave al-Kamil time to prepare. He had 
reconciled, for the moment, with al-Mu’azzam in Damascus 
and with other Ayyubid rulers. Together, they used their superior 
knowledge of the canal system to cut the crusaders off from 
Damietta and trap them near Mansurah; there, they opened sluices 
in the canal system and ﬂ ooded the crusaders. 

99

In August 1221, the crusaders asked al-Kamil for terms. They 
agreed to return Damietta and evacuate Egypt, which they did; al-
Kamil agreed to return the True Cross, which he didn’t.

How could a crusade that had started so promisingly have ended 
so badly? In hindsight, al-Kamil’s early offers looked good; how 
could crusaders have turned down the restoration of Jerusalem? 
Pelagius of Albano bore the brunt of the criticism. Some charged 
that if the crusade had had more secular leadership, it would 
have succeeded.
Frederick II’s Leadership

One reason for the crusaders’ stubbornness during the Fifth 
Crusade was their hope that they might receive reinforcements 
from Frederick II Hohenstaufen. 
Within a decade of the collapse of 
the Fifth Crusade, that king made 
good on his crusading vows as 
part of a different expedition, the 
Sixth Crusade.

Frederick II had made quite a 
few crusading vows but had not 
fulﬁ lled them. Finally, in 1225, he 
promised that he would crusade 
to the East in 1227; if he failed 
to do so, he would accept papal 
excommunication. Toward the 
end of that same year, Frederick II 
married the daughter of the king 
of Jerusalem, John of Brienne; for 
technical reasons, that marriage 
made Frederick himself king of 
Jerusalem. When Frederick’s wife 
died in 1228, their son Conrad 
became king, with Frederick II 
acting as regent until 1243. 
Frederick II’s contemporaries 
regarded him as an oddball, 
and the orthodoxy of his 
religious views was always 
suspect.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

100
Lecture 14: Fifth and Sixth Crusades—Tragedy and Oddity

In 1226, as Frederick was preparing for his crusade, he received 
ambassadors sent by the Egyptian sultan al-Kamil. Al-Kamil 
proposed an alliance between himself and Frederick against al-
Mu’azzam in Damascus, with the promise of territorial reward. 
Nothing deﬁ nitive was agreed upon, but Frederick was open to the 
possibility of cooperation when he set sail in August 1227.

After a few days at sea, Frederick fell ill and returned to Italy, 
promising to catch up with his army when he had recovered. Pope 
Gregory IX regarded Frederick’s return to Italy as evidence that he 
had broken his crusading vow of 1225 and excommunicated him. 
o Despite the pope’s order that Frederick not continue with the 
crusade until the sentence had been lifted, Frederick resumed 
the expedition, arriving at Acre in September 1228.
o Part of his crusading army had already melted away during 
the year-long hiatus that followed Frederick’s illness, and the 
local clergy, including the patriarch of Jerusalem, was none too 
happy to see the arrival of the excommunicated emperor. Even 
worse, al-Kamil no longer needed Frederick’s help because al-
Mu’azzam had died.

Frederick led the crusading army to Jaffa, which was in Christian 
hands, and began to refortify it—hardly a threatening action to al-
Kamil. Nonetheless, al-Kamil proclaimed that a horrible war was 
about to erupt and that he was bound to do whatever he could to 
prevent it. Frederick announced that he, too, would do what he 
could to prevent any ﬁ ghting. It’s quite possible that al-Kamil and 
Frederick had agreed on these proclamations ahead of time to give 
themselves cover for what they were going to do next. 

In February 1229, Frederick and al-Kamil signed a treaty giving 
most of the city of Jerusalem, which was still unfortiﬁ ed, to the 
kingdom of Jerusalem. Frederick and al-Kamil also agreed to a 10-
year truce.

101

Both the pope and the patriarch of Jerusalem condemned the deal, 
and local nobles in the kingdom of Jerusalem did not like the fact 
that their new king was a German foreigner. Frederick departed the 
kingdom in 1229 and never returned. 
The Aftermath in Jerusalem

From Frederick’s arrival in 1228 until 1243, the kingdom of 
Jerusalem was torn apart by ﬁ ghts between the local Christian 
Frankish nobility and Frederick II’s ofﬁ cials. The desire of the 
local barons to be independent of the overlordship of the German 
emperors became clear almost immediately. 
o In 1228, Frederick tried to conﬁ scate the ﬁ ef of Beirut, held by 
a prominent baronial family, the Ibelins. The Ibelins protested 
that Frederick had no right to do this, and the other barons 
agreed. Frederick did not feel bound by local law, and because 
John of Ibelin would not voluntarily abandon his ﬁ ef, in 1231, 
he sent a ﬂ eet to take Beirut by force. 
o Such a highhanded and manifestly illegal action caused most 
of the barons to unite behind the Ibelin family. Between 1231 
and 1233, there was an active civil war in the East between 
Frederick’s supporters and his opponents. In 1233, the Ibelin 
family defeated the Hohenstaufen forces on Cyprus and drove 
them off the island, which fell into the Ibelin camp. 
o A decade of relative peace followed, but the barons of the Holy 
Land took up the offensive again in 1243, when they besieged 
the city of Tyre. The citizens of Tyre welcomed the Ibelins, and 
the Hohenstaufen supporters eventually surrendered the city’s 
citadel. The Ibelins and the barons of the kingdom of Jerusalem 
had shown that they, not the emperors of Germany, had the real 
power in Outremer. 

Frederick II’s one success during the Sixth Crusade was not long-
lasting. In 1239, after the 10-year truce expired, an Ayyubid sultan 
occupied Jerusalem almost without resistance. In 1240, Jerusalem 
again returned to Christian rule, but then a newly arrived Turkish 

102
Lecture 14: Fifth and Sixth Crusades—Tragedy and Oddity
tribe, the Khwarezmians, captured Jerusalem in 1244. Thereafter, 
Jerusalem would remain under Muslim rule until World War I.
Abulaﬁ a, Frederick II. 
Powell, Anatomy of a Crusade, 1213–1221. 
1. Was the Fifth Crusade’s focus on Egypt a wise choice? Were there other 
viable options available to the Fifth Crusade?
2. How historically signiﬁ cant was the return of Jerusalem to Christian rule 
during the Sixth Crusade? Was Frederick II Hohenstaufen’s negotiated 
return of Jerusalem an important achievement or relatively meaningless?
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

103
Louis IX—The Crusader Saint
Lecture 15
I
n the last lecture, we examined the Fifth and Sixth Crusades. The Fifth 
Crusade, launched against Egypt, surpassed the Second in its futility and 
ended in crusader defeat. The Sixth Crusade resulted in the negotiated 
return of Jerusalem to Christian rule, but not, as it turned out, for very long. 
As a result, the need for eastern crusades remained high throughout the 13th
century. In this lecture, we will examine the Seventh and Eighth Crusades, 
each led by King Louis IX of France. The king’s piety and thorough 
preparation raised hopes that his efforts would meet with more success than 
his predecessors’ had. If King Louis IX were to fail, the disappointment 
would be all the more unnerving.
Preparation for the Seventh Crusade

French chroniclers report that a near-fatal illness late in 1244 moved 
Louis IX to take up the cross for the ﬁ rst time. His decision is partly 
explained by his personal piety and partly by the fact that he faced 
signiﬁ cant baronial opposition and rebellion in the years leading up 
to the Seventh Crusade. A crusade gave Louis IX the opportunity to 
reassert his royal authority. 

Events in Outremer might also have played a role in the timing 
of the Seventh Crusade. A few months before Louis made his 
crusading vow, the Crusader States had suffered another setback 
that echoed what had happened back in 1187: a decisive military 
defeat and the loss of Jerusalem. 
o Egypt had allied with the Khwarezmians and captured 
Jerusalem in 1244; later that same year, the Egyptians and 
Khwarezmians decisively defeated the combined forces of 
Homs, Damascus, and the kingdom of Jerusalem at the Battle 
of La Forbie. Virtually the entire Frankish army was killed or 
taken captive. 

104
Lecture 15: Louis IX—The Crusader Saint
o The defeat at La Forbie was as decisive as the one at the 
Horns of Hattin in 1187, but this time, the result was not an 
immediate and massive loss of territory in the kingdom of 
Jerusalem. Egypt and the Khwarezmians still regarded their 
Ayyubid rivals in Palestine and Syria as a greater threat than 
the kingdom of Jerusalem. Until someone emerged who could 
unite Egypt and the cities of Syria, the kingdom of Jerusalem 
would hold on. 

When Louis IX made his vow late in 1244, the pope had not yet 
issued a crusading bull in response to the most recent loss of 
Jerusalem, but he did so in 1245. The planning for the Seventh 
Crusade was massive, 
and it stretched out 
over several years. The 
preparations did not 
always go smoothly.

Still, between 1244 and 
1248, Louis raised a 
substantial 
crusading 
army, 
numbering 
perhaps 
10,000 
to 
15,000. The expenses 
Louis incurred during 
the Seventh Crusade 
would be enormous—
six times the royal 
government’s 
annual 
income between 1247 
and 1257.
o Incurring such great expenses changed royal government 
itself; then, as always, war meant the growth of government. 
To squeeze as much money as he could out of his subjects, 
Louis overhauled the royal administration and increased royal 
supervision of local ofﬁ cials. 
Known for his piety, King Louis IX of 
France once said that a Christian should 
not attempt to defend the religion “except 
with his sword, and that he should thrust 
into the scoundrel’s belly, and as far as it 
will enter.”
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

105
o The result was a French state that, while vastly smaller in powers 
and scope than its 20th-century counterpart, was considerably 
more omnipresent than its 12th-century predecessor. 
o Regular royal income, no matter how assiduously collected, 
could not cover the cost of the crusade; thus, Louis had to rely on 
other expedients, including ecclesiastical taxes, supplemented 
by property conﬁ scated from Jewish moneylenders, whom 
Louis expelled from France in the late 1240s. 
Triumph at Damietta 

Finally, in August 1248, Louis departed France, reaching Cyprus in 
September. Once there, he had to wait through May of 1249 while 
stragglers arrived. Barons from the kingdom of Jerusalem and the 
Grand Master of the Templars joined Louis at Cyprus. 

The local barons and Templars recommended that Louis enter into 
negotiations with the new sultan of Egypt, al-Kamil’s successor. 
They believed he might be willing to make large concessions to the 
crusaders, but Louis was not interested in negotiation, and in any 
case, Frederick II’s negotiated return of Jerusalem had proven to 
be ephemeral. Louis seems to have envisioned nothing short of the 
conquest and French settlement of the whole of Egypt.

Louis and his remaining forces landed in Egypt in early June 
1249, outside Damietta. Within a day of the landing, the garrison 
at Damietta ﬂ ed up the Nile, leaving Damietta open and fully 
supplied. It was an auspicious beginning. Equally promising, the 
sultan of Egypt, al-Salih Ayyub, was deathly ill. His followers and 
subjects had one eye on the crusaders and the other on the looming 
succession; al-Salih’s son, Turan-Shah, was away from Egypt.

The Seventh Crusade remained at Damietta from June to November 
1249, waiting until the annual ﬂ ood of the Nile subsided and for 
the arrival of latecomers. Some crusaders, especially the Italians, 
recommended an attack on the port city of Alexandria, but to take 
control of Egypt, the crusaders had to take Cairo. 

106
Lecture 15: Louis IX—The Crusader Saint
Disaster at Mansurah

In November 1249, the Seventh Crusade began to move upriver 
toward Cairo. The Egyptian sultan al-Salih was at Mansurah, 
between Damietta and Cairo, but al-Salih died before the crusaders 
reached Mansurah. The sultan’s heir, Turan-Shah, was in northern 
Iraq at that moment; until his arrival, the resistance against the 
Seventh Crusade would be led by the late sultan’s widow and his 
Turkish bodyguards, the Mamluks. 

In December, the Seventh Crusade arrived within sight of 
Mansurah, but between the crusaders and the town was a canal that 
was difﬁ cult to cross; on the opposite bank of the canal and outside 
Mansurah’s walls was the Egyptians’ camp. In February 1250, the 
crusaders found a place to ford the canal at some distance from 
Mansurah. The plan was to move many of the crusaders across the 
canal without the defenders noticing and then launch a surprise 
attack against Mansurah. 

But the crusaders who were the ﬁ rst to make it across the canal, 
led by Louis IX’s brother Robert of Artois, did not wait for the rest 
of the crusading army to cross. Instead, the advance guard charged 
straight into the Egyptian camp, where they indeed surprised the 
defenders and killed the Egyptians’ ﬁ eld commander. 
o Then, Robert of Artois and the advance guard charged into 
Mansurah itself, where they became separated, got trapped in 
the town’s winding streets, and were killed. By the time the rest 
of the crusaders made it across the canal, the Egyptians knew 
they were coming and counterattacked. 
o Louis IX and the crusaders managed to hold their ground, but 
they sustained severe losses. They were now on the same side 
of the canal as Mansurah, but Mansurah itself was no closer 
to falling. 
o The last straw came when the Egyptians cut the crusaders’ 
supply line to Damietta. In April, the Seventh Crusade began 
to retreat back toward Damietta, but the retreat became a rout. 

107
On April 6, 1250, Louis IX surrendered. The king himself and 
most of his army were taken prisoner.

Louis negotiated the terms of his and his army’s release. He pledged 
to return Damietta to Turan-Shah and to pay a large ransom in two 
installments for the release of himself and his army. In return, 
Turan-Shah pledged to free Louis and some of his followers, while 
keeping the rest as guarantees that the king would pay the ransom.

Before the terms of this agreement could be implemented, Turan-
Shah was killed in a coup in early May 1250. Henceforth, Egypt 
would be under Mamluk rule. The Mamluks honored the terms of 
Louis’s release and, indeed, set the remaining prisoners free later in 
1250, without receiving the second installment on the ransom. With 
the release of Louis IX and his army in 1250, the Seventh Crusade 
was essentially over.
The Eighth Crusade

The capture of Louis IX occasioned anguish in Europe but 
surprisingly little recrimination of the sort that had followed the 
Second and the Fifth Crusades. Louis IX’s reputation for piety 
shielded him and the crusade more generally from criticism. 
And the disaster of the Seventh Crusade did not keep Louis from 
dreaming of another crusade. In 1267, he took up the cross once 
again, along with three of his sons, in the Eighth Crusade.

Planning for the Eighth Crusade was just as extensive and 
protracted as it had been for the Seventh Crusade, and recruitment 
was, if anything, even more impressive than it had been earlier. 
Edward Longshanks, the future King Edward I of England, took up 
the cross, as did King James of Aragon. 

As always, coordinating departures and arrivals proved impossible. 
Louis IX set May 1270 as the departure date, with the crusaders to 
muster on the islands of Sardinia and Sicily. But the king of Aragon 
left in June 1269 and was killed when his ﬂ eet ran into a storm. 
Most others overshot the departure date.

108
Lecture 15: Louis IX—The Crusader Saint

The crusaders assembling on Sardinia and Sicily assumed that the 
destination of the Eighth Crusade would again be Egypt, but after 
they set sail, Louis announced, for reasons that are still unclear, that 
the Eighth Crusade would go to North Africa, speciﬁ cally to Tunis. 
The crusaders arrived outside Tunis in mid-July 1270.

It was hot in Tunisia in July, and the crusaders had difﬁ culty securing 
access to fresh water. After only a few weeks, one of Louis’s sons 
fell sick and died, and then Louis himself died on August 25, 1270. 
His brother Charles of Anjou took over the crusade and cut it short. 
Charles exacted a tribute payment from the ruler of Tunis, secured a 
promise that Christian missionaries would be allowed to operate in 
Tunis, and pronounced the Eighth Crusade over. 

The Eighth Crusade made Charles of Anjou wealthier but otherwise 
accomplished nothing beyond killing off Louis IX, one of his sons, 
and not a few other crusaders and their companions. Once again, 
hopes and expectations of victory were dashed. 

Louis IX’s companion on the Seventh Crusade, a nobleman named 
Jean de Joinville, lived to see the king’s canonization in 1297, but 
Joinville had disapproved of Louis’s decision to take up the cross for 
the Eighth Crusade. He saw a conﬂ ict between crusading and duty to 
one’s own kingdom and people. Because of this conﬂ ict, crusading 
was not necessarily an instrument of salvation; it could also be a 
source of mortal sin and, therefore, an instrument of damnation.

The Seventh and Eighth Crusades were arguably the best organized 
and best ﬁ nanced crusading expeditions to date, yet they failed—the 
Seventh Crusade disastrously and the Eighth Crusade ineffectually. 
Louis IX’s crusades were the last major eastern crusades to be 
headed by a European monarch. After the Seventh Crusade, the 
eastern Mediterranean would not experience a European military 
intervention similar to the Seventh Crusade until 1798, when the 
rapidly rising Napoleon Bonaparte invaded Egypt. 

109
Jordan, Louis IX and the Challenge of the Crusade.
Le Goff, Saint Louis. 
1. After the failure of the Fifth Crusade, should Louis IX have focused the 
Seventh Crusade on Egypt once again? Did his crusade have a realistic 
prospect for success? Could Louis IX have affected the outcome of the 
Seventh Crusade by making different decisions?
2. Was Louis IX’s personal piety a help or a hindrance to him as a crusade 
leader? Or was that piety largely irrelevant and the outcome of his 
crusades determined by forces external to the king’s religiosity?
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

110
Lecture 16: The Hohenstaufen and Shepherds’ Crusades
The Hohenstaufen and Shepherds’ Crusades
Lecture 16
I
n our last lecture, we examined the crusades of King Louis IX: the 
Seventh Crusade, leading to the king’s capture in 1250, and the Eighth 
Crusade, ending with his death in 1270. Louis’s crusades added to the 
litany of the eastern crusades’ disappointments and outright failure, but 
crusading activity remained high throughout the king’s lifetime. Some of 
that activity arose in response to Louis’s debacle in Egypt, and some of it 
ended in crusader triumph, albeit far from Egypt or the Holy Land. In this 
lecture, we will examine two mid-13th-century crusades: the crusades against 
the Hohenstaufen dynasty, beginning in 1239; and the Shepherds’ Crusade of 
1251, which would have a sequel in the Shepherds’ Crusade of 1320.
The Papal States and the Holy Roman Empire

Perhaps it was inevitable that popes, once in possession of the power 
to launch crusades, would eventually launch them against Catholics 
who happened to be the papacy’s political opponents. The ﬁ rst such 
opponent against whom the papacy brought crusading to bear was a 
Hohenstaufen king of Germany and Holy Roman Emperor.
o The Holy Roman Empire included northern Italy, which made 
it the neighbor of the Papal States in central Italy. Imperial 
control in northern Italy was always difﬁ cult to maintain, and 
popes feared that having such powerful German neighbors to 
their north would lead to the swallowing up of the Papal States. 
o Papal fears of imperial expansion became especially acute 
when, in the 1190s, the Holy Roman Emperors also became the 
rulers of the kingdom of Sicily, which included southern Italy. 
The Papal States now faced encirclement. 

In their struggles against German kings and emperors, popes had 
two advantages. First, the ofﬁ ce of king of Germany was as much 
elective as it was hereditary, and second, to assume the title of Holy 
Roman Emperor, the German king had to be crowned by the pope. 

111
Because the papacy had more leverage with German kings than it 
did with other monarchs, conﬂ icts between popes and the kings of 
Germany tended to be especially sharp. 
The Crusade against Frederick II

The ﬁ rst Hohenstaufen ruler to have a crusade proclaimed 
against him was Frederick II, the crusader who had incurred 
excommunication in the 1220s, negotiated the return of Jerusalem 
to Christian rule, and then ended his crusade by returning to 
Europe to fend off a papally initiated attack on the kingdom 
of Sicily. Frederick II had resisted that attack, and in 1230, he 
reached an uneasy truce with the papacy, which lifted his sentence 
of excommunication and agreed to recognize his negotiation of 
Jerusalem’s return to Christian control. 

But in 1239, after Frederick had won victories in northern Italy 
against imperial opponents, Pope Gregory IX excommunicated 
him again and proclaimed a crusade against him. At ﬁ rst, the pope 
offered crusading indulgences to those who were already in Milan 
and other places in northern Italy that resisted Frederick, but then 
Gregory extended the crusading call outward. He ordered that 
crusading vows could be fulﬁ lled by remaining in Europe and 
ﬁ ghting Frederick rather than traveling to the East.

Through the 1240s, the papacy ratcheted up the crusade against 
Frederick. In 1245, Pope Innocent IV deposed Frederick, releasing 
all his subjects from their obligation to obey him. Innocent IV also 
spread the preaching of the anti-Hohenstaufen crusade even farther 
than Gregory IX had. In 1246, the pope ordered crusading preachers 
in Germany to give the anti-Hohenstaufen crusade priority over the 
crusade to the East.

Outside of Hungary and a few German regions, the proclamation 
of crusades against Frederick seems to have generated few recruits. 
European monarchs were not keen on supporting a crusade against 
one of their own. Further, the crusades against Frederick overlapped 
with Louis IX’s Seventh Crusade, and when that eastern crusade 

112
Lecture 16: The Hohenstaufen and Shepherds’ Crusades
ended in disaster, contemporaries in Europe looked askance upon a 
papacy that seemed more interested in overthrowing Frederick than 
in helping Louis. 

Still, the papacy persevered in the anti-Hohenstaufen crusade. When 
Frederick died in 1250, he was still in a state of excommunication 
and the crusade against him was ongoing. The ultimate goal of the 
papacy and its allies was to end Hohenstaufen rule entirely.
End of the Hohenstaufen Dynasty

Frederick II’s heir in Germany was Conrad IV, against whom the 
papacy proclaimed a crusade in 1251. This was ironic considering 
that Conrad also held the title of king of Jerusalem. After Conrad 
IV’s death in 1254, crusading against the Hohenstaufen and their 
allies continued. 

In the end, it was the crusader Charles of Anjou, the brother of 
King Louis IX of France, who ended the Hohenstaufen dynasty. 
In 1266, Charles defeated the Hohenstaufen ruler of the kingdom 
of Sicily, Manfred, an illegitimate son of Frederick II; in 1268, he 
defeated, captured, and executed Conrad IV’s heir, Conradin, the 
last Hohenstaufen ruler of Germany. In 1273, the German electors 
chose as the new king of Germany Count Rudolf of Hapsburg.

The end of the Hohenstaufen dynasty had a peculiar postscript in 
Sicily. In 1282, during an event known as the Sicilian Vespers, Sicily 
rebelled against Charles of Anjou and accepted the overlordship of 
the king of Aragon, Peter III, who had a Hohenstaufen wife. 
o The papacy didn’t welcome the ejection of Charles from Sicily 
and proclaimed a crusade against Peter in 1285. This call was 
heeded by the king of France, Philip III, who led a crusading 
army against Aragon. 
o For the second time in the 13th century, the king of Aragon 
found himself ﬁ ghting French crusaders. But this time, the 
Aragonese defeated the French, and Philip III himself died in 
1285 during the retreat. 

113
The Shepherds’ Crusade of 1251

The Shepherds’ Crusade originated somewhere along the frontier 
between France and Germany, possibly in Flanders. Most of those 
who participated were peasants of various sorts, but the crusaders 
seem to have identiﬁ ed with shepherds; they carried before them a 
banner depicting the Lamb of God.

Both Louis IX’s Seventh Crusade and the crusades against the 
Hohenstaufen shaped the origins of the Shepherds’ Crusade, albeit 
in different ways. 
o The capture of Louis in Egypt had been a tremendous shock, and 
although Louis himself had been freed before the Shepherds’ 
Crusade got underway, much of his army was still being held 
prisoner. In 1250, Louis wrote a letter to Europe calling for a 
crusading expedition to come and assist him, and he even 
suggested that the expedition begin its journey east in April and 
May 1251—exactly when the Shepherds’ Crusade began. 
o As for the crusade against the Hohenstaufen, the areas in which 
the Shepherds’ Crusade of 1251 originated were also areas 
of intense crusade preaching against the Hohenstaufen. This 
preaching seems merely to have convinced the shepherds that 
Louis IX, and Jerusalem more generally, could expect no help 
from the pope or the European nobility. Thus, the Shepherds’ 
Crusade would take matters into its own hands; the crusaders 
would go east for the purpose of helping Louis.

Although no crusading bull called the Shepherds’ Crusade of 
1251, those who participated regarded themselves as crusaders. 
They armed themselves with what weapons they could ﬁ nd and 
with farm tools. For reasons that are still unclear, the crusaders 
began marching toward Paris, rather than the Holy Land or the 
Mediterranean. Various bands then departed Paris in June 1951, 
scattering to the north and south. 

As they traveled, the crusaders’ frustrations against those whom they 
blamed for the failures of crusading turned violent. Speciﬁ cally, the 

114
Lecture 16: The Hohenstaufen and Shepherds’ Crusades
crusaders began attacking and killing Christian clergy in the places 
through which they passed, such as Rouen and Orléans.
o By late June or early July 1251, the Shepherds’ Crusade had 
lost the support of the queen of France, and the English king 
had ordered his ofﬁ cials in southwestern France not to admit 
the crusaders under any circumstances.
o Some bands may have gotten as far as Bordeaux in the 
southwest, but by that point, French royal ofﬁ cials knew 
what to expect and had organized their forces. They killed a 
crusade leader known as the Master of Hungary and some of 
his followers and dispersed the others. 
o Probably by the end of July, the Shepherds’ Crusade of 
1251 was over. Despite its brevity, this ﬂ are-up of violent 
anticlericalism would be remembered for centuries and would 
have a successor in 1320. 
The Shepherds’ Crusade of 1320

In 1320, frustrated crusading 
expectations once again resulted 
in an unauthorized and violent 
Shepherds’ Crusade. In 1313, 
kings of France and England took 
crusading vows and collected 
crusading taxes, but in what 
had by then become a frequent 
occurrence, 
they 
kept 
the 
money and did not actually go 
on crusade. 

Further, 
even 
though 
King 
Philip IV of France had expelled 
France’s Jews in 1306, his 
successor, Louis X, in July 1315, 
allowed Jews to return for a 
In 1313, King Philip IV of France 
took crusading vows and 
collected crusading taxes but 
failed to go on crusade, feeding 
the frustration that would 
lead to a second Shepherds’ 
Crusade in 1320.
© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock.

115
period that was supposed to last for 12 years. Louis also decreed 
that debts owed to formerly expelled Jews would have to be repaid, 
with two-thirds of the debt going to the king and one-third to the 
Jews. Christian debtors were unhappy at the return of their debts.

At ﬁ rst, it looked as though the Shepherds’ Crusade of 1320 might 
simply be a replay of the Shepherds’ Crusade of 1251. 
o Somewhere in northern France, shepherds and other laborers 
gathered and proclaimed that they were going to the Holy 
Land. The crusaders ﬁ rst went to Paris, where they called on 
the French king, now Philip V, to lead them east.
o But the king would not meet with the crusaders, and ofﬁ cials 
imprisoned those whom they could seize. The crusaders freed 
their captured companions and began marching south toward 
the sea.

The greatest difference between the Shepherds’ Crusade of 1320 
and that of 1251 was their targets. The ﬁ rst Shepherds’ Crusade 
was primarily anticlerical and attacked Jewish buildings and 
probably Jews themselves when there were no Christian clerics to 
be attacked. The Shepherds’ Crusade of 1320 primarily attacked the 
recently returned Jews as it passed through central France and into 
southern France. 

Royal ofﬁ cials mustered armies and spent the summer of 1320 
hunting down various bands that kept dwindling in size. Some 
crusaders survived to reach northeastern Spain, continuing attacks 
on Jewish communities there until Aragonese royal forces put an 
end to them.

Perhaps what is most striking about the Hohenstaufen and 
Shepherds’ Crusades is their tendency to consume their own. 
o The crusades against the Hohenstaufen turned crusading 
against Frederick II Hohenstaufen, the only crusader to succeed 
in winning Jerusalem back for Christianity after Saladin’s 

116
Lecture 16: The Hohenstaufen and Shepherds’ Crusades
conquest in 1187. The Shepherds’ Crusade of 1251 turned 
crusading against the clergy. 
o As these crusades turned on their own, they proved incapable 
of saving that to which they had given birth, namely, the 
Crusader States and the kingdom of Jerusalem.
Abulaﬁ a, Frederick II. 
Barber, Crusaders and Heretics, 12th to 14th Centuries. 
Dickson, “The Advent of the Pastores.”
1. Historians sometimes designate the crusades against the Hohenstaufen 
dynasty and Italian city-states as the “political crusades.” Is that an 
appropriate and useful designation or not?
2. If participants in the Shepherds’ Crusades had written accounts of their 
expeditions, how might those accounts have differed from those written 
by clerical observers? How can historians properly study phenomena, 
such as the Shepherds’ Crusades, for which nearly all the evidence is 
generated by hostile parties?
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

117
The Fall—1291
Lecture 17
I
n our last lecture, we examined the Shepherds’ Crusades of 1251 and 
1320 and the crusades against the Hohenstaufen dynasty from 1239 
through 1268, when the last Hohenstaufen king of Germany was defeated 
and executed. Even as the crusades against the Hohenstaufen were going 
on, the situation in the Holy Land continued to deteriorate, at least from 
the crusader point of view, and neither the Seventh nor the Eighth Crusades 
brought much in the way of substantive help. As a result, by the end of the 
13th century, the Crusader States were gone. In this lecture, we will examine 
how that came to pass.
The War of Saint Sabas

By 1250, the Crusader States were not in good shape. As we have 
seen, the kingdom of Jerusalem had been defeated at the Battle of 
La Forbie in 1244, which came on the heels of 15 years of sporadic 
ﬁ ghting between Hohenstaufen ofﬁ cials and much of the local 
nobility. In 1256, the Crusader States became embroiled in the War 
of Saint Sabas, which pitted Venice against Genoa. 

Well before the War of Saint Sabas, commercial rivalry among 
Pisans, Genoese, and Venetians occasioned violence in the towns of 
the Crusader States and across the Mediterranean. Italian merchants 
in the Crusader States always coveted waterfront property and tried 
to deny access to this property to their rivals. 

In Acre, the Venetian and Genoese quarters were separated by 
a neutral section of town belonging to a monastery called Saint 
Sabas. The Venetians and the Genoese each petitioned the papacy 
to be granted possession of the monastery and its territory, and in 
a breakdown of papal recordkeeping, each secured the papal grant 
it was seeking. When the Genoese and Venetians confronted each 
other with their grants, war erupted. 

118
Lecture 17: The Fall—1291

The Genoese, assisted by some local nobles, besieged the Venetian 
quarter of Acre; the Venetians received reinforcements from Venice 
and, in turn, besieged the Genoese in their quarter. By 1257, virtually 
the whole population of the Crusader States was choosing sides. 

The most intense ﬁ ghting took place between 1256 and1260, and 
the war dragged on until 1270. Many of Acre’s defensive towers 
and some sections of the city were destroyed. 

Such events as the War of Saint Sabas compounded broader 
structural problems that had always faced the Crusader States. The 
greatest problem was demographic: The Franks who settled in the 
East were just not that numerous. In addition, turnover within the 
Crusader States’ nobility was high because so many lineages were 
extinguished in battle, and ﬁ nding relatives in Europe willing to 
take up risky positions in the East was not easy. 
o Further, the absence of conquests following the First Crusade, 
with the exception of Ascalon and the surrounding region in the 
1150s, meant that the Crusader States had to live off existing 
resources rather than acquiring additional ones. Defensive 
battles were not nearly as proﬁ table as offensive battles. 
As a result, during the 12th and 13th centuries, noble families 
increasingly died out, went bankrupt, or gave up on trying to 
make a go of it in Outremer. 
o More and more, nobles and their rulers sold or donated 
territories and castles to the military orders, whose 
landholdings in Europe gave them the ﬁ nancial resources to 
absorb these economically losing propositions. But the further 
empowerment of the military orders was a double-edged 
sword; after all, during the War of Saint Sabas, they had fought 
on opposite sides. 
The Mongols and the Mamluks

In the 1240s and 1250s, crusaders thought that perhaps they had 
found a solution to their problems: the Mongols. 

119
o Around 1200, various Mongol tribes had united under 
the leadership of Genghis Khan and embarked on a series 
of conquests stretching from Korea and China through 
eastern Europe.
o In 1241, Mongols swept through Poland and the Ukraine 
and defeated a German army. Europe then caught one of the 
luckiest breaks in history: Genghis Khan’s son Ogadai, now 
leader of the Mongols, died, and the Mongols returned home, 
sparing Europe. After the death of Ogadai, the Mongols took a 
decade off but resumed their conquests in 1251.

During the Seventh Crusade, Louis IX entertained hopes that the 
Mongols could be converted to Christianity and would then enter 
into an alliance against the Ayyubids. In response to diplomatic 
overtures, the Mongols declined to convert and tried to exact tribute 
from Louis.

When the Mongols captured Baghdad in 1258 and killed the last 
Abbasid caliph, the Franks did not mind, but when the Mongols 
captured Muslim Damascus in 1259 and Aleppo in 1260, the Franks 
became concerned; the Mongols were rolling toward the kingdom 
of Jerusalem. 

The Mamluks of Egypt were also concerned, and in 1260, they 
proposed an alliance with the Franks against the Mongols. Fearing 
both the Mamluks and the Mongols, the kingdom of Jerusalem 
declined to ally with the Mamluks, but it agreed to allow the 
Mamluks free passage through the kingdom of Jerusalem so that 
they could ﬁ ght the Mongols. 

In 1260, a Mamluk army entered Galilee and, at the Battle of Ain 
Jalut, defeated the Mongols, who withdrew to present-day Iran and 
Iraq. But as a result of Ain Jalut, the Mamluks gained control of 
much of Palestine and Syria. Just as Saladin had gained control 
of Syrian territory and encircled the Crusader States, now the 
Mamluks had done the same. 

120
Lecture 17: The Fall—1291

Between 1260 and 1277, Baibars, the Mamluk victor at Ain Jalut 
and the new sultan of Egypt, came close to driving the Franks 
into the sea. He took the town of Arsuf in 1265 and attacked the 
outskirts of Acre in 1266. In 1268, Baibars captured Antioch and 
massacred or enslaved its Christian inhabitants. By the time of the 
leader’s death in 1277, the kingdom of Jerusalem had lost all of its 
inland territory to Baibars. In 1289, Baibars’s successor, Kalavun, 
captured Tripoli, massacring its inhabitants and razing the city, 
thereby putting an end to the third of the four Crusader States.
The Fall of Acre and Tyre

If ever there was a time for an eastern crusade, now was it. The 
kingdom of Jerusalem made a truce with the Mamluks, hoping to 
buy time for the organization of such a crusade. Its calls for help 
were heeded, but organizing a major expedition required years of 
preparation. The only people who could move quickly in defense of 
the kingdom were peasants and urban laborers. 

In 1290, an unnumbered and popular crusade consisting of perhaps 
some 2,000 to 3,000 peasants and artisans set out from northern 
In 1271, the Mamluk leader Baibars captured the most famous crusader castle in 
Outremer: the Crac des Chevaliers.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

121
Italy for Acre. Once at Acre, they proved difﬁ cult to control; in 
August 1290, they attacked and killed Muslim merchants operating 
in Acre and Muslim peasants outside. 
o Templars and Hospitallers at Acre, knowing what the 
consequences would be, intervened to cut short the crusaders’ 
killing, but the damage had been done. 
o Kalavun and the Mamluks demanded that the king of Jerusalem 
hand the crusaders over to them for punishment. Christian 
authorities in Acre apologized for what the crusaders had done, 
but they would not hand the crusaders over—to do so would 
likely result in no further assistance from the West. 

In April 1291, the Mamluks besieged Acre, breaching its defenses 
on May 18. The Franks and crusaders made a mad dash for the 
harbor, but many were killed or enslaved. A Templar citadel 
held on for another 10 days, but its walls were undermined. The 
Templars, having been promised their lives, surrendered and were 
promptly executed.

The one major town remaining in Frankish hands, Tyre, surrendered 
in May 1291, a month after Acre fell. By the end of August, the 
Mamluks had mopped up a few inland castles held by Franks.
The End of Eastern Crusading

There would be no more crusades aiming directly at the conquest 
of Jerusalem after the fall of the Crusader States, although not for 
a lack of thinking about such a conquest. The late 13th and the 14th 
centuries were the great age of the crusading treatise, in which 
authors theorized about what form such expeditions should take in 
the future. 

On a few occasions in the 14th century, it looked as though there 
might be a serious attempt to launch another crusade into the 
eastern Mediterranean. 
o In 1313, the kings of France and of England each took up the 
cross, but the French king died the next year. In the 1330s, 

122
Lecture 17: The Fall—1291
another French king took up the cross and made serious plans 
for an eastern crusade but cancelled the project in 1336. 
o In 1365, King Peter of Cyprus led an expedition of perhaps 
some 10,000 crusaders in an attack on the Egyptian port 
of Alexandria. The crusade took Alexandria quickly but 
then evacuated it six days later, and the crusade 
disintegrated afterwards. 

The Crusader States had provided allies, staging areas, and places 
to retreat. Their loss in 1291 would increase the difﬁ culties for any 
future crusaders in the East.

The temptation to use crusades to deal with Europe’s internal 
problems, both political and religious, instead of to capture 
Jerusalem, also proved too strong. Much of the crusading that was 
actually done in the 14th and 15th centuries was carried out against 
heretics and papal political enemies. 

Finally, there were no more major expeditions to the East because 
such expeditions had become so expensive, so difﬁ cult to organize 
and manage, that even kings who had taken up the cross could not 
quite bring themselves to follow through on their vows. Going 
on crusade meant incurring enormous expense for an uncertain 
outcome and leaving one’s kingdom vulnerable to forces of revolt 
or covetous neighbors.

The dying out of crusading within Europe was a slower process, 
because such crusades were not as taxing on participants and the 
crusades’ goals sometimes overlapped with the aims of secular 
rulers. Crusading still took place in the 16th century, but it ultimately 
faded out, partly because secular royal authority had grown so 
strong in Europe that kings were not willing to allow spiritual 
authorities to determine when wars should be fought. The last 
formal crusade is generally reckoned to have been the Morean War, 
from 1684 to 1699, which pitted Venice and its allies against the 
Ottoman Turks.

123
Irwin, The Middle East in the Middle Ages.
Leopold, How to Recover the Holy Land.
Schein, Fideles crucis.
Thorau, The Lion of Egypt.
1. The Mamluks, not Saladin, were the ones to drive the Franks into the 
sea. Was that because of the Mamluks’ willingness to wage war in a 
much more severe manner than Saladin did, or was it because the 
Mamluks faced an easier task and a more favorable historical situation 
than Saladin faced?
2. Based on what you now know about the events of the crusades, do 
you agree or disagree with Sir Steven Runciman’s famous assessment: 
“In the long sequence of interaction and fusion between Orient and 
Occident out of which our civilization has grown, the Crusades were 
a tragic and destructive episode. … There was so much courage and 
so little honor, so much devotion and so little understanding. High 
ideals were besmirched by cruelty and greed, enterprise and endurance 
by a blind and narrow self-righteousness”? In the next seven thematic 
lectures, consider whether what you learn changes your opinion of 
Runciman’s assessment. 
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

124
Lecture 18: The Crusades and Their Critics
The Crusades and Their Critics
Lecture 18
I
n our last lecture, we saw the fall of the last of the Crusader States in 
1291. None of the crusades launched after 1291 ever set foot on Syrian 
or Palestinian territory that had once belonged to the four Crusader 
States. The end of the Crusader States, therefore, marks the end of an era and 
an opportune moment to take stock of the crusades and their consequences. 
We will begin to do so with a consideration of medieval criticism leveled at 
crusading or, more commonly, at speciﬁ c crusades or crusading institutions.
Criticism of the Crusades

Instances of blanket condemnation of all crusading were 
rare. Generally, such criticisms centered on the question of 
whether crusading and its violence violated the moral precepts 
of Christianity. 
o According to the French theologian Peter Comestor (d. 1179), 
he once received a question from the patriarch of Jerusalem 
about whether crusading was permissible in light of the biblical 
command “Thou shalt not kill.” In response, Peter told the 
patriarch to “act in a manly way, be composed, and shed the 
blood of Christ’s enemies.” 
o Roger Bacon (d. 1292), a theologian, an early specialist in the 
ﬁ eld of optics, and a member of the Franciscan Order, abhorred 
the bloodshed of the crusades, but he also favored the recovery 
of the Holy Land. He tried to reconcile these two impulses with 
a proposition to build 12 giant mirrors in the East; Christians 
could then use these mirrors and the sun’s rays to start ﬁ res 
among enemy Muslim armies and, thereby, drive the Muslims 
away and secure Jerusalem without killing anyone. 

More common than implicit or explicit rejection of all crusading 
was criticism of individual crusades that, to a given author’s mind, 

125
did not match the crusading ideal. Such criticism tended to ﬂ ow 
most easily when the crusade in question had been a failure. 
o We have already seen how the Second Crusade’s failure led to 
recrimination in Europe, but there were even earlier examples. 
Writing in the early 12th century, the English author Orderic 
Vitalis thought that the defeat of Bohemond’s crusade against 
the Byzantine Empire in 1107 and 1108 was proof that God 
had not approved of the expedition. 
o Some chroniclers of the First Crusade took the defeat of the 
People’s Crusade as evidence that God had not approved of it 
either and had permitted its annihilation as punishment for the 
participants’ sins.  

But some successful crusades, too, came in for condemnation. That 
was especially the case in the 13th century with the Albigensian 
Crusade and the crusades against the Hohenstaufen dynasty. Much 
of this criticism came from wandering poets and singers called 
troubadours or minnesingers. Although their preferred genre was 
the vernacular love song, they sometimes sang songs of a moral or 
political nature. Such songs often celebrated crusades to the East 
but criticized those carried out in Europe.
o For example, the troubadour Guilhem Figueira alleged that 
the indulgences issued to those who crusaded against the 
Hohenstaufen were invalid. The papacy was condemning to 
hell the souls of those who accepted such indulgences, thinking 
them to be legitimate. 
o The German minnesinger Walther von der Vogelweide charged 
that the crusades against the Hohenstaufen diverted valuable 
resources away from the defense of the Holy Land. German 
crusaders who wanted to go to the Holy Land could not do so 
because they had to remain home and defend their territories 
against crusader depredation.

Criticism of crusading sometimes focused on speciﬁ c crusading 
institutions. Crusading taxes ﬁ rst became prominent with the 

126
Lecture 18: The Crusades and Their Critics
levying of the Saladin tithe during the Third Crusade; thereafter, the 
levying of taxes for crusades became routine—and much resented. 
o Every crusading tax, royal and papal, generated avoidance 
and protests, and often there were good reasons for the 
protests. Sometimes, the promised crusades never materialized 
while those who had collected the crusading taxes pocketed 
the money. 
o Some protests came from surprising quarters. In response to 
one of Innocent III’s attempts to levy a papal crusading tax, a 
Cistercian monk named Rainier visited Innocent and told him 
that he had had a vision in which the Virgin Mary announced 
that the Cistercians should enjoy tax-exempt status with regard 
to the pope’s crusading levy.

It’s difﬁ cult to determine the extent of such criticism. To commit 
criticism of crusading to writing was to invite suspicion of heresy. 
Medieval inquisitors were instructed to ask individuals what they 
thought of the crusades. An unfavorable answer was taken as a sign 
that the person asked 
was probably a heretic.
Responses to Criticism

Crusade 
enthusiasts 
were 
sufﬁ ciently 
worried by criticism 
to take action against 
it. This was especially 
evident at the Second 
Council 
of 
Lyon, 
convened by the pope 
and held in 1274, just 
four years after the 
death of Louis IX on 
the Eighth Crusade. 
One of the items on 
the council’s agenda 
According to Humbert of Romans, writing 
around 1274, “When we conquer and kill 
the Saracens, we send them to Hell, which 
seems to be against the law of charity.”
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

127
was a general consideration of the crusades; that is, an analysis of 
the reasons for the repeated failures of eastern crusades.

Some of those who submitted plans felt that any assessment of the 
crusades had to begin with a rebuttal of the objections being raised 
against them. One such report, submitted by Humbert of Romans in 
a work called the Opus tripartitum, claimed that there were seven 
objections against the crusades in circulation at the time. 
o Some criticized the crusades on practical grounds. Because so 
few Europeans had been willing to settle as colonists in the 
Crusader States, the entire enterprise was hopeless. 
o Critics also alleged that the crusades condemned unbelievers 
to hell and that crusading stirred up resentment against 
Christianity among unbelievers. 
o The last objection combined both practical and moral 
considerations: Opponents claimed that “it does not appear to 
be God’s will that Christians should proceed against Saracens 
in this way, because of the misfortunes which God has allowed 
and is allowing to happen to the Christians engaged in this 
business.” This criticism—that Christian victory did not seem 
to be in accordance with God’s will—cut right to the heart of 
the crusading movement. The battle cry of the First Crusade 
had been Deus lo volt, “God wills it.”

Such criticism, however, seems not to have had much impact on the 
course of crusading, which continued to be popular. The absence of 
large-scale crusades to the East after the lifetime of Louis IX had 
more to do with the unwillingness of those who called and led such 
crusades than with widespread disillusion about crusading per se. 
Suppression of the Templars

In one respect, though, criticism had a noticeable impact; it paved 
the way for one of the more controversial episodes in medieval 
history: the suppression of the Templar Order. The Templars and 

128
Lecture 18: The Crusades and Their Critics
all military orders always had critics, both because they were an 
innovation and because of their independence. 
o Some critics put their thoughts in writing. The monk Isaac of 
l’Étoile, writing around the middle of the 12th century, charged 
that the Templars represented not a new knighthood but, as 
Isaac put it, “a new monstrosity.” 
o Later in the 12th century, the English author Walter Map 
denounced the Templars by citing the incident in the garden of 
Gethsemane, in which Jesus had commanded Simon Peter to 
put down his sword rather than use it in Jesus’s defense.

Still, for much of the 12th century, criticism of the Templars and 
military orders remained a fringe phenomenon. The loss of 
Jerusalem, though, was a disastrous blow to the prestige of the 
military orders, especially the Templars. Criticism started to come 
from high places. In 1235, Pope Gregory IX issued a general 
reprimand of all military orders, writing that they were more 
concerned with increasing their own holdings than with regaining 
from “the inﬁ del the lands consecrated by the blood of Christ.”

Even before the ﬁ nal collapse of the Crusader States, the view 
that the military orders needed to be reformed had become 
commonplace in medieval Europe, and various plans for reforming 
the military orders circulated; some were discussed at the Council 
of Lyon in 1274. 
o One idea that seemed to have some merit was a consolidation 
of all the military orders into a single order. That would end the 
rivalries, the lack of cooperation, and the wasteful competition 
among them, and the new single order would have all the 
resources necessary to take back and protect Jerusalem. But the 
consolidation never took place. 
o In the opening decade of the 14th century, the crusade 
theoretician Pierre Dubois advocated the conﬁ scation of all 
the military orders’ property. They had not used it effectively; 

129
therefore, they should be made to forfeit it so that the property 
could be used to ﬁ nance future crusades. 

On August 13, 1307, the Templars in France were suddenly arrested 
on the orders of Philip IV, the king of France. Philip charged the 
Templars with blasphemy, homosexuality, heresy, and idolatry. He 
sequestered Templar property and demanded that the pope order 
other Christian rulers to make similar arrests. 
o French inquisitors, acting at royal behest, interrogated and 
tortured the arrested Templars, most of whom were not knights 
but support personnel and elderly retirees. The arrested French 
Templars, including the Grand Master, confessed to many of 
the charges against them. Philip IV pointed to these confessions 
as evidence of Templar guilt.
o It’s impossible to know whether or not Philip actually 
believed the accusations against the Templars. He had been 
involved in a bitter dispute with the papacy and may have 
arrested the Templars, who were under papal jurisdiction, in 
an act of deﬁ ance.
o Although Philip seems to have expected the Templar matter to 
reach a quick resolution, the affair dragged on for most of a 
decade. The pope ordered the arrest of the Templars throughout 
Europe, but kings were not quick to carry out the orders. 
Further, many Templars maintained their innocence even under 
torture, and some recanted their initial confessions of guilt, at 
the cost of burning at the stake.
o Finally, in 1312, Pope Clement V ordered the suppression of 
the Order of the Temple. The remaining Templars, with the 
exception of the order’s leaders, were to be transferred to other 
religious orders. In 1314, the Grand Master of the Templars 
and one other high Templar ofﬁ cial were burned at the stake on 
an island in the middle of the Seine River.

130
Lecture 18: The Crusades and Their Critics

Almost from the moment of the crusades’ inception, there were 
critics. For the most part, such criticism had little impact, but 
mounting criticism of the military orders, especially the Templars, 
set the stage for the orders’ rapid and brutal suppression between 
1307 and 1312. The Templars outlived the kingdom of Jerusalem, 
which had given birth to the order, by only about two decades.
Barber, The Trial of the Templars.
Lloyd, English Society and the Crusades, 1216–1307. 
Siberry, Criticism of Crusading, 1094–1274.
1. Which is the more surprising to you: that there were contemporary 
critics of the crusades or that there were not more contemporary critics 
of the crusade? 
2. If crusading criticism indeed had little impact on the actual course of 
crusading, why study the critics at all?
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

131
War and Travel—The Experience of Crusading
Lecture 19
G
etting at the experiences of crusaders poses serious problems for 
historians. Crusaders who wrote chronicles almost always did so 
years if not decades after the end of their crusades. The fact that 
they knew how the crusade turned out affected how they described it and 
their decisions about what material to include and exclude. Further, every 
chronicler had a reason for writing. Sometimes, it was to glorify a crusade 
or an individual crusader. Sometimes, it was to exculpate a crusade and shift 
the blame for its outcome elsewhere. Of course, experiences also varied for 
different crusades and different crusaders. Nonetheless, it is possible to build 
up a composite picture of crusading, as we will do in this lecture. 
Preparing for a Crusade

It is safe to say that crusading was, for most crusaders, occasionally 
exhilarating but often fearful and miserable. Poorer crusaders did 
not have to make extensive ﬁ nancial arrangements before departure 
because they counted on the charity of others to support them on 
their journey. Other crusaders, though, spent months and years 
collecting the money they would need, at times, raising sums equal 
to as much as ﬁ ve times their annual income. 

Acquiring this much money required wealthier crusaders to 
mortgage and sell off property. The result of dumping so much 
property on the market at one time was to depress prices and create 
a buyer’s market; even so, there were not many buyers with the 
ﬁ nancial resources to acquire these properties. 
o Often, the buyer was a local bishop, church, or monastery. 
When Godfrey of Bouillon sold Bouillon to the bishop of 
Liège, the bishop raised the necessary funds by stripping gold 
off the reliquary that held the relics of Saint Lambert, the 
patron saint of Liège. 

132
Lecture 19: War and Travel—The Experience of Crusading
o Not everyone thought the bishop’s actions were appropriate, but 
the bishop had a response: The castles that he and others bought 
had served as bases for knightly raids and ﬁ ghting. By acquiring 
the castles, the bishops were protecting people from knights. 
o As mechanisms of crusading taxation developed in the late 12th 
and 13th centuries, the ﬁ nancial pressures on crusaders were not 
quite so severe, but they were always substantial.

There was more to preparation for a crusade than raising money. 
Even as early as the First Crusade, departing crusaders attempted 
to settle feuds and disputes with their neighbors, made devotional 
visits to local shrines and churches, and drew up their wills and 
made arrangements for the possibility that they would not return. 

The decision to go on crusade sometimes generated new disputes, 
because families did not always support the crusader’s departure. 
For a male noble to leave Europe for years on end and to leave 
his wife to defend his estates against the encroachments of nobles 
who had not gone on crusade was no easy matter. Pope Innocent III 
ruled that the objections of a wife could not prevent a crusader from 
taking up the cross. 
Finances on Crusade

No matter how much money a crusader collected, it was rarely 
enough. Crusade chroniclers, such as Odo of Deuil, who served as 
chaplain to Louis VII during the Second Crusade, sometimes ﬁ xated 
on exchange rates and expenses. Such expenses are not difﬁ cult to 
explain: The arrival of thousands of crusaders in a region or town 
inevitably sent prices for goods skyrocketing. 

Relations between crusaders and towns sometimes grew so bad that 
town residents would sell to crusaders only by lowering baskets 
over the town walls. Being pilgrims, crusaders expected hospitality; 
they resented being charged high prices for food and goods. 

133

The extended pauses, lasting for months on end, that punctuated 
crusades, exacerbated the situation. Nobles burned through their 
money quickly, both because they had their own retinues to support 
and because they supported other crusaders whose money ran out. 
When those nobles ran out of funds, they turned to kings, if there 
were any, to support them. 

Further, money was helpful only if there were goods to be bought, 
but when the crusaders passed into enemy territory, there were 
sometimes no goods to be had, either through purchase or through 
forage and requisition. As a result, crusaders encountered hunger 
and starvation. 
o Starvation was perhaps worst during the earliest crusades, when 
crusaders traveled overland. They sometimes cut their horses in 
order to consume their blood or ate their horses outright.
o During the First Crusade, some crusaders resorted to 
cannibalism, although they ate only defeated enemies, not 
fellow crusaders.

To alleviate provisioning problems, crusaders tended to travel in 
different bands and to stagger their marches, but that generated 
morale problems. When crusaders marched along roads already 
traversed by other crusaders, the sight of their fellows’ corpses and 
bones lying by the wayside was sobering.

Travel by sea was faster than marching overland, but sea travel 
required cash up front, and crusaders from the European interior had 
a deep fear of sea travel, a fear shared by those against whom the 
crusaders fought. The switch from overland marching to sea travel 
during the Third Crusade also made it easier for crusade leaders 
to deceive their fellow crusaders and divert crusades to unexpected 
destinations, such as Egypt, the Byzantine Empire, and Tunis. 
Crusaders in Battle

Of course, crusading did not just involve travel; it also involved 
ﬁ ghting. Crusade chroniclers provided helpful information to 

134
Lecture 19: War and Travel—The Experience of Crusading
future crusaders about what they might expect; Odo of Deuil even 
had speciﬁ c recommendations about what sort of carts crusaders 
should bring. 

Even so, newly arrived crusaders were not prepared for the sorts 
of battles in which they found themselves. Their Turkish and Arab 
opponents fought in unfamiliar ways; although they used lances 
and swords, as Western knights did, they used them as a last 
resort, rather than as weapons of choice. 

Crusading chroniclers marveled at how fast and mobile the 
lightly armored Turks and Arabs were and that they were 
able to ﬁ re arrows with some accuracy from moving horses. 
A typical battle would consist of Turks and Arabs swarming 
around crusaders from a distance and then pouring ﬁ re into their 
opponents’ ranks. Sometimes they would ride toward crusaders, 
wheel around, and then ﬁ re backwards as they moved away from 
their targets. 
For some crusaders, fear of the sea was so great that undertaking a voyage by 
ship was among their most courageous acts.
© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock.

135
o When Turks and Arabs attacked in this manner, they were 
trying to kill the crusaders’ horses, which were not easily 
replaced. They were also trying to goad the crusaders into 
breaking ranks and making uncoordinated charges. Those who 
charged too early would then be cut off from the rest and killed. 
o The crusaders tried to hold together despite the missile ﬁ re, 
keeping their knights behind their infantry and protecting their 
horses. They then tried to maneuver their Turkish and Arab 
attackers into a location where the crusaders could charge 
them effectively and use their heavily armored cavalry to good 
effect. Such tactics required discipline and patience, which 
some crusaders lacked.

From the First Crusade on, the more candid chroniclers 
acknowledged that such unfamiliar warfare frightened them. 
Fulcher of Chartres recalled that he and others huddled together 
like sheep as the Turks circled around them. Joinville wrote of his 
companions being cut down or suffering grievous wounds.

The crusaders’ unfamiliarity with their enemy meant that each 
newly arrived group tended to make the same mistakes as its 
predecessors. Despite warnings, new crusaders often fell victim to 
the feigned retreat of Turks and Arabs.

Not all ﬁ ghting consisted of battles in open territories. In fact, 
sieges of castles, towns, and cities tended to be more important than 
pitched battles during the crusades. But sieging could easily be as 
much of a horror to the besiegers as the besieged. 
o Foraging for a besieging army could be unrewarding or even 
impossible. Often, the defenders had taken all the food in 
the vicinity and plugged up or poisoned wells; only a steady 
stream of supplies delivered from outside could allow a siege 
to be sustained. 

136
Lecture 19: War and Travel—The Experience of Crusading
o Illness, a problem at all times, was especially difﬁ cult during 
periods when the crusaders were stationary and supplies 
were low. 
o The tedium of sieges was sometimes punctuated by horror; 
enemies might penetrate a camp’s defenses and decapitate 
sleeping crusaders.
Crusaders’ Mindset

The experience of crusading sometimes proved to be too much for 
crusaders. Many cut their crusades short, although doing so could 
make them the targets of ridicule. Stephen of Blois went on the First 
Crusade, but he abandoned the crusade at Antioch and returned 
home, only to be disparaged by his neighbors and even his wife for 
failing to see the crusade through to the end. 

Other crusaders also saw their courage fail them. As the Seventh 
Crusade was overrun, Joinville and his surviving companions 
boarded a boat and made it into the middle of the Nile River, where 
they saw their fellow crusaders being killed on shore. Rather than 
returning to ﬁ ght and dying as martyrs, Joinville and his companions 
chose to surrender, falsely claiming that Joinville was the cousin of 
the king of France in the hope that they would be taken for ransom 
rather than killed outright.

If all this sounds unpleasant, it was, but we should temper that 
impression with a few observations that point in a different direction. 
o First, during their crusades, crusaders sometimes had a sense 
of belonging to something unique and much larger than 
themselves. Most crusaders were volunteers, proud of their 
service, and amazed at the degree of transnational cooperation 
achieved in their ranks, despite the sometimes fractious 
relations among those of different ethnicities.
o Second, interspersed among the battles and sieges were 
episodes of fraternization that seem strange to us today. In one 
instance, a Frankish knight visited an Arab camp to inquire 

137
how a lance could pierce the layers of a knight’s coat of mail. 
It’s interesting to us that the knight visited the camp to pay his 
respects and was well received. During the siege of Acre in the 
Third Crusade, lethal raids and skirmishes took place alongside 
dinner invitations and parties between crusaders and Arabs.
o Finally, crusaders who traveled to the East sometimes evinced 
a genuine interest in what they saw and learned there. Those 
crusaders who passed through Constantinople, for example, 
marveled at its size. Joinville found the Nile River delta, the 
Mamluks, the Shi’a sect of the Assassins, and the Bedouin 
fascinating.

The experience of crusading deﬁ es simple classiﬁ cation. To go on 
crusade was to experience impoverishment, hunger, and fright. 
At the same time, those who on went crusade also felt a sense of 
solidarity different than any they had felt before, and the crusade 
could be as mind-opening as it was life-ending. Crusaders came 
into contact with new places and people, and they came away 
changed as a result.
Bull et al., eds., The Experience of Crusading. 
Edington and Lambert, eds., Gendering the Crusades.
Housley, Fighting for the Cross.
Maier, Preaching the Crusade. 
———, “The Roles of Women in the Crusade Movement.” 
Suggested Reading

138
Lecture 19: War and Travel—The Experience of Crusading
1. Which is more surprising to you: that so many people went crusading or 
that more people did not go crusading?
2. Which aspect of the crusading experience do you imagine to have come 
as the biggest surprise to crusaders?
Questions to Consider

139
Life in the Crusader East
Lecture 20
I
n our last lecture, we examined the experience of crusading. Crusaders 
experienced ﬁ nancial problems, illness, bafﬂ ement, and fear; they also 
experienced camaraderie and curiosity about the places and people they 
saw. In this lecture, we will examine the experience of those who settled and 
lived in the Crusader States during their two centuries of existence, and we 
will consider the question of whether the crusades ought to be considered a 
colonial enterprise.
Attitudes toward the Pullani

Just as the crusades themselves were a multinational enterprise, so, 
too, was the settlement of the Crusader States. Over time, however, 
the Europeans who settled in the Crusader States developed a 
collective identity that set them apart from the inhabitants of their 
native kingdoms. The crusaders and their descendants who lived in 
the East came to be known to other Europeans as the pullani.

Europeans did not think highly of the pullani. In the early 13th
century, a cleric and crusade enthusiast named James of Vitry was 
appointed as bishop of Acre. James had been a crusade preacher, 
and he was initially excited about being appointed as a bishop in the 
Holy Land. Overall, though, his experiences in the Crusader States 
were disappointing, and he became a sharp critic of the pullani. 
According to James, the pullani also resented newly arrived 
Western crusaders.

James of Vitry was not the only one who perceived a difference 
between those who had long lived in the crusader East and newly 
arrived crusaders. So, too, did Usamah ibn Munqidh, a 12th-
century Arab who traveled in the Crusader States, sometimes as 
an ambassador. 

140
Lecture 20: Life in the Crusader East
o On one level, Usamah was scornful of all Westerners. He 
thought their medical and legal practices, such as trial by battle, 
backward. He also found the Frankish practice of not wearing 
towels in public baths and of allowing wives to converse with 
men who were not their husbands most unseemly.
o Although Usamah found all Franks strange and inferior, he 
nonetheless became friends with some of them, including one 
knight and pilgrim who made Usamah a startling offer: When 
the knight’s pilgrimage was over, he asked to take Usamah’s 
14-year-old son back with him to France, where the boy could 
learn to be a Western knight.
o In general, Usamah preferred Franks who had lived in the 
East for a while. He wrote: “Among the Franks are those who 
have become acclimatized and have associated long with the 
Moslems. These are much better than the recent comers from 
the Frankish lands. But they constitute the exception and 
cannot be treated as a rule.” 
o Franks in the East also sometimes protected Muslims against 
newly arrived Westerners, as Usamah himself experienced 
in Jerusalem. When a newly arrived Frank in Jerusalem tried 
to convince Usamah that he was facing the wrong direction 
while he prayed, local Templars hustled off the new arrival and 
apologized to Usamah for his behavior.
Tension in the Crusader States

Alongside these episodes of friendship and tolerance, we must 
take into account other episodes indicating that the Crusader States 
could also be places where co-residence led to tension and physical 
danger. Usamah recalls, for instance, a mother-son team of serial 
killers; they were Muslims who invited Franks to dinner, only to 
poison them. 

Both Franks and indigenous populations resided in the Crusader 
States, but they were not on equal social or legal footing. 

141
o The laws of the kingdom of Jerusalem, as compiled in the 13th 
century, distinguished residents on the basis of religion and 
ethnicity: There were residents who were obedient to Rome, 
meaning Catholics, and residents who were not obedient to 
Rome, meaning most Eastern Christians, Jews, and Muslims. 
o The second group had to pay a special head tax as a sign of 
their subservience; those belonging to the second group could 
be enslaved, could not hold ﬁ efs, and could not serve in the 
royal government of the kingdom of Jerusalem. 
o One exception to this lumping together of Eastern Christians, 
Jews, and Muslims concerned residence in Jerusalem; Eastern 
Christians could live there legally, but Jews and Muslims could 
not, although the law was not actually enforced. 

The neat legal division between those of Roman obedience and all 
others might have expressed an ideal vision of how the Crusader 
States were supposed to be in the 13th century rather than a 
description of how they actually were. It’s also possible that matters 
had been different in the 12th century, soon after the First Crusade. 
o At that time, one ﬁ nds in the Crusader States knights and 
even a royal ofﬁ ceholder whose names indicate that they are 
Armenians and indigenous residents rather than Franks. 
o It’s not certain, however, whether those 12th-century Armenians 
and other indigenous residents retained their own religion or 
whether they had converted to Catholicism.

Theoretically, those who converted to Catholicism and accepted 
papal supremacy escaped legal restrictions; in practice, conversions 
were so few that the disabilities applied to the local population 
almost in its entirety. 
o Because the foundation of the Crusader States led to the 
establishment of societies in which the ruling class differed 
from the local population in terms of language, religion, and 

142
Lecture 20: Life in the Crusader East
ethnic composition, one can, to that extent, describe these 
societies as colonial. 
o Similarly, much of the ruling class lived off the labor of the 
indigenous population, in the form of rents and rights of 
lordship; that, too, looks rather like colonialism.
Eastern Christianity

Despite the legal lumping of non-Catholics into a single category, 
settlement in the East required Franks to come to grips with the 
great religious pluralism of Outremer, especially the many types of 
Christians residing there. 

Urban II had called on crusaders to help the Christians of the 
East, which suggested that Christians of the East were all the 
same. In fact, though, Franks had to deal with Melkites, Jacobites, 
Nestorians, Armenian Christians, Georgian Christians, Egyptian 
Copts, and Maronites. These Christian sects sometimes had their 
own liturgies and ecclesiastical hierarchies, and sometimes, they 
differed theologically from Catholicism. 

Those on the First Crusade seem not to have formed a favorable 
impression of these various Eastern Christians as they passed through 
Syria. In 1098, when the crusaders asked Urban II to take command 
of the crusade after the death of Adhemar of Le Puy, they wrote: “We 
have defeated the Turks and the pagans; the heretics, however, Greeks 
and Armenians, Syrians, and Jacobites, we cannot overcome.” 

For the most part, though, the Catholic Franks left the Eastern 
Christians alone, and with the Armenian Christians, they sometimes 
formed active alliances. For Eastern Christians, the experience 
of Frankish rule was mildly colonial, and to a certain extent, the 
experience of Muslims in the Crusader States was not too different. 
Frankish impact outside of a few major cities, such as Acre and 
Tyre, was fairly light. 

143

There is no way of knowing how many Franks resided in the 
Crusader States at any given time, but Frankish settlement in the 
countryside was limited. As a result, most villages experienced 
little if any change following the First Crusade. Muslim and Eastern 
Christian village ofﬁ cials continued to manage local affairs as they 
already had been doing. 
Crusading as Colonialism

If the Crusader States can fairly be described as developing colonial 
societies, we must keep in mind that the eastern crusades were, in 
many respects, very different from later colonial ventures in the 
Americas, Asia, and Africa. 
o Admittedly, some of that later colonial expansion was 
improvised and sometimes even accidental, but not as 
improvised and accidental as the foundation of the Crusader 
States was. Those who participated in the First Crusade seem 
Franks tended to settle in major cities, such as Jerusalem, Tyre, and Acre; 
founding new settlements was rarely a viable option because water resources 
were limited.
© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock.

144
Lecture 20: Life in the Crusader East
to have set out with the intention of returning everything they 
conquered, including Jerusalem, to the Byzantine Empire. 
o Only after Byzantine-crusader cooperation had broken down 
during the First Crusade did crusaders decide to disregard 
Byzantine claims and establish their own states. With the 
exception of the early years of British expansion in India, no 
explorers during the era of European colonial expansion in the 
Americas, Asia, or Africa after 1492 set out with the intention 
of returning what was captured to an allied third party.

The internationalism of the crusades and the Crusader States 
also stands in stark contrast to the very national orientation of 
later European colonialism. The kingdom of Jerusalem was not 
the responsibility of any single European kingdom; it was a 
freestanding kingdom whose protection was the responsibility of 
all Christendom. 

In addition, the centrality of Jerusalem, of capturing it and of 
holding it, made the eastern crusades rather different from what 
would happen during later periods of European colonialism. The 
kingdom of Jerusalem was not established to provide economic 
beneﬁ ts to any European kingdom or to Europe as a whole. It was 
established to keep Jerusalem under Christian rule, and even such 
episodes as the invasion of Egypt during the Fifth and Seventh 
Crusades were undertaken with an eye toward making the conquest 
of Jerusalem possible. 

A ﬁ nal difference sets the crusader East apart from some later 
episodes of European colonialism: the lack of any signiﬁ cant 
epidemiological or technological advantage for the Europeans. 
o Europeans, Byzantines, Arabs, and Turks are all part of the 
same Eurasian disease pool; they have all been in contact with 
one another over extended periods of time. The arrival and 
settlement of crusaders did not unleash devastating pandemics 
among the indigenous population, as happened in the Americas.

145
o In fact, climate and disease in the Crusader States worked to the 
advantage of the local population and against European settlers. 
That would also be the case in subtropical and tropical parts of 
the Americas, Africa, and Asia well into the 19th century, but 
by that time, Europeans had technological and organizational 
advantages that more than offset medical challenges. In 
contrast, crusaders lacked any military advantage that would 
compensate for the epidemiological disadvantage. 

In qualifying the idea that the crusades were a colonial venture, 
one does not want to go too far in the opposite direction. Italian 
merchants from Genoa, Pisa, and Venice took advantage of the 
establishment of the Crusader States to better their economic 
position and secure commercial advantages. Genoese, Pisan, and 
Venetian quarters in the cities and towns of the Holy Land took on 
an increasingly colonial character over time, as the Italian mother 
cities exercised tighter control over those quarters in the East. 

Europeans who settled in the Crusader States adopted many of the 
trappings of Eastern life and became far too Eastern for the tastes 
of newly arrived Western crusaders but legally distinct from the 
religiously diverse local population. Relations between pullani
and locals could be friendly enough, but elements of cultural 
disapproval and the tension that characterizes all colonial societies 
never disappeared.
Friedman, Encounter between Enemies.
Kennedy, Crusader Castles. 
MacEvitt, The Crusades and the Christian World of the East. 
Prawer, The Crusaders’ Kingdom.
———, The History of the Jews in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem. 
Suggested Reading

146
Lecture 20: Life in the Crusader East
1. How does life in the crusader East compare to life in other 
frontier societies?
2. Is the term “colonialism” so ideologically loaded and emotionally 
fraught that it no longer constitutes a useful category of 
historical analysis?
Questions to Consider

147
Cultural Contact and Exchange
Lecture 21
I
n our last lecture, we examined life in the Crusader States. We saw how 
relations between Frankish settlers and local peoples could sometimes 
be cordial and sometimes tense. We saw the legal distinctions drawn 
between the Catholic Franks who settled in the Crusader States and their 
descendants, on the one hand, and the non-Catholic indigenous population, 
on the other hand. But the settlers’ legal exclusivity did not prevent them 
from adopting Eastern lifestyles, and what happened in the crusader East 
also happened on a broader geographical scale. The crusades continued 
centuries of episodic, violent conﬂ ict between Christians and Muslims, but 
they also brought these groups into closer contact, fostering cultural curiosity 
and exchange.
Impact of the Crusades on Cultural Contact

Cultural contact and exchange between Europe and the Islamic East 
certainly did not begin with the crusades, but one can make the case 
that the crusades facilitated and accelerated the process. 
o First, through the foundation of the Crusader States, the 
crusades increased the number of points of contact between the 
Islamic and Catholic worlds. 
o Second, the crusades increased curiosity about, and thereby 
knowledge of, Islam. It was not just crusaders who took an 
interest in the places where crusaders traveled and the people 
they met; back in Europe, too, scholars who never went on 
crusade sought out material so that they could know more 
about Islam. 

The eastern crusades knew tremendous success with the First 
Crusade and repeated failure afterward. Ironically, both success and 
failure spurred cultural investigation and appropriation. 

148
Lecture 21: Cultural Contact and Exchange
o Success did so because, in the 12th and 13th centuries, medieval 
Europe lost some of the inferiority complex that had previously 
made it too fearful of Islamic culture to risk consciously 
borrowing it. 
o Defeats after the First Crusade provided additional reasons 
for the study of Islam. Although some Westerners were 
content to attribute the repeated failures of eastern crusades 
to the crusaders’ sinfulness and God’s inscrutable will, others 
looked for temporal explanations that focused not on the moral 
disposition of the losers but on the attributes and circumstances 
of the winners. That meant historical and scholarly examination 
of Islam. 
Western Understanding of Islam

At the time of the First Crusade and for some time beyond, Western 
ignorance of the most basic tenets of Islam was profound. The 
biggest sticking point was Westerners’ hard-to-shake and analogical 
belief that Muhammad is to Islam as Jesus is to Christianity and 
that, therefore, Muslims regard Muhammad as a god whom 
Muslims must worship. 

Even among the Western chroniclers of the First Crusade, however, 
one can ﬁ nd a growing awareness that many Western beliefs about 
Islam were misconceptions. Guibert of Nogent wrote that Muslims 
did not consider Muhammad to be God, “as some people think,” 
but just a man through whom divine laws were transmitted. About 
1127, the Latin author William of Malmesbury wrote the same 
thing; Muslims did not worship Muhammad as God but regarded 
him as the prophet of God. 

A striking sign of growing Western interest in Islam came in the 
1140s, when Peter the Venerable, the French abbot of an important 
monastery in Cluny, put together a team of scholars working in 
Spain to prepare translations of documents that would illuminate 
Islamic religious beliefs. 

149
o The project lasted for several years; in the end, the team had 
translated a number of Arabic documents into Latin, including 
the Koran itself. 
o It’s true that this translation of the Koran did not circulate widely 
in the West; it’s also true that those who read it were not looking 
to broaden their appreciation of the spiritual and theological 
subtleties of Islam but, rather, to attack and refute it.

Coming to grips with the speciﬁ cs of Islam and with the realization 
that it was something other than a mirror image of Christianity 
took many centuries. In the 1270s, Humbert of Romans still had 
to argue against the notion that Muslims worshipped Muhammad. 
That notion, he claimed, was still widespread among laypeople and 
clerics. Even wilder mistakes were to be found in the writings of the 
canon lawyer Hostiensis (d. 1270); he claimed that Muslims were 
polytheists who rejected the Old and New Testaments entirely.
Western Understanding of the Islamic World

If, by the time of the fall of the Crusader States, some Westerners 
had a better notion of Islam’s basic tenets, they also had a better 
notion of the size of the Islamic world and of what lay beyond it. 
What they learned was sobering. 

Even as late as the early 13th century, James of Vitry vastly 
underestimated the number of Muslims in the world and vastly 
overestimated the number of Christians. He believed that even in 
lands under Islamic rule, Christians outnumbered Muslims. Further, 
he believed that to the east of Persia and somewhere in Asia, there 
were Christian kingdoms, such as that of the legendary Prester John. 
o By the middle of the 12th century, stories circulated in Europe 
about the existence of Prester John—reputedly a descendant of 
one of the three magi who had paid homage to Jesus after his 
birth—and his distant kingdom. Forged letters purporting to be 
from Prester John promised assistance to crusaders. 

150
Lecture 21: Cultural Contact and Exchange
o But when Western missionaries penetrated into Asia in the 
1240s–1260s, looking for Prester John, they could not ﬁ nd 
him. Instead, they found that there were many more Muslims 
in the world than they had imagined. That realization began to 
call into question the feasibility of Christians ever being able to 
take and hold Jerusalem. 
o By the late 13th century, medieval Western demographers were 
estimating that Muslims outnumbered Christians 10 or 20 
times over. This sense of Christianity encompassing a smaller 
part of the world and fewer people than had previously been 
believed did not, however, lead to the abandonment of Prester 
John. To account for the fact that Prester John had not been 
found in Asia, authors increasingly speculated that perhaps he 
was in Ethiopia or East Africa.
Philosophical Exchange

Just as Spain was the place where, thanks to Peter the Venerable’s 
initiative, crucial Muslim religious texts were transmitted to the 
West, so, too, Spain was the place where certain key philosophical 
texts passed to the West by way of the Arabs. 

Medieval philosophy from the 12th century onward was based 
largely on the works of Aristotle, but at the time of the First 
Crusade, very little of Aristotle’s corpus was available in 
the West. During the 12th and 13th centuries, thanks largely to 
scholars working in Spain and Sicily, there was a massive effort 
aimed at translating Aristotle’s works into Latin either from 
Greek or from Arabic. 
o Toledo, captured by Christians in 1085, became a particularly 
important center for translations. One of the most proliﬁ c 
translators to work at Toledo was Gerard of Cremona (d. 1187), 
an Italian who translated at least 71 Arabic texts of such works 
as Aristotle’s Physics. 
o By the end of the 13th century, most of Aristotle’s works were 
circulating in the West; some had been translated multiple times.

151

Translators 
at 
Toledo 
and elsewhere were also 
interested in what Arab 
philosophers 
had 
said 
about Aristotle in various 
commentaries. 
Among 
the Muslim philosophers 
whose work passed into 
the West during the 12th 
and 13th centuries were 
the 11th-century Persian 
philosopher Avicenna and 
the 12th-century Spanish 
Muslim 
philosopher 
Averroës. 
Cultural Inﬂ uence in Everyday 
Life

The trading advantages 
secured by Italians in 
the East as a result of 
the crusader conquests 
increased the supply of Eastern goods to Europe; this greater access 
to Eastern goods played a role in the development of the European 
languages. There are numerous Arabic loan words in English, and 
these tend to be words for the sorts of items that the crusades made 
even more available in Europe, such as words for spices (saffron, 
tarragon), agricultural products (spinach, orange), fabrics (cotton, 
taffeta), trade (tariff), and drinks (alcohol). 

Although Europe simply borrowed words along with items, in 
certain cases, it borrowed ideas and made adjustments to them. 
One example of this is the windmill. The introduction of windmills 
presented Westerners with a way to harness a new source of 
inanimate energy for operating both grain and textile mills. 
o Windmills ﬁ rst appeared in Persia (modern-day Iran), 
possibly in the 7th century. From there, they spread eastward 
The inﬂ uence of Averroës on medieval 
philosophers and theologians was so 
great that they referred to Averroës 
simply as “the commentator,” with the 
understanding that readers would know 
he was a Muslim philosopher.
© Hameryko/Cordoba/Wikimedia Commons/ CC BY-SA 3.

152
Lecture 21: Cultural Contact and Exchange
into China in the 13th century and appeared in Europe at the 
end of the 12th century. 
o Differences in the construction of European and Eastern 
windmills suggest that Europeans did not simply adopt 
Eastern designs but adapted the idea from the East to suit 
local conditions.

Europe also borrowed profound mathematical ideas from the East, 
including Arabic numerals (much easier to use for calculation than 
Roman numerals), the number zero, and the place-value system.
o This adoption was slow. Even at the time of the Second 
Crusade, Arabic numerals were still virtually unknown in 
the West. That changed around 1150, when Robert of Ketton 
translated from Arabic a work simply called Arithmetic by a 
Muslim mathematician named al-Khwarizmi. 
o Another such mathematical handbook was written in 1202 
by Leonardo Fibonacci, a resident of Pisa who had been born 
in North Africa. Fibonacci’s Book of Calculation praised the 
use of Arabic numerals, and with its problems sets that treated 
merchants going to Constantinople to sell pearls, Fibonacci’s 
treatise reﬂ ected the driving force behind the adoption of 
Arabic numerals: commerce.
Western Inﬂ uences in the East

If the West was changed to some degree by the crusades and increased 
contact with the Islamic East, to what extent was the Islamic East 
similarly transformed? Did cultural contact and exchange work both 
ways? In general, the answer is that in the Middle Ages, the ﬂ ow of 
intellectual interest went only one way. If the crusades brought about 
a heightened interest in the East among Westerners, the Muslim East 
remained largely uninterested in the West. 

This fact is not surprising for the simple reason that at the time of 
the First Crusade, there was not much to borrow. Given that Jesus 
and Old Testament ﬁ gures, such as Abraham, are revered ﬁ gures 

153
within Islam, Muslims knew and understood Christianity and 
Judaism far better than Western Christians understood Islam at the 
time of the First Crusade. 

Muslims were also well aware of their economic and cultural 
superiority vis-à-vis the West and saw little point in learning more 
about such an area. Such attitudes predated the crusades and lasted 
for a long time. A 10th-century Arab geographer named al-Mas’udi 
wrote of the people of Western Europe that “their bodies are large, 
their natures gross, their manners harsh, their understanding dull 
and their tongues heavy.” The crusades did little to change this sort 
of opinion in the East.
Harris, Byzantium and the Crusades. 
Hillenbrand, The Crusades: Islamic Perspectives.
Laiou and Mottahedeh, eds., The Crusades from the Perspective of 
Byzantium and the Muslim World.
Lillie, Byzantium and the Crusader States, 1096–1204. 
Phillips, Defenders of the Holy Land.
Tolan, Saracens.
1. At what point in history did European cultural inﬂ uence on the Islamic 
world start to eclipse Islamic cultural inﬂ uence on Europe?
2. If the crusades did indeed foster cultural borrowing and exploration, 
was that an aberrational and exceptional occurrence in global history, 
or is that what typically happens during wars? If it was aberrational and 
exceptional, what was it about the crusades that caused them to develop 
this unusual historical dynamic? 
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

154
Lecture 22: Crusade and Mission
Crusade and Mission
Lecture 22
I
n our last lecture, we saw that the crusades catalyzed cultural contact and 
exchange in complicated ways. On the one hand, increasing familiarity 
with the Islamic world triggered demographic pessimism, as Europeans 
realized that there were many more Muslims in the world than they 
originally thought. On the other hand, the success of the First Crusade helped 
Europeans overcome their fears of being overwhelmed by Islamic culture. 
In the 12th and 13th centuries, Europeans became more open to studying the 
Koran and Muslim scholars. Another sign of this conﬁ dence is the fact that 
European missionary efforts among Muslims began during the crusades. In 
this lecture, we will examine the history of the relationship between crusade 
and mission. 
Emergence of Missionizing in the East

Christian proselytism is as old as Christianity itself, based on the 
belief that Christians should make salvation—achieved through 
baptism and correct belief—as broadly available as possible. But 
until the 13th century, Christian missionaries did not generally 
attempt to convert Muslims, focusing instead on pagans living 
to their north and east: the Irish, some German populations, 
Scandinavians, Slavs, and Balts. 
o The primary reason that European missionary activity was 
conﬁ ned to northern and eastern pagans for so long was that 
European Christians possessed greater social, political, and 
economic complexity than those pagans did, which gave 
the missionaries the conﬁ dence necessary for proselytizing. 
Missionaries believed that northern and eastern pagans might 
conceivably want to be more like the missionaries themselves. 
o But because the economic and cultural sophistication of 
the Islamic world was so much greater than that of Europe, 
missionaries before the 13th century could not believe that 
Muslims would want to be more like Christians in any respect. 

155

In the matter of missionizing and of harnessing the crusades 
to further missionizing, popular sentiment was ahead of 
ecclesiastical leadership. 
o At Clermont in November 1095, Urban II called on Westerners 
to help Eastern Christians, but according to the surviving 
accounts of his sermon, he did not say anything about crusaders 
converting the Muslims of the East. 
o Nonetheless, at a more popular level, military success and 
crusading were linked. The Song of Roland, written down 
around the time of Urban’s call, repeatedly speaks of Christian 
military victory shattering the conﬁ dence of Muslims in their 
religion and of defeated Muslims converting to Christianity. 
o The Barons’ Crusade and the Franks in the ﬁ rst decade after the 
conquest of Jerusalem demanded that Muslims either convert 
to Christianity or leave conquered towns and cities. 
o According to Odo of Deuil, the leaders of the French army in 
the Second Crusade declared that their aim was “to visit the 
Holy Sepulcher and, by command of the supreme pontiff, wipe 
out our sins with the blood or conversion of the pagans.” In 
fact, Pope Eugenius III had commanded no such thing. 

The First Crusade resulted in only a few Muslim conversions to 
Christianity. In the aftermath of the crusade, when Europeans 
began to ponder the proper relationship between crusading and 
missionizing, some came to the conclusion that the two represented 
fundamentally different activities that worked to cross purposes.
o In his Summary of the whole heresy of the diabolical sect 
of the Saracens, written in the 1140s, Peter the Venerable 
emphasized the difference between peaceful persuasion—the 
approach he uses in his treatise—and the recourse to violence 
typical of the crusade.
o Peter also explains that the love he feels for Muslims is the 
love that ought to exist between Christians and unbelievers and 

156
Lecture 22: Crusade and Mission
ought to prevail among all human beings, according to God’s 
teaching. Implicit in that assertion is the notion that crusading 
falls afoul of God’s teaching.
o On other occasions, Peter wrote differently. For example, 
before King Louis VII embarked on the Second Crusade, Peter 
expressed his hope that the king would destroy the Muslims 
he countered. 

Whether Peter the Venerable was more a crusading enthusiast or 
a critic of the crusades is difﬁ cult to determine, but he was not 
alone in claiming that crusading was bad because it would alienate 
potential converts and, thereby, hinder missionary work. Three 
12th-century critics of crusading, Isaac of l’Étoile, Walter Map, and 
Ralph Niger, all went further than Peter the Venerable in openly 
decrying the use of violence and espousing the peaceful preaching 
of the faith as the true Christian approach. 
Pioneering Missionaries

The pioneers of sustained missionary efforts in the Islamic world 
were not critics of crusading but, rather, crusading enthusiasts and 
fellow travelers. This indicates that missionary activity arose not 
from frustration with the crusades’ failures but appreciation for the 
crusades’ accomplishments.

One early-13th-century missionary whom we have already met was 
James of Vitry, the bishop of Acre who was contemptuous of the 
pullani who lived in the Crusader States. 
o Before becoming bishop of Acre, James had been a successful 
preacher. When he arrived in the East, he preached to the 
Eastern Christians, such as the Jacobites, and to Muslims 
within the Crusader States. 
o James seems to have wanted to cross the frontier and preach 
in Islamic territory, but he never did so. Instead, he tried 
long-distance missionizing; he composed letters exhorting 
Muslims to convert, had those letters translated into Arabic, 

157
and then sent them off. Although nothing came of this postal 
proselytizing, James’s preaching was the ﬁ rst sustained attempt 
to convert Muslims in the Crusader States.

Another pioneering missionary in the East was Francis of Assisi. In 
1219, Francis joined the crusaders in Egypt; he secured permission 
to cross enemy lines and meet with the sultan al-Kamil, whom 
Francis tried to convert. The sultan gave Francis a hearing but 
declined to convert and sent Francis back to the crusader camp. 

In several respects, James of Vitry and Francis of Assisi were 
quite different. For instance, James had no desire to become a 
martyr, but it’s possible that Francis preached before al-Kamil in 
the expectation and hope that he would be martyred. Certainly, 
Francis ran greater risks in the East than James did.

Nonetheless, James and Francis 
had 
something 
in 
common: 
Neither was a critic of the 
crusades. 
o James was an avid supporter 
of 
crusading, 
a 
crusade 
preacher before and after 
going to the East, and a 
participant 
in 
the 
Fifth 
Crusade. Francis never seems 
to have said anything for or 
against crusading, but the fact 
that he joined the crusaders 
during the Fifth Crusade 
suggests at least a tacit 
approval of crusading. 
o Furthermore, 
both 
used 
crusading to further the 
cause 
of 
missionizing. 
Without the presence of 
The religious order founded 
by Francis of Assisi, the 
Franciscans, made some 
efforts at converting Muslims in 
Spain and Islamic North Africa.
© Purestock/Thinkstock.

158
Lecture 22: Crusade and Mission
the Fifth Crusade in Egypt, Francis might never have been 
able to visit al-Kamil or, perhaps, even set foot there. James 
of Vitry was more explicit about how crusading could help 
missionizing; he maintained that successful crusades and 
the establishment of Christian rule would help missionaries 
to win converts because Muslims who converted would not 
have to fear revenge by their former coreligionists.

Two religious orders, the Franciscans (founded by Francis of 
Assisi) and the Dominicans, also devoted some of their energy 
to converting Muslims. Both orders established religious houses 
in places where there were substantial Muslim populations and 
instituted language schools where friars could study Arabic.
o Most Franciscans and Dominicans preferred to follow James 
of Vitry’s example rather than Francis of Assisi’s, preaching to 
Muslims within Christian territory. Still, the friars were doing 
something that Christians had not tried to do before: to convert 
Muslims in substantial numbers. 
o Even as they pursued this proselytizing, Franciscans and 
Dominicans were also enthusiastic crusade preachers; indeed, 
during the 13th century, these two orders assumed the main 
responsibility for crusade preaching. The Franciscans and 
Dominicans saw no contradiction or opposition between 
crusade and mission.
Crusade versus Mission: Resolving the Debate

Even as missionary activity among Muslims became more common 
and more organized in the 13th century, the old debate over the 
relationship between crusade and mission continued. One person 
who gave much thought to this relationship was a member of the 
Franciscans named Ramon Llull (d. 1316). 
o Llull wrote in Latin, Catalan, and Arabic and established a 
school for missionaries on the island of Mallorca. He traveled 
to North Africa three times, and he probably died there, trying 
to convert Muslims even th ough he was in his 80s.

159
o Early in his life, Llull preferred preaching to crusading, but as 
he grew older, he came to view crusading more favorably. By 
the time he reached his 70s, Llull advocated for missionaries to 
go to the East and preach Christianity to Muslim rulers. Once 
they were done preaching, they should inform the Muslim 
rulers that unless they converted, they would face innumerable 
crusades until they were destroyed. 

Others went even further than the elderly Llull in connecting 
mission and the violence inherent in crusading. 
o The Franciscan theologian Duns Scotus (d. 1308) argued that 
rulers in Christian kingdoms had an obligation to forcibly seize 
Muslim and Jewish children from their parents and have them 
baptized. He also argued that Christian rulers ought to use 
violent threats, if not violence itself, to bring about the baptism 
of parents and other adults. 
o The theologian Robert Holcot (d. 1349) argued that 
Christians should have two goals: the conversion or death of 
all Muslims. Missionaries should bring about the ﬁ rst, and 
crusaders, the second.

The debate over the proper relationship between missionizing and 
crusading achieved a degree of resolution during the 13th century, 
enunciated by a participant in the Fifth Crusade named Oliver 
of Cologne. 
o According to Oliver, the Fifth Crusade was justiﬁ ed because 
Christian missionaries were not able to speak freely before 
Muslim audiences—insults against Islam were punishable 
by death. Because of this, crusading became a necessary 
precondition for preaching; the success of mission depended 
on the success of the crusade. 
o This notion, that crusading should support missionizing 
wherever missionaries could not operate freely, became 
the most broadly accepted interpretation of the relationship 
between crusade and mission. 

160
Lecture 22: Crusade and Mission
o In the middle of the 13th century, Pope Innocent IV made it the 
ofﬁ cial church position: Non-Christians were not to be forcibly 
converted; however, those who interfered with Christian 
preaching invited the launching of crusades against them. 
The crusades and the conquests that followed would make it 
possible for Christian missionaries to operate freely. 
o Innocent IV thus reconciled the ideal of conversion as an act of 
free choice, which had always been the church’s teaching, with 
the popular notion that crusading ought somehow to further 
the spread of Christianity. He also reconciled the ideal of free 
choice with the fact that Christianity spread most easily in 
places under Christian political rule. As for whether Christians 
were also obliged to admit Muslim preachers to enter Christian 
lands, Innocent IV answered no, because Muslim preachers 
taught erroneous beliefs. 
Kedar, Crusade and Mission.
Vose, Dominicans, Muslims, and Jews in the Medieval Crown of Aragon.
1. What role did Christian missionizing play in the European colonization 
of the Americas and in European imperial expansion at the expense 
of China and Africa in the 19th and 20th centuries? Was the role that 
missionizing played in later periods of European expansion different 
from the role it played during the crusades, and if so, why?
2. Why did arguments for the compatibility of crusade and mission win out 
over arguments opposing that compatibility?
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

161
The Crusades and the Course of History, Part 1
Lecture 23
T
he idea that crusading was acceptable when non-Christian rulers 
interfered with Christian missionizing was invoked after the crusades 
to justify Spanish conquests in the Americas. The crusades didn’t 
cause these conquests, but Spanish practice in the Americas was shaped by 
the experience of the Reconquista, and that, in general, is how the crusades 
changed history—not by spawning events that would otherwise never have 
happened but by shaping subsequent events, often in ways contrary to the 
crusaders’ expectations. If there is a lesson to be learned from the crusades, 
it is to respect the law of unintended consequences. This lecture, on the rise 
of the Ottoman Turks, and the next lecture, on indulgences, seek to illustrate 
that point.
Byzantine Imperial Challenges

The Byzantine Empire of Nicaea captured Constantinople in 
1261. This reacquisition of the empire’s capital put an end to 
the Latin Empire that had existed since the Fourth Crusade took 
Constantinople in 1204. But for the Byzantine Empire, the legacy 
of the Fourth Crusade extended well beyond 1261. 
o The emperor of Nicaea’s possession of Constantinople 
strengthened his claim to be the true Byzantine emperor. 
However, other Byzantine successor states that had sprung up 
in the aftermath of the Fourth Crusade remained independent 
for some time. Further, substantial territories in Greece and the 
southern Balkans remained under the rule of French dynasties, 
and Greek islands and Crete remained under Venetian rule. 
o Territorially, the Byzantine Empire was much compromised in 
1261, and Constantinople itself was not what it had once been. 
The sack of Constantinople had drained wealth out of the city, 
and its population started to decline.

162
Lecture 23: The Crusades and the Course of History, Part 1

The threat that most occupied the Byzantine Empire in the two or 
three decades after 1261 was the very real possibility of a crusade to 
reinstate Latin rule in Constantinople. That possibility became even 
greater with the papacy’s ﬁ nal triumph against the Hohenstaufen 
dynasty in 1268. 
o The papacy’s champion against the Hohenstaufen, Charles 
of Anjou, was interested in leading an expedition against 
Constantinople. To forestall such an attack, in 1274, 
the Byzantine emperor Michael VIII Paleologus sent a 
representative to the Second Council of Lyon in France; there, 
the imperial representative swore to accept the union of the 
Orthodox and Catholic churches. In theory, the schism between 
Byzantine and Catholic Christianity was over. 
o However, the emperor’s submission touched off furious 
opposition within the Byzantine Empire. Most of the empire’s 
clergy and inhabitants refused to accept the union, and Michael 
VIII could not make good on his promises to the pope, who 
excommunicated the emperor in 1281. Michael VIII died the 
next year, and his successor renounced the union.
o Still, Michael VIII’s submission lessened the threat of a 
crusade, at least for a little while, as the pope no longer 
countenanced an expedition against the Byzantines. 
o Michael VIII also ﬁ nanced Sicilian resistance and Aragonese 
hostility to Charles of Anjou, which led to the Sicilian Vespers 
of 1282 and the crown of Aragon’s occupation of the island. 
That, in turn, put an end to Charles of Anjou’s dreams of 
conquering the Byzantine Empire. 

From Michael VIII onward, the Byzantine Empire focused its 
efforts on trying to regain lost territory in southeastern Europe, 
but it did not meet with much success. The restored empire made 
little if any attempt to take back Asia Minor, notwithstanding the 
fact that the arrival of the Mongols in the 1250s had upended Asia 
Minor and led to a proliferation of small Turkish principalities. One 

163
of these—the state of the Ottomans—would conquer the Byzantine 
Empire and much more.
Emergence of the Ottoman Empire

The Ottomans take their name from an early member of the Ottoman 
dynasty, Osman (d. c. 1324). At that time and for many decades 
afterward, the Ottomans were primarily nomadic pastoralists who 
roamed and raised herds in northwestern Asia Minor, just along the 
Byzantine frontier. 

The Ottomans captured Bursa in 1326, which served for about the 
next four decades as the capital of the newly emerging Ottoman 
state, and Nicaea in 1331. The Ottomans also expanded eastward 
across Asia Minor, subjugating rival Turkish principalities. By 
1400, they had taken Asia Minor, with a brief loss of control 
during the ﬁ rst two decades of the 15th century that did not set 
them back permanently. 

What set the Ottomans apart from other Turks in the early 14th 
century was their location hard against the Byzantine frontier, 
which created opportunities not available to other Turkish groups. 
The Ottomans also dealt relatively well with a problem that 
weakened their Turkish rivals: the problem of succession. They 
tended not divide up their state among a late ruler’s heirs; instead, 
one son became the new sultan. 

The Ottoman Turks ﬁ rst came to Europe in the service of the 
Byzantines. During a war between two claimants to the Byzantine 
throne in the 1340s, one claimant brought Ottomans from Asia 
Minor to southeastern Europe to ﬁ ght on his behalf. There, the 
Ottomans fought, from the Byzantine point of view, too well. The 
Ottomans captured and kept Gallipoli in 1354. In the 1360s, they 
captured Adrianople in the Balkans, renamed it Edirne, and made it 
their new capital. 

The movement of the capital from Asia Minor to southeastern 
Europe gave some sign of where the Ottomans intended to push 

164
Lecture 23: The Crusades and the Course of History, Part 1
forward most forcefully. By the end of the 1370s, they had 
outstripped the Byzantine Empire to such an extent that the empire 
became an Ottoman dependency. 
Direct Ottoman Rule

During the ﬁ rst few decades of Ottoman expansion into southeastern 
Europe, the Ottomans were not yet looking to create an empire that 
they themselves would rule but a network of subordinate states 
ruled by locals. However, those subordinate states often proved 
uncooperative. As a result, from roughly the 1380s onward, the 
Ottomans looked to impose direct rule. 

This new policy entailed further reduction of Byzantine 
autonomy; the Ottomans captured the Byzantine Empire’s few 
remaining territories in southeastern Europe and sought to capture 
Constantinople itself. In the 1390s and again in 1422, the Ottomans 
besieged Constantinople but were unable to take it. 

As the Ottomans assumed direct rule in southeastern Europe in the 
later 14th century, they also devised the devshirme. The devshirme 
strengthened the Ottomans militarily and, although in a sense 
punitive, gave local Christian populations a stake in Ottoman success. 
o This practice required a certain percentage of Christian 
households to hand over a male youth, typically between 
the ages of 14 and 17, to Ottoman ofﬁ cials during periodic 
collections. The selected youths then became imperial slaves; 
they converted to Islam, were circumcised, learned to speak 
Turkish, and were given physical and other training for the 
roles they would henceforth play. 
o Some of these former Christians were given high positions in 
the Ottoman administration; most others went into the elite 
Janissary corps, the Ottomans’ most effective ﬁ ghting force. 
o The Janissaries’ military importance and proximity to the 
sultan made them a potential threat, but as deracinated former 
Christians drawn from the Slavic population of southeastern 

165
Europe, the Janissaries were not likely to ally with other Turks 
against the Ottomans. 
Response to the Ottoman Expansion

Faced with the rise of the Ottomans, Byzantine emperors took 
steps even more drastic than Michael VIII’s submission to papal 
authority 
in 
1274. 
Now, 
the 
emperors 
themselves 
traveled to Europe, personally 
beseeching popes and rulers 
for assistance. Among others, 
John VIII traveled to Europe 
in 1438 and 1439, where he, 
like Michael VIII, submitted 
himself 
and 
the 
Orthodox 
Church to papal authority. As 
had happened earlier, the bulk 
of the Byzantine population and 
clergy refused to accept union 
with the Catholic Church. 

It was not just the Orthodox 
Christians of Byzantium who 
objected to John VIII’s imperial 
submission to papal authority 
but also the Orthodox Russians. 
They considered the Byzantine 
emperor to have abdicated his 
leadership of the Orthodox 
world through his acceptance of Catholic union and Ottoman 
overlordship. In the mid-15th century, Orthodox Christianity split 
into Russian and Greek branches.

Europe responded to Ottoman expansion and to Byzantine appeals 
for help with crusades, launched at rather scattered moments; the 
largest expeditions were launched not in response to Byzantine 
appeals for help but appeals from Hungary. A few quite small 
In the 1440s and early 1450s, 
Orthodox Russians rejected 
the legitimacy of the Byzantine 
emperor and began to hail 
Moscow as the New Rome 
and, thereby, Constantinople’s 
replacement.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

166
Lecture 23: The Crusades and the Course of History, Part 1
expeditions enjoyed a few small successes, but the largest 14th-
century crusading expedition against the Ottoman Turks ended in 
disastrous defeat. 

In 1453, the Ottomans besieged Constantinople once again. This 
time, they had cannons and naval forces superior to those that had 
been available in the 1420s, along with knowledge gained during 
earlier sieges. 
o On May 29, Ottoman soldiers forced their way through the 
city walls. As had happened at Acre in 1291, Constantinople’s 
residents dashed to the harbor, but there were not enough boats 
to ferry away the city’s population. 
o The Byzantine emperor seems to have died during the sack of 
the city. The Ottomans made Constantinople, or Istanbul, their 
new capital.

Neither Ottoman expansion nor crusades that aimed at checking 
Ottoman expansion ended in 1453. Despite some successful 
defenses, Ottoman advance remained the overall trend through the 
15th and early 16th centuries. 
The Crusades and the Fall of Byzantium

It would certainly not be correct to say that the crusades caused 
the fall of the Byzantine Empire; that was caused by the rise of the 
Ottoman Turks. Neither did the crusades give rise to the Ottomans. 
Their rise was due to a combination of geography, policy, and 
opportunity. However, it would be correct to say that the crusades 
contributed substantially to the fall of the Byzantine Empire and, 
thereby, to the rise of the Ottoman Turks. 

The First Crusade had brought only modest gains to the Byzantines 
and modest losses to the Turks of Asia. Between the First Crusade 
and the late 14th century, eastern crusading, with its emphasis on 
Jerusalem and, as a secondary target, Egypt brought even fewer 
gains to the Byzantine Empire and even fewer losses to the Turks 
of Asia Minor. 

167

Most importantly, the Fourth Crusade was very bad for the 
Byzantine Empire. The sack of Constantinople, followed by 
nearly two generations of Latin rule, the establishment of the Latin 
Empire, the division of much of the empire among victorious 
crusaders, the emergence of rival Byzantine successor states—these 
dealt to the Byzantine Empire a series of reverses from which it 
never recovered. 

And without the crusaders’ weakening of the Byzantine Empire, 
it is difﬁ cult to see how the Ottoman Turks could have expanded 
into southeastern Europe as they did. Whatever else Pope Urban II 
might have said at Clermont in November 1095 when he launched 
the First Crusade, surely he did not call upon crusaders to pave the 
way for Turkish expansion to the gates of Vienna, but that is what 
the crusades helped to bring about. 
Bisaha, Creating East and West.
Finkel, Osman’s Dream.
Harris, The End of Byzantium.
Housley, The Italian Crusades. 
———, The Later Crusades.
Kafadar, Between Two Worlds.
Nicol, The Last Centuries of Byzantium (1261–1453). 
1. If there had been no crusades, would the Ottoman Empire have assumed 
the historical form that it did? 
2. What were the long-term historical consequences of the rise of the 
Ottoman Empire for southeastern Europe, for the Near East, and for 
global history?
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

168
Lecture 24: The Crusades and the Course of History, Part 2
The Crusades and the Course of History, Part 2
Lecture 24
I
n the last lecture, we saw how the crusades, through the Fourth Crusade’s 
dismemberment of the Byzantine Empire, facilitated the emergence of 
the Ottoman Turks. In turn, we saw how the Ottoman Turks brought 
Turkish and Islamic rule to southeastern Europe in the 14th century and 
conquered Constantinople and ﬁ nished off the Byzantine Empire in the 
15th century. Ottoman expansion changed the course of Balkan and eastern 
European history and, thereby, the course of European and world history. 
But the rise of the Ottomans was not the only unintended consequence of the 
crusades. In this lecture, we will examine an often overlooked consequence 
that involves a topic we explored in our ﬁ rst lecture: indulgences.
Indulgence Inﬂ ation

The plenary indulgence, the remission of all temporal penalties due 
to sin, provided a substantial spiritual beneﬁ t to those who received 
one. And, for about a century after the First Crusade, the only way 
to get a plenary indulgence was by going on crusade. The reward 
was great, but the price was high. 

Only in rare circumstances was it possible to obtain a plenary 
indulgence without going on crusade. Crusaders who took vows but 
were unable to fulﬁ ll them could, in some cases, redeem their vows 
by making a payment theoretically equal to the amount of money 
they would have spent if they had gone on crusade. The money 
paid would be used to support other crusaders. Into the early 13th
century, ecclesiastical authorities held the line on vow redemption: 
It was to be done only in exceptional circumstances.

In 1213, however, Pope Innocent III initiated a major change in this 
policy. Instead of making it difﬁ cult for people to redeem crusading 
vows and instead of discouraging those who were unﬁ t for military 
service from making vows, henceforth, crusading preachers should 
do the opposite. They should encourage as many people as possible 

169
to make crusading vows, and they should make it easy for those who 
had taken vows to redeem them in return for monetary payment. 
o In making this decision, Innocent III was trying to solve 
an old problem: Ever since the People’s Crusade of 1096, 
noncombatants had hamstrung crusader armies and insisted 
on tagging along because crusading was the only way to get a 
plenary indulgence. 
o This new system would increase the effectiveness of crusading 
armies by ridding them of unwanted members while increasing 
the ﬁ nancial support for such armies. 

In theory, the pope’s solution was an excellent one, but it also 
had unintended consequences and generated problems of its own. 
This new approach made it too easy for people to gain plenary 
indulgences without going on crusade. As a result, the laity 
pressured popes and other clerics for more opportunities to earn 
indulgences in return for doing less. Within the church, bishops, 
churches, and shrines also pressured their superiors, seeking the 
issuance of ever more indulgences.

Throughout the 13th through 15th centuries, the number of 
indulgences in circulation increased. 
o Some of these were partial indulgences, meaning that they 
remitted either a speciﬁ c fraction of the temporal penalties due 
to sin or remitted a speciﬁ c amount of time. 
o The amount of service required to earn a partial or a plenary 
indulgence decreased, and increasingly, that service had 
nothing to do with crusading. 
o Most controversially, the acquisition of indulgences became 
more a matter of commerce than of service. It looked as though 
people were being encouraged to buy their way out of penance 
and purgatory. 

170
Lecture 24: The Crusades and the Course of History, Part 2

Technically, the new policy did not involve the selling of 
indulgences; the person acquiring the indulgence was redeeming 
a vow, not buying an indulgence. But when the amount of time 
between the taking and the redeeming of the vow shrank to seconds 
and when the vow had been taken with no intention of ever fulﬁ lling 
it, that distinction was hard to maintain.

The big break between crusading and the plenary indulgence came 
in 1300, when the pope declared that to be a Year of Jubilee. All 
pilgrims who came to Rome in that year and spent a certain amount 
of time there received a plenary indulgence. The papal grant also 
decreed that a Jubilee Year would take place every 100 years.
o Succeeding popes revised the proclamation to celebrate a 
Jubilee Year every 50 years and then every 33 years.
o When people complained that they could not make it to Rome 
during a designated year, popes responded by granting the 
Jubilee indulgence anyway or offering alternatives.
Theology of Indulgences

The extent to which popular desire for indulgences drove indulgence 
inﬂ ation, ecclesiastical policy, and even theology, is apparent in the 
doctrine of the Treasury of Merits. 
o In the 1230s, theologians posited that there existed a Treasury 
of Merits, consisting of an inexhaustible supply of merits 
earned by Jesus and the saints. When popes and bishops issued 
indulgences, they dipped into the Treasury of Merits and paid 
off the temporal punishment due to sinners. 
o In 1343, this doctrine received papal approval, well after 
indulgences had become commonplace. With the Treasury of 
Merits, as with Islamic jihad, theology retroactively explained 
and sanctioned what had already happened.

Even more controversial than the Treasury of Merits was the 
question of whether indulgences could be applied to those who had 

171
already died, and here, too, the inﬂ uence of popular expectation on 
theology is evident. 
o Praying for the dead and performing works of charity on behalf 
of the dead in the hope that God would lessen the amount of 
time that the deceased had to spend in purgatory were not 
controversial practices. God could choose to respond or not to 
respond to those prayers and to do as he saw ﬁ t with those in 
purgatory. 
o But the application of indulgences to the dead was 
controversial because indulgences involve compulsion rather 
than supplication. Where indulgences were concerned, God 
had to lessen the amount of purgatorial time. 

In the early 13th century, preachers told their listeners that 
indulgences could be used to beneﬁ t those who were already dead 
and in purgatory. Thomas Aquinas found the process by which 
indulgences could be applied to the dead bafﬂ ing, but he still 
seemed to accept it. He argued that preachers already taught that 
indulgences could be applied to the dead and it would be impious 
to say that the church did anything in vain; thus, indulgences for the 
dead must be valid, at least in some cases. 

Not everyone agreed; the canon lawyer Hostiensis and the 
theologian Bonaventure asserted that indulgences could not 
be applied to the dead because the dead had passed from the 
jurisdiction of bishops, cardinals, and popes to the jurisdiction of 
God. Further, as Bonaventure noted, indulgences worked only for 
sins to which a sinner had confessed. Those in purgatory or hell had 
no opportunity to confess their sins and have penance assigned to 
them; thus, they could not beneﬁ t from indulgences. 

In the end, Aquinas’s position won out because the practice of 
issuing indulgences for the dead was so popular and commonplace. 
Eventually, the upper ranks of the ecclesiastical hierarchy followed 
the lead of its preachers in the trenches. In 1476, Pope Sixtus IV 

172
Lecture 24: The Crusades and the Course of History, Part 2
issued an indulgence for the dead, signifying papal approval of 
the practice. 
Motives behind Indulgences

The issuance of indulgences for the dead was both humane, 
accommodating the desire of people to do something on behalf of 
their departed loved ones, and proﬁ table, opening a large market 
to the papacy. In many cases, it was impossible to disentangle the 
humane and the proﬁ table motives in papal calculations.
o In some instances, particularly with devotional indulgences, 
the humane predominated. Whoever put this type of indulgence 
into circulation seems not to have expected ﬁ nancial 
compensation for doing so. Instead, devotional indulgences 
merely provided believers with another means of increasing 
the likelihood of salvation and greater comfort than an ordinary 
partial indulgence.
o In other instances, ﬁ nancial motives predominated. Indulgences 
came to be used as bond issues are used today: to ﬁ nance public 
works, road building, bridge repair, and so on. Although these 
indulgences were partial rather than plenary, they tightened the 
association between payment and remission of sin. 

Because the amount of time that one would have to spend in 
purgatory was known to no one, the demand for partial indulgences 
was theoretically inﬁ nite. As for plenary indulgences, they applied 
only to sins committed and confessed at the time one acquired the 
indulgence. For sins committed after that point, another indulgence 
was needed. Popes could and did generate new demand for plenary 
indulgences by annulling all existing plenary indulgences and 
requiring their possessors to acquire new ones.
The End of Indulgences

Of course, in many instances, the system of indulgences generated 
criticism and resentment. Popes were aware of problems with 
the system, but even those popes who were inclined to rein in 
indulgences failed to do so for more than brief periods. Too much 

173
money came from indulgences, and too many livelihoods depended 
on them.

The end of indulgences in some parts of Europe came surprisingly 
quickly. On October 31, 1517, Martin Luther produced his 
Ninety-ﬁ ve 
Theses, 
in 
which he hammered away at 
indulgences, 
believing 
that 
they represented the antithesis 
of Christian life. As Luther 
developed his doctrine of 
justiﬁ cation 
by 
faith, 
he 
slashed away at the theological 
underpinnings of indulgences: 
There was no purgatory.

The Protestant Reformation 
ushered in an age of religious 
wars. During the 16th and 
17th centuries, wars between 
Protestants and Catholics and 
between different Protestant 
sects 
touched, 
directly 
or 
indirectly, every part of the 
European continent: civil wars in Germany and Switzerland, the 
French Wars of Religion between Catholics and Huguenots, the 
Dutch Revolt against the Catholic Hapsburgs, war between Catholic 
Spain and Protestant England, and so on. 
o During the period of the crusades, people from all these places 
had taken up the cross because they shared a common faith. 
o During and after the Protestant Reformation, people from these 
countries found themselves ﬁ ghting wars against one another 
and for different faiths. 

As we’ve seen, the crusades, launched to bring Jerusalem under 
Christian rule, facilitated Turkish and Islamic expansion into 
Geoffrey Chaucer created a 
portrait of a duplicitous charlatan 
in his Pardoner from the 
Canterbury Tales.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

174
Lecture 24: The Crusades and the Course of History, Part 2
southeastern Europe. The crusades, launched to aid the Byzantine 
Empire, weakened that empire. The crusades, launched to promote 
the reuniﬁ cation of the Eastern Orthodox and Western Catholic 
churches, gave rise to grievances that made reuniﬁ cation even more 
difﬁ cult to achieve. Our consideration of indulgences brings us to 
one last irony: Thanks to the indulgence and the controversies it 
generated, the crusades, launched to reunify the Christianities of 
Byzantium and Europe, contributed to the dissolution of European 
Christendom itself.
Armstrong, Holy War.
Stark, God’s Battalions. 
Swanson, Indulgences in Late Medieval England. 
1. If crusading had not made indulgences so central to the religious life of 
medieval Europe, how might the Protestant Reformation have developed 
differently? Would there have been a Protestant Reformation at all?
2. What broader lesson do you draw from the history of indulgences? 
Might and should the church have changed course as regards the 
proliferation of indulgences? At some point, did it become prohibitively 
difﬁ cult for the church to undo what had already been done or even to 
stop doing what it had been doing?
3. Can you think of other historical movements and events whose 
unintended consequences exceeded their intended consequences? 
Are there any historical movements and events whose unintended 
consequences did not exceed their intended consequences?
Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

175
The End of the Christian Empire

176
The Reign of Bassle II

177
Arrival of the Seljuk Turks

178
The First Crusade:
Advance to Antioch
1099: The March to Jerusalem

179
The People’s Crusade

180
The Crusader States, c. 1100

181
The Aftermath of Hattin

182
The Rise of Saladin

183
The “Splinter Empress,” 1214

184
The Crusade of Louis IX

185
Bibliography
Abulaﬁ a, David. Frederick II: A Medieval Emperor. London: Allen Lane, 
1998. A marvelously readable and perceptive study of a Holy Roman Emperor 
who crusaded and against whom crusades were launched.
Angold, Norman. The Fourth Crusade: Event and Context. New York: 
Longman, 2003. A good study of the Fourth Crusade by a Byzantinist.
Armstrong, Karen. Holy War: The Crusades and Their Impact on Today’s 
World. 2nd ed. New York: Anchor Books, 2001. A quirky and polemical work; 
like Rodney Stark’s book listed below, it is worth reading if only to gain an 
appreciation for what is at stake in the modern study of the crusades.
Bachrach, David S. Religion and the Conduct of War, c. 300–1215. Rochester, 
NY: Boydell Press, 2003. A good overview of the relationship between 
Christianity and war over a long time span. 
Barber, Malcolm. Crusaders and Heretics, 12th to 14th Centuries. Burlington, 
VT: Ashgate, 1995. A collection of important articles; especially noteworthy 
are the studies of the Shepherds’ Crusades. 
———. The New Knighthood: A History of the Order of the Temple. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1994. A ﬁ ne examination of the Templars.
———. The Trial of the Templars. 2nd ed. New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2006. A sound, sober, and detailed study of a controversial event.
Bartlett, Robert. The Making of Europe: Conquest, Colonization and Cultural 
Change, 950–1350. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993. Not about 
crusading per se, but this ﬁ ne book puts the expansion associated with 
crusading in its historical context and assesses the consequences.
Bisaha, Nancy. Creating East and West: Renaissance Humanists and the 
Ottoman Turks. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2004. A good 

186
Bibliography
study of how European contemporaries understood the Turks and the growth 
of the Ottoman Empire.
Bonner, Michael David. Jihad in Islamic History. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 2006. A solid overview.
Brundage, James. Medieval Canon Law and the Crusader. Madison: 
University of Wisconsin Press, 1970. An older and hard-to-ﬁ nd book but 
essential on the legal deﬁ nition of a crusader.
Bull, Marcus, Norman Housley, Peter Edbury, and Jonathan Phillips, eds. The 
Experience of Crusading. 2 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2003. Weighty scholarship covering an array of topics.
Bull, Marcus. Knightly Piety and the Lay Response to the First Crusade: The 
Limousin and Gascony, c. 970–c. 1130. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993. A 
trailblazing study of the response to the call for the First Crusade. 
Chazan, Robert. European Jewry and the First Crusade. Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1996. Using both Latin and Hebrew sources, this book is 
the best study of the massacres of Jews at the outset of the First Crusade.
Christiansen, Eric. The Northern Crusades. Rev. ed. New York: Penguin 
Books, 1998. A ﬁ ne place to start for those interested in crusades that may be 
little known among North Americans today but were of considerable historical 
signiﬁ cance. 
Constable, Giles. Crusaders and Crusading in the Twelfth Century. Burlington, 
VT: Ashgate, 2009. A collection of some of the author’s many classic articles 
on the crusades, perhaps most especially, the Second Crusade.
Cook, David. Understanding Jihad. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2005. Contains pointed but quite valid and important observations about the 
history of jihad and how Western scholars have dealt with it.
Dajani-Shakeel, Hadia. “A Reassessment of Some Medieval and Modern 
Assessments of the Counter-Crusade.” In The Jihad and Its Times. Edited by 

187
Hadia Dajani-Shakeel, Ronald A. Messier, and Andrew S. Ehrenkreutz. Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan, 1991, pp. 41–70. An important assessment of 
the Islamic response to the crusades. 
Dickson, Gary. “The Advent of the Pastores.” Revue belge de philology 
et d’histoire 66 (1988): 249–267. An important examination of the ﬁ rst 
Shepherds’ Crusade; available online at www.persee.fr.
———. The Children’s Crusade: Medieval History, Modern Mythistory. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008. Especially interesting on the historical 
memory of the Children’s Crusade.
Edbury, Peter W., and John Gordon Rowe. William of Tyre: Historian of 
the Latin East. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. Studies an 
important resident and chronicler of the kingdom of Jerusalem.
Eddé, Anne-Marie. Saladin. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2011. 
An intriguing examination of the Saladin of history and the Saladin of legend.
Edington, Susan B., and Sarah Lambert, eds. Gendering the Crusades. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2002. Gerundial titles tend to make most 
nonacademics’ hair stand on end and usually with good reason, but these 
essays are well-wrought and eye-opening.
Finkel, Caroline. Osman’s Dream: The History of the Ottoman Empire. New 
York: Basic Books, 2007. A useful introduction to Ottoman history.
Forey, Alan J. The Military Orders from the Twelfth to the Early Fourteenth 
Centuries. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 1991. A solid introduction to the 
subject.
France, John. Victory in the East: A Military History of the First Crusade. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1997. A traditional military history (and I 
do not mean that pejoratively) of the First Crusade by an insightful scholar.
Frankopan, Peter. The First Crusade: The Call from the East. Cambridge, 
MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2012. This ambitious and 

188
Bibliography
well-written book does a ﬁ ne job of situating the First Crusade in the context 
of Byzantine-Turkish conﬂ ict; perhaps it overreaches on occasion, but it is an 
invaluable, thought-provoking addition to the study of crusading. 
Friedman, Yvonne. Encounter between Enemies: Captivity and Ransom in the 
Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem. Boston: Brill, 2002. Studies a ubiquitous aspect 
of life in the crusader East that often lurks in the background of other studies 
but deserves the extensive treatment it receives here.
Gillingham, John. Richard I. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2002. Much 
has been written about Richard Lionheart, and much of what has been written 
is quite fanciful; this book, however, is well worth your time.
Hamilton, Bernard. Crusaders, Cathars, and the Holy Places. Aldershot: 
Ashgate, 2000. A collection of signiﬁ cant studies on various aspects of 
crusading. 
———. The Leper King and His Heirs: Baldwin IV and the Crusader Kingdom 
of Jerusalem. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. Examines the 
most famous, if unfortunate, of the kings of Jerusalem.
Harris, Jonathan. Byzantium and the Crusades. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2003. The crusades from a changing Byzantine perspective.
———. The End of Byzantium. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2010. A 
clear, readable narrative that disentangles the complicated ﬁ nal 50 years of the 
Byzantine Empire.
Hillenbrand, Carole. The Crusades: Islamic Perspectives. New York: 
Routledge, 2000. A good introduction to the crusades as seen by Muslim 
contemporaries.
Housley, Norman. Contesting the Crusades. Malden, MA: Blackwell 
Publishers, 2006. Thoughtful ruminations on the nature and historical 
signiﬁ cance of the crusades.

189
———. Fighting for the Cross: Crusading to the Holy Land. New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 2008. A series of insightful studies treating various 
aspects of the crusading experience. Those looking for a thematic more than a 
narrative approach will ﬁ nd this book to be an excellent choice.
———. The Italian Crusades: The Papal-Angevin Alliance and the Crusades 
against Christian Lay Powers, 1254–1343. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1982. Examines the spread of crusading to Europe’s interior.
———. The Later Crusades: From Lyons to Alcazar, 1274–1580. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1992. A superb examination of crusading in its ﬁ nal 
centuries; a wonderful accomplishment.
Irwin, Robert. The Middle East in the Middle Ages: The Early Mamluk 
Sultanate, 1250–1382. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press, 
1986. (Available as a part of the History E-Book Project of the American 
Council of Learned Societies, 2008.) A succinct examination of early Mamluk 
Egypt. 
Jackson, David, and Malcolm Lyons. Saladin: The Politics of the Holy 
War. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1982. A sober, fair-minded 
assessment of Saladin.
Jordan, William Chester. Louis IX and the Challenge of the Crusade: A Study 
in Rulership. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980. A good study of the 
relationship between Louis IX and crusading.
Kafadar, Cemal. Between Two Worlds: The Construction of the Ottoman State. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005. A sophisticated but accessible 
and important study of the early Ottomans.
Kedar, Benjamin Z. Crusade and Mission: European Approaches toward the 
Muslims. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1988. An excellent study of 
medieval missionizing in the Islamic world.
———. “The Massacre of 15 July 1099 in the Historiography of the 
Crusades.” The Crusades 3 (2004): 15–75. An important examination of what 

190
Bibliography
happened at Jerusalem when the city was captured by the First Crusade and 
how chroniclers wrote about that event.
Kennedy, Hugh. Crusader Castles. New York: Cambridge University Press, 
2001. A well-illustrated study of castles in the East.
Laiou, Angeliki, and Roy Mottahedeh, eds. The Crusades from the Perspective 
of Byzantium and the Muslim World. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks, 
2001. Important essays on how others viewed the crusaders.
Laiou, Angeliki, ed. Urbs capta: The Fourth Crusade and Its Consequences. 
Paris: Lethielleux, 2005. An outstanding collection of essays approaching the 
Fourth Crusade from various angles.
Le Goff, Jacques. Saint Louis. Translated by Gareth Gollrad. Notre Dame: 
University of Notre Dame Press, 2009. One of France’s greatest medieval 
historians studies the king who led the Seventh and Eighth Crusades. 
Leopold, Antony. How to Recover the Holy Land: The Crusade Proposals of 
the Late Thirteenth and Early Fourteenth Centuries. Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 
2000. Studies the sometimes highly creative plans for retaking Jerusalem, 
proposed even as conventional crusades continually failed to do so.
Lillie, Ralph-Johannes. Byzantium and the Crusader States, 1096–1204. 
Rev. ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994. Examines the changing 
relationship between the crusading states and the Byzantine Empire until the 
Fourth Crusade.
Lloyd, Simon. English Society and the Crusades, 1216–1307. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1988. An interesting examination of the impact of 
crusading on the English “home front.”
Lock, Peter. The Routledge Companion to the Crusades. New York: Routledge, 
2006. A valuable reference work, especially good in its coverage of many 
smallish expeditions and expeditions that never got off the ground.

191
MacEvitt, Christopher. The Crusades and the Christian World of the East: 
Rough Tolerance. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2008. An 
impressive, well-written examination of an under-studied topic: relations 
between crusaders and Eastern Christians, such as the Armenians, Jacobites, 
and Melkites.
Madden, Thomas, ed. The Crusades: The Essential Readings. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell, 2002. An excellent selection of important essays that are not easy 
to access otherwise. 
———, ed. Crusades: The Illustrated History. Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press, 2005. A marvelously well-illustrated book with pithy essays; 
a great book for those new to the subject and useful to those with a background 
in the ﬁ eld.
———. Enrico Dandolo and the Rise of Venice. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 2006. A well-written study of a ﬁ gure whose role in the 
controversial Fourth Crusade was pivotal. 
Maier, Christoph T. Preaching the Crusade: Mendicant Friars and the Cross 
in the Thirteenth Century. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
Preaching was an essential part of crusading recruitment, and this book shows 
how it was done.
———. “The Roles of Women in the Crusade Movement: A Survey.” Journal 
of Medieval History 30 (2004): 61–82. This essay complements the book 
edited by Edington and Lambert listed above.
Marshall, Christopher. Warfare in the Latin East, 1192–1291. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1992. This book makes original contributions 
and summarizes the work of previous historians; interesting both for its subject 
and for the ﬁ eld of military history more generally.
Nicol, Donald M. The Last Centuries of Byzantium (1261–1453). 2nd ed. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1993. A good overview of the Byzantine 
Empire from the Byzantine reconquest of Constantinople to its ﬁ nal loss to the 
Turks.

192
Bibliography
O’Callaghan, Joseph F. Reconquest and Crusade in Medieval Spain. 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2003. This book is the place to 
start for those interested in Spanish crusades.
Pegg, Mark Gregory. A Most Holy War: The Albigensian Crusade and the 
Battle for Christendom. New York: Oxford University Press, 2008. A highly 
and justly controversial reexamination of the Albigensian Crusade.
Phillips, Jonathan. Defenders of the Holy Land: Relations between the Latin 
East and the West, 1119–1187. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996. 
Examines diplomatic contact between the Crusader States and their homelands 
during the 12th century.
———. The Second Crusade: Extending the Frontiers of Christendom. New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 2007. The best account of the Second Crusade; 
also covers the conquest of Lisbon and the Wendish Crusade.
———. The Fourth Crusade and the Sack of Constantinople. New York: 
Viking, 2004. A narrative examination of the crusade that led to the sack of 
Constantinople.
Powell, James M. Anatomy of a Crusade, 1213–1221. Philadelphia: University 
of Pennsylvania Press, 1990. The best account of the Fifth Crusade.
———, ed. Muslims under Latin Rule, 1100–1300. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1990. A useful collection of essays that examines the status 
of Muslims in the Christian kingdoms of Iberia and the Crusader States. 
Prawer, Joshua. The Crusaders’ Kingdom: European Colonialism in the 
Middle Ages. London: Phoenix Press, 2001. Studies society within the 
Crusader States and stakes out a strong position in the debate over whether the 
crusades were a colonial enterprise.
———. The History of the Jews in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1988. Adds greatly to our understanding of the 
kingdom of Jerusalem.

193
Queller, Donald E., and Thomas Madden. The Fourth Crusade and the 
Conquest of Constantinople. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: University of Philadelphia 
Press, 1997. A good account of the Fourth Crusade.
Riley-Smith, Jonathan. The Crusades: A History. 2nd ed. New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 2005. An excellent place to start and equally rewarding for 
those wanting to deepen their knowledge of the crusades. Be sure to read the 
second edition, which does a good job of assessing recent developments in the 
study of the crusades.
———, ed. The Oxford Illustrated History of the Crusades. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1995. Covers an assortment of topics sometimes overlooked 
in other studies and covers them well.
Rowell, S. C. Lithuania Ascending: A Pagan Empire within East-Central 
Europe, 1295–1345. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1994. A 
fascinating account of the last major pagan polity in Europe at the time of the 
northern crusades.
Rubenstein, Jay. Armies of Heaven: The First Crusade and the Quest for the 
Apocalypse. New York: Basic Books, 2011. A highly readable narrative of the 
First Crusade that emphasizes its apocalyptic overtones. 
———. “Crusaders and Cannibals.” French Historical Studies 31 (2008): 
525–552. During the First Crusade, crusaders ate people; this provocative 
article makes a case for cannibalism having been driven not by hunger but by 
tactical considerations.
Runciman, Steven. A History of the Crusades. 3 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1951–1954 (republished many times). Classic narrative 
history of the eastern crusades. Runciman is partial to Byzantium and 
sometimes bathetic, but recent rejections of his work and insights have thrown 
out the proverbial baby with the bathwater.
Schein, Sylvia. Fideles cruces: The Papacy, the West, and the Recovery of the 
Holy Land, 1274–1314. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991. Examines how hopes 

194
Bibliography
and plans for the recapture of Jerusalem ﬂ ourished just before and after the fall 
of the kingdom of Jerusalem.
Setton, Kenneth, ed. A History of the Crusades. 6 vols. Madison: University 
of Wisconsin Press, 1969–1989. The wide-ranging essays in these six volumes 
are a treasure trove of information; the entire collection is available (legally) 
online at http://uwdc.library.wisc.edu/collections/History/HistCrusades. 
Seward, Desmond. The Monks of War: The Military Religious Orders. Rev. 
ed. New York: Penguin, 1995. A stylishly written introduction to the subject, 
perhaps more far-ranging than deep. 
Siberry, Elizabeth. Criticism of Crusading, 1094–1274. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1985. A useful examination of those who dissented from 
crusading.
Sivan, Emmanuel. “Modern Arab Historiography of the Crusades.” Asian 
and African Studies 8 (1972): 119–148. A bit dense but a very interesting 
examination of how modern Arab historians have grappled with the crusades.
Stark, Rodney. God’s Battalions: The Case for the Crusades. New York: 
HarperOne, 2009. A polemical work, worth reading (like Armstrong’s book 
above) if only to gain an appreciation for what is at stake in the modern study 
of the crusades.
Sumption, Jonathan. The Albigensian Crusade. Boston: Faber and Faber, 
1978. A readable narrative treatment of the crusade against the Cathars and 
their defenders.
Swanson, R. N. Indulgences in Late Medieval England: Passports to 
Paradise? New York: Cambridge University Press, 2007. A fair-minded and 
thorough study of indulgences in one country; meticulous scholarship.
Thorau, Peter. The Lion of Egypt: Sultan Baybars I and the Near East in the 
Thirteenth Century. New York: Longman, 1992. Studies the Mamluk who 
helped to end the Frankish presence in the East. 

195
Tolan, John V. Saracens: Islam in the Medieval European Imagination. 
New York: Columbia University Press, 2002. An essential study of how 
Christian understandings of Islam changed during the Middle Ages; a truly 
important book.
Tyerman, Christopher. God’s War: A New History of the Crusades. Cambridge, 
MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2006. Well-written and 
sound of judgment. If I could recommend only one book on the crusades, this 
would be it.
Urban, William. The Teutonic Knights: A Military History. London: Greenhill 
Books, 2003. A good study of medieval Europe’s most powerful military order.
Vose, Robin. Dominicans, Muslims, and Jews in the Medieval Crown of 
Aragon. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009. Not about crusading 
per se, but this book makes an important contribution to our understanding of 
medieval missionizing, and it debunks some enduring myths.

