Modern History
History
Topic
Subtopic
Course Guidebook
Professor Mark A. Stoler
The University of Vermont
The Skeptic’s Guide 
to American History

PUBLISHED BY:
THE GREAT COURSES
Corporate Headquarters
4840 Westﬁ elds Boulevard, Suite 500
Chantilly, Virginia 20151-2299
Phone: 1-800-832-2412
Fax: 703-378-3819
www.thegreatcourses.com
Copyright © The Teaching Company, 2012
Printed in the United States of America
This book is in copyright. All rights reserved. 
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above,
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form, or by any means 
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), 
without the prior written permission of
The Teaching Company.

i
Mark A. Stoler, Ph.D.
Professor Emeritus of History
The University of Vermont
P
rofessor Mark A. Stoler is Professor 
Emeritus of History at The University of 
Vermont, where he specialized for almost 40 
years in U.S. diplomatic and military history. He 
received his B.A. from The City College of New 
York and his M.A. and Ph.D. from the University 
of Wisconsin–Madison.
Professor Stoler is the author of The Politics of the Second Front: American 
Military Planning and Diplomacy in Coalition Warfare, 1941–1943; 
Explorations in American History: A Skills Approach, with Marshall True; 
George C. Marshall: Soldier-Statesman of the American Century; Allies and 
Adversaries: The Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Grand Alliance, and U.S. Strategy 
in World War II; Debating Franklin D. Roosevelt’s Foreign Policies, 1933–
1945, with Justus D. Doenecke; and Allies in War: Britain and America 
Against the Axis Powers, 1940–1945. In addition, he has written numerous 
articles and book chapters on U.S. diplomatic and military history. Professor 
Stoler is the editor of The Origins of the Cold War and Major Problems in the 
History of World War II: Documents and Essays, with Melanie S. Gustafson 
and Thomas Paterson.
Professor Stoler has been a visiting professor at the U.S. Naval War College, 
a Fulbright Lecturer at the University of Haifa in Israel, a visiting professor 
at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, the Harold K. Johnson Visiting 
Professor at the U.S. Army Military History Institute, the Stanley Kaplan 
Visiting Professor of American Foreign Policy at Williams College, and 
a visiting professor and the Robert S. Grifﬁ th, Jr. ’52 Visiting Scholar at 
Washington and Lee University.
Professor Stoler’s multiple awards include the Distinguished Book Award 
of the Society for Military History for Allies and Adversaries; inclusion in 
Who’s Who Among America’s Teachers; The University of Vermont’s George 

iiii
V. Kidder Outstanding Faculty Award, University Scholar Award, Dean’s 
Lecture Award, and Kroepsch-Maurice Excellence in Teaching Award; 
honorary membership in the university’s chapter of Phi Beta Kappa; and two 
public service awards from the U.S. Army. 
Professor Stoler was a member of the Board of Trustees of the Society 
for Military History and a Presidential Counselor to the National World 
War II Museum; he has also served on the U.S. Army Historical Advisory 
Committee and the Board of Directors of the World War Two Studies 
Association. He was a member and the 2004 president of the Council of the 
Society for Historians of American Foreign Relations. Since 2008, he has 
been the editor of The Papers of George Catlett Marshall, with volume 6 
scheduled to appear in fall 2012 and volume 7 scheduled for 2014.
Professor Stoler has previously taught America and the World: A Diplomatic 
History for The Great Courses. ■

iii
Table of Contents
LECTURE GUIDES
INTRODUCTION
Professor Biography ............................................................................i
Course Scope .....................................................................................1
LECTURE 1
Religious Toleration in Colonial America? ..........................................4
LECTURE 2
Neither American nor Revolutionary?  ..............................................11
LECTURE 3
The Constitution Did Not Create a Democracy  ...............................19
LECTURE 4
Washington—Failures and Real Accomplishments  .........................27
LECTURE 5
Confusions about Jefferson and Hamilton  .......................................34
LECTURE 6
Andrew Jackson—An Odd Symbol of Democracy  ..........................41
LECTURE 7
The Second Great Awakening—Enduring Impacts  .........................48
LECTURE 8
Did Slavery Really Cause the Civil War?  ........................................55
LECTURE 9
The Civil War’s Actual Turning Points  ..............................................62

Table of Contents
iviv
LECTURE 10
The Myth of Laissez-Faire  ...............................................................68
LECTURE 11
Misconceptions about the Original Populists  ...................................74
LECTURE 12
Labor in America—A Strange History  ..............................................81
LECTURE 13
Myths about American Isolation and Empire  ...................................88
LECTURE 14
Early Progressives Were Not Liberals  .............................................95
LECTURE 15
Woodrow Wilson and the Rating of Presidents  .............................102
LECTURE 16
The Roaring Twenties Reconsidered  ............................................109
LECTURE 17
Hoover and the Great Depression Revisited  .................................116
LECTURE 18
What Did Roosevelt’s New Deal Really Do?  .................................123
LECTURE 19
World War II Misconceptions and Myths  .......................................130
LECTURE 20
Was the Cold War Inevitable?  .......................................................137
LECTURE 21
The Real Blunders of the Vietnam War  .........................................144
LECTURE 22
Myths about American Wars  ..........................................................151

Table of Contents
v
LECTURE 23
Who Matters in American History?  ................................................158
LECTURE 24
History Did Not Begin with Us  .......................................................165
Bibliography ....................................................................................172
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL

vi

1
Scope:
E
veryone recognizes as myths the idea that Columbus was the ﬁ rst 
to discover America or the story that George Washington admitted 
cutting down a cherry tree. But very few people realize how much 
of what we think we know about American history is also mythical and 
mistaken. As historians often emphasize, many popular beliefs about history 
in general—and about U.S. history in particular—are myths, either totally 
false or, at best, only half true. 
In this course, we will examine some of these myths, such as those 
concerning the origins of religious tolerance in America, the American 
Revolution, George Washington, the causes of the Civil War, the causes 
and conduct of World War II and the Cold War, and America’s supposed 
history of isolationism and anti-imperialism, as well as our government’s 
laissez-faire policies regarding business. But the course is far from limited to 
challenging these and other myths. It will also examine how and why these 
myths arose and what historians now say about what really happened—as 
opposed to what most Americans believe happened. 
In the process, we will also explore the complexities of history and just 
what historians do. In that exploration, we will again challenge popular 
misconceptions—this time about the study of history itself. For example, 
it is often said that those who cannot remember the past are condemned 
to repeat it, but the idea that history repeats itself is a myth. It does not. 
World War II was not a replay of World War I in this regard, and the Cold 
War was not a replay of World War II; the belief that they were led to
disastrous consequences. 
Beyond challenging such misconceptions, we will explore some of the 
important but little known realities of historical study, most notably the law 
of unintended consequences and the need to separate results of actions from 
their causes and the motivations of those who acted. We will also examine 
the pitfalls of projecting contemporary values onto the past and other forms 
The Skeptic’s Guide to American History
1

Scope
2
of anachronistic thinking, the changing meaning of key words over time, 
how and why people and events in history are lost and then rediscovered, 
and the differences between history and memory.
Below are just a few examples of the questions this course will consequently 
raise and attempt to answer: 

Did religious toleration truly begin in America’s colonial history? 
And if not, when did it arise? 

Was the American Revolution less revolutionary (and less 
American) than we commonly believe?

What were George Washington’s numerous failures and most 
important contributions to American history, and why are they 
commonly overlooked?

What is the difference between separation of church and state and 
separation of religion and politics?

Why is empire-building a surprisingly constant feature of
U.S. history?

Was slavery truly the major cause of the Civil War? And if so, how?

Has the United States ever had a truly laissez-faire approach to 
economics? 

When and why did states’ rights become a rallying cry not only in 
the South but also in New England?

Is Woodrow Wilson overrated? Is Herbert Hoover underrated? 

Who have been America’s greatest presidents and according to 
what standards?

3

How have such important concepts as “progressive” and “populism” 
changed drastically from what they originally meant? 

Just what did Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal do and not do? 

How does our collective memory and commemoration of World 
War II differ from the actual history of that conﬂ ict? 

Was the Cold War inevitable, and why did it occur and last so long? 

What were America’s true blunders during the Vietnam War?

Who are some of the most notable but often forgotten ﬁ gures in 
American history, and why have they been forgotten in comparison 
to their contemporaries?

How dramatic and consequential are contemporary changes in 
American life compared to previous changes in U.S. history?
In this skeptical journey through American history, we will consider 
anew key people, events, periods, and legacies and gain a much deeper 
understanding of the extraordinary history of the United States. ■

4
Lecture 1: Religious Toleration in Colonial America?
Religious Toleration in Colonial America?
Lecture 1
T
wo well-known historical myths about Christopher Columbus are that 
he discovered America and that he proved the earth was round rather 
than ﬂ at. Of course, in reality, educated people had for centuries 
believed the world was round. A great deal of what we think we know 
and believe about American history is just as wrong as these myths about 
Columbus. In this course, we will identify some of those myths and examine 
how and why they arose.
Myths and Realities of Historical Study

These lectures are devoted to identifying myths of American 
history and learning what historians now say about the true course 
of events in our past. In the process of this exploration, we will also 
challenge popular misconceptions about the study of history itself. 

As we will see throughout these lectures, history does not consist 
of rote memorization of facts about the past, and those facts do not 
“speak for themselves.” Further, history does not repeat itself, nor 
can we draw lessons from these supposed repetitions. It’s also not 
true that history and memory are synonymous; they are, in fact, 
separate and often antithetical to each other. 

Among the important realities of historical study is what historians 
sometimes call the law of unintended consequences—the fact 
that consequences of human actions often differ sharply from the 
motivations of those who acted. Columbus, for example, wanted 
to ﬁ nd a western water route to the Indies, not “discover” America. 

Further, we often select facts to study in history on the basis 
of those unintended consequences. For example, even though 
Columbus was not the ﬁ rst European to “discover” the Americas, 
his explorations are far more important historically than those of 
Leif Eriksson because of their enormous consequences. 

5
The Myth of Religious Toleration in America

Many people believe that toleration arrived in North America with 
English colonists who were seeking religious freedom, beginning 
with the Pilgrims in 1620 and proceeding through the establishment 
of all 13 colonies. That is not the case. 

Many colonies, including Virginia and New York, were founded for 
non-religious reasons, and even in colonies that were religiously 
founded, many colonists came for non-religious reasons. 

Moreover, religious toleration was not considered a virtue at the 
time. Even a desire to escape from religious persecution in Europe 
usually did not lead to a belief in tolerance for others. As a result, 
colonial history is ﬁ lled with religious conﬂ ict and persecution. 
Puritans, for example, persecuted and banned virtually anyone who 
disagreed with them. 
Much of what we believe about American history is as untrue as the myth that 
Columbus discovered America.
© Photos.com/Thinkstock.

6
Lecture 1: Religious Toleration in Colonial America?

Toleration did begin to develop during the colonial era but only 
gradually—and largely accidentally. 
o For those who came to North America seeking religious 
freedom and an end to their persecution, religion was central to 
their entire belief system and worldview. Almost by deﬁ nition, 
then, they could not conceive of another belief system as valid. 
o Indeed, the Pilgrims who arrived in Plymouth in 1620 were 
not escaping religious persecution in England but toleration in 
the Netherlands, where they had moved and where they feared 
their youth would be led astray. 
o The Puritans who arrived in Massachusetts Bay a decade 
later banished dissenters in their own Congregationalist 
denomination, such as Roger Williams and Anne Hutchinson, 
as well as those from other denominations or religions, and 
executed those who violated such banishment. 
o Furthermore, religious warfare broke out in colonies that 
did allow other denominations and religions. Maryland, for 
example, was founded by George Calvert (Lord Baltimore) 
as a haven for persecuted Catholics but soon had a Protestant 
majority—and a virtual civil war between the two. 
The Development of Toleration

Religious toleration was partially established by Puritan dissenters, 
most notably Roger Williams. After he was banished from 
Massachusetts Bay, Williams founded Rhode Island and is known 
to us for his insistence on the separation of church and state, as well 
as his opposition to forced worship. 
o Not well known is the fact that Williams wanted separation 
of church and state in hopes of maintaining the purity of the 
Puritan church against a corrupt state, not vice versa! Unlike 
the Puritans, who sought to reform the corrupt Anglican 
Church, Williams also wanted total separation from the Church 
of England.

7
o Equally unknown is the fact that in his continuing efforts to 
create a pure church and retain his own purity, Williams’s 
separatism accelerated in Rhode Island until “he could not 
conscientiously have communion with anyone but his wife.” 
At that point, he realized the error of his ways and admitted 
sinners into his church and all denominations to his colony. 
o Williams, in short, was a religious absolutist and purist who 
came to toleration only gradually and only by a series of what 
we would consider backdoors. 

Toleration also resulted from settlers more interested in proﬁ ts than 
religion, particularly the Dutch in New Amsterdam. In the mid-
1650s, these settlers even allowed the ﬁ rst Jewish community in 
what would eventually become New York. 

Another partial explanation for the development of toleration can 
be found in the negative example of the English Civil Wars during 
the 1640s, followed by the execution of the English king and the 
establishment of a Puritan dictatorship under Oliver Cromwell. This 
experience illustrated where both religious and political conﬂ ict 
could lead. Greater tolerance arose in England after the restoration 
of the monarchy in 1660. 

It’s also true that no one Christian denomination was dominant in 
all 13 colonies, which led many groups who feared persecution by 
others to support toleration as a means of protecting themselves. 
Maryland’s famous 1649 Act of Religious Toleration, for example, 
was approved by Calvert’s son, Cecilius, to protect Catholics 
against a Protestant majority, but it was passed by a Protestant 
legislature to protect them against Calvert’s Catholics! 

Finally, toleration was partially the result of the founding of a new 
colony in the 1640s, Pennsylvania, by a new and more tolerant 
denomination, William Penn’s Quakers. 

8
Lecture 1: Religious Toleration in Colonial America?
Why Do We Believe the Myth? 

Our belief in the myth of toleration may be the result of a tendency 
to confuse colonial practice with the First Amendment to the 
Constitution, which banned any state-established religion and 
established legal toleration of all religions. But that amendment 
passed in 1791 and should not be confused with events that occurred 
more than a century and a half earlier. 
o Furthermore, the First Amendment banned only Congress from 
establishing a state religion (i.e., the federal government), not 
the individual states. 
o Only with the Fourteenth Amendment in 1868 and 20th-
century Supreme Court rulings was state-established religion 
completely prohibited. 

Even more anachronistic and incorrect than this projection of 
events from 1791–1833 onto the 1600s is a tendency to project our 
contemporary values onto the past in the process of attempting to 
discover the roots of those values. The praise of Roger Williams 
serves as a classic example in this regard. He did indeed call for 
tolerance and the separation of church and state but in the interests 
of protecting what he considered his true church from the corruption 
of the state. 

Further, the passage of the First Amendment and the later 
disestablishment of Congregationalism in New England by no 
means resulted in religious tolerance as we understand the term 
today. Toleration did not translate into social acceptance, and plenty 
of religious prejudice existed in 19th- and 20th-century U.S. history, 
as well as in 17th- and 18th-century colonial history. 
o Anti-Catholicism, a deep prejudice in much of U.S. history, 
reached a peak of sorts with the anti-immigrant and anti-
Catholic Know-Nothing party of the 1850s, which fused 
religious and racial intolerance and almost eclipsed the newly 
founded Republican Party as the successor to the Whigs and 
the second major political party. 

9
o Anti-Catholicism reemerged in the 20th century with the rise of 
the Ku Klux Klan and played a role in the defeat of the Catholic 
Al Smith in the presidential election of 1928. The 1920s also 
witnessed a major wave of anti-Semitism.
The Real Emergence of Religious Toleration

Religious tolerance has historical roots in early colonial history, but 
it didn’t emerge in its modern form until the second half of the 20th 
century, primarily as a result of World War II.

Hitler’s racist ideas came from more than a century of European 
and American thinking and practice. However, in witnessing 
the hideous consequences of the literal implementation of those 
ideas, Americans ﬁ nally began to question their religious and
racial prejudices.

Simultaneously, defeating Hitler required placing more than 15 
million Americans in uniform—many of whom saw and interacted 
with other Americans of different religions and races for the
ﬁ rst time. 

The impact of this awakening on many Americans was profound and 
nearly immediate. In just a few years after the war, Major League 
Baseball was integrated, a ﬁ lm about anti-Semitism in America 
won the Oscar for Best Picture, Truman ordered the integration of 
the armed forces and supported recognition of the state of Israel, 
and the Supreme Court ordered integration of the public schools. 
A Skeptical Approach

What we’ve said in this lecture exempliﬁ es the broader approach 
that we will take throughout this course. Speciﬁ cally, our skeptical 
approach will involve paying attention to the law of unintended 
consequences—the fact that the consequences of human actions 
often differ quite sharply from the motivations of those who acted. 

We must also be wary of anachronistic thinking, that is, distorting 
the past by dealing with events and ideas out of their proper 

10
Lecture 1: Religious Toleration in Colonial America?
chronological order and context. As we saw in this lecture, such 
thinking often takes the form of projecting contemporary values 
onto the past. 

We will further see how key words change meaning and signiﬁ cance 
over time. Religious toleration once meant not killing one another 
and accepting that others might live in the same colony. Today, 
toleration tends to have a much broader meaning than it did in 
previous centuries. 

Finally, we see that history and memory are not the same. Our 
memory and ensuing commemoration of the origins of events and 
ideas often differ quite dramatically from historical reality. 
Morgan, The Puritan Dilemma. 
1. Why do we tend to equate the desire to escape religious persecution 
with a desire for religious freedom and tolerance?
2. Why do we assume that 17th-century Europeans thought the same way 
about religion that we do today?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

11
Neither American nor Revolutionary? 
Lecture 2
T
he American Revolution is generally portrayed in terms of a uniﬁ ed 
“American people” rising up to defeat a great empire and establishing 
a democratic republic. As with all myths in history, this one contains 
an element of truth, but it also ignores some inconvenient facts: The colonists 
didn’t view themselves as Americans or as undertaking a revolution, and 
they could never have defeated the British alone. Indeed, it was almost 
despite themselves that the colonists created a revolution and a unique
American ideology. 
American Perceptions in 1763

A key to understanding the very nonrevolutionary origins of the 
American Revolution lies in the perceptions Americans held
in 1763. 

The colonists saw themselves not as Americans but as proud 
members of the British Empire, which had just achieved a stunning 
victory in the Seven Years’ War—one that eliminated the French 
from the North American continent. 

Unlike the French or Spanish empires, the British Empire was not a 
monarchial tyranny. Parliament had asserted its supremacy over the 
monarchy in the so-called Glorious Revolution of 1688. 

This action was justiﬁ ed by John Locke and others with the “social 
contract” theory of government, whereby government exists through 
the consent of the governed to protect certain “natural rights,” and a 
government that did not protect them should be overthrown. 
Changing Perceptions

Colonists were proud to be part of this liberty-loving British 
Empire, but that perception would change dramatically over the 
next decade in response to acts by Parliament.

12
Lecture 2: Neither American nor Revolutionary? 
o To put an end to continued warfare with Indians in the west—
and the rising costs associated with it—Parliament declared the 
Proclamation line in 1763, prohibiting colonists from crossing 
the Appalachian Mountains into Indian territories, with troops 
to enforce the prohibition. 
o Parliament also levied taxes on the colonies to pay off some of 
the debt incurred during the Seven Years’ War, from which the 
colonists had beneﬁ ted most. 
o This taxation would take place through three measures: (1) the 
enforcement of existing navigation acts to raise revenue, (2) 
the requirement of partial payment for troops needed to enforce 
the navigation acts and the Proclamation line, and (3) new 
taxes, most notably the Stamp Act of 1765.

The colonists saw the Proclamation line as denying them the 
fruits of their military victory and the land they needed to survive 
economically. They also realized that enforcement of the navigation 
acts would interfere with smuggling, without which the colonial 
economies could not survive. 

The colonists further complained that the enforcement mechanisms 
for these new taxes violated their “rights as Englishmen” by 
allowing for the issuance of search warrants without evidence and 
trial by Admiralty courts without juries. 

The new direct taxes from Parliament were seen as invalidating 
the powers of the colonial assemblies to tax—thus the cry of “no 
taxation without representation.” 
Revolutionary Ironies 

These economic problems and political differences between the 
colonies and the mother country had existed for nearly 100 years but 
had never been raised because they were meaningless in practice. 

13

What made them meaningful were the new British policies resulting 
from the victory in the Seven Years’ War and the ensuing need to 
reorganize the empire and pay off the war debt. Britain’s problems 
thus stemmed from its military successes.

The colonial response would eventually create an American identity 
that had never existed before. The idea that citizens of the colonies 
and the mother country were all English was beginning to unravel. 
Colonial Resentment

Colonial resentment built from 1761 to 1765, then exploded over 
the Stamp Act. The Stamp Act Congress was formed, at which 
representatives from nine colonies agreed to boycott British goods 
until the law was repealed. 

Parliament agreed to repeal the Stamp Act, but in the Declaratory 
Act, it asserted its power to make laws “in all cases whatsoever.” 
Parliament then passed the Townshend Acts in 1767 to tax 
colonial imports from England, with a new Board of Customs 
Commissioners established to enforce these acts. 
The Tea Act of 1773 created a monopoly for the British East India Company and 
imposed “taxation without representation” on the American colonists, sparking 
the Boston Tea Party.
© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock.

14
Lecture 2: Neither American nor Revolutionary? 

The colonists responded with more nonimportation agreements 
and mob violence against customs ofﬁ cials. Troops were called in, 
leading to the Boston Massacre and the intensiﬁ cation of the so-
called “country ideology,” with its attendant fears of parliamentary 
corruption and a royal plot to establish despotism. 

In 1773, the Tea Act allowed the bankrupt British East India 
Company to sell tea in the colonies, paying a tea tax of only one 
penny. The colonists, already sensitive because of the events of the 
1760s, exploded, demonstrating their indignation with the Boston 
Tea Party.

Parliament retaliated with the Coercive or Intolerable Acts of 1774, 
closing the port of Boston, revoking the Massachusetts charter, 
appointing General Thomas Gage as governor, and sending troops 
to be quartered in the colony. Simultaneously, the Quebec Act 
extended Quebec into the Ohio valley, making the Proclamation 
line permanent. 
The First Continental Congress

These actions fed colonial conspiracy theories and prompted more 
intercolonial cooperation. The First Continental Congress was 
convened in September of 1774.

Radicals at the Congress argued that Parliament had no rights in the 
colonies, but moderates disagreed. By now, four distinct groups had 
emerged in each colony: loyalists, neutrals, moderates, and radicals. 
This last group wanted a break with England; some members, 
angered by the undemocratic nature of colonial assemblies, even 
sought a revolution at home. 

The moderates controlled the Continental Congress and most 
colonial assemblies, but their position could hold only if the king 
and Parliament agreed with it, which they did not. Instead, London 
ordered General Gage to arrest John Adams and John Hancock and 
to seize guns and ammunition being collected at Concord. 

15
The Second Continental Congress

Moderates remained in charge of the Second Continental Congress, 
yet the opening of hostilities at Lexington and Concord forced 
them to agree to ﬁ ght. The Continental Army was established under 
George Washington to maintain the siege of the British in Boston.

The king rejected the moderates’ Olive Branch Petition, and 
Parliament ordered all colonial ports closed; arrangements were 
made to send Hessian mercenaries to the colonies. 

As the ﬁ ghting continued, colonial assemblies seized power from 
royal governors and became de facto revolutionary (and illegal) 
governments. Loyalists objected, and civil wars broke out in
many colonies.

In early 1776, Thomas Paine’s Common Sense was published, 
offering a radical position on the logic of independence phrased in 
simple and inﬂ ammatory rhetoric. 

Gradually, the moderates in the Second Continental Congress were 
forced—against their will—into independence. The decision for 
independence was ﬁ nally announced in July 1776.
The Declaration of Independence

The reason the Declaration of Independence was directed against 
the king, despite the fact that the colonies’ struggle had been against 
Parliament, was twofold: (1) The Continental Congress had already 
declared its independence from Parliament via previous acts, and 
(2) the colonists believed that Parliament was being manipulated by 
the despotic king. 

The famous Preamble is based on John Locke’s social contract, 
and three-quarters of the document is a bill of indictment against 
the king to justify the revolt on the grounds that he had broken the 
social contract. 

16
Lecture 2: Neither American nor Revolutionary? 

In effect, Jefferson used British theories regarding liberty 
from Locke and the Glorious Revolution to declare American 
independence. In that sense, the Revolution and the Declaration 
were not very revolutionary at all. The entire movement was an 
attempt to maintain traditional British rights against new and 
tyrannical British policies. 
Redeﬁ ning Liberty

In revolting, the colonists implicitly and explicitly expanded and 
changed the deﬁ nition of liberty—and of themselves. 

With the perceived failure of the British constitutional monarchy 
to protect liberty, the colonists turned to an alternative form of 
representative government, personiﬁ ed in elected legislatures: 
republicanism. This was a new and radical ideology. 

With the overthrow of the authority of the king and his governors, 
as well as Parliament, the traditional “rights of Englishmen” came 
to exist only in the former colonies. They thus became, in Paine’s 
words, “the rights of man.” This new nation was to be the haven 
of liberty and the source from which it would eventually spread 
throughout the world.

In the process of reaching this conclusion, the people in what had 
been 13 separate British colonies came to see themselves for the 
ﬁ rst time as Americans. 

The revolt had begun with the questioning of parliamentary 
and royal authority. But once one begins to question authority 
as antithetical to liberty instead of defensive of it, where does 
the process end? The question of home rule leads logically to 
the question of who should rule at home, and the answer will 
inexorably lead to government that is more representative and
more democratic. 

17
The True Course of the Revolution

The colonists quickly learned that declaring independence and 
achieving it are two very different things. They would be ﬁ ghting 
against the largest and most powerful empire in the world and 
against fellow colonists who remained loyal to the king. 

Washington was able to stave off total defeat with successful raids 
at Trenton and Princeton, but the only way to force the British to 
accept American independence was to obtain foreign aid, most 
notably from the despotic French monarchy. Indeed, American 
victory over the British would have been impossible without French 
money, equipment, and forces.

The American revolutionaries thus wound up creating a new nation 
and “cradle of liberty” only with the help of tyrannical European 
powers and against the wishes of their neighbors who remained 
loyal to England. 

It’s safe to say that the American Revolution was far less American 
and far less revolutionary than we might think. A variety of 
reasons explains the emergence—and persistence—of myths to 
the contrary: the tendency of nations to overemphasize their own 
role versus that of their allies in war; the admiration of the French 
general Lafayette for the American ideology, perhaps leading to a 
larger myth of aid from the “liberty-loving French”; the migration 
of many loyalists to Canada; and the tendency to look at the end 
result of a series of events rather than its origins. 

What remains true is that the Americans rose up against a tyrannical 
British Parliament and king, in a coalition that ultimately involved 
all the other major powers of Europe—uniting against the greatest 
empire in the world and making it possible for a group of rebellious 
colonies to form a new nation. 

18
Lecture 2: Neither American nor Revolutionary? 
Bailyn, The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution. 
Chernow, Washington: A Life.
Middlekauff, The Glorious Cause.
Wood, The Creation of the American Republic, 1776–1787.
1. Why do we tend to look at results of events rather than their origins
and causes?
2. What other events in U.S. history have results that differ from their 
causes and origins?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

19
The Constitution Did Not Create a Democracy 
Lecture 3
W
e often hear talk about the “original intent” of the writers of the 
Constitution, but the Founding Fathers did not plan to create 
the political system we have today: a democratic republic based 
on two national and permanent political parties. Indeed, “democracy” and 
“political parties” were dirty words to them. They did realize, however, 
that the world was likely to change, which is one reason they included an 
amendment process in the Constitution that has allowed this document to 
survive as our frame of government for so long.
Historical Views of the Constitution

The Constitution was not the original frame of government of 
the newly independent United States. The states were originally 
governed by the Second Continental Congress and then, from 
1781–1789, by the Articles of Confederation. 

Late-19th-century historians saw these Articles as a disastrous 
failure, engendering the “critical period” concept, in which the 
infant and endangered United States was saved by the godlike 
Founding Fathers. 

That 
interpretation 
was 
questioned 
by 
early-20th-century 
historians, who argued that the Constitution was the response of
moderates protecting their own economic and class interests. 
In 
this 
view, 
the 
Constitution 
was 
an 
antidemocratic,
counterrevolutionary document.

In turn, that interpretation came under attack in the mid- and late 
20th century. Many historians today view the Constitution as a 
continuation, not an antithesis, of the Revolution. 

20
Lecture 3: The Constitution Did Not Create a Democracy
The Articles of Confederation

The process of creating governments began in the 1770s as the 
colonial assemblies transformed themselves into state legislatures 
and governments. This process would involve a rejection of 
the British concept of “balanced” government in favor of 
overwhelming legislative power and a move from unwritten to 
written constitutions.

At ﬁ rst, the central government was the Second Continental 
Congress. The Articles of Confederation, meant to serve as a bridge 
between the Congress and a federal government, were presented to 
the states in 1777 but not ratiﬁ ed by all until 1781, largely because 
the states retained their distrust of both centralized power and
one another. 

The Articles set up a central government of sorts but a weak 
one, with no executive or judiciary, no power to tax or enact any 
important measures without a two-thirds vote, and no power to 
change the structure without unanimity. Each state had one vote 
and, thus, a virtual veto power. 

This organization was established very consciously. The states 
saw themselves as independent republics retaining sovereignty 
and joining into a loose confederation, something like the United 
Nations. They feared centralized power and sought to guarantee 
their liberty through decentralization and state legislatures. 
Successes of the Articles

Despite the inherent weaknesses of this frame of government, much 
was accomplished under the Articles, including the winning of 
independence and a favorable peace treaty in 1783, with a western 
boundary for the United States all the way to the Mississippi River. 

State governments were also established under the Articles, with 
many social and political reforms, including the extension of the 
franchise, frequent elections, and the separation of church and state. 

21

The pattern for western expansion and settlement was established 
with the Northwest Ordinances of 1784, 1785, and 1787. 

Internationally, the Articles opened trade with European powers 
and Asia. 
Problems with the Articles

By 
1787, 
problems 
under 
the 
Articles 
appeared 
to
outweigh successes.

The Confederate Congress had no power to tax and, thus, to pay 
for a military force or pay its debts. The nation’s military power 
rested, essentially, with untrained and unreliable state militias. 
This translated into a lack of power in foreign affairs and a lack of 
respect from European nations.

A postwar economic depression was also blamed on the Articles. 
To halt land foreclosures, states began to repudiate debts and print 
paper money, causing inﬂ ation; such measures were easy to enact 
The Constitution was written to address the need to create a government strong 
enough to preserve liberty without giving it enough power to become
tyrannical itself.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

22
Lecture 3: The Constitution Did Not Create a Democracy
because there was little or no check on legislative powers in the 
states. Some states established their own currencies and trading 
systems, causing a breakdown in interstate relations and presenting 
the danger that states would turn to European allies for intervention.

With Shays’s Rebellion—a march of 1,200 men on the Supreme 
Court in Massachusetts and on an arsenal—fear of anarchy spread. 
No national army was available to halt the rebellion, and although 
the state militia did, it could just have easily failed from lack of 
training or even joined the revolt. 

These problems convinced many that the national government 
was incapable of defending the liberty won during the Revolution 
and that a new frame of government was necessary. Note that 
the deﬁ nition of “liberty” here was not democracy but individual 
freedom from tyranny, either from above or below.
o The Revolution had fought successfully for liberty and against 
tyranny from above, but the threat now seemed to be tyranny 
from below—mob rule as in Shays’s Rebellion. 
o With the danger of European intervention and the possible 
destruction of the republican experiment, tyranny from above 
had not been eliminated either.
The Constitutional Convention

In 1787, a special convention was called to revise and strengthen 
the Articles of Confederation. Revolutionary leaders Benjamin 
Franklin and George Washington were present, but aside from these 
two, most of the delegates were quite young. Many were veterans 
of Washington’s Continental Army or the Continental Congress, 
which gave them a national, as opposed to a state, outlook. 

The representatives were simultaneously conservative and 
revolutionary. They were men of property who feared democracy 
and mob rule as destructive of liberty, but they were also 
revolutionaries who desired to create something new—a republic 
with centralized power to preserve rather than destroy liberty. 

23

Their basic dilemma was this: How to create a government strong 
enough to preserve liberty from the tyranny of the mob or European 
monarchs without giving it enough power to be tyrannical itself? 

In the 51st Federalist paper, James Madison noted, “A dependence 
on the people is, no doubt, the primary control on the government.” 
Thus, the Constitution begins, “We the People.” Sovereignty rests 
with the people. 
Checks and Balances

The Constitution separates sovereignty from rule via a series of 
intermediaries and divides power among those intermediaries to 
avoid tyranny. We know this system as “checks and balances,” 
and it exists on two levels: separation of powers among the three 
branches of the national government and division of powers 
between the national government and the state governments. 

The Founders returned to the concept of “balanced” government 
because of the perceived excesses and weaknesses of existing 
legislative governments. They sought to combine elements of 
a monarchy, an aristocracy, and a democracy within the new
national government. 
o The president would be a monarch indirectly elected via the 
electoral college by elite electors (the aristocracy), with a four-
year term and powers limited to those enumerated in Article II. 
o The Senate would be an aristocratic branch indirectly elected 
by the people through the state legislatures, with a six-year 
term and the powers listed in Article I. The national judiciary 
would also be aristocratic. 
o The House of Representatives would be the democratic branch, 
with short terms, albeit still with property qualiﬁ cations
for voting. 

As we know, each branch has the power to “check” the others. 
For example, the president is the commander-in-chief of the 

24
Lecture 3: The Constitution Did Not Create a Democracy
armed forces, but Congress appropriates funds for the military and 
declares war. 

The new national government had enormous powers, but it did 
not have a monopoly on power. The Tenth Amendment explicitly 
reafﬁ rmed that all powers not delegated to the new national 
government or prohibited by it to the states would be reserved to 
the states, each capable of checking the other. 
A Large Republic

The Constitution set up a large republic, something that, according 
to political theory of the day, could not survive. In the 10th Federalist 
paper, Madison turned this theory on its head, claiming that a 
republic in a large area had a better chance of preserving liberty 
than one in a small area. 

For Madison, factions were the key problem in sustaining a 
republic. In a democracy, a majority faction—a group willing to 
ride roughshod over the rights of others to ensure its own interests—
could easily gain control and destroy liberty. 

Such factions cannot be abolished without abolishing liberty, but 
they must be controlled via checks and balances. A large republic 
can do this better than small ones because the greater population 
and area resulted in more factions and a reduced chance that one 
would dominate. 
Disagreement at the Convention

Despite agreement on certain essentials, disagreements among the 
delegates almost wrecked the Convention. Major disputes pitted 
large states against small ones over the issue of representation and 
northern states against southern on some issues related to slavery. 
Delegates also split over just how much power to give the national 
government at the expense of the states. 

25

Some delegates feared that despite the checks and balances, the new 
national government had too much power. Only 39 of 55 delegates 
signed the ﬁ nal document. 

The Constitution called for special state ratifying conventions, with 
ratiﬁ cation by nine states required to put the document into effect. 
Intense opposition emerged in virtually every state, primarily from 
established groups who controlled state governments and feared 
centralized power. 

The pro-Constitution forces won the struggle for a number of 
reasons. They were better organized, were on the offensive, and 
had the advantage of deﬁ ning themselves as Federalists, while their 
opponents were labeled Anti-Federalists. 
o The ratiﬁ cation process also bypassed state legislatures that 
had a vested interested in the failure of the new system.
o Further, the Federalists also agreed to address a key Anti-
Federalist objection: the lack of a speciﬁ c Bill of Rights. 
Creating one would be the ﬁ rst order of business under the
new government. 
The Truth about the Founders

The ﬁ nal version of the Constitution and the Federalist papers 
show the Founders as Hobbesian realists who distrusted human 
nature and sought to stop what they considered the excesses 
of revolution. In that sense, they can be viewed as conservative,
even counterrevolutionary. 

Simultaneously, 
however, 
they 
were 
still 
Lockeans 
and 
revolutionaries who wanted to preserve their republican experiment 
against what they considered clear and present dangers and were 
willing to try a radical and unprecedented experiment to do so. 

The Founders succeeded in establishing a new frame of government, 
but in the process, they left a series of unanswered questions that 

26
Lecture 3: The Constitution Did Not Create a Democracy
would cause a split among them within a few years and would be 
bequeathed to their successors.
Chernow, Washington: A Life.
Hamilton, Madison, and Jay, The Federalist Papers. 
Middlekauff, The Glorious Cause. 
Wood, The Creation of the American Republic, 1776–1787. 
1. Why do we equate liberty with democracy when the writers of the 
Constitution did not do so?
2. Why do we tend to project our contemporary values onto the past?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

27
Washington—Failures and Real Accomplishments 
Lecture 4
W
e know that the cherry tree story about George Washington is a 
myth, but we still accept as fact what is at least partially mythical 
about the father of our country: that he was a great military 
and political leader. He was not perceived that way by some of his peers, 
and many historians agree with some of their criticisms. This lecture will 
look at Washington’s failings and analyze his accomplishments, including 
some little-known ones that may be his most important contributions to
American history. 
Washington as General 

George Washington was originally selected by the Continental 
Congress to head the Continental Army not because of his previous 
military record, but because he was a well-established and respected 
ﬁ gure in Virginia and had afﬁ rmed that the southern colonies would 
ﬁ ght for Massachusetts in the wake of Lexington and Concord. 

Washington admitted that he did not think himself “equal to the 
command I am honored with,” and he wasn’t. 

He succeeded in maintaining a siege of Boston during 1775 and 
forced a British withdrawal from Boston in March of 1776. But he 
also ordered Benedict Arnold’s ill-advised effort to take Quebec in 
1775, which ended disastrously. 

In the summer of 1776, the British invaded New York, defeated 
Washington at the Battle of Brooklyn Heights, and took over 
New York City as their headquarters for the rest of the war. They 
went on to defeat Washington again at White Plains, capture Fort 
Washington, and force the abandonment of Fort Lee in New Jersey. 
Washington was chased all the way through New Jersey and across 
the Delaware River into Pennsylvania.

28
Lecture 4: Washington—Failures and Real Accomplishments

All that prevented the pitiful remnants of Washington’s army 
(now fewer than 3,000) from evaporating at the end of 1776—
and the Revolution from ending in failure—was his desperate and 
successful raid on the Hessian garrison at Trenton on Christmas 
Day, followed by his successful raid on the British garrison
at Princeton. 

In the following year, the British defeated Washington again in 
the battles of Brandywine Creek and Germantown and took the 
American capital of Philadelphia. Washington went into winter 
quarters at Valley Forge. 

At that point, a movement known as Conway Cabal emerged in 
both the ofﬁ cer corps and the Continental Congress to replace 
Washington with General Horatio Gates. Conway Cabal was 
squelched, but the attacks on Washington’s competence continued.

From 
1778–1780, Washington’s 
forces 
under 
subordinate 
commanders also suffered a series of disastrous defeats in Georgia 
and the Carolinas. Indeed, with the exception of the 1777 Saratoga 
victory, in which Washington was not directly involved, the general 
had only one major victory after Trenton and Princeton in the entire 
war, at Yorktown. 
o But Washington realized that he did not need a large number of 
battleﬁ eld victories to win the war and achieve independence; 
he had only to avoid the capture or destruction of the 
Continental Army to keep the Revolution alive until the British 
tired of the effort or were distracted by other concerns. 
o And that is exactly what happened. By the time of Yorktown, 
the British found themselves formally at war with France, 
Spain, and Holland, as well as unofﬁ cially at war with 
the rest of Europe. The British government also faced 
major dissent against the war at home. After the defeat at 
Yorktown, it was thus willing to make peace and recognize
American independence. 

29
The Newburgh Conspiracy

At least as important as the Yorktown victory was Washington’s 
recognition of the appropriate strategy, along with what he did after 
Yorktown but before completion of the formal peace treaty: his 
squelching of the Newburgh Conspiracy, one of the most dangerous 
events in U.S. history. 

While the Continental Army was encamped at Newburgh, 
New York, during the winter of 1782–1783, ofﬁ cers upset over 
Congress’s refusal to fulﬁ ll past promises regarding pay circulated 
documents denouncing Congress, threatening its supremacy over 
the military, and calling for a meeting to discuss how to proceed. 

These ofﬁ cers had been encouraged by some political ﬁ gures who 
wanted to use the threat of a possible coup to force Congress to 
agree to an import tax that would have strengthened national power 
and who turned to the anti-Washington group around General Gates 
to help foment the threat. 

Washington quickly squelched what could have easily become a 
real attempted coup, denouncing the documents and countering the 
threat by reminding his ofﬁ cers in a special meeting of what they 
had fought for and how perilous their behavior was to liberty. 

He followed that up later in the year with his own resignation as 
commander of the army. This formal renunciation of military power, 
as well as the refusal to seize power earlier when he easily could 
have, made him the American Cincinnatus—the ancient hero who 
had been granted absolute power, had saved the Roman Republic in 
a military crisis, and had then given up his power voluntarily. 

This move endeared Washington to his countrymen. In effect, he 
became the embodiment, as well as the defender, of the American 
concepts of liberty and civic virtue. He was asked to preside at the 
Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia in 1787 and thereby lend 
his prestige to the document the convention produced to replace the 
Articles of Confederation. 

30
Lecture 4: Washington—Failures and Real Accomplishments

Given 
that 
prestige, 
it 
was 
also 
apparent 
that 
Washington 
would 
be 
elected as the ﬁ rst president 
under 
this 
new 
frame 
of 
government, 
and 
he 
was, unanimously in the
electoral college. 
Washington as President

As 
the 
ﬁ rst 
president, 
Washington 
set 
critical 
precedents in just about 
everything he did, many of 
which continue to this day. 
He also had many speciﬁ c 
policy 
accomplishments, 
including creating a sound 
currency and ﬁ scal structure 
to pay off the national debt, crushing the Whiskey Rebellion, and 
securing the western frontier by various treaties. 

In 1793, Washington managed to avoid war with Britain and 
maintain American neutrality during the European war that erupted 
in the wake of France’s declaration of a republic and execution of 
its king.

In one area, however, Washington failed miserably: avoiding a major 
split between his key advisers, Alexander Hamilton and Thomas 
Jefferson, and among the American people over his policies. That 
split resulted, during his second term, in the formation of two national 
political parties and, by century’s end, almost a civil war. 
The Neutrality Compromise

Washington had appointed the northerner Hamilton and the 
southerner Jefferson to the two most important cabinet posts, 
Treasury and State, to avoid division. But the two quickly came into 
Neither a great general nor a great 
president, Washington’s actions 
during the Revolution and his two 
terms in ofﬁ ce were nonetheless 
vital to solidifying the American 
ideology of republican liberty.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

31
sharp disagreement over ﬁ scal policies, foreign policy, and their 
interpretation of the Constitution. 

In general terms, the key differences between the two were as 
follows: (1) In ﬁ scal policy, Jefferson opposed Hamilton’s idea of 
a national bank and his entire ﬁ scal program; (2) in foreign policy, 
Hamilton leaned toward neutrality favoring Britain, while Jefferson 
advocated neutrality favoring France; and (3) in constitutional 
interpretation, Hamilton maintained a broad view of the powers 
of the federal government as opposed to the state governments, 
while Jefferson held a narrow one. Their followers soon referred 
to themselves as Federalists (for Hamilton) and Democratic-
Republicans (for Jefferson). 

Some have seen Hamilton and Jefferson as Washington’s surrogate 
sons and what followed—the neutrality compromise of 1793—as a 
desperate and failed attempt by Washington to steer a middle course 
between the two and avoid a “family” crisis. 

Hamilton recommended an immediate proclamation of neutrality 
in the conﬂ ict between Britain and France and no recognition 
of the new French government or its minister, Genêt. Jefferson 
recommended the opposite, and Washington’s compromise was 
to issue a Neutrality Proclamation but also to recognize the new 
French government and receive Genêt.

Gradually, Washington came to favor Hamilton’s positions, 
and indeed, Hamilton used Washington’s prestige to obtain 
congressional approval of both his ﬁ scal program and the Jay Treaty 
guaranteeing continued peace with England. The unpopularity of 
the Jay Treaty—which smacked of surrender on neutral rights issues 
to the hated British—led to both public and private denunciations 
of Washington. 
The Farewell Address

Washington announced his retirement after two terms in a document 
known as the Farewell Address. Contrary to popular belief, that 

32
Lecture 4: Washington—Failures and Real Accomplishments
document was not a call for isolation from European or world 
affairs. It was a warning against emotionalism in foreign affairs 
and against future permanent alliances given the grief the wartime 
alliance with France had cost Washington. 

But the basis of that warning is Washington’s preceding warning 
against political parties based on geography. For Washington, such 
parties weakened the United States and invited European powers 
to exploit the split in order to increase their own power in the
New World. 

The importance of Washington’s advice in foreign affairs has 
tended to bury what may be the most important part of the address: 
his decision to leave the presidency voluntarily and after only 
two terms. It established a precedent for the two-term limit that
lasted for more than 140 years and is now enshrined in a 
constitutional amendment. 

As he had done in his military career, Washington once again 
voluntarily gave up power and, in doing so, reinforced the 
constitutional emphasis on limiting the power of government 
ofﬁ ces as a way of preserving republicanism and liberty. 
A Negative Legacy

Washington was far from perfect as either a general or a president, 
yet his accomplishments were extraordinary in both ﬁ elds: 
He virtually created the Continental Army and developed the 
appropriate strategy for using it to attain victory. He renounced 
absolute power when it could have been his and voluntarily 
gave up power at war’s end. As president, he made the new 
frame of government work and established countless precedents,
including the two-term limit when he once again voluntarily 
renounced power.

Washington’s most important contributions were, thus, negative, 
that is, critical for what did not happen: creation of a dictatorship. 
But they were nonetheless vital to the success of the nation. 

33
Chernow, Washington: A Life. 
Clausewitz, On War. 
Ellis, His Excellency: George Washington. 
Wills, Cincinnatus. 
1. Why do we tend to ignore negative as opposed to positive 
accomplishments in history?
2. What personal characteristics and values made Washington so vital to 
the United States during the War of Independence and his presidency?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

34
Lecture 5: Confusions about Jefferson and Hamilton
Confusions about Jefferson and Hamilton 
Lecture 5
D
uring the 1790s, Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton held 
sharply conﬂ icting views on foreign and domestic policies and on 
constitutional interpretation. Today, many label Hamilton’s views as 
conservative and Jefferson’s as liberal and see their conﬂ ict as a harbinger of 
contemporary battles. Yet the speciﬁ c issues over which they argued are not 
relevant to modern Americans, and their views have little to do with current 
deﬁ nitions of “conservative” and “liberal.” Still, their conﬂ icts are relevant 
to us, albeit not in the ways we might think. 
The Split over Fiscal Policy

Washington had selected Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton 
for his two most important cabinet positions as part of a general 
effort to maintain sectional balance—not political/ideological 
balance—within the new national government. 

The split that developed between the two was primarily over two 
issues: government ﬁ scal policies and deﬁ nitions of neutrality as a 
result of the war between England and France. 

As Treasury secretary, Hamilton believed that the most pressing 
problems of the United States were ﬁ nancial. The country needed 
to establish credit at home and abroad if the new government was 
to work. 
o Hamilton thus proposed that the new national government 
assume all state Revolutionary War debts, combine them 
with the national debt, and fund both at par value via a new
bond issue. 
o He also proposed new taxes on imports and some domestically 
produced items to pay government debts and the establishment 
of a combined private and government-controlled national 
bank to serve as a depository for treasury notes and ﬁ scal agent 

35
for the government, with its own bank notes to be considered 
legal tender. 
o These actions would tie the wealthy merchant and ﬁ nancial 
class to the success of the new government, while providing 
a new circulating medium, establishing the credit of the 
government, and increasing its power and prestige. 

The opposition to Hamilton was at ﬁ rst led by James Madison, not 
Jefferson. Later, Jefferson opposed the establishment of the national 
bank on the grounds that the power to do so was not speciﬁ cally 
enumerated in Article I of the Constitution. Hamilton argued that 
the power was constitutional via the “necessary and proper” clause 
in Article I. Washington sided with Hamilton, but a serious split
had emerged. 
The Split over Foreign Affairs

The division over foreign affairs became apparent in 1793, when 
the French Revolution turned radical with the creation of the French 
Republic, the execution of the king, and the institution of the Reign 
of Terror. This resulted in the outbreak of general war in Europe, 
pitting republican France against Britain and all the other major 
monarchies of Europe. 

Everyone in the cabinet agreed that the United States should remain 
neutral, but a treaty of alliance was in effect with France dating 
back to the Revolutionary War. Further, the question arose of which 
country U.S. neutrality should favor. Hamilton argued for neutrality 
favoring Britain, while Jefferson advocated neutrality favoring the 
“sister republic” of France. 

At ﬁ rst, Washington took a middle-of-the-road position, but by 
1794–1795, he sided with Hamilton by agreeing to the Jay Treaty 
with England. In an effort to avoid war, the treaty acceded to the 
British deﬁ nition of “neutral rights” in return for British evacuation 
of posts on U.S. territory and peace.

36
Lecture 5: Confusions about Jefferson and Hamilton

The Jay Treaty led to a public uproar against it and formation of the 
ﬁ rst two national political parties: the Federalists under Hamilton 
and the Democratic-Republicans under Jefferson and Madison. 
The Split Widens

In the presidential election of 1796, Federalist John Adams 
narrowly defeated Jefferson, who became the vice president. 
o During Adams’s presidency, the dispute between the two 
political parties became white-hot as the United States engaged 
in an undeclared naval war with France as a result of the
Jay Treaty. 
o The Federalists passed the Alien and Sedition Acts, directed 
against 
the 
Democratic-Republicans, 
while 
Jefferson 
and Madison responded with the Virginia and Kentucky 
Resolutions, threatening nulliﬁ cation of the acts and other 
“unconstitutional” laws. 
o The speciﬁ c issues addressed by these laws and resolutions are 
of little or no relevance to us today, but many argue that the 
conﬂ icting beliefs behind the issues are signiﬁ cant, though not 
in the ways we might think.

As we’ve noted, Jefferson argued for a narrow interpretation of 
the Constitution with regard to national power versus state power, 
while Hamilton argued for a broad interpretation via the necessary 
and proper clause. 
o This argument over state versus national power is a constant in 
U.S. history, right down to this day. It pitted Federalists against 
Democratic-Republicans throughout this era, then Democrats 
against Whigs in the 1830s and 1840s, then Democrats against 
Republicans in the modern era. 
o In this case, however, the positions in the 1790s were reversed 
from what they would later be and still are today. At the time, 
the supposedly aristocratic Hamilton argued for more national 
power and the supposedly democratic Jefferson argued for 

37
less, whereas since the 1930s, Jefferson’s liberal disciples have 
argued for more and their conservative opponents for less! 

Also relevant in this regard was Jefferson’s welcoming of the 
French Revolution while Hamilton and his followers abhorred it 
and favored the British. 
o Hamilton 
favored 
the 
British 
because 
British 
trade was essential to 
provide revenues for the 
government 
via 
import 
taxes and because British 
credit and manufactured 
goods 
were 
necessary 
for 
his 
vision 
of
U.S. development. 
o At 
the 
same 
time, 
Jefferson’s 
opposition 
was based not so much 
on his love for republican 
France but on the fact 
that he did not support 
the Hamiltonian domestic program and, thus, did not believe 
that the United States needed British trade or credit. He also 
feared dependency on the powerful British and desired to use a 
French connection as a counterweight. 

It’s also true that, in many ways, Hamilton was not really aristocratic 
and Jefferson was not really democratic. Both men believed 
strongly in republicanism (meaning representative government) as 
opposed to monarchy, but the questions here were: Who would be 
the representatives, and who would they represent?
o Despite his reputation, Jefferson was not a democrat who 
believed in majority rule. He was a slaveholder and aristocrat 
who believed in property qualiﬁ cations for voting. He also 
saw a decentralized, agrarian society of self-sufﬁ cient yeoman 
Although Jefferson argued for 
less national power in his clash 
with Hamilton, as president, he 
actually expanded the power of 
the federal government.
© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock.

38
Lecture 5: Confusions about Jefferson and Hamilton
farmers as the best way to preserve liberty, and he believed in 
the “politics of deference”—hardly a democratic notion! 
o Hamilton, on the other hand, was no aristocrat. He was an 
illegitimate child from the West Indies, and he believed that 
centralized power was necessary to preserve liberty from both 
internal chaos and external threat. He also believed that self-
interest rules human nature and should be used to create such 
centralized power by a linking of the wealthy commercial 
and ﬁ nancial interests to those of the national government. 
Jefferson saw self-interest as evil. 
Modern-Day Relevance

The speciﬁ c issues facing Jefferson and Hamilton, and their 
disagreements, have little to do with the issues we as a nation face 
now, yet their disagreement is still relevant to us on multiple levels. 

First, the disagreement over the interpretation of the Constitution 
and national versus state power has been a constant throughout U.S. 
history down to the present day. Here, it is Hamilton’s view that 
contemporary liberals embrace and Jefferson’s that contemporary 
conservatives embrace.

Second, Jefferson’s agrarianism and aristocratic emphasis on 
property qualiﬁ cations for voting possessed a strong democratic 
streak in the agrarian American world of the 1790s. At the time, 
the United States was overwhelmingly populated by farmers who 
owned their own land and, thus, possessed sufﬁ cient property to 
vote. Hamilton’s commercial/manufacturing and urban vision 
possesses an unwitting democratic streak in the opportunities for 
advancement it would provide in the future.

The conﬂ icting views of Hamilton and Jefferson on human 
nature and the role of self-interest in government also have
continued relevance.
o Hamilton had a pessimistic view of human nature, which 
he saw as motivated by self-interest. He sought to harness 

39
that self-interest by tying the wealthy and powerful to the
new government. 
o Jefferson saw self-interest and the mutual dependence of 
government and commercialism as leading to corruption 
and the destruction of liberty. He also believed strongly in 
republican virtue and political disinterest (rather than self-
interest) as appropriate for politics in a republican society and 
as the key to preserving liberty. 
o Although Jefferson’s words still resonate with our democratic 
beliefs today, it is Hamilton’s vision and views regarding a 
politics based on self-interest that would become our reality. 
The concept of republican virtue as central to politics would 
disappear with the deaths of the Founding Fathers and their 
replacement by a new generation of political leaders with 
different ideas. 
The Aftermath of the Split

Hamilton’s death did not result in the immediate demise of the 
Federalist Party, but it left the party leaderless and geographically 
isolated in New England, while westward expansion brought in 
more supporters of Jefferson’s Democratic-Republicans. 

Jefferson and his successor, James Madison, succeeded in wooing 
moderate Federalists into the Democratic-Republican Party by 
agreeing to some Federalist ideas, including a protective tariff for 
American industry and the chartering of a second national bank. 

During the War of 1812, the remaining extreme Federalists further 
isolated themselves by opposing the war and, at the Hartford 
Convention, hypocritically calling for states’ rights and virtually 
threatening secession. News of American military victories and the 
negotiation of a peace treaty ending the war with Britain led to the 
party’s disgrace and collapse. 

40
Lecture 5: Confusions about Jefferson and Hamilton

In the election of 1820, the Democratic-Republican candidate James 
Monroe ran unopposed, and the nation entered an era of one-party 
rule, during which the Democratic-Republican Party encompassed 
the views of both Hamilton and Jefferson. 

That, of course, could not and would not continue. The Hamilton-
Jefferson disagreements would soon reassert themselves in the 
creation of the so-called second two-party political system during 
the 1820s and 1830s. 
Chernow, Alexander Hamilton.
Ellis, American Sphinx. 
———, Founding Brothers. 
1. How are the conﬂ icts between Hamilton and Jefferson relevant to
us today?
2. Where else in U.S. history do we tend to anachronistically project our 
contemporary values onto the past?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

41
Andrew Jackson—An Odd Symbol of Democracy 
Lecture 6
T
he election of Andrew Jackson to the presidency in 1828 ushered in 
a new era in U.S. history, one in which property qualiﬁ cations for 
voting disappeared and the nation truly became democratic. Yet 
Jackson was an odd symbol of democratic reform: He was not himself a 
“common man,” and many of the policies he championed would not be 
considered democratic today. This lecture’s careful examination of the age 
of Jackson reveals much about the nature of American democracy—both in 
his time and today. 
Jackson’s Life

Andrew Jackson was born into poverty on the Carolina frontier 
in 1767. By the age of 14, he was an orphan. He moved west and 
prospered, becoming a slaveholding planter and a major political 
ﬁ gure in the new state of Tennessee. 

During the War of 1812, Jackson became a national military hero 
for his victories at the battles of Horseshoe Bend and New Orleans. 
He also achieved fame for his invasion and conquest of Spanish 
Florida, which led to the acquisition of Florida. 

Throughout these years, he prospered economically, made a fortune, 
lost it, and then made another one. In doing so, he became a symbol 
of the common man, as well as a symbol of his era and its values. 
o He stopped army desertions in the War of 1812 and managed 
to defeat the British army—the ﬁ nest in the world—at New 
Orleans with a ragtag force of farmers, pirates, Indians,
and others.
o He ignored diplomatic protocol and international law by 
invading Spanish Florida in pursuit of hostile Indians and 
escaped slaves who had crossed the border. In the process, 
he took two Spanish forts, executed two British subjects, 

42
Lecture 6: Andrew Jackson—An Odd Symbol of Democracy
deposed the Spanish governor of Pensacola, seized the Spanish 
archives, and appointed his own governor. 
o He defeated a superb marksman in a duel in 1806, pretending 
he was unharmed—even though a bullet had lodged in his 
chest—then hitting his opponent with a mortal shot.

The fact that Jackson’s success was tempered by personal tragedy 
only enhanced his appeal as a man of the people. His beloved wife, 
Rachel, died just a few months before his presidential inauguration. 
Jackson in Politics

Jackson emerged as a major political ﬁ gure with his 1823 election 
to the Senate and the 1824 presidential election, which took place 
during the so-called Era of Good Feelings, when the Federalist 
Party had disappeared and left only one national party, the
Democratic-Republicans. 

In 1824, however, this party split over its presidential candidate, 
and four candidates ultimately emerged for the race: Secretary of 
State John Quincy Adams, Senator Henry Clay (Kentucky), Senator 
John Calhoun (South Carolina), and Jackson.
o Adams was the son of the former president and a 
brilliant diplomat. As secretary of state under Monroe, 
he was responsible for the acquisition of Florida and the
Monroe Doctrine.
o Clay, known as “Harry of the West,” was a former speaker 
of the House, a war hawk, a peace negotiator at Ghent, and a 
popular voice of the new West. 
o Calhoun was another former war hawk and nationalist, but 
one who would soon move in the opposite direction to defend 
slavery in the South. He had a reputation for having a sharp 
mind, but he dropped out of the race early to run for the vice 
presidential position, which he won. 

43
o Jackson ran as a war hero and an alternative to Clay as the 
voice of the new West. 

Jackson won a plurality of both the popular and the electoral 
vote but no majority; thus, the election went to the House of 
Representatives, where each state casts one vote. The contest came 
down to Jackson and Adams; Adams won with Clay’s support, then 
appointed Clay secretary of state. Outrage against this “corrupt 
bargain” poisoned Adams’s presidency and ensured Jackson’s 
victory in the 1828 election. 
Jackson as President

Many historians agree that democracy made Jackson rather than 
vice versa. Indeed, no one really knew what Jackson stood for in 
1829, but as president, he would dominate events and help to deﬁ ne 
the main political characteristics of this new democracy that had 
elected him. 

Key events of Jackson’s presidency included Indian removal, the 
Maysville Road veto, the nulliﬁ cation crisis, and the destruction of 
the second national bank. 
o In the 1830s, Jackson refused to enforce the ruling of the 
Supreme Court that the Cherokee Nation was entitled to 
federal protection from Georgia state actions to force its 
removal. Instead, he used federal forces to impel the movement 
of Cherokees out of Georgia, resulting in the notorious Trail
of Tears.
o In the Maysville Road event, Jackson vetoed a bill that would 
have authorized federal funds for internal improvements, 
insisting this was a state issue and that the bill overstepped the 
powers granted to Congress. 
o Although Jackson supported slavery and, thus, the gag rule 
against abolitionists, he was an intense nationalist who would 
not tolerate South Carolina’s attempt to nullify a new tariff law.

44
Lecture 6: Andrew Jackson—An Odd Symbol of Democracy
o Jackson also destroyed the second Bank of the United States 
through his veto of its new charter and removal of federal 
funds before the old charter expired, moving those funds into 
state “pet” banks. 
A Transformation of the Presidency

During these and other events, Jackson transformed the ofﬁ ce of 
president in the name of “the people.” 

He made massive use of the presidential veto, expanded executive 
power at the expense of Congress, refused to enforce Supreme 
Court decisions with which he disagreed, and became known to his 
enemies as “King Andrew.” 

Jackson 
justiﬁ ed 
the 
expansion of presidential 
power on the grounds 
that he was the only 
government ofﬁ cial elected 
by all the people and that 
this new power was needed 
to 
tear 
down 
special 
privilege that had come to
dominate Washington. 

Jackson 
instituted 
rotation in ofﬁ ce and the 
spoils system for federal 
appointees, a move he 
justiﬁ ed as a democratic 
attack on the entrenched 
aristocracy 
of 
educated 
bureaucrats. 
He 
also 
instituted 
the 
“kitchen 
cabinet” of special personal 
advisers not subject to 
Senate 
conﬁ rmation, 
Through his military exploits and 
business endeavors, Jackson 
became a symbol of his era: a man 
able to overcome adversity through 
an understanding of the natural 
order and possession of both divine 
protection and incredible will.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

45
justifying it as a move away from the elitism of the cabinet and 
necessary given the presence of political appointees in that body 
whom he did not trust. 

Jackson justiﬁ ed all these moves in the name of democracy, 
but today, it’s clear that many were not democratic and that 
they resulted in corruption of the American political system, a 
dangerous expansion and abuse of executive power, a crippling 
of the American ﬁ nancial system, and a gross denial of rights for 
opponents of slavery and for Indians. 

Interestingly, many of Jackson’s revolutionary moves were also 
justiﬁ ed via the old Jeffersonian doctrine of limited government 
and states’ rights. The Jacksonian coalition was made up of many 
contradictory elements that had little in common other than the 
desire for change. The lowest common denominator able to hold 
this coalition together was a strict interpretation of the Constitution. 
The Bank War

The contradictions in Jacksonian democracy are best illustrated 
through analysis of the so-called Bank War.

Chartered in 1816 for 20 years, the second Bank of the United 
States stood as a symbol of the Democratic-Republican Party’s 
move to political center after the Jeffersonian opposition to the ﬁ rst 
national bank. Control of the bank was divided 20/80 between the 
government and the private sector.

The bank served many useful functions, both for the government 
and for the American ﬁ nancial and economic system, but it also 
had many enemies. It was distrusted by small farmers and eastern 
workers and opposed by businessmen, western bankers, Wall Street 
ﬁ nanciers, southern slaveholders, and Jeffersonian Republicans.

The lowest common denominator among these opponents, which 
Jackson used to justify his veto of the bank recharter bill in 1832, 
was strict interpretation of the Constitution to destroy special 

46
Lecture 6: Andrew Jackson—An Odd Symbol of Democracy
privilege. But this is also an argument against any government 
control of the economy and a validation of Adam Smith’s economic 
ideology of laissez-faire. 

Jackson followed up on his veto after his 1832 reelection with a 
personal vendetta to destroy the bank, despite the fact that its 
charter still had three years to run. To carry out the destruction of 
the bank, he had to ﬁ re two Treasury secretaries—both of whom 
feared ﬁ nancial and economic disaster if the bank was shut down—
before he found a third who was willing to assist him in removing 
government deposits from the bank. 

Disaster did indeed follow; Jackson placed federal funds in state 
“pet” banks, which then used the funds to underwrite more paper 
money, leading to a vicious cycle of overspeculation in land
and inﬂ ation. 

Jackson tried to stop the speculation with his Specie Circular in 
1836, announcing that henceforth the government would accept 
only gold and silver for land. The land market collapsed, and 
overextended banks called in their loans, which led to panic and 
depression in 1837 under Jackson’s successor, Martin Van Buren. 
Jackson’s Legacy

Jackson is an apt symbol for a democratic era in which all free white 
males obtained the right to vote and for an ideological revolution in 
economics as laissez-faire triumphed over government direction of 
economic growth. The two were now fused in American ideology 
by the concept of equality of opportunity and, thus, no special 
favors from the government for anyone. 

Jackson also helped to re-create a two-party system in the United 
States. His coalition, now known as Democrats, united around the 
issues of destruction of special privilege and strict interpretation of 
the Constitution. His opponents, known as National Republicans, or 
Whigs, favored continued government control of economic growth 
and, thus, a broad interpretation of the Constitution. 

47

Many at the time and still today view Jackson’s laissez-faire 
economics and his political behavior as democratic. But in reality, 
his economic policies marked the triumph of those who favored a 
highly speculative economy with rapid growth and its ensuing risks 
over the traditionalists who favored government supervision and 
more modest growth. 

In the political realm, the spoils system and other related political 
reforms wound up enhancing the “special privileges” for some 
that Jackson sought to destroy. Further, the expansion of rights 
for free white males during the age of Jackson was paradoxically 
accompanied by the rise of the “cult of true womanhood” and 
“scientiﬁ c racism,” almost as if expanded rights for some meant 
that others must be deﬁ ned as inferior.
Meacham, American Lion. 
Tocqueville, Democracy in America.
Ward, Andrew Jackson: Symbol for an Age. 
Wilentz, Andrew Jackson. 
1. Why are many of the political reforms considered democratic in the 
1830s now considered undemocratic and corrupt?
2. Why do individuals like Andrew Jackson emerge as symbols of their 
eras despite the facts about their lives and beliefs that run contrary to 
the symbolism? What other individuals in U.S. history have emerged in 
this way?
    Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

48
Lecture 7: The Second Great Awakening—Enduring Impacts
The Second Great Awakening—Enduring Impacts 
Lecture 7
T
he fact that some evangelical groups are politically active has 
concerned many Americans because we are used to thinking of 
religion and politics as existing in separate realms. But that is not the 
case historically. This lecture looks at the Second Great Awakening, focusing 
on the ways in which it both reﬂ ected and affected American politics in the 
ﬁ rst half of the 19th century. In the process, we will see that this 200-year-old 
religious movement continues to inﬂ uence us today. 
Romanticism, Transcendentalism, and the Second Great Awakening

The early 19th century witnessed an intellectual and spiritual 
upheaval in both the United States and Europe. This movement, 
known as romanticism, emphasized emotion and intuition, replacing 
the previous Enlightenment emphasis on reason. In New England 
intellectual circles, this led to the transcendentalist movement, 
which was translated into political action by such thinkers as Ralph 
Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau.

The mass emotional movement at this time was the Second 
Great Awakening, a widespread evangelical religious revival 
that downplayed theological arguments in favor of heartfelt
personal experiences. 

Theologically, the Second Great Awakening ended once and for 
all in the United States the old Puritan concept of predestination, 
that is, the belief that salvation was available only to a select few 
chosen by and known to God before they were even born. In its 
place grew the belief that salvation was available to anyone who 
admitted his or her sins, accepted Jesus Christ, and chose to lead a 
good Christian life. Sin thus became voluntary and alterable, and in 
rejecting it, one could be “born again.” 

49
The Impact on Politics

The Awakening resulted in an explosion of religious commitment, 
with regular church attendance increasing dramatically. It 
democratized American religion by making salvation available to 
all, interestingly, at the same time that American political life was 
being democratized by the Jacksonian movement. But it also had 
more speciﬁ c and direct inﬂ uences on politics.

Many Americans at the time held a different interpretation of the 
Book of Revelation than the one popular today. 
o This interpretation included doctrines of perfectionism and 
immediatism that emphasized the need for saved Christians to 
save others and to work to perfect the world as a prerequisite 
to—and a way to hasten—the Second Coming of Christ. 
o Some thought the Second Coming would occur in their own 
lifetimes, but many more thought in terms of a millennium that 
they believed was to precede the Second Coming, a time in 
which the world would be perfected and one they claimed had 
begun with the establishment of the United States. 
o Perfectionism led to extraordinary communal experiments 
as some Americans sought to live on earth as they would in 
heaven. Extremes ran from the Shakers, who banned sex 
altogether, to the Oneida Community, in which every male 
member of the commune was married to every female member. 
o Far more lasting than these communes was the birth and 
growth at this time of the polygamous Church of Jesus Christ 
of Latter-day Saints. 

Many other evangelicals became involved in a series of major 
reform movements that arose during this time. 
o Such famous revivalist preachers as Lyman Beecher and 
Charles G. Finney rejected predestination and original sin in 
favor of free will and the idea that salvation was available to 
all in the here and now. They also preached that one could aid 

50
Lecture 7: The Second Great Awakening—Enduring Impacts
Christ’s work by acting both to save others and to reform or 
perfect society. 
o One major reform movement was in the ﬁ eld of education, 
where such ﬁ gures as Horace Mann emphasized the importance 
of public education supported by state taxes to strengthen 
religious and family values and to avoid permanent social 
classes by providing tools for economic success. 
o Another movement took place in prison reform, with Lewis 
Dwight and others focusing on the rehabilitation rather than 
merely the incarceration of lawbreakers. 
o Other reformers, such as Dorothea Dix, focused on care of the 
mentally ill, establishing the concept of the asylum as a place 
where sanity could be restored rather than one where insanity 
was locked away under atrocious conditions. 
o One of the biggest and most important reform movements of 
the time was temperance. Alcoholism had become a major 
problem, with consumption per person in 1830 three times 
what it is today. Calls for temperance soon shifted to those for 
total abstinence, and by the 1840s–1850s, some states enforced 
legal prohibition. 
Abolitionism

Although temperance may have been the most popular of the 
reform movements, the most controversial and consequential was 
abolitionism—the movement for the immediate and total abolition 
of slavery. 

Abolitionism differed from previous antislavery movements, 
with their emphasis on gradual emancipation and resettlement in 
Africa, in its focus on slaveholding as a mortal sin. Thus, for those 
who truly wished to be saved, slaveholding must be brought to an 
immediate and total end. 

51

Contrary to popular belief, most northerners were not abolitionists. 
Indeed, many abolitionists were denounced and attacked in the 
North as fanatics, irresponsible agitators, and self-righteous 
absolutists. Neither the Free Soil Party nor the later Republican 
Party adopted abolitionism before the middle of the Civil War. 

Nevertheless, abolitionists played a vital role in awakening 
northerners to the evils of slavery and the need to do something 
about it.
The Role of Women in Reform

Women were key ﬁ gures in the abolitionist movement, as well as 
the temperance and other reform movements. Their involvement 
created an uproar and led to the ﬁ rst women’s rights movement in 
the United States.

According to the “cult of domesticity” then in vogue, women’s 
proper role was in the private sphere, while men were engaged in 
The Second Great Awakening saw the democratization and expansion of religion 
in America that remain with us to this day.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

52
Lecture 7: The Second Great Awakening—Enduring Impacts
the public sphere. That private sphere focused on the home, where 
women were responsible for raising children and creating a retreat 
from the marketplace for their husbands.

This, in turn, was part of what one historian has termed the “cult 
of true womanhood” for middle-class women, based on the four 
interlocking pillars of domesticity, piety, submissiveness, and 
purity. Men were considered to be more competitive, dominant, 
rational, and secular than women by nature, while women were 
more cooperative, emotional, virtuous, and religious.

At same time, we see the rise of the family as an institution of 
affection, dominated by love between husband and wife and 
between parents and children. This coincided with a declining 
birthrate as children lost their economic importance and parents 
practiced extensive birth control. 

Given the fact that women were considered to be more virtuous and 
religious and were responsible for the moral development of their 
children, it is far from accidental that they became active in their 
churches. But with the emphasis on reforming society in the Second 
Great Awakening, religious women ironically found themselves 
entering the public sphere in their calls for temperance and
other reforms. 
o Women’s benevolent associations began to form to promote 
moral reforms to control men’s “baser instincts,” and women 
began to speak at public meetings for the ﬁ rst time to promote 
such reforms. This led to major controversies within the 
churches and within the abolitionist movement.
o The reform movements and the strong reactions to their 
participation also led some women to question the validity 
of the entire system of domesticity and to launch a reform 
movement of their own for women’s rights. 

53
Disestablishment of Religion

Disestablishment of religion in the late 18th and early 19th centuries 
ironically appears to have led to an extraordinary democratization 
and expansion of American religion in the Second Great Awakening, 
to the point where Americans became and remain today the most 
religious people in the industrialized world. 

The Second Great Awakening’s emphasis on emotion rather than 
formal theology and on rejecting sin and accepting Christ continued 
throughout 19th- and 20th-century U.S. history and continue today 
with the contemporary evangelical movement. 

The Second Great Awakening also had profound political 
repercussions. Abolitionism, of course, had the most immediate 
impact in terms of its role in the coming of Civil War, but not 
far behind it was the anti-alcohol crusade, leading to nationwide 
prohibition in the 1920s. Ideologies of many of the other reform 
movements continue to this day, most notably in the ﬁ elds 
of education, prison reform, treatment of mental illness, and
women’s rights. 

The camp meeting emphasis on renouncing sin publicly that 
emerged in the Awakening also continues today, a fact illustrated 
by the call heard on many campuses over the past few decades to 
“stand up and admit you are a racist.” This is incredibly similar 
to the “stand up and admit you are a sinner” of the evangelical
camp meetings.

Nineteenth-century religious rhetoric has consistently reappeared 
throughout 20th-century U.S. history, particularly during time of 
war. The Cold War, for example, was seen as a struggle against 
“Godless communism.” 

Alexis de Tocqueville, who was touring the United States in 
the midst of the Second Great Awakening, said that the religious 
atmosphere of the country was the ﬁ rst thing that struck him, and 
he marveled at the number of sects and their apparently inseparable 

54
Lecture 7: The Second Great Awakening—Enduring Impacts
relationship to American concepts of liberty. Perhaps in this regard, 
all our politics are—and always have been—evangelical. 
Howe, What Hath God Wrought.
Tyler, Freedom’s Ferment. 
1. Why do we tend to view religion and politics as separate realms despite 
their historical linkage?
2. In what speciﬁ c ways is the Second Great Awakening still with us?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

55
Did Slavery Really Cause the Civil War? 
Lecture 8
O
ver the last 150 years, historians have cited numerous causes other 
than slavery to explain the Civil War: conﬂ ict over the extension 
of slavery into the territories or over states’ rights, differences 
in the cultures and economies of the North and South, and perceptions of 
conspiracy brought on by a particular American belief system. Nevertheless, 
as we examine these causes, we’ll see that slavery was, in a unique way, 
indeed the primary cause of the war, and we’ll learn much about the nature 
of historical study.
The Extension of Slavery

The key issue of the 1850s was not slavery per se but its extension 
into the western territories. The Kansas-Nebraska Act, passed by 
Congress in 1854, set off a ﬁ restorm by opening to slavery territories 
previously closed to it by the 1820 Missouri Compromise. 

That ﬁ restorm led to the event known as Bleeding Kansas, a small-
scale civil war in the Kansas territory, and to the replacement of 
the Whig Party by the new Republican Party, a sectional party 
committed to reversal of the act and prohibition of slavery in all
the territories. 

The Republican Lincoln was elected in 1860 without a majority 
of the total vote but with victories in every one of the populous 
Northern states, thereby giving him a majority in the electoral 
college. With his election, South Carolina and other states of the 
Deep South seceded, and with the start of hostilities at Fort Sumter, 
the states of the Upper South followed suit. 

Lincoln’s call for troops in April 1861 was to suppress the rebellion 
in South Carolina and preserve the Union, not to abolish slavery. 
Indeed, before hostilities began, Lincoln had been willing to 

56
Lecture 8: Did Slavery Really Cause the Civil War?
guarantee the preservation of slavery in the states where it existed 
and had called for barring slavery only in the territories. 

Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation was issued as a war measure. 
It did not apply to border slave states that had remained in the 
Union or to occupied Confederate territories but affected only those 
areas still in a state of insurrection.

In light of these facts, historians in the early 20th century began to 
question the centrality of slavery to the coming of Civil War. 
State versus National Power

One revisionist interpretation of the cause of the Civil War focused 
on the old conﬂ ict between state and national power. Three years after 
the war ended, for example, Confederate Vice President Alexander 
H. Stephens maintained that this was the real issue, with the
The abolition of slavery was not a Union war aim in 1861 or the ﬁ rst half of 1862; 
at the time, Lincoln’s objective was preservation of the Union.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

57
South seceding and ﬁ ghting to support the primacy of states’ rights 
over the federal government. 

As we’ve seen, this conﬂ ict had existed since the days of Hamilton 
and Jefferson. Was the national government of the Constitution 
a creation of the states and, therefore, subordinate to them and 
possessing only limited powers? Or was it a union of the people, 
possessing strong implied powers over the states? 

Contrary to popular belief, the South has not always defended and 
the North had not always opposed states’ rights over national power. 
o New England had supported states’ rights and opposed the 
federal government before and during the War of 1812 and 
during the Mexican-American War of 1846–1848. 
o Interestingly, the northeast did not control the federal 
government during those two wars. Indeed, as historian Arthur 
Schlesinger Sr. made clear during the 1930s, states’ rights had 
consistently been used throughout U.S. history by whichever 
section did not control the national government and felt 
oppressed by national power. 
o It was thus a device to protect speciﬁ c sectional interests and, in 
truth, a rationalization for, rather than a cause of, the Civil War. 
Economic and Cultural Interests

Of course, slavery was among the sectional interests that led the 
South to defend states’ rights at the time, but historians during 
the 1930s saw slavery as just one part of a much larger Southern 
economic interest. In this view, the Civil War was the defense of 
an agrarian economy against a diametrically opposed economic 
system of industrial and commercial capitalism in the North.

These two economic systems clashed not only over slave versus free 
labor but also over taxation, tariffs, railroads, monetary policies, 
and land policies, issues requiring federal action. Given that the 
three-ﬁ fths slavery clause in the Constitution was the basis of 

58
Lecture 8: Did Slavery Really Cause the Civil War?
Southern agrarian power in the federal government, disagreements 
over economic interests became a struggle between competing 
economic systems for control of that government.

But economic differences between the North and South had 
existed since colonial times and had not led to war. In fact, in
many ways, the different economies were complementary rather 
than competitive.

Some historians answered that the two economic systems were 
in themselves part of what had become two unique cultures: a 
Southern agrarian society and a Northern society with different 
political, economic, social, and intellectual values. Here, too, 
though, the idea of an aristocratic, agrarian South versus a bustling 
capitalist North is largely myth. The similarities between the two 
regions far outweighed their differences.
A Conspiracy against Liberty

In the 1930s, a group of historians argued that Americans on both 
sides of the Civil War saw the other as engaged in a conspiracy 
against liberty.

Despite the fact that neither Lincoln nor any other major Republican 
ﬁ gure proposed abolishing slavery where it existed, many 
Southerners believed that the hidden aim of what they labeled the 
“Black Republicans” was to destroy slavery entirely and institute 
black rule in the South. Similarly, many Northerners believed that 
Southern slaveholders were engaged in a conspiracy to spread 
slavery to the North and, thereby, control the entire Union. 

No such conspiracies ever existed, but many people believed they 
did, and people act on the basis of their beliefs, even if those beliefs 
are false. Thus, some historians argued that false perceptions led 
each side to believe it was threatened by an illusionary plot and to 
go to war to defend its rights. 

59

Historians also argued that the blame for belief in these conspiracies 
should be placed on fanatics, agitators, and blundering politicians 
on both sides. But this leads us to ask why the American people 
would believe and follow such irresponsible agitators and
political incompetents?
The American Belief System

In the last three or four decades, many historians have concentrated 
on examining the general beliefs—that is, the ideology—that led 
Americans to their perceptions of conspiracy. These historians have 
concluded that the basic problem lay with the belief system itself. 

Americans had come to believe that there should be no barriers to 
their individual efforts to achieve their own destiny and perfection, 
and that of their society, in this nation of equal rights, equal 
opportunity, and individual liberty. 

The problem was that Northerners and Southerners had, by the 
1850s, deﬁ ned their freedom in diametrically opposed terms: The 
Southerners’ fundamental right to property (including slaves) 
collided with the Northerners’ right to compete in a free market of 
equals, not slaves or slaveholders. 

The Southern idea of property rights also conﬂ icted with the 
Northerners’ concept of the rights all human beings possessed. As 
historian Avery Craven put it as early as 1950, “right and rights had 
become the symbols of all those interests and values” that divided 
North and South. 

Other historians, such as Allan Nevins, saw the slavery issue as 
inseparable from the “complementary problem of race adjustment.” 
The root of the conﬂ ict, Nevins maintained, was that neither side 
was willing to “face these conjoined problems squarely.” For 
historian David Donald, the cause of this unwillingness was a 
society “suffering from an excess of liberty” and, consequently, 
unable to deal rationally with differences. 

60
Lecture 8: Did Slavery Really Cause the Civil War?

By the 1970s, another group of historians argued that a nation so 
devoted to individual liberty lacked, almost by deﬁ nition, the strong 
social and institutional frameworks required to deal with their 
differences short of war. 

David Brion Davis put all this together in the 1970s and 1980s when 
he wrote that there had been, in the four decades before the Civil 
War, an “overleaping of boundaries of every kind” and a growing 
belief that the American people as a whole, like the American 
individual, were “free from the burdens of the past and free to shape 
their own national character.” 
Multiple Interpretations

These different interpretations of the causes of the Civil War make 
abundantly clear that history is a subjective discipline in which 
disagreements are common. The study of such disagreements is 
called historiography. 

It’s also true that speciﬁ c interpretations are usually tied in some 
way to the era in which they were written. 
o It is far from accidental, for example, that the generation that 
fought the war would come to view it, in the North, as a moral 
struggle over slavery and, in the South, as a more defensible 
support of states’ rights. 
o Similarly, it’s not surprising that an economic interpretation gained 
popularity during the years of the Great Depression or that the 
interpretations emphasizing fanatics and incompetent politicians 
should arise during the ascension of Hitler and Mussolini. 
o Of course, the emphasis on ideology developed during the Cold 
War, which was both a power conﬂ ict and an ideological one. 

It’s important to note that if one accepts this ideological approach, 
all the previous interpretations retain their validity. 
o Even if there were no conspiracies, no differences in economies 
or cultures, no basic disagreement over the nature of the Union, 

61
and no chance of slavery establishing itself in the territories, 
Americans North and South believed otherwise because of 
their ideology—and they acted on the basis of those beliefs. 
o Further, ideology and perceptions are themselves the products 
of all the general factors previously cited as causes of the war: 
economics, culture, politics, political theory, and moral values. 
o The common denominator linking all of these previously cited 
causes is slavery, which is, therefore, the basic cause of the war. 

Have we simply come back to the earliest interpretation and wasted 
our time over the last 150 years in false interpretations linked to 
the values of speciﬁ c eras? The answer is no. We are far from 
seeing slavery as the basic cause in the simplistic way originally 
proposed. Indeed, we now have a much better understanding of the 
causes of the war than ever before and of the ways in which our 
interpretations are shaped by the values of our era. 
McPherson, Battle Cry of Freedom.
Perman and Taylor, eds., Major Problems in the Civil War and 
Reconstruction.
Stampp, ed., Causes of the Civil War.
1. Are past ideas that historians now consider rationalizations nevertheless 
causes because people believed and acted upon them?
2. In what ways does our present synthesis on slavery as the key cause of 
the Civil War differ from the one enunciated by historian James Ford 
Rhodes nearly 100 years ago: “there is a risk of referring any historic 
event to a single cause… of the American Civil War it may be safely 
asserted that there was a single cause, slavery”? 
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

62
Lecture 9: The Civil War’s Actual Turning Points
The Civil War’s Actual Turning Points 
Lecture 9
M
ost Americans would probably point to Gettysburg as the 
most important battle of the Civil War, the turning point when 
Confederate victory ceased to be a possibility. In reality, however, 
Gettysburg was not all that signiﬁ cant for the outcome of the Civil War. 
Far more consequential, both militarily and politically, were at least three 
other events: the Battle of Antietam, the Union capture of Vicksburg, and the 
Union capture of Atlanta. 
The Battle of Antietam

The Battle of Antietam, fought on September 17, 1862, was not 
a clear-cut victory for either the North or the South, but in terms 
of importance, it was one of the most consequential battles of the
Civil War.

Before the battle, Confederate General Robert E. Lee had decided 
to follow up on his successful summer victories outside Richmond 
and at the Second Battle of Bull Run with an invasion of the 
North. If successful, his campaign could result in the capture of 
Washington and/or British and French intervention on the side of 
the Confederacy, either of which would mean Confederate victory 
and independence. 

But Lee’s plans were foiled by the accidental Union discovery of 
his orders. Had the Union commander, General George McClellan, 
moved quickly, he could have destroyed Lee’s army, but his 
slowness enabled Lee to bring his forces together at Sharpsburg, 
Maryland, along Antietam Creek. Still, Lee was put on the defensive 
against a concentrated Union army nearly twice as large as his own. 

Lee was able to counter three uncoordinated Union assaults on his 
line, but given his heavy casualties and the fact that his location 
in Maryland was no longer a secret, he was forced to end his 

63
campaign and withdraw back into Virginia, with McClellan unable 
(or unwilling) to pursue. 

The battle itself was thus inconclusive on a tactical level, but it was 
a strategic defeat for Lee in that he had to end his invasion of the 
North. And it had decisive political and diplomatic consequences. 
o At the time, both the British 
and French governments 
were 
considering 
intervention on the side 
of the South, but Lee’s 
withdrawal from Maryland 
convinced them to remain 
out of the conﬂ ict.
o Further, Lee’s withdrawal 
enabled 
Lincoln 
to 
portray the battle as a 
Union 
victory, 
despite 
McClellan’s 
failures. 
Lincoln 
then 
used 
the 
occasion of this “victory” 
to issue the Emancipation 
Proclamation, 
which 
altered the aim of the war 
from preserving the Union to ending slavery and made the 
possibility of British intervention in support of the South even 
less likely.
The Battle of Gettysburg

Antietam was followed by major Union defeats against Lee at 
Fredericksburg in December 1862 and Chancellorsville in May 1863. 
In this latter battle, Lee almost destroyed a Union army twice the 
size of his own, but the victory did nothing to improve the chances of
Confederate success. 
o It did not relieve the Union blockade that was gradually 
starving the Confederacy, and it did not relieve pressure on 
Despite his failures at 
Antietam and elsewhere, Union 
commander George B. McClellan 
became a viable peace candidate 
in the North in 1864, threatening 
Lincoln’s reelection. 
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

64
Lecture 9: The Civil War’s Actual Turning Points
Confederate forces in the west, where Union General Ulysses 
Grant had isolated and laid siege to the Confederate fortress
of Vicksburg. 
o If Vicksburg fell, Union forces would control the entire 
Mississippi River and effectively cut the Confederacy in half.

Lee, therefore, decided to go on the offensive for a second 
time in June 1863 in an effort to achieve decisive results. This 
second invasion of the North brought him to Gettysburg in
southern Pennsylvania.

The most important day of that three-day battle is the one least 
studied—the ﬁ rst one. On that day, Lee’s arriving army routed 
Union forces in the area and captured the town but failed to seize 
the high ground south of the town, which the Union army, now 
under General George Meade, immediately reinforced. 

Lee’s uncoordinated assaults on Meade’s right and left ﬂ anks on 
the second day failed, as did his famous assault on the Union center 
on the third day, Pickett’s Charge. In retrospect, Lee should have 
broken off the battle after his second-day failures rather than launch 
the doomed frontal assault that so decimated his forces. 

Even if Lee had succeeded in ﬂ anking Meade on the second day 
and forcing his retreat, the Union commander would have retreated 
to his prepared position at Pipe Creek, Maryland, or to Washington, 
which was, by this time, the most heavily fortiﬁ ed city in the world. 
Lee thus probably could not have destroyed Meade’s army or taken 
Washington, and without one of those results, the British would not 
have intervened.

Again, even if Lee had succeeded at Gettysburg, it is doubtful 
that the British would have intervened at this stage given the 
slavery issue that Lincoln had introduced with the Emancipation 
Proclamation and a host of additional factors that had emerged in 
the 10 months since Antietam. 

65

On the day after Pickett’s Charge failed at Gettysburg, Vicksburg 
surrendered to Grant’s forces, thereby effectively cutting the 
Confederacy in half. Nevertheless, Lee was far from ﬁ nished in 
July of 1863. 
Grant’s Campaign against Lee

Grant followed up his victory at Vicksburg by relief of a trapped 
Union army at Chattanooga and major victories at Lookout 
Mountain and Missionary Ridge. He was ultimately able to defeat 
Lee, not by tactical brilliance on the battleﬁ eld but by his strategic 
plan—to bring all Union forces to bear in a simultaneous assault 
along the entire Confederate periphery—and by his refusal to 
retreat even when his plan failed miserably. 

Lee defeated Grant at the Battle of the Wilderness on May 5–6, 
1864, but instead of retreating, Grant continued to move south in 
an effort to outﬂ ank Lee. Lee was forced to follow him and pin him 
down so that he could not regain the strategic initiative. 

During the course of the campaign, Lee’s casualties were about 
half of Grant’s, but they represented a higher percentage of his total 
force than Grant’s. Grant was draining Lee’s army of men while 
stretching its lines to the limit.

As a result of military failures and massive Union casualties, 
peace sentiment in the North grew stronger, threatening 
Lincoln’s reelection. The promise of an end to the war if a peace
candidate was elected would mean Union recognition of 
Confederate independence.

In July 1864, Confederate General John Bell Hood took command 
of the defense of Atlanta, but he was forced to abandon the city 
in September when Sherman threatened to cut his supply lines. 
That victory, along with Union victories at Mobile Bay and in the 
Shenandoah Valley, ensured Lincoln’s reelection and, with it, a 
continuation of the war to the bitter end. It also placed Sherman 

66
Lecture 9: The Civil War’s Actual Turning Points
in position to begin his destructive and decisive march through 
Georgia and South Carolina, the heart of the Confederacy. 
Drawing Meaning from Battles

As these examples clearly show, battles are truly meaningful in the 
study of history for their consequences, not their size. As we saw 
in an earlier lecture, Washington lost most of his battles during the 
Revolutionary War, but the few he won—Trenton, Saratoga, and 
Yorktown—were incredibly consequential. 

It’s also true that the political consequences of battles are especially 
meaningful. War is, as the Prussian general Carl von Clausewitz 
famously observed, a political act, and it always has a political goal. 
Antietam and Atlanta clearly had political consequences for the 
Union cause far more important than any Gettysburg had or could 
have had even if Lee had been victorious. 

In terms of military consequences, Grant’s simultaneous victory at 
Vicksburg was more important than what happened at Gettysburg 
in that it split the Confederacy in half, reopened the Mississippi 
River to the North, and led to Grant’s overall command of all
Union armies. 

It’s important to note, however, that battles are not the only 
consequential events in war. Indeed, one could argue that a little-
known diplomatic event in late 1861 was at least as consequential, 
if not more so, than any of these three battles. 
o On November 8, 1861, U.S. Navy Captain Charles Wilkes, in 
command of the USS San Jacinto, intercepted the British mail 
steamer Trent as it left Havana and seized two Confederate 
emissaries, James Mason and John Slidell, who were on their 
way to London and Paris to attempt to obtain British and 
French recognition of the Confederacy. 
o The enraged British government demanded the release of the 
two emissaries and a formal apology, and Lincoln chose to 
agree to this humiliation rather than face war with Britain. 

67
Gettysburg: A Turning Point?

Why is Gettysburg seen by so many as the decisive battle of the 
Civil War? The explanation lies partially in its sheer size—it was 
the largest and deadliest battle of the war—and partially in the 
tendency to look for a single and speciﬁ c “turning point” in war.

Such single turning points seldom exist, but Gettysburg appears to 
be one because it broke Lee’s invincibility. Still, that is what we 
know now with the advantage of historical hindsight; it did not 
appear that way at the time. 

Gettysburg’s fame is probably also a result of what happened 
there after the battle—speciﬁ cally, the establishment of a cemetery 
for the reburial of Union dead, dedicated by Lincoln with his
Gettysburg Address. 

In that brief address, Lincoln stated, “The world will little note, 
nor long remember what we say here,” but in commemorating 
those who had died and imploring his countrymen to “resolve 
that these dead shall not have died in vain,” Lincoln unknowingly 
immortalized the battle, as well as himself.
Clausewitz, On War. 
McPherson, Battle Cry of Freedom. 
———, Tried by War. 
Reardon, Pickett’s Charge in History and Memory. 
1. What battles in other wars are more or less important than we think?
2. Why do we have a tendency to look for single “turning point” battles in 
wars when they seldom exist?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

68
Lecture 10: The Myth of Laissez-Faire
The Myth of Laissez-Faire 
Lecture 10
T
he years between 1865 and 1900 are known as the age of 
industrialization, a period in which enormous national and personal 
wealth were created in the United States and one that also witnessed 
a huge gap between rich and poor. People have attributed these outcomes—
both positive and negative—to a governmental policy of noninterference in 
the business world. But the truth is that such a policy toward business did not 
exist then or at any previous time in American history.
The Age of Industrialization

The era of industrialization brought the United States to a position 
of leadership among the powers of the world, but it also produced 
major problems, including signiﬁ cant corruption and an equally 
signiﬁ cant gap between the rich and poor.

Both at the time and later, people viewed the positives and 
negatives of this era to be the result of a governmental policy of 
noninterference in the business world, a “hands-off” policy that 
the British economist Adam Smith had most famously proposed in 
his 1776 classic, The Wealth of Nations, and which became known 
popularly as laissez-faire. 

Smith and other economists had argued against governmental 
controls over the economy, such as government-chartered 
monopolies, on the grounds that they hindered economic growth 
and the accumulation of wealth. If left alone, they argued, the 
marketplace would produce more wealth and would be self-
regulating by the laws of supply and demand. The “invisible hand” 
of the marketplace would allow for constant competition among 
individuals and unlimited economic growth and progress.

This was a revolutionary, liberating thought in 1776, countering 
the mercantilist idea that wealth is ﬁ nite and that to get more, one 

69
must take it away from someone else. Laissez-faire ideas gained 
popularity over the ensuing 100 years and, by the late 19th century, 
dominated economic thought in the industrialized world. Since 
then, they have been praised by their supporters for the wealth 
they helped to create and condemned by their opponents for the 
corruption and income disparities that accompanied them. 

Despite the rhetoric, a hands-off governmental policy toward 
business did not exist during this era or any previous era in 
American history. 
Government Economic Interventions

The age of industrialization was a period of very high protective 
tariffs (taxes on imports). Early U.S. tariffs were designed to 
raise revenue to run the government, but protective tariffs were 
much higher and were designed to protect American industries 
from foreign competition. Such protective tariffs reached a high 
point in the 1890s with the 
passage of the McKinley 
Tariff Act at the same time 
that 
the 
Supreme 
Court 
ruled that any income tax
was unconstitutional. 

Another form of government 
aid involved land grants to 
railroads 
as 
construction 
incentives, along with loans 
and ﬁ nancial subsidies. In 
fact, 
numerous 
businesses 
successfully 
lobbied 
the 
federal government for special 
favors during this era. 

Government aid also took the 
form of immigration policy. 
Congress 
maintained 
open 
Thomas Edison took advantage of 
the federal government’s support 
of inventions via patents and its 
encouragement of the growth of 
large-scale corporations.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

70
Lecture 10: The Myth of Laissez-Faire
immigration policies, which provided surplus workers for industry 
and kept salaries low. 

Government also encouraged inventions by issuing patents. 
Inventing itself became a big business, with Thomas Edison 
developing and patenting more than 1,000 items at his Menlo Park 
“invention factory.”

The growth of large-scale corporations, such as Edison’s General 
Electric Company, was sanctioned and encouraged by the 
government, even though such corporations tended to destroy 
competition. In addition, courts deﬁ ned corporations as possessing 
the same constitutionally guaranteed rights as human beings, while 
labor unions were deﬁ ned as “combinations in restraint of trade.”
o Monopolistic corporations were thus ironically protected 
from state regulations via the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal 
protection clause, while unions would be prosecuted under the 
1890 Sherman Antitrust Act designed to outlaw monopolies! 
o Court injunctions were issued against numerous labor strikes, 
and government forces were brought in to break such strikes, 
including the railroad strike of 1877 and the Pullman strike
of 1894.
The Myth of Laissez-Faire in America

Government in America had always seen its role as promoting 
business to increase the wealth of the country, an idea with roots 
in the mercantilist beliefs under which the colonies had originally 
been founded. Americans broke out of the British mercantilist 
system as too conﬁ ning during the Revolution and gradually 
accepted the laissez-faire ideology, but they certainly did not reject 
all mercantilist thought. 

Hamilton’s proposal of, and Congress’s agreement to, the 
ﬁ rst national bank in the 1790s, for example, can be seen as 
a continuation of the mercantilist concept of government-
sanctioned and -controlled monopolies. The same holds true for 

71
the second national bank in 1816 and the ﬁ rst protective tariff, 
passed in the same year to protect infant American industries from
British competition. 

Not all Americans agreed with such government support for 
business before the Civil War. The Democratic Party—in particular, 
Andrew Jackson—appeared to oppose government favors to any 
one group, as well as any federally funded internal improvements. 
This could be seen in Jackson’s veto of the Maysville Road bill and 
his destruction of the second national bank. But that destruction 
was, in effect, government action in support of Wall Street and 
other banks desiring to escape from the national bank’s control! 

The Whig Party opposed the Democrats on these points. And the 
rise of the Republican Party in the Northern states during the 1850s 
created an alliance of classes in the North who favored government 
action against slavery and economic competition from slave labor 
and supported free government land for homesteaders and a high 
protective tariff for Northern industry. The sectional division of the 
Democratic Party in 1860, the Republican electoral victory, and the 
secession of Southern states removed the major political barriers to 
the passage of the entire Republican platform. 

After the Civil War, the reunited Democratic Party claimed to be 
laissez-faire via its low tariff policy, but in reality, it too favored 
continued government support of business. 
o As we will see in later lectures, the reform movements of the 
late 19th and 20th centuries sought to regulate the perceived 
excesses of big business but did not halt government promotion 
of business. 
o Further, some big businesses may have actually wanted this 
regulation at the time as a way to stiﬂ e future competition, by 
establishing rules that large corporations could easily obey but 
small newcomers could not.

72
Lecture 10: The Myth of Laissez-Faire

Contrary to popular belief, the 1920s did not mark a return to 
laissez-faire policies. Indeed, the Republican administrations of 
those years were quite active in promoting business and, in the 
early 1930s, in promoting major government programs to end the 
Great Depression. 

Business also has the ability to obtain the types of government 
actions it desires—and block those it does not desire—via the 
need of elected government ofﬁ cials to retain business conﬁ dence 
to ensure economic prosperity. As we will see in a future lecture, 
one reason the New Deal failed to end the Great Depression was 
the fact that business would not accept its temporary expedient of 
deﬁ cit spending and other measures. 
Belief in the Laissez-Faire Myth

If all this is true, then where, when, and why did the myth of laissez-
faire government policy regarding business develop? 

Although the U.S. government has never been completely laissez-
faire, different groups throughout U.S. history have favored sharp 
restrictions on government’s role in regulation of the economy. 
Such restrictions have often been proposed and defended in the 
name of laissez-faire, even though that was a distortion of what was 
being proposed and why it was being proposed. 
o In this regard, we’re reminded of the use of states’ rights 
arguments by different sections of the country at different 
times, as discussed in the causes of the Civil War lecture. 
o In a similar fashion, laissez-faire has been used by different 
groups at different times to lend ideological support to their 
self-interests. 

Does that make such proponents of laissez-faire hypocrites? Critics 
say yes, but if so, the same can be said for all the varying advocates 
of states’ rights. Is it hypocrisy to honestly believe in something 
that is not true? 

73

Further, if people honestly believed in laissez-faire or states’ rights, 
and if they acted on such beliefs, can we consider the belief to be 
a real cause of an ensuing historical event, even if it is not true? 
Many historians would say yes. Human beings create history not on 
the basis of reality but on their perceptions of reality—perceptions 
that are often far removed from what actually occurred. And what 
actually occurred, as we have seen, is often visible only with the 
hindsight that the study of history provides.
Heilbroner, The Worldly Philosophers.
1. How and why did the myth of laissez-faire develop in this country?
2. As with states’ rights, is belief in a myth a valid causal factor in history?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

74
Lecture 11: Misconceptions about the Original Populists
Misconceptions about the Original Populists 
Lecture 11
W
e often hear the word “Populist” used today either to praise or 
to attack political movements and leaders. Obviously, there 
is disagreement and confusion over whether the term denotes 
praise or contempt—as well as whether it refers to the Left or the Right. 
Interestingly, that echoes historical disagreement regarding the original 
Populist Party of the 1890s and its leaders. This lecture will analyze that 
original movement and explore what links it may have to later movements 
and leaders described as Populist.
The Plight of Farmers

Populism arose in the decades after the Civil War as an agrarian 
movement of farmers victimized by the industrial revolution then 
sweeping the United States. Although that revolution created 
enormous wealth for some, it also impoverished many others, most 
notably unskilled factory workers and farmers. 

In the last quarter of the 19th century, millions of farmers faced 
the problem of overproduction, primarily brought on by the 
mechanization of agriculture and the massive expansion of acreage 
under cultivation. By the laws of supply and demand, the result of 
this enormous expansion of supply was falling prices with each 
bumper crop. 

The problem was compounded by overseas competition. The U.S. 
farmer was now part of the world market, and the agricultural 
revolution was taking place worldwide. 

Farmers’ economic problems were worsened by a host of
additional factors. 
o The general deﬂ ation of the time, combined with the fact that 
farmers were perennially in debt owing to the need to buy 
land, seed, and equipment, made it more difﬁ cult for farmers 

75
to pay off their debts. A 50 percent drop in the prices farmers 
received for their produce meant that they had to grow twice as 
much to pay off their debts, but the more they grew, the lower
prices dropped. 
o In addition, high tariffs raised prices of manufactured goods 
farmers bought but not prices for their produce. In effect, 
farmers were forced to sell on a world market of depressed 
agricultural prices but buy manufactured goods on a protected 
market of high prices. 
o Farmers also faced high property taxes; high interest rates from 
banks, loan companies, and insurance companies; and high 
railroad rates to ship their produce to market. Moreover, the 
railroads controlled land and land sales through government 
land grants and charged high fees for the use of grain elevators 
they owned.

Farmers’ problems were also a result of the shift from self-
sufﬁ ciency to specialized commercial farming, which placed 
farmers at the mercy of market forces beyond their control. 

Finally, farmers faced social isolation and a loss of social status in 
the newly industrialized and urbanized America. 

Existing political parties were unable or unwilling to help, 
essentially for two reasons. 
o What has been labeled the “steel chain of ideas”—a 
combination of Smith’s laissez-faire ideology and the laws of 
supply and demand with David Ricardo’s Iron Law of Wages—
led to the conclusion that nothing could be done politically to 
change conditions for American farmers. Andrew Carnegie 
asserted that economic inequality in the industrial era was 
inevitable and that it was useless to criticize the inevitable.
o The fact that the two parties were so evenly matched and 
elections hinged on a very small number of votes in just six 

76
Lecture 11: Misconceptions about the Original Populists
states led to marginalization of the real issues in favor of 
an emphasis on political machines in the cities, corporate 
contributions, and special favors to swing key states.
Organization

From the farmers’ perspective, both parties were corrupt and there 
was no real difference between them. As a result, they began to 
organize, at ﬁ rst 
on the local level, 
with the Grange. 

In the 1870s, the 
Granger 
laws 
were 
passed 
in 
the 
Midwest 
to 
regulate 
rates 
charged 
by 
railroads. 
The 
Supreme Court at 
ﬁ rst upheld such 
laws but later ruled 
that 
they 
were 
unconstitutional.

Those 
decisions 
led to the formation of Farmers’ Alliances—one in the Midwest 
and two in the South—to elect both state and national ofﬁ cials. The 
Alliances were successful in 1890, electing 6 governors, 3 senators, 
and 50 congressmen. 

In 1892, the Alliances met and created the People’s or Populist 
Party in Omaha, Nebraska. The party attempted to unite farmers, 
industrial workers, and reformers, but it would be dominated by the 
three Farmers’ Alliances.

The party platform has been called “one of the most comprehensive 
reform documents in American history.” It called for an end to 
The enormous expansion of farm production 
brought on by the industrial revolution brought 
falling prices and poverty to many of the 
nation’s farmers; in response, they created the 
Populist Party in 1892.
© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock.

77
government subsidies for private corporations, a graduated income 
tax, political reforms to return power to the people, sympathy for 
labor unions, and numerous other measures. 

The key plank was one that called for free and unlimited coinage of 
silver, as well as gold, at a ratio of 16 to 1. 
o Until this time, the government had printed money as it 
received gold or silver, but in 1873, it agreed to accept only 
gold. Populists labeled this the “Crime of ’73” and called for 
the acceptance of silver again, at a higher-than-open-market 
rate. This would allow the creation of more money and change 
deﬂ ation to inﬂ ation, enabling farmers to pay off their debts 
more easily via the ensuing higher prices for their produce. 
o Opponents protested that such moves represented unsound 
economics that would lead to disaster via Gresham’s law (“bad 
money drives out good”). Further, neither England nor the rest 
of the world would accept the currency.
o Congress had agreed to limited silver purchases with the 1878 
Bland-Allison Act and the 1890 Sherman Silver Purchase Act, 
but the Populists wanted free and unlimited coinage at 16 to 1 
with more printing of paper money as a result. 

Along with this platform came a revivalist tone of holy war, 
impending doom, and cataclysmic confrontation—the forces of 
good versus evil. In the words of Populist orator Mary Lease of 
Kansas, it was time to raise “less corn and more hell.”
The Incredible Election of 1892 

In the run-up to the elections of 1892, opponents in the Midwest 
characterized Populists as ﬁ lthy, illiterate idiots who would wreck 
the country if put in ofﬁ ce. In the South, some Populists attempted 
to unite whites and blacks in a class war against conservatives. 
Merchants refused credit to farmers who wouldn’t disavow Populist 
candidates, and violence, fraud, and intimidation were seen across 
the country. 

78
Lecture 11: Misconceptions about the Original Populists

The Democrat Grover Cleveland won the election, but the 
Populists scored 1 million votes for president and 22 electoral votes
and elected numerous senators, congressmen, governors, and
state legislators. 

In the wake of Cleveland’s election, the U.S. economy suffered 
its worst depression to date, with 20 percent of the workforce 
unemployed and no government relief, as well as massive salary 
cuts for those who still had jobs. The fallout would include 1,400 
strikes in 1894 and violence as the government once again sided 
with business and sent in troops. 

A rush on the U.S. gold reserve led Cleveland to turn to J. P. 
Morgan to bail out the U.S. Treasury and to have Congress repeal 
the Sherman Silver Purchase Act, which only made the economic 
situation worse and increased the popularity of free silver. 

Populist Ohio businessman Jacob Coxey organized the ﬁ rst march 
on Washington (labeled Coxey’s Army) to support his idea of 
a government public works program for the unemployed, to be 
ﬁ nanced with paper money. But he was arrested when he reached 
the capital, and his marchers were forced into detention camps. 
The 1896 Nomination

In 1896, the Democrats repudiated Cleveland as silverites from the 
South and West gained control of the convention and placed free 
silver, as well as many other Populist proposals, in the proposed 
platform, leading to an intense ﬂ oor ﬁ ght. The last to speak was 
William Jennings Bryan, who delivered the extraordinary Cross of 
Gold speech.

Bryan’s words ensured the passage of the platform and his 
nomination for the presidency. Gold Democrats bolted, initiating a 
major party realignment.

The fact that the Democrats had taken their most popular issue put 
the Populists in a quandary. Fusion with the Democrats would mean 

79
loss of identity and much of their party platform, but no fusion 
meant that the anti-silver Republican William McKinley would 
win. Their solution was to nominate Bryan for president but their 
own candidate, Tom Watson, for vice president.
The 1896 Election

The 1896 campaign was one of the most polarized in U.S. history. 
Bryan was portrayed as a wild-eyed radical. Businesses threatened 
to close if workers voted for him and contributed massively to 
McKinley’s campaign. His only major resources were his youth and 
his extraordinary oratorical ability.

The election was an overwhelming victory for McKinley. Bryan 
carried only the South, part of the Great Plains, and the Rocky 
Mountain (silver) states. McKinley swept the industrial Northeast 
and the old Midwest. Bryan failed to gain votes from the Granger 
states, some wheat states, labor, and urban areas. 
o Labor and urban voters feared inﬂ ation and were personally 
affronted by Bryan’s and the Populists’ evangelical rhetoric, 
which was seen as anti-Catholic and anti-urban.
o Many historians agree with these anti-Bryan voters and have 
labeled the Populists as reactionaries. 
Populism Today

Although the Populists were defeated in the 1890s, some of the 
measures they called for in the Omaha Platform were enacted 
during the Progressive and New Deal eras. Nevertheless, many of 
the issues that led to the Populist movement lost relevance with the 
passage of time and with the tremendous decrease in the percentage 
of the population engaged in farming. 

Still, the word lives on in both our historical and our political 
controversies, as does the rhetoric of the Populist platform in calls 
today for action to address the enormous gap between rich and poor 
and the economic plight of many Americans. 

80
Lecture 11: Misconceptions about the Original Populists

Historians still debate who and what the Populists were: radical 
revolutionaries trying to overthrow the existing order, progressive 
reformers, reactionaries, or just an agrarian interest group out to get 
its piece of the pie. 

Similarly, the public continues to debate what a Populist is as the 
term is used today. The word means “for the people,” but which 
people and in what ways? Is Populism forward- or backward-
looking? The answer depends on your own politics and your views 
of the politicians you are describing. 

Descriptions and disagreements related to contemporary Populists 
echo descriptions and disagreements regarding Populists of more 
than a century ago, despite what appears to be the lack of relevance 
to our lives today of the speciﬁ c problems they faced and their 
attempted solutions.
Goodwyn, The Populist Moment.
Hofstadter, The Age of Reform.
Woodward, Tom Watson. 
1. How do you reconcile the successful later passage of many Populist 
proposals in the Omaha Platform with the failure of the movement as a 
whole in the 1890s?
2. Describe your views of the original Populist movement and its leaders. 
    Suggested Reading
Questions to Consider

81
Labor in America—A Strange History 
Lecture 12
D
uring the early 21st century, a movement gained traction to rescind 
the collective bargaining rights of unionized teachers and other 
state employees. Whether in favor or opposed to this action, many 
Americans perceived it as a dramatic reversal of historic governmental policy 
toward unions. But as we will see, this 21st-century effort is a continuation of 
traditional government hostility to labor unions that dates back to at least the 
last third of the 19th century. 
Origins of Organized Labor in America

The industrial revolution of the 19th century led to the creation of a 
new class of largely unskilled industrial workers. In response to low 
wages and dangerous working conditions, these workers attempted 
to organize into labor unions, using the strike as their key weapon 
to force employers to bargain.

As noted in a previous lecture, U.S. government policy in the late 
19th century was pro-business rather than truly laissez-faire. That 
policy included hostility toward labor unions that tried to form 
during this era and the use of armed force to suppress union strikes. 

Partially as a result, effective unionization of industrial workers in 
America would take much longer than it did in Europe and would 
lead to a very different union ideology. 
Opposition to Organized Labor

A number of factors contributed to the hostility toward labor unions 
and failure to organize during this period.

First, many industrial workers continued to believe in the traditional 
American dream and ideology of individualism. Unionization 
meant recognition that they could not “make it” on their own. 

82
Lecture 12: Labor in America—A Strange History

In addition, this was the era of the so-called “new” immigration 
from eastern and central Europe and Asia, as opposed to the older 
immigration wave from western and northern Europe. Linguistic 
and cultural differences divided American workers, making union 
solidarity extremely difﬁ cult if not impossible. Compounding this 
problem was the fact that employers often pitted these groups 
against each other as strikebreakers. 

As previously noted, the courts deﬁ ned corporations as individuals 
possessing the same guaranteed rights as citizens. Consequently, 
they voided state laws attempting to regulate industries as violations 
of the equal protection clause in the Fourteenth Amendment. 
o Courts also issued injunctions against union strikes on the 
grounds that they threatened property rights and constituted 
restraint of trade. 
o Both state and national governments used armed forces to 
enforce these injunctions and break strikes.
The 1892 Homestead Strike

The Carnegie steel plant in Homestead, Pennsylvania, employed 
3,000 unskilled workers who were paid 14 cents an hour for a 
10-hour day, 6 to 7 days per week. The 800 skilled and unionized 
workers at the plant did much better, getting paid $50 to $70 per 
week but only when the mill was in full production. 

In 1889, Andrew Carnegie appointed Henry Frick, who already 
had a reputation as a union buster, to manage the Homestead 
plant. Carnegie instructed Frick to sign no new union contract 
when the old one expired in June 1892. Instead, Homestead was to 
overproduce steel before that date in order to create surplus, then 
close the plant to break the union. 

The union called on all Homestead workers to strike, which they 
did, and to take over the company town. Frick responded by hiring 
strikebreakers and Pinkerton detectives. On July 6, the opponents 
exchanged gunﬁ re; seven Pinkertons and nine workers died, and 

83
sympathy strikes spread to 
other Carnegie steel mills. 

The strike and violence 
continued throughout the 
summer, but by October, 
1,600 workers were on relief 
rolls, and in November, the 
union gave up. Only 800 of 
the original 3,800 workers 
were rehired. In retrospect, 
this failure spelled the end of 
any unionization in the steel 
industry for 40 years. 
The 1894 Pullman Strike

The 1894 Pullman Strike 
took place in the supposedly 
model company town of 
Pullman, Illinois. Plant workers there declared a strike after ﬁ ve 
wage cuts in one year, with no reduction in company rent. Pullman 
responded by closing the plant. 

The independent American Railway Union, under Eugene Debs, 
voted to aid the strikers by boycotting Pullman cars nationally. 
When the railroads began to ﬁ re participants in the boycott, Debs 
called on his 150,000 members to walk off the job, crippling the 
national rail system. 

U.S. Attorney General Richard Olney sent in 3,400 special deputies, 
over the protests of the governor of Illinois, on the grounds that the 
trains must be kept running for the mail and interstate commerce. 

This move led to violence, and Debs was jailed for violating a 
federal court injunction that had prohibited the strike on the grounds 
that it violated the Sherman Antitrust Act as a “combination in 
restraint of trade.” 
The failure of the strike at Andrew 
Carnegie’s Homestead plant set back 
the union movement in the steel 
industry for 40 years.
© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock.

84
Lecture 12: Labor in America—A Strange History
The Socialist Movement

When Debs emerged from jail, he announced that he was a 
socialist. He would later run for president as the candidate of the 
Socialist Party of America (SPA) and, in 1912, would poll nearly 1 
million votes. But that was as close as socialism ever came to being 
accepted in the United States.

The situation was quite different in Europe, where socialist political 
parties were forming with union members as their backbone. They 
demanded not only better working conditions and wages but an end 
to the capitalist system via a government takeover of the factories. 
Many of these socialist parties would emerge as the largest parties 
in their countries. 

It’s important to note that not all European socialist parties were 
communist. Both the SPA and the large socialist parties of Europe 
were democratic and believed in achieving socialism via the ballot 
box. Communists, in contrast, believed in the violent overthrow of 
capitalism and the establishment of what Karl Marx had called “the 
dictatorship of the proletariat.” 

In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, many Americans were 
attracted to socialism, although the ideology had far less appeal in the 
United States than it did in Europe. One major reason that socialism 
didn’t take hold in the United States was that Americans as a whole 
did not possess the class consciousness that Europeans did. 
The American Federation of Labor

Only one national labor union succeeded during this period, and it 
did so by eschewing any anti-capitalist political goals. This was the 
American Federation of Labor (AF of L). 

Under Samuel Gompers, the AF of L refused to have anything to 
do with socialist ideas, socialist political parties, or anti-capitalist 
radicalism. Gompers emphasized that his organization’s only aim 
was to improve the wages, hours, and working conditions of its 
members within the capitalist system. 

85

Gompers was willing to use strikes and boycotts and to back speciﬁ c 
candidates from existing political parties but only to obtain his 
limited goals. In effect, he was willing to use what were perceived 
in the late 19th century as radical means but only for conservative, 
limited ends. 

Gompers favored mediation and arbitration of labor disputes when 
he ran into businesses that were willing to deal with his union. 
And many big businesses were, on the grounds that Gompers was 
far better than the radicals and that they could afford to offer the 
higher wages and shorter hours he demanded, whereas most small 
businesses could not.

Socialists opposed the AF of L and, in 1905, founded their own 
radical industrial union, the Industrial Workers of the World 
(IWW), declaring, “The working class and the employing class 
have nothing in common.” 
o In direct opposition to the AF of L, the IWW sought to organize 
all workers, both unskilled and skilled, and to amass sufﬁ cient 
members and power to be able to eventually overthrow the 
entire capitalist system. 
o But the IWW never achieved the popularity, strength, and 
acceptance of the AF of L, and both before and during World 
War I, it was decimated by government repression. 
Unions in the 20th Century and Today

Gompers and the AF of L have been accurately described as “a new 
generation’s capitulation to the corporate revolution.” In effect, they 
constituted a corporation of labor, organized in a corporate manner 
to obtain proﬁ ts for their members within a capitalist system. 

Operating in this manner, Gompers was able to obtain, in the 
1914 Clayton Antitrust Act, a clear statement that labor was “not 
a commodity or article of commerce” and that it had a right to 
organize and use peaceful strikes, picketing, and boycotts. The 

86
Lecture 12: Labor in America—A Strange History
act also placed restrictions on the use of court injunctions against 
organized labor. 

The AF of L would become the model for later successful unions, 
most notably, the Congress on Industrial Organization (CIO). 
Although willing to use more radical methods than the AF of L, the 
CIO similarly accepted the capitalist system and asked simply for 
its “share of the pie.” 

Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal broke with traditional governmental 
policy in the 1930s by supporting unionization in general. In 
effect, the AF of L and the CIO replaced, through the activities of 
their members and their ﬁ nancial donations, the many corporate 
businesses that broke with the Democratic Party in the 1930s over 
the New Deal. 

But the New Deal’s break with past governmental policy should not 
be overstated. During and after World War II, Roosevelt and Harry 
Truman proved more than willing to move against union strikes 
when they were perceived as endangering the national welfare. 
In our own time, Ronald Reagan would ﬁ re striking air trafﬁ c 
controllers who refused to obey his order to return to work.

Union membership as a percentage of the workforce declined in the 
last third of the 20th century as the economic base of the United 
States moved away from heavy industry. Unionization of some 
white collar professions, such as teachers and government workers, 
took place, but with uneven success and with numbers and power 
that did not make up for the losses by industrial unions. 

We tend to view this decline as a break with history, but the real 
aberration is the pro-union policies of the New Deal during the 
1930s. That this aberration has come to be viewed as what has 
always existed speaks volumes about the way in which an event 
in the relatively recent past can distort our perceptions about our 
entire past—and, with it, our perceptions about the present. 

87
Heilbroner, The Worldly Philosophers.
Salvatore, Eugene V. Debs. 
1. Why were Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker’s actions—proposing the 
elimination of most collective bargaining rights for state government 
workers—incorrectly viewed as a dramatic reversal of government 
policy toward unions?
2. Why has there been so much governmental and public hostility to 
unions in the United States?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

88
Lecture 13: Myths about American Isolation and Empire
Myths about American Isolation and Empire 
Lecture 13
G
iven that the United States was born in an anti-colonial revolt, we 
have come to believe that our country has opposed imperialism 
throughout its history and even sought to encourage anti-colonial 
republican revolts elsewhere. Along with this anti-imperialism, we have 
evidenced a desire to remain isolated from the rest of the world. But the 
United States has never been isolated or anti-imperialist; indeed, it has been 
a highly expansionist power always involved with the rest of the world. 
Early American Expansion

The 13 original American colonies were founded in the 17th century 
as part of an expanding British Empire, and in the next century, they 
rebelled against that empire. But that does not mean they rebelled 
against the concept of empire. 

One of the ﬁ rst military acts in the Revolution was the attempted 
conquest of French Canada in 1775 in an effort to make it the 
14th state—an effort that ended in failure at Quebec at the end of
the year. 

In the 1783 peace treaty with Britain, the United States acquired not 
only what had been the 13 colonies east of the Appalachian Mountains 
but also the huge territory between those mountains and the
Mississippi River. 

Nor did the Founding Fathers see the Mississippi as the ﬁ nal 
boundary of the United States. They often referred to the United 
States as “our rising empire.” The Fathers envisioned an expanding 
entity, but not one that would acquire formal colonies that might 
eventually rebel. Instead, acquired land would gradually be 
incorporated into the Union on an equal political basis, ﬁ rst as 
organized territories, then as states. 

89

This pattern was ﬁ rst established in the Northwest Ordinances of 
the 1780s, and it would serve as the model for American expansion 
across the entire North American continent over the next 50 years—
by both war and treaty. 

○
Americans did not consider these activities imperialism 
because of the political equality granted settlers in the new 
areas, as opposed to colonial status. 

○
Further, they saw the entire continent as theirs by divine 
right, as evidenced by the expression “Manifest Destiny” in 
the 1840s. Of course, others—Native Americans, Spanish, 
Mexicans, Canadians—saw it as aggression, subversion,
and imperialism. 
The Reality of Isolationism

The American expansion across the North American continent was 
hardly isolationism. Neither was the 1823 Monroe Doctrine, which 
asserted that the entire Western Hemisphere was “off limits” to 
European colonialism but open to continued American expansion. 
The expansion of American commerce throughout the world in the 
late 18th and 19th centuries was not isolationism either. 

American isolation was limited to nonparticipation in Europe’s 
numerous military alliances and wars, which was made possible 
by two factors: (1) the geographical separation of America from 
what Jefferson called “the exterminating havoc of one quarter of the 
globe” and (2) the American belief that expanded commerce was a 
way to avoid war and, indeed, a rational alternative to war.

In reality, of course, commerce was often a cause of war. 

○
A clear example was the American declaration of war against 
Britain in 1812, prompted by British violations of American 
commercial “neutral rights” via seizures of American ships and 
goods on the high seas. 

○
Commerce as a cause of conﬂ ict was also obvious in the 
declaration of war against Germany in 1917, again for 

90
Lecture 13: Myths about American Isolation and Empire
violation of commercial neutral rights, but this time, via
submarine warfare. 

○
In retrospect, the major reason we did not go to war with a 
European or world power in the 105 years between the end 
of the War of 1812 and our entry into World War I was the 
fact that British balance-of-power politics maintained overall 
European peace. 
Expansion in the 19th Century

Sectionalism and the Civil War brought a temporary end to 
American territorial expansion during the 1850s and 1860s, but 
throughout the 1850s, numerous adventurers—known as ﬁ libusters 
and supported by the U.S. government—attempted to conquer Cuba 
and portions of Central America. 

Within two years of the end of the Civil War, the United States 
purchased the enormous Russian colony of Alaska. 

In 1898 came the war with Spain and the acquisition of the 
Philippines, Guam, and Puerto Rico, as well as the annexation
of Hawaii. 
Informal Empire in Central America and the Caribbean

Much more extensive than any formal colonial empire of the United 
States was the informal empire it created in Central America and 
the Caribbean in the aftermath of the war with Spain. That empire 
included protectorates over ﬁ ve nations: Cuba, Nicaragua, Panama, 
the Dominican Republic, and Haiti. 

Although these countries were nominally independent, the United 
States controlled their economies, ﬁ nances, and foreign policies 
and reserved the right to intervene militarily in each of them. 

In 1901, Cuba was forced incorporate the Platt Amendment 
into its constitution. Provisions of this bill included agreement 
not to incur indebtedness beyond Cuba’s means or take 

91
any other actions that might endanger its independence, 
to grant the United States a naval base on the island 
(Guantánamo), and to allow U.S. military intervention in
the country. 

In 1903, the United States helped to organize and supported a 
successful revolt in the Colombian province of Panama in order 
to obtain the right to build and fortify a canal through that now 
independent country. 

Over the next decade, the United States would foist treaties similar 
to the Platt Amendment on Nicaragua, Haiti, and the Dominican 
Republic, as well as Panama, and would intervene militarily in each 
of them. 

Careful examination of the map explains why these nations became 
part of the American Empire: Panama and Nicaragua held the two 
key potential routes for an interoceanic canal, while Cuba, Haiti, 
and the Dominican Republic, along with Puerto Rico, controlled 
the Caribbean approaches to such a canal. 
Commercial Expansion and Domination

The American policy of free trade, most clearly enunciated in the 
1899 and 1900 Open Door notes regarding China, also promised, 
and often led to, further commercial expansion and domination of 
other areas. 

Given the enormous size and power of the American economy by 
this time, free trade (free of tariff barriers) would almost inevitably 
mean that U.S. goods were cheaper than those of other powers. 

Continuation of commercial expansion during the years between the 
two world wars has led many historians to question the supposed 
“isolation” of the United States during this period. 

○
Although the Senate rejected membership in the League of 
Nations, the United States remained actively involved in the world 

92
Lecture 13: Myths about American Isolation and Empire
during the 1920s, signing numerous treaties and expanding its
economy globally. 

○
Indeed, the American economy undergirded the entire global 
economy of the 1920s and, with it, the peace structure of
that decade. 

The American economy, the global economy, and the peace structure 
collapsed during the 1930s. Admittedly, what both preceded and 
followed that collapse is what one historian has accurately labeled 
a “mood of isolation” in the United States, but once again, it was 
limited to a desire to stay out of another European war. 

That mood would change dramatically in 1940–1941 under the 
impact of the Nazi conquest of Europe, and it would result in the 
permanent demise of isolationism in this country. Indeed, the United 
States would emerge after World War II as the most powerful and 
inﬂ uential nation in the world. 
Belief in the Myth of Isolationism

Belief in the myth that America was once isolationist and almost 
always anti-imperialist stems partially from our belief in an anti-
empire history. It also stems from the fact that our Founders deﬁ ned 
our nation as an “empire of liberty,” not tyranny, and we tend to 
equate empire with tyranny. 

The 19th-century idea that the North American continent was 
ours by divine right meant that our claims to land were superior 
to any contrary claims by Native Americans, Europeans, or Latin 
Americans and could not be considered imperialistic.

Along with that went the belief that the entire Western 
Hemisphere was separated from Europe by a republican 
form of government, as well as geography. Consequently, 
the 1823 Monroe Doctrine was (and still is) perceived as a 
defensive 
document 
against 
European 
encroachment—and, 

93
thus, isolationist and anti-imperialist, rather than expansionist
and aggressive. 

Similarly, we believed that we were liberating the Cubans in 1898 
and that we were both defending and spreading freedom against 
mortal threats in World War I, World War II, and the Cold War. 

Our belief that we were anti-imperialist also partially stems from 
the fact that we equated imperialism with formal colonialism, rather 
than viewing the 
latter as but one 
form of the former. 
Further, we have 
always 
viewed 
trade as a rational 
alternative 
to 
empire and war, 
which 
it 
often
is not. 
Is America an Empire?

A debate about 
whether 
or 
not 
America was an 
empire—and if so, 
what kind—began during the Cold War and accelerated after the 
collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. 

To most Americans, the answer deﬁ nitely remains no. 
Our political leaders tell us that our major foreign policies 
are and always have been to protect our own security and 
to promote democracy around the world—not to create
an empire. 

But in the name of protecting our security and promoting democracy, 
we have created and consistently use the largest military force in 
the world. If this is not imperialistic, then what is? Further, isn’t 
Many Americans believe that our nation’s 
expansionism has resulted at least partially 
from the need to counter Soviet threats.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

94
Lecture 13: Myths about American Isolation and Empire
promotion of American-style democracy imperialistic to cultures 
that do not share or want our democratic values? 

On the other hand, isn’t much of our previous expansion the 
unplanned, defensive result of our need to counter mortal 
threats to our security, such as Nazi Germany or the communist
Soviet Union? 

Perhaps so, but that does not negate the domination we have been 
able to exercise over others in the process of defending ourselves 
and ensuring our security—a domination those others clearly deﬁ ne 
as imperialistic. 

Indeed, in a world of nation-states all claiming sovereignty—
including the right to make war—the only absolute security is 
expansion designed to preclude the emergence of any other centers 
of power that could pose a threat. In that regard, one nation’s 
defense is another’s aggression. And that will be the case as long 
as we live in an anarchic international system in which every nation 
maintains its right to make war on any other nation. 
Beisner, From the Old Diplomacy to the New, 1865–1900.
Stephanson, Manifest Destiny. 
Williams, The Tragedy of American Diplomacy.
1. Is the United States today an empire? If not, why? If so, how and why, 
and is its empire of a unique form?
2. Is free trade “the imperialism of the strong”? Why or why not?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

95
Early Progressives Were Not Liberals 
Lecture 14
M
any Americans, 
whether 
liberal 
or 
conservative, 
trace 
contemporary liberalism back to the late-19th- and early-20th-
century reform movement known as Progressivism. As with 
other historical myths, there is a kernel of truth in the supposed connection 
between Progressivism and contemporary liberalism, but it has been grossly 
overstated. It also distorts the history and meaning of Progressivism, as well 
as the meaning of contemporary liberalism and conservatism. 
A Contradictory and Confusing Movement 

Confusion over Progressivism is understandable because the 
movement was never uniﬁ ed. It contained many different 
groups with many different goals, a fact clearly illustrated by the 
incongruous legislation and constitutional amendments passed 
during the Progressive era. 

○
Amendments Sixteen through Nineteen to the Constitution 
established the income tax, direct election of senators, alcohol 
prohibition, and the vote for women. 

○
Major Progressive legislation included railroad and antitrust 
regulations, the Pure Food and Drug Act, creation of the 
Federal Reserve System, major attacks on civil liberties during 
and after World War I, and immigration restriction. 

The Progressive era would also see the creation of numerous 
professional organizations with enforced standards, the rise of 
social work and settlement houses, the beginnings of a national birth 
control movement, a further deterioration in the condition of African 
Americans, the Social Gospel movement in churches, and a racist 
eugenics movement that sought to sterilize those it labeled “inferior.” 

The movement elected two of our best-known presidents—
Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson—who ran against 

96
Lecture 14: Early Progressives Were Not Liberals
each other in 1912 on two Progressive but diametrically opposed 
platforms and who hated each other. 

The Progressive movement included people famous in other areas 
of American life but with little if anything in common: philosophers, 
such as William James and 
John Dewey; ministers, such 
as Walter Rauschenbusch and 
Washington Gladden; jurists, 
such as Oliver Wendell Holmes 
and Louis Brandeis; journalists; 
novelists; and others. 

Progressive programs included 
many ideas from the 1892 
Populist platform, but most 
Progressive leaders had been 
anti-Populist in the 1890s. 

Most 
Progressives 
wanted 
to regulate big business, but 
numerous 
business 
leaders 
were part of the movement. 
Other opposing groups among 
the 
Progressives 
included 
immigrants and those who were anti-immigrant, African Americans 
and racists, and women and those who sought legislation to 
“protect” women because of their alleged inferiority.

The movement was perhaps best described by the historian Robert 
Wiebe as a “search for order”—an attempt to redeﬁ ne American 
politics and society in light of the radical changes created by the 
industrial revolution and the ensuing urbanization of the country. 

In this regard, a new class of urban, white-collar professionals 
created by the industrial revolution would join with the older urban 
middle class to be two of the driving forces in the movement. 
The New Nationalism reform 
program of Theodore Roosevelt 
emphasized regulation of big 
business and economic and 
social welfare legislation.
© Getty Images/Photos.com/Thinkstock.

97
General Goals of Progressivism

In general, the Progressive movement sought to end the abuses 
of power and corruption that had come to dominate American 
economic and political life. Corrupted institutions would be 
replaced with reformed ones that would restore power to the people.

Another general goal of the movement was to restore morality to 
American politics and life, that is, honesty in business, government,
and production. 

Progressives sought to help the victims of industrialization—
children and women who were forced to work, new immigrants, 
and others. 

The movement aimed to use scientiﬁ c and efﬁ ciency principles 
and expertise from the academic and business worlds to 
minimize disorder and establish cooperation. A related goal was 
to professionalize and regularize certain aspects of American 
life by establishing clear standards for doctors, lawyers, and
other professionals. 

Finally, the Progressives wanted to restore a sense of discipline, 
virtue, and service to the nation by encouraging people to look 
beyond their narrow self-interests to the good of others and the 
good of the country as a whole. 
Progressivism versus Liberalism

For Progressives, the key tool to accomplish these goals was 
positive government action. This is the key shift in what we might 
call the “liberal perspective” and the one clear link between the 
Progressives and contemporary liberals: a belief that government 
is not the problem but the solution to the problems that plagued 
American life at this time. 

Traditional 18th- and 19th-century liberalism feared government 
power as the source of tyranny throughout history and had sought 
to limit that power in whatever ways it could. 

98
Lecture 14: Early Progressives Were Not Liberals

But Progressives turned traditional liberalism on its head by arguing 
that the large monopolistic corporations and corrupt urban political 
machines had become the problems and that positive government 
action was imperative to control big business, reform the political and 
economic systems, and thereby restore and save the American dream. 

One of the most important Progressive thinkers was Herbert Croly, 
who attacked the notion of laissez-faire and Adam Smith’s “invisible 
hand.” The marketplace was no longer self-regulating and did not 
lead automatically to better things in the economic or in any other 
sphere. What was needed to restore the “promise of American life” 
was greater government power—nationalization and centralization.
Competing Progressive Platforms

Although Progressives tended to agree on these general goals 
and the positive use of government, they disagreed over just how 
government should be used, for example, how it should be used to 
regulate business. That fact is most clearly seen in the competing 
platforms of Roosevelt and Wilson in the 1912 presidential election. 

Wilson’s New Freedom sought to use government to break up big 
business in order to restore competition. 

Roosevelt’s New Nationalism argued that this was both impossible 
and counterproductive. Instead, government should seek to control 
and legitimize big business and play a key role in arbitrating 
differences between business and labor. Far from accidentally, this 
indirect attack on laissez-faire also led the New Nationalists to 
propose legislation to help the victims of industrialization. 
Progressivism and Contemporary Politics 

Those who opposed the Progressive call for positive government 
action would henceforth be considered conservatives. But in 
actuality, they were retaining one of the major principles of 18th- 
and 19th-century liberalism: fear of government power. American 
conservatives were, thus, diametrically opposed to traditional 
European conservatives, who favored strong government power. 

99

In this regard, American conservatives and liberals both base their 
belief systems on John Locke’s concept of the social contract, not 
the concepts of Thomas Hobbes and other European conservative 
thinkers that underlay the very different European deﬁ nition
of conservatism. 

Hobbes maintained that the natural, original state of human life 
was “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short” and that the only way 
to organize a society to overcome this condition was to give total 
power and obedience to a monarch or small group empowered to 
decide every issue. 

Although some American conservatives might agree with Hobbes’s 
pessimistic view of human nature, they do not agree with his 
proposed solution of absolute obedience to a powerful, centralized, 
and authoritarian government. Instead, they argue that strong 
centralized government—not big business—remains the greatest 
threat to freedom. 

It’s also important to note that while the logic of Progressive thought 
leads to many programs contemporary liberals might support, it also 
led to many programs that are anathema to contemporary liberalism. 

For example, the desire to help the victims of industrialization, 
which contemporary liberals would applaud, combined with 
the desire to restore morality to American life would translate 
into an imposition of middle-class American morality via legal 
social coercion in numerous areas (which many contemporary 
conservatives would support). 

○
The prohibition amendment and laws against certain drugs 
were partially justiﬁ ed on the grounds that alcohol and drugs 
are immoral and create dependency that holds back the 
working class. 

○
Social reform thus becomes social control as the government 
assumes functions previously performed by the church, family, 
and local community. 

100
Lecture 14: Early Progressives Were Not Liberals

The desire to help the victims of industrialization would also lead 
to a major movement to Americanize the new immigrants at the 
expense of their traditional cultures. 

Further, the Progressive emphasis on science, expertise, and 
professional standards actually hurt the poor by depriving them of 
the doctors, lawyers, and other professionals who—although they 
might have been ill-trained—had at least previously served them. 

Similarly, Progressive efforts to destroy political corruption deprived 
the new immigrants and other poor of the urban political machines 
that took care of them—in return, of course, for their votes. 

The fusion of science with preexisting racism would reinforce 
the desire to help the new immigrants by Americanizing them and 
destroying their native cultures. It would also lead to immigration 
restriction to prevent any more of these “inferior” peoples from 
competing with American labor. 

That fusion of science with racism would further lead to the rise of 
eugenics and, with it, calls for forced sterilization of “inferiors” to 
improve the genetic base of the population. 

○
It is no accident that the great Progressive Woodrow Wilson 
would expand segregation in the federal government and praise 
D. W. Grifﬁ th’s racist ﬁ lm Birth of a Nation as “history written
with lightning.” 

○
This racism, along with the emphasis on imposing American 
middle-class standards of expertise and morality, would 
lead many Progressives to become avid imperialists. Indeed, 
most of the military interventions in Central America and the 
Caribbean occurred during the Progressive era. 

The Progressive emphasis on nationalism and centralization would 
reinforce, if not create, the suppression of civil liberties during 
World War I in the name of patriotism. The Espionage and Sedition 

101
acts of 1917 and 1918 virtually outlawed dissent against the war 
and criticism of the U.S. government.
The Legacy of Progressivism

Much of the legislation introduced in the Progressive era failed, and 
many of the movement’s goals were not accomplished.

Big business today is in many ways more centralized and destructive 
of competition than it was 100 years ago. 

Big government has also, in many ways, failed to do what it 
promised to do, and it appears today to many Americans as worse 
than the problems it originally grew to address. 

Nevertheless, Progressivism created much of the broad value 
structure we live with today, whether liberal or conservative, 
regarding such issues as efﬁ ciency, expertise, morality, and 
government control, as well as the inculcation of such values 
through our education system. In that sense, most if not all of us, 
liberal and conservative, remain linked to Progressive ideas. 
Blum, Woodrow Wilson and the Politics of Morality. 
Cooper, Woodrow Wilson: A Biography. 
Fink, ed., Major Problems in the Gilded Age and the Progressive Era. 
1. In what ways do we still live within the value structure of the
Progressive era?
2. Do contemporary liberals and conservatives truly divide over how 
powerful the national government should be or instead over the speciﬁ c 
issues in which government should play a strong role?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

102
Lecture 15: Woodrow Wilson and the Rating of Presidents
Woodrow Wilson and the Rating of Presidents 
Lecture 15
W
oodrow Wilson is one of the most controversial presidents in U.S. 
history. In most presidential polls, he is put in the great or near-
great category, yet to his numerous detractors, both at the time and 
later, he is vastly overrated. Examining the reasons for this sharp difference of 
opinion provides an opportunity to explore the broader issue of presidential 
ratings in general and the standards by which past presidents are judged. 
Wilson’s Accomplishments

Woodrow Wilson’s high rating in presidential polls rests on what 
appears to be an extraordinary series of accomplishments during his 
eight years in ofﬁ ce. 

During his ﬁ rst two years as president, Wilson’s Progressive 
program included the ﬁ rst major downward revision of the tariff 
since before the Civil War, the establishment of the Federal Reserve 
System and the Federal Trade Commission, and the passage of the 
Clayton Antitrust Act to curb monopolistic business practices. 

In 1916, he obtained passage of a second round of Progressive 
legislation that included programs to provide farmers with credit, 
construct and improve rural roads, prohibit interstate shipping 
of goods made with child labor, establish an eight-hour day for 
railroad workers, and create a worker’s compensation system for 
federal employees.

In obtaining this impressive collection of Progressive legislation, 
Wilson became the ﬁ rst president to propose and receive from 
Congress a full program (his New Freedom program). He also 
exhibited exceptional political skill and, by 1916, had united 
Progressive forces from both parties to support him for reelection. 

103

In foreign affairs, Wilson’s supporters argue, he kept the United 
States out of World War I for nearly three years. When ﬁ nally 
forced by German actions to enter the war, he quickly became the 
moral leader of the Allied nations and the major force for reform of 
the entire international system. 

○
That reform program, as enunciated in his Fourteen Points 
address and other major speeches, focused on establishing a 
new world order based on the creation of a League of Nations 
and the principle of collective security. 

○
Wilson obtained his League of Nations and much of the rest of 
his international program during intense negotiations with Allied 
leaders in Paris. But he failed to obtain Senate ratiﬁ cation of the 
Treaty of Versailles because of Republican obstructionists and 
because of a major stroke that prevented him from mobilizing 
the American people in favor of the treaty and membership in
the League. 

Despite this ﬁ nal failure, Wilson’s supporters argue that his record 
of achievements is extraordinary. He brought the Progressive 
movement to its zenith and helped to redeﬁ ne the role and power of 
the presidency, the federal government as a whole, and the United 
States in the world arena. 
Criticisms of Wilson

Wilson’s critics see a very different record and reach different 
conclusions. Although he carried 40 of 48 states in 1912 and won a 
massive victory in the electoral college, he was a minority president 
who obtained only 42 percent of the popular vote. 

Soon after he took ofﬁ ce, Wilson abandoned portions of his New 
Freedom reform program and, by 1916, had embraced the much 
broader but diametrically opposed New Nationalism reform 
program of Theodore Roosevelt. This program emphasized 
regulation, rather than destruction of the trusts, and economic and 
social welfare legislation, which Wilson had previously opposed.

104
Lecture 15: Woodrow Wilson and the Rating of Presidents

Wilson also refused to support women’s suffrage and was responsible 
for bringing racial segregation to the federal government. 

In foreign affairs, critics note, this supposed anti-imperialist 
intervened militarily in Latin America more than his openly 
imperialist predecessors, Roosevelt and Taft, and his military 
intervention in Mexico 
almost resulted in a 
war with that nation. 

His 
pro-Allied 
sympathies and actions 
made a mockery of 
American 
neutrality 
in World War I. By 
allowing 
extensive 
war trade and loans 
to the Allies, Wilson 
effectively 
made 
the United States an 
unofﬁ cial 
belligerent 
that 
Germany 
was 
more than willing to 
attack in 1917. 

Once 
in 
the 
war, 
Wilson’s 
administration amassed almost dictatorial powers. It established 
a propaganda bureau and virtually outlawed dissent with the 
Espionage and Sedition acts, initiating a period of government 
repression and some of the worst violations of civil liberties in 
U.S. history. 

Wilson also participated in the Allied military intervention that 
attempted but failed to overthrow the Bolshevik regime in Russia 
and refused to recognize that government. These moves embittered 
Woodrow Wilson receives a relatively 
high ranking in most presidential polls, 
a somewhat puzzling result given the 
failures that seem to balance out his 
successes.
Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division.

105
relations between the two nations for decades and were an important 
factor in the development of the Cold War. 

At the same time, his administration attacked domestic and 
immigrant Leftists and, soon after the war, launched what became 
known as the ﬁ rst Red Scare.

After World War I, Wilson’s critics continue, he proved to be an 
inept negotiator at the peace conference and, in the end, abandoned 
many of the lofty principles he had previously championed. 

The primary cause of the Senate’s refusal to ratify the Treaty of 
Versailles and join the League of Nations was Wilson’s arrogant 
refusal to compromise with Senate Republicans. That refusal led to 
a second and bloodier world war only 20 years later.
Presidential Ratings

Among the primary standards used in presidential rating polls 
are the consequences of presidential action. By that standard, 
Washington, Lincoln, and Franklin Roosevelt always rank as the 
top three: Washington for establishing the new government and 
setting key precedents, Lincoln for preventing the destruction of the 
country, and FDR for successfully leading the country through the 
worst domestic and international crises in its history. 

Similarly, the two presidents who preceded Lincoln, Franklin Pierce 
and James Buchanan, are usually placed at the bottom because their 
policies and incompetence resulted in the Civil War. In most polls 
Jefferson, Theodore Roosevelt, and Wilson are ranked just below 
Washington, Lincoln, and FDR. 

Wilson’s high ranking is a bit puzzling in light of his numerous 
failures and their negative consequences. 

○
But consequences do not constitute the only standard involved 
in rating presidents; assessments are often based on the values 
the assessors bring to their task. 

106
Lecture 15: Woodrow Wilson and the Rating of Presidents

○
Assessors who approve of the Progressive movement and an 
activist federal government in both domestic and international 
affairs tend to give Wilson positive assessments, while those who 
disagree with these positions tend to give lower assessments.

Such value judgments play a major role in all presidential ratings. 
Presidents usually listed as the worst—Pierce, Buchanan, Ulysses 
Grant, and Warren Harding, for example—are put in that category for 
one of two reasons: incompetence or corruption. But those are not the 
only reasons to conclude that someone was a terrible president. What 
about hypocrisy, lying, breaking the law, or sheer stupidity? 

Similarly, those usually placed in the highest category—Washington, 
Lincoln, and FDR—are put in that category because of the enormous 
dangers the country faced during their tenures. But again, should this 
be the only category for determining a great presidency? What about 
political skill in ofﬁ ce or, simply, lack of mistakes?

Further, use of consequences as a standard requires treating the 
rankings of recent presidents with a grain of salt because we do not 
yet know the full consequences of their actions. 

It’s also true that the consequences of presidential actions are 
sometimes both positive and negative, as can be seen in the record 
of James K. Polk or, in modern times, that of Richard Nixon.

We should also recognize that presidential polls and ratings are 
affected by changing American values and perspectives over time. 
Andrew Jackson, for example, dropped from 6th place in a 1948 poll 
to 14th place in a more recent poll because of our changing views on 
just how “democratic” his presidency really was and the negative 
economic impact of his destruction of the second national bank.

There is also often a sharp difference between the ratings of past 
presidents made by historians and those made by the general public. 
In a 2011 Gallup poll, Americans agreed with historians only on 

107
Lincoln as one of the top three presidents. Instead of Washington and 
FDR, they put Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton in that elite group! 

Of course, the public’s views can change with the passage of time 
as much as historians’ views. The public’s rating of Truman went 
up in the 1970s and 1980s, at about the same time that it began 
to decline among historians, who argued that he deserved partial 
blame for both the Cold War and the rise of McCarthyism. 
Wilson’s Ratings

Wilson’s ratings have gone down somewhat since the 1960s as a 
result of our changing views on race relations, women’s rights, civil 
liberties, and perhaps, the UN. He was number 4 in 1948, 7 in the 
1990s, and a bit lower in the 21st century. 

Is he perhaps still overrated? As we have seen, both his achievements 
and his failures are consequential. Yet his supporters ask whether 
any of his predecessors or contemporaries could have done 
better given the signiﬁ cant problems he faced, both domestically
and internationally. 

It’s interesting to speculate what would have happened if Theodore 
Roosevelt had won the 1912 election instead of Wilson. 

○
Whereas Wilson’s New Freedom sought to return to a mid-19th-
century world of competition, Roosevelt’s New Nationalism 
realized that was impossible and was the ﬁ rst program to 
address 20th-century realities in terms of business regulation 
(rather than trust-busting) and social welfare legislation. 

○
In foreign affairs, Roosevelt was one of the most 
successful diplomats in U.S. history, at least in regard 
to the great powers. He won the Nobel Peace Prize 
for mediating an end to the Russo-Japanese War and 
secretly mediated an end to the Moroccan crisis that 
could have easily led to the outbreak of World War I in
1905–1906. 

108
Lecture 15: Woodrow Wilson and the Rating of Presidents

○
Given that record, we must ask if World War I would have even 
broken out if Roosevelt had been elected in 1912. Certainly, he 
would have actively tried to prevent it, much more so than did 
Wilson, who was preoccupied at the time with the death of his
ﬁ rst wife. 

○
Had Roosevelt failed to halt the outbreak of war, he probably 
would have joined the conﬂ ict earlier than Wilson, and it’s 
unlikely that his record in civil liberties would have been any 
better than Wilson’s. But it’s also unlikely that he would have 
attempted to replace the balance of power with collective 
security, a concept that has proven to be unworkable in the 20th
and 21st centuries.
Blum, Woodrow Wilson and the Politics of Morality. 
Cooper, Woodrow Wilson: A Biography. 
Fink, ed., Major Problems in the Gilded Age and the Progressive Era. 
1. How do your values affect your ranking of Woodrow Wilson
as president?
2. How do your values affect your ranking of other presidents?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

109
The Roaring Twenties Reconsidered 
Lecture 16
T
he popular view of the 1920s is that the country was tired of 
Progressive reforms and overseas crusades. In 1920, it elected a 
president, Warren Harding, who verbalized this mood with his call 
for a return to “normalcy.” The result would be a supposed return to the 
business values of the late 19th century and an isolationist foreign policy. But 
in reality, the 1920s set the stage for contemporary America far more than 
this decade looked back to the past. 
An Economic Revolution

Underlying all the changes that emerged in the 1920s is the economic 
revolution that took place at this time. This revolution was based on 
the continued consolidation and growing efﬁ ciency of business via 
“scientiﬁ c management,” as explained by Frederick W. Taylor and 
known as Taylorism. With this movement came the rise of a new 
class of business managers and an explosion in productivity. 

On the surface, the increase in per capita output and the emergence 
of giant national chains, such as A&P, the Woolworth Company, 
and Bank of America, may seem like a continuation of trends 
from the 1890s. But this business growth and concentration was 
accompanied by a major shift in American industry during this 
decade, from heavy industry to the production of new and cheap 
consumer items.

Equally critical to the new economy was the automobile. Thanks to 
assembly-line techniques and scientiﬁ c management, Henry Ford 
cut the price of automobiles by more than two-thirds and made 
them available to the middle and lower classes.
o Ford paid his own workers the unheard-of sum of $5 a day so 
that they could buy the cars they made—in return for a ban
on unions.

110
Lecture 16: The Roaring Twenties Reconsidered
o Some consider this the start of welfare capitalism in industry to 
combat unionization, with the creation of pension funds, proﬁ t-
sharing plans, and so on. This was hardly a return to late-19th-
century conditions! 
o As a result of Ford’s innovations, auto production jumped from 
4,000 in 1900 to 4.8 million in 1929, with auto ownership 
jumping from 8 to 23 million. 

Automobile production had a ripple effect on the entire economy, 
especially in such industries as steel, rubber, glass, and oil but also 
indirectly in the production of concrete, highway construction, and 
the emergence of roadside restaurants, gas stations, and motels. 

Along with this economic revolution came a phenomenal growth 
in advertising to convince people to buy cheap consumer products
and automobiles. 
o Advertising was not new, but there was a massive expansion of 
the industry, along with a major shift, from informing the public 
of a product’s existence to playing on psychological desires and 
needs, such as sex, acceptance, prestige, and popularity. 
o This advertising mania becomes known as “boosterism,” a 
phenomenon epitomized by Bruce Barton’s best-selling 1925 
book, The Man Nobody Knows, which portrayed Jesus as the 
greatest advertising executive and businessman in history. 

The era also witnessed the rise of installment buying as a way for 
the middle and lower classes to afford all these new items. 
A Cultural Revolution

This economic boom would both feed and be fed by the continuing 
urbanization of the United States. In the 1920s, urban dwellers 
outnumbered rural dwellers for the ﬁ rst time. Helping to spread the 
new urban culture was the mass media that emerged during this era, 
most notably radio and motion pictures. These would also create 
new national heroes. 

111

Radio contributed to the rise of spectator sports as a big business, 
both professional and collegiate. Especially noteworthy in the 
professional realm was baseball, which became the national pastime 
and made heroes of Babe Ruth and other players. 

With the advent of sound, the movie industry exploded in the 1920s, 
with 100 million out of a population of 120 million attending at 
least one movie each week. Movies also played a major role in 
the expansion of American culture overseas and created their own 
national heroes in movie stars. 
Government Actions in the 1920s

The economic boom was fed by government assistance and other 
moves to help business and, thereby, create prosperity for all. As 
emphasized in a previous lecture, this was no “return” to a 19th-
century laissez-faire approach, nor were the government’s efforts to 
expand prosperity on a global scale isolationist. 

The 1920s witnessed a return to Republican dominance in national 
politics and the election of what are usually considered three highly 
conservative presidents whose administrations supposedly hearken 
back to the late 19th century: Warren Harding, Calvin Coolidge, and 
Herbert Hoover. 

Each of these administrations also retains a stigma in historical 
memory: Harding’s for corruption, Coolidge’s for not heeding 
warning signs about the state of the economy, and Hoover’s for 
failure to act in the ensuing economic collapse. In reality, these 
reputations are not fully deserved, and they distort the records of 
all three. 

All three administrations believed in using the World War I 
experiences in government-business cooperation to foster even 
greater cooperation (rather than regulation) as a means to greater 
growth, efﬁ ciency, prosperity, and peace. Positive action in this 
regard included lowering taxes, raising protective tariffs, and 

112
Lecture 16: The Roaring Twenties Reconsidered
providing federal aid for state roads and a plan for a national 
highway system. 

Government itself became more efﬁ cient via the Budget and 
Accounting Act, which established a director of the budget and 
enabled the executive to plan and produce a uniﬁ ed, coherent 
national budget. 

Progressivism was not dead in the 1920s either: Thirty-four states 
passed worker’s compensation laws, and women obtained the right 
to vote in this decade. At the same time, the immigration restriction 
supported by Progressives achieved its most notable success with 
the passage of the National Origins Act of 1924, and scientiﬁ c 
racism spread. The 1920s was also the decade of continued 
government assaults on American and immigrant Leftists, known as 
the ﬁ rst great Red Scare. 

Prohibition was also a Progressive reform. The Eighteenth 
Amendment to the Constitution passed in 1919, along with the 
Prohibition represents just one of many Progressive reforms carried over into 
the 1920s.
© Getty Images/Thinkstock Images/Comstock/Thinkstock.

113
Volstead Act, and went into effect the following year—with such 
well-known consequences as the rise of bootleg whiskey and 
organized crime. 

Hoover, who was a key ﬁ gure before his own presidency as 
Harding’s and Coolidge’s secretary of commerce, had been a 
famous Wilsonian Progressive and, in many ways, remained one. 
o In the 1920s, Hoover actively used his commerce department 
to help American corporations ﬁ nd new and expanded overseas 
markets. Along with the state department, the commerce 
department also promoted overseas investment. 
o Most notable in this regard was the Dawes Plan, whereby the 
United States loaned money to Germany and negotiated a 
linked reparations repayment schedule with France and Britain, 
ending a major European crisis. This was hardly isolationism, 
despite the continued refusal of the United States to join the 
League of Nations. 

Similarly, the state department, under secretaries Charles Evans 
Hughes and Frank B. Kellogg, was active in promoting and signing 
a series of treaties to help preserve the peace and prosperity of 
the era. These included naval arms limitation agreements and 
the 1928 Kellogg-Briand Pact, outlawing war as an instrument of 
national policy. 
Culture Clashes

The 1920s saw major clashes between the newly emerging national 
urban culture and traditional American rural culture. 
o At its 1924 national convention, for example, the Democratic 
Party split badly between its northern urban and southern rural 
wings over who to nominate and such issues as Prohibition and 
condemnation of the revived Ku Klux Klan. 
o The conﬂ ict over the presidential candidate, pitting New York’s 
“wet” Governor Al Smith against the “dry” Protestant William 
McAdoo, left the convention deadlocked for an incredible 102 

114
Lecture 16: The Roaring Twenties Reconsidered
ballots before a lackluster compromise candidate could be 
nominated on the 103rd. 

Equally if not more telling is the famous Scopes trial in Dayton, 
Tennessee, where the state had outlawed the teaching of evolution. 
o High school biology teacher John Scopes challenged the law, 
was arrested, and was convicted at the trial. 
o But Scopes was quickly forgotten in the duel that emerged 
between William Jennings Bryan, who stood as an expert Bible 
witness for the prosecution, and the prominent lawyer for the 
defense, Clarence Darrow. Darrow humiliated Bryan and his 
cause by mocking his literal interpretation of creation, but at 
least as telling was the rural-urban enmity that surfaced during 
the trial. 
A Multifaceted Era

Historians now recognize the 1920s as much more complex and 
multifaceted than the traditional popular image of the era. 

It was conservative in many ways, as in the passing of the 1921 
Revenue Act that eliminated an excess-proﬁ ts tax and dramatically 
lowered the income tax rate on the wealthy. But it can also be seen 
as both a continuation of portions of the Progressive era and the 
birth of the modern American economy and urban culture. 

We also see an active foreign policy in this era—despite the 
American refusal to join the League of Nations—beﬁ tting a nation 
with the largest economy in the world. At the same time, we see the 
continued development of a government-business partnership, both 
domestically and in foreign affairs, designed to achieve the twin 
goals of peace and prosperity. 

In most areas, the result was an incredibly peaceful and prosperous 
United States and world—probably the most peaceful and 
prosperous decade of the 20th century and the one in which the 
United States was more secure than in any other decade of the 

115
20th century. But all of this depended on the continued health and 
growth of the American economy, which would collapse in late 
1929, transforming both the United States and the world. 
Allen, Only Yesterday. 
Heilbroner, The Worldly Philosophers.
Wilson, Herbert Hoover.
1. Why did the 1920s gain a reputation for “normalcy” and conservatism, 
and what alternative words better describe the decade?
2. What ideas and policies from the 1920s do we still live with today?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

116
Lecture 17: Hoover and the Great Depression Revisited
Hoover and the Great Depression Revisited 
Lecture 17
H
erbert Hoover is generally considered an abject failure as president 
for his refusal to deal aggressively with the Great Depression, yet he 
did more than any previous president to combat serious economic 
decline. In fact, he began many programs that would later be associated with 
the New Deal of Franklin Roosevelt, the man whose programs he would 
sharply attack. This lecture will take another look at Hoover to try to explain 
the reasons for the discrepancy between his record and his reputation. 
Hoover’s Pre-Presidential Career

Herbert Hoover started his career as a mining engineer and 
developed a reputation as an effective and efﬁ cient administrator 
and humanitarian. He was considered to be a Progressive with great 
political possibilities—and both parties courted him. He chose to 
be a Republican and was a major ﬁ gure in the administrations of 
Harding and Coolidge as secretary of commerce. 

In this position, Hoover exempliﬁ ed the continued Progressivism 
and organizational revolution of the 1920s. He personiﬁ ed the 
new managers and social engineers who worshiped efﬁ ciency 
and business-government cooperation. In 1928, he optimistically 
predicted that the nation would soon see an end to poverty.

Hoover easily defeated his Democratic opponent, Al Smith, in the 
1928 election. But his prediction about ending poverty proved to be 
anything but accurate as the stock market, the American economy, 
and the global economy all collapsed from 1929 to 1932. 
Causes of the Great Depression

As numerous historians have noted, a mass production society 
requires mass consumption, and although the United States had 
become a consumer society by the late 1920s, its consumption was 
not adequate. 

117
o One reason for underconsumption was the fact that the great 
prosperity of the 1920s was not shared by all; 40 to 60 percent 
of the population lived below the marginal subsistence level. 
o Compounding this problem was an unsound corporate structure 
in which 200 of the 400,000 corporations in the nation owned 
43 percent of the national wealth. That led to price rigidity 
despite a lack of consumer purchasing power and a “pyramid” 
structure that could collapse entirely via a chain reaction. 

The banking structure was equally unsound, with thousands of 
local, unstable, and unregulated banks. The Federal Reserve 
System, still in its infancy, was underutilized and had little or no 
control over many of these banks. The Fed’s 1927 policies actually 
played a role in bringing about the collapse, and in the wake of the 
collapse, it made the situation worse by pursuing adverse policies.

All of this was aggravated by unprecedented speculation in the 
stock market because of the lack of investment opportunities and 
the belief that the market would always go up. 

The international economic and ﬁ nancial structure was equally 
unstable as a result of World War I and its aftermath. Both the 
United States and other industrialized nations had instituted higher 
tariffs in the 1920s, but that led to a decline in international trade—
which led to more economic strains, the withdrawal of foreign 
funds from the United States, and eventually, the withdrawal of 
U.S. funds from overseas. 

Installment buying and the creation of artiﬁ cial demand via 
advertising masked these problems, postponing the day of 
reckoning and worsening the situation. 
The Stock Market Boom

Why did the stock market continue to boom with the economy 
already in serious trouble by 1928? 

118
Lecture 17: Hoover and the Great Depression Revisited

With consumer demand saturated, corporate proﬁ ts from the 1920s 
went into stock speculation rather than plant and machinery. And 
because there was less corporate demand for expansion loans, 
banks loaned more money for stock purchases.

Much of this money went not into direct stock purchases but into 
call loans—loans that stock brokers make to customers at a high 
interest rate to enable customers to buy stock on margin (putting 
down only a percentage of the purchase price). This is actually a 
form of installment buying applied to the stock market.

The Federal Reserve made matters worse by lowering the rediscount 
rate at which banks could borrow in 1927. With such easy credit, 
banks borrowed from the Fed at a low 3.5 percent rate and then 
reloaned the money to the call market for 10 percent or higher. 

The entire stock market boom had no economic foundation on 
which to rest; it was a bubble fueled by the belief that the market 
would go up forever, with previous shocks dismissed since they
had stopped. 
The Results of the Crash

Panic in the market hit full blast during the last week of October 
1929. Stocks would lose one-third of their value in three months. 
The crash didn’t cause the Depression, but it made the situation 
substantially worse. 

The loss of stock money wiped out purchasing power and led to 
bank failures. No loans were available, and industries were forced 
to cut back on production, which meant layoffs, lower wages, and 
even less purchasing power. 

The banking system as a whole began to collapse in late 1930, with 
a total of 1,352 banks failing by the end of the year. That led to runs 
on other banks, requiring them to call in loans and sell assets to 
meet those runs. That, in turn, drove down the value of other assets 
and further contracted the money supply and tightened credit. 

119

In 1931, the European ﬁ nancial structure began to collapse, a 
result of the drying up of U.S. loans, which led to the drying up of 
German reparations to World War I Allies that had been linked to 
those loans. 

At ﬁ rst, the Federal 
Reserve 
did 
nothing 
to 
save 
the 
banks. 
Eventually, 
it 
raised 
the rediscount rate to 
stop the outﬂ ow of 
gold, which is exactly 
the opposite of what it 
should have done. 
Hoover Steps In

Earlier 
ﬁ nancial 
collapses and economic 
depressions 
in 
U.S. 
history had been viewed 
as a normal part of the 
business cycle and part 
of the market’s self-
correcting 
mechanism 
via 
Adam 
Smith’s 
“invisible hand.” The 
traditional response of the government had been to do nothing and 
let the market correct itself, but Hoover did not accept this logic. 

Hoover came up with a program that reﬂ ected his belief in the 
so-called “associational society”—voluntary groups for rational, 
scientiﬁ c planning, with government to stimulate and encourage 
such groups but not dictate to them. Hoover held a series of 
conferences with business and labor leaders to reach voluntary 
agreements to keep production and wages up. 
Herbert Hoover, widely criticized for his 
failure to take action in the face of the 
Great Depression, actually did more 
than previous presidents had to combat 
economic decline.
Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division. 

120
Lecture 17: Hoover and the Great Depression Revisited

For agriculture, he used the just-passed Agricultural Marketing 
Act of 1929, establishing the Federal Farm Board, to promote 
agricultural cooperatives and stabilization corporations that agreed 
to limit production (with limited ability to buy surplus). 

Hoover also supported the Smoot-Hawley Tariff—the highest tariff 
in U.S. history—to eliminate external competition for agriculture, 
encourage business, and restore conﬁ dence. 

He agreed to a modest public works program to provide some jobs 
and encouraged state and local public works projects via the 1932 
Emergency Relief and Construction Act. 

He supported voluntary programs to provide loans to endangered 
ﬁ nancial institutions, with sound banks providing funds to banks
in trouble. 

When these programs failed to end the Depression, Hoover went 
even further, taking direct government action that marked a shift 
from his previous insistence on volunteerism. Measures included 
the Glass-Steagall Act (to address frozen assets), the Federal 
Home Loan Bank Act, and the institution of the Reconstruction
Finance Corporation. 
Hoover’s Reputation

Given these efforts, why does Hoover have such a “do-nothing” 
reputation? Part of the explanation can be found in Democratic 
campaign propaganda of the 1930s, and part of it is the fact that 
later New Deal measures that went further than Hoover made his 
efforts appear nearly nonexistent in comparison. In this regard, 
future events distort our understanding of what Hoover did during 
his presidency. 

Equally important was Hoover’s own behavior from 1929 to 1932. 
Rather than a deeply respected efﬁ ciency expert, as he had seemed 
in good times, Hoover came across as cold during the Depression. 
He also consistently made optimistic statements that were at odds 

121
with reality, believing that he needed to restore conﬁ dence in what 
was basically a sound system. 

It’s important to realize that Hoover had a tremendous fear of 
what would happen if government began to dictate policy. For this 
reason, he stuck with a voluntary, cooperative approach (at least at 
ﬁ rst), which failed because the agreements made could not be kept. 

In addition, and linked to this fear of the consequences of having 
the government dictate policy, Hoover adamantly refused to supply 
federal relief, believing it would destroy individual initiative and 
the American system. In this refusal, the great humanitarian came 
to be perceived as inhuman.

To make matters worse, Hoover refused to take additional measures 
to provide federal aid to business. He rejected the so-called Swope 
Plan for an operation similar to what would become the New 
Deal’s National Recovery Administration because of his fear of 
government control. 

If anything, Hoover became even more ideologically and 
personally rigid as a result of being forced into the drastic measures 
of 1931–1932. That rigidity can be seen in his continued support 
of Prohibition and his defense of the U.S. Army’s attack on the 
marchers of the Bonus Army—World War I veterans who had come 
to Washington to demand early payment of the bonus granted them 
in the 1920s.
Perceptions Distorted by Future Events

Our understanding of Herbert Hoover and his policies has been 
seriously distorted by a number of factors beyond the failure 
of his programs: the propaganda of his political opponents, 
later government measures that made his efforts appear almost 
nonexistent, and his own later attacks on those measures. In this 
regard, future events distorted our perceptions of what Hoover did 
from 1929–1933 and who he was. 

122
Lecture 17: Hoover and the Great Depression Revisited

Equally important was Hoover’s own behavior, most notably his 
ideological rigidity, which made him appear cold, heartless, and 
willing to save banks and big business but not the people. 

All of Hoover’s intelligence, training, and experiences were, if 
anything, counterproductive. He is not alone in having had such 
an experience as president. Indeed, it is interesting to note that two 
of the brightest men elected president in the 20th century—both of 
whom were failures as presidents and were not reelected—were 
engineers: Hoover and Jimmy Carter. Intelligence and ability in 
the areas of engineering and administration, it appears, may not 
translate into success in the political realm. 
Heilbroner, The Worldly Philosophers.
Wilson, Herbert Hoover. 
1. How does the contemporary economic situation compare with what took 
place during the Great Depression? What similarities and differences do 
you note?
2. Given Hoover’s failure as president despite his proven abilities, what 
personal characteristics are needed for success in the presidency?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

123
What Did Roosevelt’s New Deal Really Do? 
Lecture 18
F
ranklin D. Roosevelt is simultaneously one of the most beloved and 
one of the most hated presidents in U.S. history. Despite what his 
critics say, Roosevelt and the New Deal did not destroy economic or 
political liberty in the United States, but it is equally true that the New Deal 
spawned many of the political and economic problems we now face. In this 
lecture, we will look at the New Deal in detail, noting a host of unintended 
consequences that resulted from its implementation. 
Ending the Immediate Crisis

Franklin Roosevelt was elected amid the greatest economic crisis 
in U.S. history. On inauguration day, March 4, 1933, the Great 
Depression had brought the economic and ﬁ nancial life of the 
country to a virtual standstill. 

The new president’s ﬁ rst and most important goal was to end 
the ﬁ nancial crisis, primarily by psychological means that would 
restore people’s conﬁ dence and prevent further runs on the banks. 
In this, he was quickly successful. 

On the day after his inauguration, Roosevelt used a World War I–
era law to close all banks in the country that were still open in order 
to prevent more runs and a total ﬁ nancial collapse. He ingeniously 
labeled the measure a “bank holiday” and then disappeared with 
his staff to draft legislation that would provide for government 
inspection and assistance to reopen sound banks. 

On March 12, Roosevelt gave the ﬁ rst of his famous “ﬁ reside 
chats” over the radio; 60 million Americans heard him say that 
the banking system was sound and the banks would reopen on the 
following day. On March 13, people lined up at the banks, not to 
withdraw their funds but to make deposits! The immediate ﬁ nancial 
and psychological crises were over. 

124
Lecture 18: What Did Roosevelt’s New Deal Really Do?
Relief, Recovery, and Reform

Beyond ending the immediate crisis, Roosevelt and his advisers 
sought to achieve three fundamental goals—the “three Rs” of relief, 
recovery, and reform. 

To this end, Roosevelt proposed 15 major bills in the ﬁ rst few 
weeks of his administration, all of which Congress passed. These 
included the Agricultural Adjustment Act, the National Industrial 
Recovery Act, the Homeowners Loan Act, and others. 

In 1935–1936, Roosevelt and Congress went much further, passing 
the bills of the Second New Deal, including a massive public works 
program, the Social Security Act, the Wagner Labor Relations Act 
(establishing the National Labor Relations Board), higher taxes 
on the wealthy, rural electriﬁ cation, and more federal control over 
banking and public utilities. 

These bills from both New Deals were only partially successful in 
achieving the three Rs. 
o In the First New Deal, the downward spiral was halted and 
recovery started, but the recovery stalled by 1934. 
o As a result of the Second New Deal measures, additional and 
major recovery took place, and the economy was nearing its 
1929 levels by the end of Roosevelt’s ﬁ rst term. But most of the 
gains were then wiped out by a major recession in 1937–1938. 
o The New Deal’s relief bills succeeded in helping many of those 
who were suffering the most, but they were too modest to help 
all. And New Deal recovery policies simultaneously made the 
economic situation worse for many people. 
Roosevelt’s Thinking

Roosevelt may well be the greatest politician the United States has 
ever produced, but for that very reason, he is extremely difﬁ cult to 
ﬁ gure out. He was a master manipulator of people, with a front of 
jovial simplemindedness masking a complex and secretive interior. 

125

Ideas and consistency were not important to Roosevelt, and he was 
not a deep thinker. He also had a short attention span but a mind, 
according to one biographer, “like ﬂ ypaper.” 

He was willing to experiment and see what worked, but his 
experimentation had severe limits. He had no socialist or Marxian 
ideas and was actually a conservative man who wanted to preserve 
the 
essentials 
of 
the 
American system. 

Roosevelt’s expertise was 
in getting ideas accepted 
by both Congress and 
the American people. In 
this, he was a political 
and a media genius, but 
his programs often made 
more political sense than 
economic sense. 

His 
advisers, 
known 
as 
the 
Brain 
Trust, 
disagreed sharply in their 
recommendations. All had 
roots in the Progressive 
era and believed government had the responsibility to ensure some 
sort of security for all, but there was no unity regarding the speciﬁ c 
policies needed. 

Contrary to popular mythology, most of the reformers associated 
with Roosevelt wanted a balanced budget and did not believe 
in massive deﬁ cit spending to create purchasing power, as 
recommended by the British economist John Maynard Keynes. 

The result of Roosevelt’s thinking and style of government was a 
hodge-podge of legislation, all concerned with the three Rs but with 
different emphases at different times. 
Roosevelt’s New Deal was much 
more conservative than is generally 
recognized; indeed, its initial emphasis 
was on government planning in 
conjunction with big business.
Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division.

126
Lecture 18: What Did Roosevelt’s New Deal Really Do?
Limited Recovery and Opposition

The recovery of the First New Deal was quite limited, primarily 
because of the competing nature of the spending programs and 
the continued ﬁ scal conservatism of Roosevelt, his advisers,
and Congress.

The goal of the First New Deal remained a balanced budget, as seen 
in the early legislation to cut federal spending and increase revenues 
via a tax on beer and wine. Contrary to the myths, there was no great 
increase in government and deﬁ cit spending at this time.

The relief measures were too limited to generate full employment 
and, thus, full recovery, and were often at cross-purposes with the 
recovery measures.

Early failures made Roosevelt willing to experiment with more 
drastic measures in 1935–1936. At the same time, despite the 
pro-business orientation of some New Deal legislation, business 
turned against Roosevelt as the immediate crisis receded. He also 
came under attack from the Left and faced growing militancy
among farmers, newly unionized industrial workers, and 
congressional Democrats.

As if all that was not enough, in 1935, the Supreme Court declared 
both the National Industrial Recovery Act and the Agricultural 
Adjustment Act, the centerpieces of the First New Deal’s recovery 
legislation, unconstitutional. 
The Second New Deal

Under the impact of these attacks and threats, Roosevelt swung to 
the Left in 1935–1936 and sided with both the anti–big business 
New Freedomites and the big spenders in the Brain Trust. 

The Second New Deal measures—particularly the heavy deﬁ cit 
spending and subsequent employment of millions of workers in 
work-relief projects—raised the economy nearly back to its 1929 
levels and lowered unemployment to 14 percent. 

127

As with the First New Deal, however, these measures were 
much less radical than they appeared and negatively affected
many Americans. 

Roosevelt made clear that he was not in favor of long-term relief, 
and he never called for an egalitarian society. One of his foremost 
biographers labeled him more a British-style classic conservative 
than a Progressive or liberal. 
Major Recession, 1937–1938

Contrary to the mythology, Roosevelt never accepted Keynesian 
concepts of deﬁ cit spending. He saw any deﬁ cit spending as 
a temporary expedient and remained ﬁ rmly committed to the 
balanced budget. 

After his 1936 reelection, he incorrectly concluded that the 
Depression was over and tried to balance the budget by cutting 
government spending, with deep cuts in work-relief expenditures. 

At the same time, the new Social Security tax removed another $2 
billion of potential spending money, with no beneﬁ ts due until 1940. 
And the Federal Reserve, fearing inﬂ ation, contracted the money 
supply by increasing reserve requirements for member banks. 

The result was a major recession in 1937–1938 that wiped out many 
of the gains of Roosevelt’s ﬁ rst term. 

In 1937, Roosevelt’s ill-considered attempt to “pack” the Supreme 
Court broke his political hold over Congress and led to cries of 
dictatorship, in effect ending the New Deal after a ﬁ nal burst of 
legislation in 1938. Full recovery was not reached until 1941 and 
then largely under the impact of World War II. 
The Real Results of the New Deal

Clearly, the New Deal did not end the Great Depression; World 
War II did. Nor did it establish socialism, accept and institute 
massive deﬁ cit spending (that happened only during World War II), 

128
Lecture 18: What Did Roosevelt’s New Deal Really Do?
redistribute wealth, or change the basics of the American capitalist 
system. In retrospect, it was quite conservative in what it attempted 
to do. 

But that is only part of the story. It did not appear conservative 
at the time, and it had an enormous impact on almost all 
aspects of American life. Although some of these consequences 
were planned, many were examples of the historical law of
unintended consequences.

The New Deal stopped the downward economic spiral in the 
United States and achieved a good measure of recovery. As 
such, it may well have prevented a total collapse of the capitalist 
economic system and the American democratic political system. 
It also experimented and, in the process, created a new role for 
government in people’s lives and the modern American government 
and economy—the so-called “welfare state.”

During the New Deal, power shifted from Wall Street to 
Washington, with the president becoming the nation’s “chief 
economic engineer.” Two of the negative results of this shift were 
a hodge-podge economic system and a growth in executive and 
federal power that has proven quite dangerous to the constitutional 
system of checks and balances. 

Although the New Deal did not redistribute wealth, it clearly 
brought previously “forgotten” groups into American politics and 
cultural life: labor, the elderly, the unemployed, and immigrant 
groups from eastern and southern Europe. Its pro-union stand 
broke with previous government policy and helped to create the 
largest middle class in history. Its impact on American agriculture, 
however, was mixed, as were its effects on African Americans
and women.

The New Deal helped to reassert an ethic of social consciousness 
in arts, letters, and society in general and pioneered government 
patronage of the arts. It also ﬁ rmly established the Progressive 

129
concept of using experts in government and brought intellectuals 
back into government service. 

Politically, the New Deal made the Democrats the majority party 
of the country and created the Democratic coalition that would 
dominate U.S. politics for the next 40 to 50 years. 

This mixed bag of results should not blind us to all that the New 
Deal accomplished. In a nutshell, it gave us the American economic 
and political systems we still live with—and argue about—today, 
with all of their successes and problems. 
Heilbroner, The Worldly Philosophers.
Kennedy, Freedom from Fear.
Sitkoff, ed., Fifty Years Later.
1. If the New Deal, in retrospect, was so conservative, why did 
conservatives condemn it and label it radical?
2. What 
personal 
characteristics 
led 
to 
Roosevelt’s 
enormous 
popularity and success as a president, especially in comparison to his
predecessor, Hoover? 
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

130
Lecture 19: World War II Misconceptions and Myths
World War II Misconceptions and Myths 
Lecture 19
W
orld War II remains one of the most popular of all U.S. history 
subjects, but the version of the war that exists in our collective 
memory is ﬁ lled with misconceptions and myths. Unfortunately, 
these myths have dominated our worldview ever since 1945 and have heavily 
inﬂ uenced, often disastrously, our foreign and military policies. This lecture 
explains how some of these myths developed and challenges them with a 
comparison to the actual history of the war.
Myths about the Origins of World War II

The standard approach to the origins of World War II holds that it 
was caused by dictators in Germany, Italy, and Japan who illegally 
seized power against the will of their peoples, sought to conquer the 
world, and combined into the Axis alliance for that purpose. 

They were aided in their efforts by the disastrous British and 
French policy of appeasement, a policy indirectly reinforced by 
American isolationism in the two decades between World War I and
World War II. 

The Axis powers came close to total victory in 1940–1941 but 
were stopped by belated American recognition of the threat they 
posed and the ensuing decision to aid militarily those nations still 
ﬁ ghting the Axis. That, in turn, led the Axis powers to make war on 
the United States via the Japanese sneak attack on the U.S. ﬂ eet at
Pearl Harbor. 
The Reality of the War’s Origins

The historical reality regarding the origins of the war is quite 
different, on at least seven major points. 

First of all, it is a misnomer even to think about a single war before 
December 1941. In effect, what began in the years 1931–1941 

131
was a series of regional and largely unconnected wars in Asia and 
Europe that became partially fused in late 1941. 

Second, the Axis dictators did not seize power against the will of 
their peoples. Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini, and Tōjō Hideki all 
took power with the acquiescence and/or connivance of the existing 
powers in their countries. 
o It’s important to understand, in this regard, the enormous 
worldwide appeal during the interwar years of the ideology of 
fascism. This ideology held that true freedom lay in acting as 
part of a group, not individually, with a single dictatorial leader 
serving as the incarnation of the group’s spirit. 
o Fascism arose and gained enormous popularity during the 
interwar years as a result of World War I and the Great 
Depression, which was viewed as the failure of capitalism
and democracy. 

Third, despite their common ideology, the Axis powers were 
united in name only. Their alliance was basically a diplomatic bluff 
designed to scare potential adversaries into inaction via the threat of 
having to ﬁ ght all of them rather than just one. 

Fourth, as we’ve seen, the United States was not isolationist during 
this period. Despite its refusal to join the League of Nations in 
1919–1920, it remained active in world affairs throughout the 
interwar years. 

Fifth, appeasement was not a new policy during the 1930s, nor a 
dirty word. It was, and still is, one of the oldest practices in the 
history of diplomacy. The British had practiced it vis-à-vis Germany 
during the 1920s and 1930s, as had the Americans. 
o The problem in the 1930s was that Hitler was unappeasable. 
Successful appeasement is usually based on shared desires 
and values, something totally absent when Hitler dealt with 
the British. 

132
Lecture 19: World War II Misconceptions and Myths
o Earlier appeasement, especially at Munich in 1938 with regard 
to Czechoslovakia, had helped Hitler by allowing him to begin 
the war enormously strengthened, but it also helped the British. 
It enabled them to be much better prepared from a military 
standpoint in 1939 than they had been at the time of Munich 
and to go to war with the full backing of the Commonwealth 
countries and the British public.

Sixth, the Axis bid for total victory in 1940–1941 was halted not by 
American material aid but by the continued and successful resistance 
of the Chinese in Asia and of the British and Russians in Europe. 

Finally, the attack on Pearl Harbor was not brought on by U.S. 
aid to the Allied countries but by American economic sanctions 
against Japan in 1940–1941, combined with opportunities created 
by Hitler’s European victories for the Japanese to pursue access 
to resources in Southeast Asia. The attack on Pearl Harbor was 
designed to remove the threat presented by the U.S. ﬂ eet to further 
Japanese conquests, and neither Hitler nor Roosevelt had anything 
to do with its conception or launch.
Myths about Fighting the War and “Losing” the Peace

Our collective memory holds that the United States was primarily—
and almost singlehandedly—responsible for total military victory 
over the Axis powers. 
o We provided our allies with critical military supplies free of 
charge via the lend-lease program, while undertaking a massive 
military and economic mobilization that placed more than 15 
million Americans in uniform and enabled us to equip them 
and our allies simultaneously. 
o We then deployed our uniformed forces around the world, 
destroying the German and Italian armies in major battles in 
North Africa, Italy, and western Europe and the Japanese army 
and navy in the central and southwest Paciﬁ c theaters. 

133
o At the same time, our air forces smashed German and Japanese 
war production and cities, culminating in the atomic bombs that 
destroyed Hiroshima and Nagasaki and ended the Paciﬁ c war. 

Our collective memory also holds that during the war, the American 
people realized we had made a terrible mistake by refusing to 
join the League of Nations at the end of World War I and that we 
had been granted a chance to correct this error by joining a new 
international collective security organization, the United Nations. 
This time, however, there would be no talk of disarmament. 

Roosevelt’s great failure, Americans would soon argue, had been 
in not seeing a new Hitler in his Soviet wartime ally, Joseph 
Stalin, along with his naïve and futile attempt to appease Stalin, 
most notoriously at the 1945 Yalta Conference. There, Roosevelt 
supposedly gave away half the world to the Soviet dictator. The 
result of such naïveté and appeasement was the Cold War. 
The American understanding of World War II is riddled with myths about the 
war’s origins, our country’s contributions, and our naïveté in negotiating the 
occupation of postwar Germany with Stalin.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

134
Lecture 19: World War II Misconceptions and Myths
The Reality of the Fighting and the Peace

World War II was not won by the United States alone but by an 
Allied coalition whose other members contributed at least as much 
as our country. 
o The 15 million Americans in uniform constituted only 12 
percent of the U.S. population and only 25 percent of the total 
Allied forces during the war. The United States did, however, 
produce more than 50 percent of the war material used to 
defeat the Axis powers. 
o At least as important as the U.S. contribution was the 
contribution of Great Britain and the Commonwealth 
countries, which played a major role in every victory claimed 
by the Americans in the North African, Mediterranean, and
European theaters. 
o Although the British remain tremendously grateful for the 
American aid they received, it is important to note that the war 
would have ended in total German victory in 1940 without 
the British success in ﬁ ghting alone in 1940–1941 and that, in 
British minds, we traded our weapons for British blood during 
that time. 
o It’s also true that the Soviets’ contribution to victory, and their 
ensuing casualties, dwarfed those of both the United States and 
Great Britain. 

As for Roosevelt’s attempts to appease Stalin at Yalta, it’s important 
to note that Yalta was a wartime conference, not a postwar
peace conference. 
o Its accords were wartime agreements designed to maintain the 
alliance until the Axis had been totally defeated and to keep the 
alliance together in the postwar era so that the Germans could 
not rise again to start a third world war. 
o Roosevelt did not “give away” to Stalin any territory occupied 
by U.S. soldiers. Indeed, he struck some favorable bargains 

135
with the Soviet dictator, despite the relative weakness of his 
military hand. 
Why Do We Sustain Our Myths?

Many of our myths about World War II reinforce our preconceived 
ideological notions. Our faith in democratic elections, for example, 
is directly challenged by the fact that voters made the Nazis the 
largest party in Germany during the early 1930s. It’s much easier to 
say that Hitler seized power than to admit this. 

Other myths reinforce our misconceptions about ourselves, such as 
the belief that we were ever truly isolationist or naïve. 

The overestimation of the American contribution to victory also 
reﬂ ects a traditional ethnocentrism shared by our allies, as well 
as a desire to downplay the critical Soviet contribution to victory. 
Admitting that the victory depended on alliance with a bloody 
dictator would challenge our view of the “Good War.” 

In addition to these factors, conspiracy theories, such as those 
about Pearl Harbor, feed into what the historian Richard Hofstadter 
labeled the “paranoid style” in American politics. They also reﬂ ect 
an anachronistic projection of contemporary knowledge of events 
onto policymakers of the past who did not have such knowledge. 
The Yalta myths feed into this paranoid style and the anachronistic 
projection of later events, as well. 

In addition, there appears to be a natural tendency to make and 
misuse historical analogies to support preconceived notions and 
plans. In this regard, the myths and misconceptions about the war 
have proven useful in justifying American policies since the war. 
o Almost every president since Franklin Roosevelt has used 
World War II myths in the collective memory to justify his own 
policies: Truman in Korea; Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, 
and Nixon in Vietnam; Kennedy in Cuba; and both Bushes
in Iraq. 

136
Lecture 19: World War II Misconceptions and Myths
o Many if not most American policymakers believe the myths as 
much as the public does. But these events—in Korea, Vietnam, 
Cuba, and Iraq—had nothing to do with the reality of World 
War II, and relying on this historical analogy has consistently 
led to tragedy. 
o Indeed, those tragedies emphasize the fact that faulty 
perceptions of history are in some ways more important than 
what actually happened—because people act on the basis of 
their perceptions. And when perceptions differ so dramatically 
from historical reality, the results can indeed be tragic. 
Adams, The Best War Ever.
Clausewitz, On War. 
Kennedy, Freedom from Fear.
Weinberg, “Some Myths of World War II.”
1. Why are historical conspiracy theories so popular despite the fact that 
most of them cannot stand up to serious scrutiny?
2. Exactly how have presidents during the last 65 years used World War II 
myths, misconceptions, and analogies to justify their policies?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

137
Was the Cold War Inevitable? 
Lecture 20
W
e shouldn’t be surprised by the fact that some of the World War 
II myths discussed in the last lecture feed into myths about the 
Soviet-American conﬂ ict known as the Cold War. It’s not true, 
however, that the Cold War could have been avoided if Roosevelt had not 
been naïve at Yalta or that the conﬂ ict was inevitable. In this lecture, we will 
explore how and why this conﬂ ict took place and lasted for as long as it did. 
Conﬂ icting Histories and Ideologies

Russia and the United States always possessed diametrically 
opposed political systems: centralized autocratic tyranny versus 
decentralized democracy. Despite this difference, the two countries 
had been friendly throughout the late 18th century and most of the 
19th century because their interests did not collide and because they 
shared a common enemy, Great Britain. 

Still, there were predictions in the 19th century that the two 
expansionist powers would eventually come into conﬂ ict, and these 
predictions became a reality at the end of the 19th century when the 
interests of the two nations collided in Manchuria. 

Ideology became much more of a factor in the conﬂ ict as a result of 
the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution, which established the communist 
government in Russia. 
o This took place at the very moment that Woodrow Wilson was 
restating and expanding the American mission to re-create the 
world in its own image. 
o The two nations thus had diametrically opposed and 
universalist ideologies, with each one claiming to negate the 
validity of the other. 

138
Lecture 20: Was the Cold War Inevitable?
Changes Wrought by World War II

None of these differences prevented Russia and the United States 
from collaborating effectively as allies, along with Great Britain, 
during World War II. What changed in 1945 was the fact that 
they succeeded in defeating Nazi Germany and Japan. With their 
common enemies gone, there was nothing to offset their differing 
interests and ideologies. 

The world in which the two nations existed also changed 
dramatically after World War II. The Allied victory had created a 
massive and unprecedented global power vacuum at the same time 
that the United States and the Soviet Union became superpowers. 
As their differences became obvious after the Axis defeat, each 
began to see the other as its major adversary. 

Each also tended to view the other through the prism of the events 
they had just lived through and, thus, as potentially similar to the 
Nazi enemy they had just defeated. The historical lessons they took 
from that experience were never to “appease” and to negotiate only
from positions of military strength. 

Further, each viewed its own ensuing actions as defensive reactions 
to the aggression of the other, thereby leading to a constant escalation
of conﬂ ict. 
Superpower Conﬂ ict, 1945–1946

Given these factors, it is far from surprising that conﬂ ict between 
the two superpowers quickly erupted and escalated from
1945–1946. 

First came conﬂ ict over the boundaries and government of Poland, 
with cries on each side that the other was breaking the Yalta 
Accords. This was quickly followed by conﬂ ict over policies in 
occupied Germany. 

The American dropping of the atomic bomb without informing the 
Soviets heightened their suspicions and fears of the United States, 

139
as did the later discovery of communist spies in the wartime project 
to develop the bomb. 

The activities of local communist parties in Europe simultaneously 
heightened American suspicions and fears. Those parties had 
gained enormously in power and prestige because of their anti-Nazi 
resistance activities during the war, but Americans perceived them 
as stalking horses for the Soviets.

In 1947, when Britain informed the United States that it could no 
longer afford to support the Greek government against communist 
guerrillas or Turkey against Soviet pressure, the United States—
with the famous Truman Doctrine—replaced the British in both 
countries and announced a global policy to “support free peoples 
who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by 
outside pressures.” 
The Marshall Plan and Containment

With the failure of the foreign ministers conference in Moscow in 
1947, Secretary of State George C. Marshall proposed the European 
recovery program that bears his name: the Marshall Plan. 
o The plan would include the economic rebuilding of Germany, 
which Stalin feared and opposed. Stalin interpreted the plan as 
designed to disrupt his empire in Eastern Europe.
o Consequently, he refused to participate in the recovery program 
and forced his East European satellites to do the same. 

Later in 1947, in an effort to halt the rebuilding of Germany and 
the formation of a West German government, Stalin instituted 
a blockade of the western zones of Berlin. That move led to the 
Berlin airlift by the United States, escalated the formation of a West 
German government, and led to the formation of NATO by 1949. 

All of this was part of the new American policy enunciated in 1947 
by State Department ofﬁ cial George F. Kennan to contain Soviet 

140
Lecture 20: Was the Cold War Inevitable?
expansionist tendencies, a policy that he asserted would lead either 
to a mellowing or a collapse of the Soviet system. 

Containment resulted in a major expansion of U.S. power as our 
nation moved into areas around the Soviet Empire. It also increased 
Soviet perceptions of American aggressiveness, necessitating a 
response. By 1948–1949, this “mirror image” effect brought the 
two superpowers to the edge of World War III. 

As we know, World War III did not occur, but by 1949, the two 
superpowers had, in effect, divided Europe into respective spheres of 
inﬂ uence, spheres that each was 
willing to go to war to defend.
The Korean War

In China, civil war between 
Chinese communists under Mao 
Zedong and nationalists under 
Chiang Kai-shek broke out soon 
after the Japanese defeat. In 
October 1949, Mao’s forces won 
and Chiang ﬂ ed to the island
of Formosa. 
o Although his defeat had long 
been expected by experts in 
the State Department, it sent 
shock waves through the 
United States. 
o The “loss” of China took 
place at the same time as a 
series of spy cases and the 
detonation of the Soviets’ 
ﬁ rst atomic bomb, all of which resulted in an anticommunist 
hysteria in the United States known today as McCarthyism. 
o In early 1950, Mao signed a treaty of alliance with Stalin. 
The victory of Mao Zedong’s 
forces in 1949 shocked the 
American public and fanned 
the ﬂ ames of anticommunist 
hysteria.
Corel Stock Photo Library.

141

Meanwhile, the peninsula of Korea, previously part of the 
Japanese Empire, had been divided by Russian and American 
occupation forces after the Japanese surrender. The two 
superpowers had established rival governments in the North and 
South, but with Stalin’s acquiescence, the North invaded the 
South on June 25, 1950. 

The Truman administration interpreted this as a Soviet move that 
could not be tolerated. Taking advantage of a Soviet boycott of the 
UN Security Council, the Americans obtained UN sanction for a 
military intervention to halt the North Koreans. 

The administration then decided to take advantage of the victory at 
Inch’ŏn to unify North and South Korea by force. General Douglas 
MacArthur’s forces crossed the 38th parallel and moved toward the 
Chinese border on the Yalu River. That movement led to a massive 
military intervention by the Chinese communists. The conﬂ ict now 
threatened to turn into a full-scale world war. 

The Truman administration reverted to its previous aim of liberating 
only South Korea, and U.S./UN forces fought their way back up 
the peninsula. When MacArthur refused to accept this policy and 
pressed for an expanded war with China, he was dismissed. An 
armistice was signed in 1953. 

Also in 1953, Stalin died and was replaced by Nikita Khrushchev, 
who denounced Stalin and called for a more open society. For a 
brief moment, there appeared to be a possibility of a thaw in the 
Cold War, but instead, it intensiﬁ ed and expanded, becoming “hot” 
again in Vietnam.
Détente 

By the late 1960s and early 1970s, the bipolar world that had come 
into being in 1945 no longer existed. Instead, new centers of power 
had emerged, as Europe recovered from the war and China emerged 
as a major player—and as its major split with the Soviet Union 
became public and more intense. 

142
Lecture 20: Was the Cold War Inevitable?

Sensing both the limits of American power in Vietnam and the 
possibilities inherent in this development, President Richard Nixon 
and his national security adviser, Henry Kissinger, pursued a 
triangular balance-of-power approach that led to a major lessening 
of global tensions. 

Despite predictions, the Cold War did not come to an end; instead, 
détente ended by the late 1970s, and a new “hot” war emerged 
when the Soviets invaded Afghanistan.
A New and Fierce Cold War

In retrospect, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the 
simultaneous Iranian Revolution constituted the wave of the future 
and threatened both superpowers, but they remained locked in their 
old conﬂ ict and did not see this. Both Jimmy Carter and Ronald 
Reagan reacted ﬁ ercely to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and 
supported the Islamic forces. 

A new and ﬁ erce Cold War thus began in the early 1980s—one we 
tend to forget because of what happened in the late 1980s, but one 
that nevertheless had many thinking that World War III was at hand 
once again. 

Again, World War III failed to materialize, primarily for two 
reasons. First, the old generation of Soviet leaders died and a new 
Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, instituted major reforms in both 
Soviet domestic and foreign policies. Second, Reagan embraced 
these reforms and, with Gorbachev, instituted a new era of Soviet-
American cooperation. 

The Cold War ﬁ nally did end between 1989 and 1991 when 
glasnost and perestroika led ultimately to the total collapse of the 
Soviet Empire in Eastern Europe, followed by the collapse of the 
Soviet Union itself. 

143
Reexamining the Cold War

In one sense, the Cold War was not a war at all but a state of 
abnormal bipolarity following World War II. Still, there were 
numerous bloody regional wars fought within the Cold War, 
including Korea, Vietnam, Afghanistan, and a series of civil and 
regional conﬂ icts fought by proxies. 

As previously stated, conﬂ ict may have been inevitable when World 
War II ended, but the duration and intensity of the conﬂ ict was not. 
That intensity and duration resulted primarily from domestic and 
ideological factors in each country that, in retrospect, were almost 
totally at odds with international realities after 1949 or 1953. 
Clausewitz, On War. 
Gaddis, Strategies of Containment. 
LaFeber, America, Russia and the Cold War, 1945–2006. 
Lefﬂ er, For the Soul of Mankind.
Westad, The Global Cold War.
1. Why did the Cold War never erupt into a direct, global, and total Soviet-
American war?
2. Why did most if not all of the major “thaws” in the Cold War take place 
under presidents who had strong anticommunist reputations?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

144
Lecture 21: The Real Blunders of the Vietnam War
The Real Blunders of the Vietnam War 
Lecture 21
T
he Vietnam War was one of the most unsuccessful and internally 
divisive conﬂ icts in U.S. history. Indeed, the reasons for our 
failure in that war continue to divide Americans today. But none 
of the scapegoats usually put forth—Lyndon Johnson, the military’s 
counterproductive strategy, the domestic antiwar movement—addresses the 
central reasons for the American failure in Vietnam, which lie in the realm of 
faulty perceptions—of both the nature of the conﬂ ict and of Vietnam itself.
The Course of American Involvement

American involvement in Vietnam began in 1950—if not earlier—
and lasted until 1975. Throughout this period, the United States 
viewed Vietnam as part of its larger Cold War conﬂ ict with the 
Soviet Union. 
o This American perspective was partially explained by the fact 
that the insurgencies against French colonial rule and the South 
Vietnamese government were led by Vietnamese communists 
under Ho Chi Minh. 
o In addition, rebuilding France as a bulwark against communist 
expansion in Europe and helping to maintain French control of 
Indochina were key components of America’s Cold War policy 
of containment.

The United States followed a policy of benevolent neutrality 
toward France in the early stages of its war with Ho and then active 
support of the French from 1950–1954, by which time our nation 
was paying for approximately 70 percent of the French war effort. 

That effort ended in failure, however, and in 1954, France decided 
to sue for peace. The result was the Geneva Conference of 1954; 
the withdrawal of the French; and the creation of the independent 

145
states of Cambodia, Laos, and a temporarily divided Vietnam in 
what had been French Indochina. 

At that point, the United States shifted its support to the 
anticommunist entity below the 17th parallel known unofﬁ cially 
as South Vietnam. All U.S. efforts were now directed at defending 
South Vietnam militarily against the actions of both communist 
guerrillas in the South and the North Vietnamese army. 

The effort was at ﬁ rst limited to economic and military aid, along 
with military advisers, but when that failed, the number of military 
advisers was increased dramatically. And when that effort failed, 
President Lyndon Johnson began a sustained bombing campaign 
against North Vietnam and sent major U.S. military forces into
the South. 

Those forces failed to achieve more than a military stalemate. That 
fact and the damage being done by the war—both domestically and 
internationally—led Johnson’s successor, Richard Nixon, to scale 
down U.S. military forces and sign a peace accord with the North. 
Simultaneously, he tried to build up the effectiveness of the South 
Vietnamese army, a process known as “Vietnamization.” 

This was done at the same time that Nixon was creating the policy 
of détente with the Soviet Union, which led to the belief that the 
Soviets would hold back the communists in Vietnam while Nixon 
completed Vietnamization and the American military withdrawal. 
The Soviets failed to do so, however; Vietnamization also failed, 
and North Vietnam was able to conquer the South in 1975.

The key problems with the American approach were threefold: (1) 
The South Vietnamese government was never a viable entity; (2) 
the Vietnam War was much more than a Cold War conﬂ ict; and (3) 
the war was not a Cold War conﬂ ict at all to the Vietnamese ﬁ ghting 
in it. 

146
Lecture 21: The Real Blunders of the Vietnam War
Decolonization after World War II

The Cold War was but one of two major international events to 
take place in the aftermath of World War II. The other was the 
decolonization of Asia, Africa, and the Middle East, as nationalist 
movements in these areas succeeded in throwing out the European 
colonial powers that had previously ruled them. 

Nationalist sentiments had been strong in the French colony of 
Indochina since its creation in the 1880s. At the end of World War 
I, Vietnamese nationalist Ho Chi Minh, having been rejected by 
President Wilson, pled the case for his country’s independence to 
the Bolsheviks, who were more than willing to provide support.

During World War II, the United States had supported 
decolonization, and after the war, Ho had worked with American 
agents to launch guerrilla attacks against the Japanese, who had 
seized control from a French puppet government in 1945. After the 
Japanese surrender, Ho announced the independence of Vietnam 
from France.

But by 1945, both Roosevelt and his successor, Truman, were 
having second thoughts about decolonization. As the Cold War 
increased in intensity from 1946–1949, so did U.S. support for our 
nation’s European allies with colonial empires.

The ﬁ nal blows to any American support for Ho, or even neutrality 
during his ensuing war with the French, were the 1949 communist 
victory in China and the Korean War that began in 1950. From 
that point onward, the United States was determined to contain 
communism in Asia.
The Geneva Conference and Its Aftermath

American support for the French in the early 1950s failed to 
change the outcome in Vietnam. At the 1954 Geneva Conference, 
the French agreed to recognize Vietnamese independence, as 
well the independence of Laos and Cambodia. Vietnam itself was 
temporarily divided at the 17th parallel. 

147

The United States refused to sign the Geneva Accords, though 
it did state that it would not disturb them by force. Privately, it 
labeled them a disaster that would lead to the communization of all 
Southeast Asia. 

To prevent this from happening, the United States found an 
anticommunist Vietnamese nationalist,  Ngo Dinh Diem, to wrest 
control of the French puppet government in South Vietnam. The 
Americans hoped that Diem could establish an anticommunist 
alternative to Ho.
Increasing U.S. Commitments

South Vietnam appeared to be a success in nation-building, but 
beneath the surface, Diem’s government was in serious trouble, 
leading the United States into deeper commitments. By 1959, Ho’s 
communist government in the North had decided to support the 
insurgency brewing in the South.

The Kennedy administration sent in military forces to stop the 
communists with the goal of “winning hearts and minds.” But by 
1963, that effort had failed, and the United States sanctioned a 
military coup that overthrew and assassinated Diem.

Ensuing military coups added to the instability of the government 
and the failure in the war against the communists. By 1964–1965, 
the communists were on the verge of winning. 

President Johnson then escalated American involvement via 
selective bombing of North Vietnam, followed by a sustained 
bombing campaign against the North and the decision to send 
combat troops into the South in 1965.
Escalation, De-escalation, and the End

By 1968, American forces in Vietnam numbered more than 500,000. 
The Americans had succeeded in preventing the communists from 
winning but not in defeating them. 

148
Lecture 21: The Real Blunders of the Vietnam War

In addition to misunderstanding the nature of the war, the United 
States had grossly miscalculated the enemy’s will—perhaps 
because it tended to view that enemy in Cold War terms, as puppets 
of the Soviet Union rather than ﬁ erce nationalists. 

To make matters worse, the war was tearing America apart 
and weakening U.S. military containment of the Soviet Union 
elsewhere. The war had also prompted severe questioning of 
American policy by our European allies and increased the prestige 
and inﬂ uence of the Soviets in the Third World.

In 1968, Nixon realized the failure of the Americanization of the war 
and the damage it was doing both domestically and internationally, 
but like his predecessors, he would not accept defeat. 

Instead, Nixon began the process of Vietnamization and the de-
escalation of the American presence in South Vietnam but combined 
with an expansion of the air war against the North. He also believed 
that with détente, the Soviets would lessen their military support of 
the North and apply diplomatic pressure. 

All of Nixon’s efforts failed as badly as those of his predecessors. 
At the peace talks in Paris, he managed to obtain a return of 
U.S. POWs, an armistice in place, and the ability to remove 
the last U.S. combat forces from Vietnam, but no lessening of
communist pressure.

The South Vietnamese government continued to be weak, corrupt, 
totally reliant on U.S. aid, and unable to win nationalist support 
from the population. It thus collapsed in the face of the North 
Vietnamese offensive of 1975. As a result of the Watergate break-
in and a host of related illegal activities, the Nixon presidency had 
also collapsed by this time.
The True Causes of American Failure

There were many additional reasons for the American failure in 
Vietnam, but the basic problem that underlay all the others was the 

149
insistence on viewing the war in Cold War terms rather than Third 
World nationalist terms. 

Along with this went a related ignorance of Vietnamese history 
and culture, itself at least partially the result of the Cold War. That 
ignorance resulted in the underestimation of both the willingness of 
Hanoi to face American ﬁ repower and the difﬁ culty of creating an 
effective government in the South. 

Given that Washington viewed Vietnam as part of the global 
Cold War, it did not ever make Vietnam its top priority. In effect, 
every administration put into Vietnam only what was necessary 
to avoid defeat during its watch, not enough to win. This decision 
was also motivated by domestic factors, most notably a desire 
not to be charged with being “soft on communism” or having
“lost” Indochina. 
By early 1968, American forces in Vietnam numbered more than 500,000, but 
those forces failed to achieve more than a military stalemate.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

150
Lecture 21: The Real Blunders of the Vietnam War
Consequences of the War

Ironically, the negative domestic consequences of the American 
failure in Vietnam far outnumbered the international ones. It did 
not lead to the communization of all of Southeast Asia or seriously 
affect the global balance of power between the United States and 
the Soviet Union.

It did, however, rip the United States apart internally, destroy two 
presidencies, and end the bipartisan consensus in foreign affairs 
that had existed since World War II. It also shattered the faith of 
many Americans in their government and, indeed, their country. 

Decades after the Vietnam War and the Cold War ended, we still 
live with these negative consequences and their aftermath. Ever 
since the war ended, Americans have either sought to ignore it or to 
draw analogies between it and more recent military interventions. 
But the truth is that every event in history is unique. History does 
not repeat itself, and every analogy is, thus, inherently ﬂ awed.

Although history does not repeat itself, patterns of human behavior 
do. With Vietnam, perhaps the most important lessons are in that 
realm, in particular, in the tragedies of faulty perceptions that result 
from historical and cultural ignorance. 
Clausewitz, On War. 
Herring, America’s Longest War. 
McMahon, ed., Major Problems in the History of the Vietnam War.
1. What additional errors did the United States make in Vietnam?
2. Why were American policymakers and strategists so ignorant of the 
history and culture of Southeast Asia and, indeed, of Asia in general?
Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

151
Myths about American Wars 
Lecture 22
I
n the last lecture, we examined some of the major misunderstandings 
associated with the Vietnam War. But Vietnam is far from the 
only American war that is misunderstood. Indeed, numerous 
misunderstandings and myths exist about most American wars: the idea that 
America has a tradition of defense by citizen-soldiers, that we go to war 
only for defensive reasons, and that we always “win the war but lose the 
peace.” In this lecture, we will dispel such myths by examining the history 
and results of some of our wars.
The Defensive War

Many if not most of our wars have been wars of choice. Indeed, 
only in the two world wars were we actually forced to declare war 
by the actions of our enemies.

In the 19th century, both the 1846–1848 war with Mexico and the 
1898 war with Spain were wars by choice—the ﬁ rst to acquire 
California and New Mexico and the second to force the Spanish 
out of Cuba. Similarly, in the 20th century, we chose to go to war in 
Korea in 1950 and in Vietnam in the 1960s as part of the Cold War. 

In a somewhat gray area is the War of 1812. Madison and the 
Congress went to war in desperation because of the failure of their 
previous measures of economic retaliation designed to force the 
British to cease violating American neutral rights on the high seas. 

In the Civil War, the South chose to secede and ﬁ ght for 
independence, while the North chose war to prevent that. Similarly, 
Americans chose to ﬁ ght against what they saw as British violations 
of their rights in 1775, while Britain chose to crush their rebellion 
by force. 

152
Lecture 22: Myths about American Wars

Even in the two world wars, our enemies argued that our previous 
non-neutral acts had made us an unofﬁ cial belligerent and forced 
them to attack us. 
Incorrect and Manipulated Evidence for War

The fact that America went to war against Iraq in 2003 on the basis 
of faulty or manipulated intelligence regarding “weapons of mass 
destruction” is viewed incorrectly as an anomaly in American 
history. In reality, numerous past presidents have presented 
incorrect information—sometimes knowingly and sometimes 
unknowingly—in 
order 
to 
obtain 
congressional and 
public 
approval
of war. 

In 1846, President 
James 
K. 
Polk 
sent 
an 
army 
under 
General 
Zachary 
Taylor 
into 
disputed 
territory 
along 
the 
Rio 
Grande 
River, and when 
that army clashed 
with the Mexican 
army, he asked Congress for war on the grounds that “American 
blood” had been shed on “American soil.” In reality, Polk may have 
sent Taylor’s army into the territory to provoke a war in order to
obtain California.

In September of 1941, President Franklin Roosevelt claimed 
that the U.S. destroyer Greer had been “wantonly attacked” by a 
German submarine in the Atlantic and launched an unofﬁ cial naval 
war against Germany in response. In reality, however, the Greer 
had been trailing the German submarine and radioing its position 
The faulty basis for America’s war on Iraq is 
not an anomaly in our history; presidents from 
Madison, to FDR, to Johnson, to Bush have 
relied on faulty intelligence to launch military 
actions. 
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

153
back to a British ﬂ eet, which had responded with air attacks. The 
submarine had ﬁ red on the Greer in self-defense. 

More common historically than such blatant manipulation of the 
facts has been the presentation of evidence that was believed at the 
time but that later research showed to be incorrect. Such was the 
case in the declaration of both the War of 1812 and the Spanish-
American War.
Dispensing with Contrary Evidence

In a separate category are war-causing events that were believed 
at the time because the administration wanted to believe them and, 
consequently, ignored contrary evidence. 

In order to obtain passage of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, 
President Lyndon Johnson and Defense Secretary Robert 
McNamara claimed, in August 1964, that two attacks had taken 
place against U.S. destroyers by North Vietnamese torpedo boats in 
the Gulf of Tonkin. 
o The resolution authorized the president to use force to prevent 
future attacks and would later be used by Johnson to justify his 
Americanization of the Vietnam War.
o Johnson’s original aim in getting the resolution passed, 
however, had been to “send a message” to the North Vietnamese 
regarding American unity and seriousness of purpose and to 
neutralize the issue of Vietnam in the 1964 presidential election 
campaign.
o The administration had, in fact, prepared the resolution months 
earlier and simply waited for an “episode” to justify presenting 
it. It thus chose to ignore evidence that the second attack may 
not have occurred, as well as its own actions that probably led 
to the ﬁ rst attack. 

Nearly 40 years later, the Bush administration relied on faulty 
intelligence to claim that Saddam Hussein possessed weapons of 

154
Lecture 22: Myths about American Wars
mass destruction and ignored contrary evidence, in all likelihood 
because it had already decided to go to war and had convinced itself 
that the Iraqi dictator possessed such weapons. 
Winning the War and Losing the Peace

The belief that Americans always “win the war but lose the peace” 
because of our political naïveté is also incorrect. In point of fact, the 
reverse has often been the case. 

Militarily, the United States did not win the War of 1812, and 
politically, it did not lose the peace. In fact, U.S. military forces 
were consistently defeated by the British, and only last-minute 
defenses prevented total American defeat. Yet American diplomats 
at Ghent proved superior to British diplomats and obtained a highly 
favorable peace treaty.

In 1846–1848, the United States both won the war with Mexico and 
achieved the original territorial aims of President Polk. In fact, one 
reason Polk accepted the ﬁ nal treaty was that despite its military 
victories, his small army in Mexico City was in danger of being cut 
off and having to deal with guerrilla warfare.

The United States also won both the war and the peace in the 1898 
war with Spain. Indeed, our nation acquired an overseas empire that 
territorially went beyond what we had actually conquered during 
the war. 

In World War II, the United States played a role in Allied victory, 
but its participation in the war was brief and it was not primarily 
responsible for victory. Still, the limited role played by our forces 
was sufﬁ cient to enable President Woodrow Wilson to claim a 
dominant role at the Paris Peace Conference. 

Similarly, the United States did not win World War II all by itself, 
nor did it “lose the peace.” 

155
o There was, in fact, never a peace to lose because the Cold War 
precluded the negotiation of any peace treaty—or even the 
calling of a peace conference. 
o The claim that we lost the peace at the wartime Yalta 
Conference, where a naïve Roosevelt gave away half the world 
to Stalin, incorrectly assumes that Roosevelt possessed half the 
world to give away, which he did not.
o Further, despite its limited contribution to military victory, 
the United States emerged from the war as by far the most 
powerful nation in the world. 

Militarily, the Korean War was a stalemate. Nevertheless, the 
United States succeeded in attaining its original political goal: the 
halting of North Korean aggression and the maintenance of the 
preexisting South Korea. 

In Vietnam, the United States clearly lost the war yet achieved, in 
the Paris Peace Accords, what Nixon and Kissinger had desired 
regarding a “decent interval” for Vietnamization and the removal 
of U.S. forces from what had clearly become a military quagmire. 

In the ﬁ rst Persian Gulf War, the United States succeeded both 
militarily and in its stated political goal of halting Iraq’s aggression 
against Kuwait. 

And, of course, with the 1991 demise of the Soviet Union, the 
United States “won” the Cold War without ever having defeated a 
Soviet army. 
Roots of the Myths

To a large extent, our myths about war are the result of our 
bitterness and disappointment regarding its results, especially the 
results of the two world wars. That disappointment was linked to 
our unrealistic expectations regarding the ability of total military 
victory in a coalition war to translate into the total re-creation of 

156
Lecture 22: Myths about American Wars
international relations in the image we desired. Victory in the two 
world wars did not—and could not—accomplish that. 

The two world wars, and the nature of American democracy, also 
helped to create a mythical belief that the only wars worth ﬁ ghting 
are total wars for total victory and a total re-creation of the world. 
None of that is true. 

These myths are also part of our national mythology about 
ourselves—that we are a peace-loving people who go to war 
only when left with no choice; who are then militarily victorious 
against evil enemies because of our goodness, our military prowess, 
and divine protection; but who are foiled and defeated in the 
peace because as a peace-loving people we are naïve about war
and peacemaking. 

That national mythology is, in turn, based on a belief that war is 
evil and should be undertaken only when we are attacked and there 
is no choice. Many of us believe that, but that does not mean that 
what we should do—avoid war unless we are attacked—is what we 
actually have done in our history.

The mythology also stems from the fact that we confuse success in 
battle with success in war. 
o Our failure to understand the difference between war and battle 
was boldly illustrated after the Vietnam War by the American 
who commented to his Vietnamese counterpart that throughout 
the war, we never lost a battle. The statement may have been 
correct, but it was also irrelevant. 
o George Washington came to understand this idea during 
the Revolutionary War, as he achieved the political goal of 
independence despite the fact that his army lost most of its 
battles. The few that it won, as shown in an earlier lecture, 
were enough because of their political consequences. 

157
o We have forgotten that lesson from our 18th-century past. 
Perhaps that is because as our power has grown, so has our 
arrogance and our blindness to our own history. 
Buhite, ed., Call to Arms. 
Clausewitz, On War. 
Paterson, et al., American Foreign Relations.
1. Why does total victory on the battleﬁ eld usually not result in obtaining 
stated political goals?
2. Why do Americans insist that war should be total when most of its wars 
have not been total?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

158
Lecture 23: Who Matters in American History?
Who Matters in American History? 
Lecture 23
M
ost Americans think they know the names of the great political 
ﬁ gures in American history: Washington, Jefferson, Lincoln, and 
so on. Yet there are numerous other ﬁ gures whose contributions 
were just as important, but who are far less familiar to us. In this lecture, 
we’ll examine a few such individuals and try to understand why, despite their 
accomplishments, they are less familiar than other ﬁ gures. Our analysis will 
also enable us to explore who in history we choose to remember and why. 
John Adams

John Adams was probably the most important and respected of 
all the Revolutionary leaders from New England. He played a 
major role in both Continental Congresses; he nominated George 
Washington to command the Continental Army; he helped draft the 
Declaration of Independence; and he drafted the instructions that 
would result in the wartime treaty of alliance with France. 

He also obtained a critical Dutch loan while a diplomat in Europe 
during the war, played a major role in the peace negotiations that 
ended the war, and became the ﬁ rst ofﬁ cial U.S. representative to 
Great Britain after the war. 

When he took ofﬁ ce as president, Adams inherited a diplomatic 
crisis with France, as well as a growing partisan rift at home, with 
the opposition led by Thomas Jefferson. 

The crisis with France erupted into an undeclared naval war in 1798 
that the Hamiltonian wing of Adams’s own Federalist Party wanted 
to turn into a full-scale declared war. Such a war, when combined 
with the recently passed Alien and Sedition Acts virtually outlawing 
dissent, would have guaranteed his reelection, but Adams refused to 
agree. He never ﬁ lled the ranks of the special army Congress had 

159
agreed to create, and when France proposed negotiations to end the 
conﬂ ict, he quickly agreed. 

He also ﬁ red the Hamiltonian members of his cabinet when he 
discovered that they were subverting his plans to negotiate an end to 
the war. As a result, he obtained peace with France but at the cost of 
splitting his Federalist Party and, thus, dooming his own reelection. 
Adams realized the political cost of his behavior but considered it 
the most meritorious act of his life.

As the only one of the ﬁ ve Founding Fathers elected president but 
not reelected for a second term, Adams became the forgotten one. 
Recent biographers have done their best to give Adams his due, but 
he nevertheless remains relatively unknown to the public.
John Quincy Adams

At Adams’s death in 1826, his son, John Quincy, was in the 
midst of his own largely forgotten presidency. Yet like his father, 
the younger Adams had had a brilliant career before he became 
president, primarily as a diplomat. He had helped negotiate the 
Treaty of Ghent, ending the War of 1812; had served as ambassador 
to the Netherlands, Prussia, Russia, and Great Britain; and had been 
James Monroe’s secretary of state. 

In these roles, Adams had been responsible for some of the most 
important treaties and announcements in the history of U.S. foreign 
relations: the agreement to limit naval forces on the Great Lakes, 
which was the basis of the peaceful border between Canada and 
the United States; joint Anglo-American occupation of the Oregon 
Territory; and the acquisition of Spanish Florida.

As noted in an earlier lecture, the 1824 presidential election boiled 
down to a choice in the House of Representatives between Adams 
and Andrew Jackson. 

160
Lecture 23: Who Matters in American History?
o Speaker of the House Henry Clay encouraged his supporters to 
vote for Adams, even though Jackson had more electoral and 
popular votes. 
o When Adams won, he appointed Clay secretary of state; 
Jackson cried that the appointment was a “corrupt bargain” and 
immediately began a campaign to win the election of 1828 and 
subvert Adams’s presidency.

Unlike his father, Adams did not allow his failure to win a second 
term as president end his political career. He won election to the 
House of Representatives from his home district and became a 
ﬁ erce opponent of slavery and its expansion. He also opposed the 
annexation of Texas and the war with Mexico. 
George C. Marshall

In 1939, Franklin Roosevelt appointed George C. Marshall army 
chief of staff over 33 senior ofﬁ cers. He held that post from the day 
Hitler invaded Poland to begin 
World War II to the end of the 
war, and during that time, he 
created the largest American 
armed force in U.S. history. 

In the process, he won the 
respect 
and 
admiration 
of 
Congress, the American people, 
America’s wartime allies, and 
his colleagues on the U.S. Joint 
Chiefs of Staff and the Anglo-
American Combined Chiefs 
of 
Staff. 
Churchill 
called 
him the “true organizer” of
Allied victory. 

Marshall 
was 
the 
obvious 
choice to command Operation 
Unlike the elder or younger 
Adams, General George 
C. Marshall never became 
president—but only because he 
chose not to run.
Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division. 

161
Overlord, the 1944 invasion of France. But questions arose as to 
whether he could be spared from Washington; he was, in effect, 
running the global U.S. war effort from that city. 

Marshall refused to request the command, telling Roosevelt that he 
had to do what was best for the country, not for himself. Roosevelt 
then chose Marshall’s protégé, Dwight D. Eisenhower. As we know, 
the success of the operation guaranteed Eisenhower both historical 
immortality and the presidency.

In early 1947, President Truman appointed Marshall secretary of 
state. In the two years he served, he established the containment 
policy of the Cold War and, as part of it, the European Recovery 
Program that bears his name and for which he received the Nobel 
Peace Prize in 1953: the Marshall Plan. He also established a 
bipartisan foreign policy with a Republican Congress that lasted for 
20 years. 

In September 1950, at nearly 70 years of age, Marshall agreed to 
become secretary of defense in order to rebuild the U.S. army for 
the Korean War. He played a key role in the 1951 relief of General 
Douglas MacArthur in what many historians consider the greatest 
threat to civilian control of the military in U.S. history.

When Marshall died in 1959, he remained one of the most respected 
men in the country, yet his reputation faded as the generation that 
knew him passed away. 
The Reasons for Obscurity

One common factor that may account for the relative obscurity of 
John Adams, his son, and George Marshall today is their refusal to 
allow personal political ambition to control their behavior or violate 
their sense of what was right. Another factor may have been their 
utter honesty and refusal to compromise that honesty for political 
gain, along with their knowledge of history and ability to take the 
“long view” regarding what was truly important. 

162
Lecture 23: Who Matters in American History?
o For Adams, what was important was peace with France in 1800 
more so than reelection. For his son, it was ﬁ rst the geographic 
expansion of his country without war, followed by the crusade 
against slavery. And for Marshall, it was the preservation of a 
truly democratic society in the midst of a global war. 
o A fourth factor that may account for the relative obscurity of 
these three was the strong belief each had in the concept of 
selﬂ ess public service, a belief that may have precluded them 
from actively seeking the publicity and popularity necessary 
for lasting fame. 

Who matters most to us from a given past era may vary depending 
on what we wish to know about that era. Certain ﬁ gures who are 
not well known to the public may be very important to historians 
who specialize in particular aspects of U.S. history.

Beyond that, many ﬁ gures who are known primarily to historians 
come from relatively recent ﬁ elds of historical study that developed 
during the 1960s and 1970s as part of the “new” social history. This 
social historical approach examined groups that had been left out 
of the traditional “grand narrative” of U.S. history, a narrative that 
had focused on white, male political leaders. In the process, the 
new historians transformed and continue to transform the study of
U.S. history. 

These historians also played a major role in the destruction of the 
traditional grand narrative, because minorities and women have 
histories of their own that do not appear to ﬁ t the political history of 
white men in that narrative—or do they? 
o One could argue, for example, that the 20th-century theologian 
Reinhold Niebuhr was at least as important in the emergence 
of the United States as a superpower as Franklin Roosevelt 
and Harry Truman—for his religious concepts regarding the 
nature of power and the need to grasp it to do good and the 
simultaneous recognition of human limits and the corrupting 
nature of power.

163
o One could similarly argue that the revivalist preacher Charles 
G. Finney, active during the Second Great Awakening, was at 
least as important as any of the presidents of his era in that 
the link he preached between religious conversion and political 
reform had enormous political and societal consequences, 
including the antislavery crusade that led to the Civil War. 
o Shifting to economics, one could maintain that Eli Whitney 
was more important than any political ﬁ gures in “causing” 
the Civil War, not only for his well-known invention of the 
cotton gin and its enormous impact on Southern slavery but 
also for his impact on Northern industry via his pioneering 
work to mass produce muskets for the U.S. Army using
interchangeable parts. 
o Similarly, one could claim that industrial and ﬁ nancial leaders 
from the late 19th century through the 20th were more important 
in America’s rise to superpower status than any generals, 
admirals, or presidents. The foundation of U.S. military power 
in the 20th century was its economic power that these men had 
helped to create. 
o One could also claim that pioneers in the struggle for minority 
rights and women’s rights from the pre–Civil War years through 
the 20th century were more important than the presidents, 
legislators, and judges responsible for government actions in 
these realms. These leaders changed the consciousness of the 
public, mobilized people, and thereby pressured politicians 
into action. 

Our old grand narrative is dated and fractured, but a new one may 
be actually forming right now—one that synthesizes all of the 
“new” histories with the old one to give us a much fuller, more 
informative, and more useful picture of our past. 

164
Lecture 23: Who Matters in American History?
Dangerﬁ eld, The Era of Good Feelings. 
McCullough, John Adams.  
Pogue, George C. Marshall. 
Stoler, George C. Marshall: Soldier-Statesman of the American Century. 
1. What other major American ﬁ gures are lesser known than they should 
be and why?
2. What qualities lead to historical fame in this country, and are they 
appropriate?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

165
History Did Not Begin with Us 
Lecture 24
M
any of us have the tendency to believe that history either began 
or was dramatically altered during our lifetimes. Many have 
argued, for example, that the personal computer has brought 
unprecedented change to our lives. In this ﬁ nal lecture, we will explore the 
historical realities that challenge several incorrect or questionable beliefs 
and look at why so many Americans tend to believe them. 
Antiwar Movements

Contrary to popular belief, Vietnam was not the ﬁ rst American 
war opposed by many Americans. Indeed, even the War for 
Independence was, in all likelihood, not supported by a majority of 
American colonists.
o The quasi-war with France in 1798–1800 was vehemently 
opposed by Jefferson’s Democratic-Republicans and nearly 
brought on a civil war. The War of 1812 was opposed by an 
entire section of the nation (New England) and the Federalists. 
Major sectional and partisan opposition also existed to the 
1846–1848 war with Mexico, as well as the Civil War. 
o There was no opposition to speak of during the brief 1898 war 
with Spain but plenty of opposition to McKinley’s ensuing 
decision to acquire an overseas colonial empire as a result of 
the war. Even more opposition arose to the ensuing war with 
the Filipinos. 
o Major opposition also existed with regard to American entry 
into World War I, even though the war vote passed the Senate 
and House by overwhelming majorities. 
o Although there was virtually no opposition to U.S. entry into 
World War II after the Pearl Harbor attack and Nazi declaration 

166
Lecture 24: History Did Not Begin with Us
of war, there had been plenty of opposition to Roosevelt’s pre–
Pearl Harbor policies, most notably aid to Britain. 
o Opposition also existed to major U.S. policies in the early days 
of the Cold War. Even during the supposedly placid 1950s, 
major antinuclear and paciﬁ st movements existed. 
o Republicans attacked President Truman during the Korean War 
for executive war-making without congressional consent and 
his limited-war strategy, with backing instead for MacArthur’s 
calls for an expanded war against China. 
o Interestingly, similar dissent occurred during the Vietnam War, 
with those calling for escalation and expansion of the war 
outnumbering those who favored de-escalation or withdrawal 
before 1968. 

Why has this long history of major antiwar movements been 
forgotten by most Americans? 
o The history was partially buried in the outpouring of patriotism 
after the Pearl Harbor attack and by the bipartisan foreign 
policy during the early years of the Cold War. Related was the 
anticommunist hysteria during the 1950s that stiﬂ ed dissent. 
o In addition, all these previous antiwar movements failed, 
including—contrary to mythology—the Vietnam antiwar 
movement, and we tend to study successes rather than failures. 
o The government also actively suppressed many of these 
antiwar movements—especially those during the Civil War and 
World War I. 
o Further, the bipartisan foreign policy and anticommunist 
hysteria of the l950s created an environment in which 
“consensus school historians” tended to emphasize the lack of 
conﬂ ict in American history rather than the conﬂ icts. 

167
The Civil Rights Movement

The civil rights movement has an equally long history. For African 
Americans, it began with the antislavery movement that started 
in the mid- to late 18th century and accelerated in the 1830s. 
Simultaneously, free blacks and their white supporters fought 
against segregation laws in the northern states. 

Booker T. Washington gave up on such rights in his Atlanta 
Compromise of 1895, but he did so only temporarily in order to 
obtain white support for improving the economic condition of 
African Americans. He was almost immediately challenged by 
other black leaders, such as W. E. B. Du Bois. 

Du Bois would help to found the NAACP in the early 20th century, 
and that organization would begin to challenge southern segregation 
laws and other denials of black civil rights throughout the ﬁ rst half 
of the 20th century. 

Why was most of this history forgotten by many Americans before 
the 1960s? 
o The plight of free blacks and their efforts to obtain civil rights 
before the Civil War tended to be forgotten amid the much 
larger and more basic struggle against slavery. 
o The movement for black civil rights after the Civil War failed, 
despite the passage of constitutional amendments guaranteeing 
rights for blacks during the Reconstruction era. 
o Further, white America as a whole was racist and did not 
support equal rights for blacks either before the Civil War or in 
the century following it. Consequently, there was little interest 
in the history of the struggle for black civil rights outside the 
African American community. 
o Finally, the consensus historians of the early Cold War years 
tended to downplay if not ignore this struggle, much as they 
ignored previous antiwar movements. 

168
Lecture 24: History Did Not Begin with Us
The Women’s Movement

The women’s movement also has a lengthy history in this country. 
As noted in a previous lecture, it began with the prominence of 
women within the abolitionist movement of the 1830s. 

During the Reconstruction era, the women’s movement pressed for 
inclusion in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments guaranteeing 
rights for black males, but those efforts were unsuccessful. Women 
ﬁ nally gained the right to vote in 1920. 

Women also achieved symbolic moves toward equality with 
Franklin Roosevelt’s appointment of the ﬁ rst female cabinet 
member and the political redeﬁ nition of the role of ﬁ rst lady by 
Eleanor Roosevelt during the 1930s. 

During World War II, the Women’s Auxiliary Corps was established 
in the army under a female colonel, and women obtained jobs in a 
host of occupations previously closed to them. 

Why was this history lost in the years following World War II? 
o The situation in World War II was generally perceived as a 
temporary aberration caused by the exigencies of war and the 
removal of millions of men from the workforce for military duty. 
o After the war, working women were perceived as taking jobs 
away from men; the same attitude had been expressed during 
the Great Depression. 
o The combination of the Great Depression and World War II had 
led many women to postpone having children; that situation 
ended with the end of the war, leading to the postwar baby 
boom and the reassertion of women’s “traditional” roles as 
mother and housekeeper. In this reassertion, the history of the 
earlier women’s rights movement seemed largely irrelevant.

169
The Rediscovery of Histories

Each of these three histories was rediscovered during the 1960s and 
1970s as members of the three movements searched for a usable past.
o At numerous teach-ins during the 1960s, professors and 
students challenged the myth of past wartime consensus (and, 
with it, the implicit attacks on their patriotism) by highlighting 
previous antiwar movements. 
o Civil rights activists and feminists similarly challenged 
prevailing racial and gender stereotypes and the idea that 
blacks and women had docilely accepted their inferior status 
in the past.
o These rediscoveries led a new generation of scholars to explore 
these histories in great depth and produce a rich literature about 
them, which has since altered our views of American history 
and affected the ensuing development of the antiwar, civil 
rights, and women’s movements.

History is not an objective and unchanging discipline that simply 
studies the facts of a dead past. Rather, it is a subjective and 
constantly evolving study of a living past that is heavily inﬂ uenced 
by the questions each generation asks of it in light of contemporary 
concerns. As a result, history tells us much about ourselves in the 
present, as well as the past being studied. 
The Personal Computer: Unprecedented Change?

Consider our current belief that the personal computer is the 
most important invention in history, that it has ushered in a new 
era in history, and that the pace of change is accelerating at an 
unprecedented rate and inﬂ uencing every aspect of our lives. 

A careful examination of American history reveals a series of 
fundamental technological changes long before the computer, each 
one considered at the time the most important and consequential 
in history: the steamboat and canal boom of the early to mid-
19th century, the development of railroads, mass production, the 

170
Lecture 24: History Did Not Begin with Us
telegraph, the internal combustion engine, the automobile, the 
airplane, and nuclear weapons and power.

Is 
the 
computer 
any different than 
these 
innovations, 
or is it just another 
major change—and 
perhaps 
one 
not 
nearly as signiﬁ cant 
and life-altering as 
these earlier ones? 
An 80-Year Lifespan

Imagine a man born 
on 
a 
Midwestern 
farm in 1835 or 
1840 
who 
lived 
into his mid- to late 80s. In the course of his lifetime, he might 
have experienced the railroad for the ﬁ rst time; participated in 
the industrial revolution; acquired a telephone, an automobile, 
a toaster, a vacuum cleaner, and a radio; seen the success of the 
Wright brothers; and witnessed the “war to end all wars.”

Are we really experiencing technological changes more rapid, 
dramatic, and life-transforming than this individual did? Or is the 
belief that we are a distortion caused by our ignorance of history 
or by “tunnel vision”—whereby the past in front of us as we enter 
a tunnel appears longer (and more important) than the rest of
the tunnel? 
The Spiral of History

History does not repeat itself save, perhaps, in terms of the 
emotions—love, anger, fear—that drive human beings to behave in 
certain ways. Each event and era in history is unique, as is each new 
interpretation of the past that arises within each era. 
Many believe that the personal computer has 
accelerated the pace of change in our world, 
but the belief that change is accelerating at 
an unprecedented rate is itself far from new.
© Jupiterimages, Brand X Pictures/Brand X Pictures/
Thinkstock.

171

We should think of history neither as a straight line or a circle but as 
a spiral. In this view, we are separate from all past events but also 
linked to them in a multidimensional time stream of which we are 
a part. Being linked, we see that history did not begin with us and 
will not end with us either.

In this course, we’ve learned to be skeptical, to challenge historical 
myths, and to search for the truth behind those myths. It’s also 
important for us to realize that the search for truth is quite different 
from the claim to have found it; as we’ve seen repeatedly, historical 
truth changes over time as new events lead to new questions and 
new interpretations of the past.
Franklin and Higginbotham, From Slavery to Freedom. 
Morison, Merk, and Freidel, Dissent in Three American Wars. 
1. Why do we prefer to study successes rather than failures in history, even 
though failures can often teach us much more?
2. What other aspects of U.S. history have been “lost” and rediscovered, 
and why?
    Suggested Reading
    Questions to Consider

172
Bibliography
Bibliography
Adams, Michael C. C. The Best War Ever: America and World War II. 
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994. Adams identiﬁ es and 
attacks many myths regarding the United States and World War II.
Allen, Frederick Lewis. Only Yesterday: An Informal History of the 1920s.
New York: Harper Collins, 2000. First published in 1931, this popular 
history helped to establish the standard interpretation of the 1920s.
Bailyn, Bernard. The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1967, 1992. This pathbreaking book 
played a major role in refocusing historical study of the Revolution back to 
ideas. It won both the Pulitzer and the Bancroft prizes and was republished 
in an enlarged edition in 1992.
Beisner, Robert. From the Old Diplomacy to the New, 1865–1900. 2nd ed. 
Arlington Heights, IL: Harlan Davidson, 1986. This is a brief and useful 
introduction to the events and historical interpretations of late-19th-century 
American foreign relations.
Blum, John M. Woodrow Wilson and the Politics of Morality. Boston: Little, 
Brown, 1956. This brief but insightful biography is highly critical of Wilson.
Buhite, Russell D., ed. Call to Arms: Presidential Speeches, Messages and 
Declarations of War. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁ eld, 2003. This 
valuable collection provides a fascinating and informative view of the 
ofﬁ cial reasons U.S. presidents from John Adams to George W. Bush have 
given for both requesting congressional declarations of war and justifying 
speciﬁ c military actions. 
Chernow, Ron. Alexander Hamilton. New York: Penguin, 2004. A recent 
full-length biography.

173
———. Washington: A Life. New York: Penguin, 2010. A recent and highly 
regarded full biography.
Clausewitz, Carl von. On War, edited and translated by Michael Howard 
and Peter Paret. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976. Although 
written in the early 19th century by a Prussian military ofﬁ cer and not 
revised before his untimely death, this volume is generally considered the 
most insightful, important, and inﬂ uential analysis of the nature of war ever 
written. One of its emphases is the relationship of war to political goals. 
This particular edition contains three outstanding introductory essays by 
the editors and Bernard Brodie on the genesis, inﬂ uence, and continued 
relevance of the work.
Cooper, John M. Woodrow Wilson: A Biography. New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf, 2009. The most recent and best full biography of Wilson available. It 
strongly defends Wilson.
Dangerﬁ eld, George. The Era of Good Feelings. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 1989. 
First published in 1952, this prize-winning history of the years between 
the Jefferson and Jackson presidencies provides extensive and excellent 
information on John Quincy Adams as diplomat and president. 
Ellis, Joseph J. American Sphinx: The Character of Thomas Jefferson. 
New York: Random House, 1996. Winner of the National Book Award, this 
volume focuses on Jefferson’s contradictions and inconsistencies.
———. Founding Brothers: The Revolutionary Generation. New York: 
Random House, 2000. This Pulitzer Prize–winning volume offers insightful 
analyses of Hamilton and Jefferson, as well as ﬁ ve other major political 
ﬁ gures of this era and a good introduction to their conﬂ icts.
———. His Excellency: George Washington. New York: Random House 
(Knopf), 2004. This brief biography focuses on Washington’s character and 
personality, as well as his numerous accomplishments. 
Fink, Leon, ed. Major Problems in the Gilded Age and the Progressive Era. 
2nd ed. Boston: Cengage, 2001. This collection of primary and secondary 

174
Bibliography
sources provides a useful introduction to these two eras and their numerous 
historical interpretations.
Franklin, John Hope, and Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham. From Slavery to 
Freedom: A History of African Americans. 9th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 
2010. First published in 1947 and written by the recently deceased Franklin, 
one of the most revered and honored ﬁ gures in the historical profession, this 
has long been the preeminent text for African American history. 
Gaddis, John L. Strategies of Containment: A Critical Appraisal of American 
National Security Policy during the Cold War. Rev. and exp. ed. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2005. Cold War senior scholar Gaddis explores the 
different types of containment that the United States used throughout the 
Cold War.
Goodwyn, Lawrence. The Populist Moment: A Short History of the Agrarian 
Revolt in America. New York: Oxford University Press, 1978. This major 
and overall positive reinterpretation of the Populists is a condensation of 
Goodwyn’s longer Democratic Promise: The Populist Moment in America 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1976).
Hamilton, Alexander, James Madison, and John Jay. The Federalist Papers. 
New York: Bantam Books, 1982. First published in 1787–1788 as part of an 
effort to convince New Yorkers to vote in favor of the Constitution, these 
85 essays are pivotal to understanding that document and are considered 
by many to be the most important works of political theory in U.S. history. 
Numerous editions are available. This particular one is inexpensive and 
contains an introduction and commentary by Garry Wills.
Heilbroner, Robert L. The Worldly Philosophers: The Lives, Times and Ideas 
of the Great Economic Thinkers. Rev. 7th ed. New York: Touchstone/Simon 
and Schuster, 1999. First published in 1953, this best-selling classic provides 
an excellent introduction to the most important economic theorists and their 
ideas from the 18th through the 20th centuries.

175
Herring, George C. America’s Longest War: The United States and Vietnam, 
1950–1975. 4th ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill, 2002. This remains one of the best 
and most comprehensive histories of the Vietnam War. 
Hofstadter, Richard. The Age of Reform: From Bryan to F.D.R. New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf, 1955. An inﬂ uential historian of the 1950s and 1960s, 
Hofstadter, in this Pulitzer Prize–winning volume and other works, such 
as The Paranoid Style in American Politics (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
1965), sharply criticizes and attacks the Populists as irrational reactionaries 
rather than true reformers.
Howe, Daniel W. What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 
1815–1848. New York: Oxford University Press, 2007. This Pulitzer Prize–
winning book offers comprehensive coverage of all aspects of American life 
during the years 1815–1848.
Kennedy, David. Freedom from Fear: The American People in Depression 
and War, 1929–1945. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999. In this 
Pulitzer Prize–winning volume, Kennedy provides a superbly researched 
and written account of the Great Depression, the New Deal, and World War 
II. The work is also available in two separate volumes, one on the New Deal 
and one on World War II.
LaFeber, Walter. America, Russia and the Cold War, 1945–2006. 10th ed. 
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006. First published in 1966 and now in its 
10th revised edition, this volume, by one of the foremost U.S. diplomatic 
historians, provides an excellent introduction to the entire Cold War. It has 
long been a standard text in college courses. 
Lefﬂ er, Melvyn P. For the Soul of Mankind: The United States, the Soviet 
Union, and the Cold War. New York: Hill and Wang, 2007. In this work, 
senior Cold War scholar Lefﬂ er offers a wide-ranging analysis of Cold War 
origins, why the conﬂ ict lasted so long, and how and why it ﬁ nally came to 
an end.

176
Bibliography
McCullough, David. John Adams. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2001. 
This Pulitzer Prize–winning and popular biography helped to restore Adams 
as one of the major ﬁ gures of the Revolutionary era.
McMahon, Robert, ed. Major Problems in the History of the Vietnam War: 
Documents and Essays. 4th ed. Boston: Cengage, 2010. This volume presents 
key primary and secondary sources on the most debated and important 
aspects of the Vietnam War.
McPherson, James M. Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1988. This Pulitzer Prize–winning work remains 
the basic single volume on the causes and conduct of the Civil War.
———. Tried by War: Abraham Lincoln as Commander in Chief. New York: 
Penguin, 2008. This volume examines the process by which Lincoln came to 
understand the relationship of battles to politics, as well as the appropriate 
grand strategy for the Union, and his emergence as what the author considers 
the nation’s greatest commander in chief.
Meacham, Jon. American Lion: Andrew Jackson in the White House. 
New York: Random House, 2008. Winner of the Pulitzer Prize, this recent 
biography focuses on Jackson’s personal life, as well as his numerous and 
controversial actions as president.
Middlekauff, Robert. The Glorious Cause: The American Revolution, 
1763–1789. Rev. and exp. ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2007. A 
Pulitzer Prize ﬁ nalist, this critically acclaimed work provides a recent and 
highly readable analysis of the Revolutionary era from the end of the French 
and Indian War through ratiﬁ cation of the Constitution.
Morgan, Edmund S. The Puritan Dilemma: The Story of John Winthrop. 
Boston: Little, Brown, 1958. Despite its age, this brief volume remains an 
excellent introduction not only to the ﬁ rst governor of the Massachusetts 
Bay colony but also to Puritan religious beliefs and conﬂ icts.
Morison, Samuel E., Frederick Merk, and Frank Freidel. Dissent in Three 
American Wars. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1970. Written 

177
in the midst of the Vietnam War, this volume by three eminent historians 
explores antiwar movements during the War of 1812 and the 1846–1848 war 
with Mexico, as well as opposition to the war against Philippine insurgents 
that followed the 1898 war with Spain and acquisition of the archipelago. It 
offers a classic case of rediscovered history in the search for a “usable past.”
Paterson, Thomas G., et al. American Foreign Relations: A History. 7th ed., 
2 vols. Boston: Wadsworth/Cengage, 2010. This excellent textbook contains 
up-to-date and useful analyses of both the actual and the ofﬁ cial reasons for 
American wars and military actions throughout U.S. history.
Perman, Michael, and Amy M. Taylor, eds. Major Problems in the Civil 
War and Reconstruction. 3rd ed. Boston: Wadsworth/Cengage, 2011. This 
collection of primary and secondary sources provides a useful introduction 
to the numerous interpretations regarding the Civil War and Reconstruction.
Pogue, Forrest C. George C. Marshall. 4 vols. New York: The Viking Press, 
1963–1987. The ofﬁ cial biography of Marshall, as well as the most accurate 
and comprehensive. 
Reardon, Carol. Pickett’s Charge in History and Memory. Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina Press, 1999. Reardon traces and analyzes the 
history of this battle and the historical memories of it. The two are related 
but, as she emphasizes, very different.
Salvatore, Nick. Eugene V. Debs: Citizen and Socialist. 2nd ed. Urbana and 
Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1984. An award-winning biography of 
one of the major American labor leaders and Socialist Party political ﬁ gures 
of the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Sitkoff, Harvard, ed. Fifty Years Later: The New Deal Evaluated. 
Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1985. The nine essays in this volume 
provide excellent assessments by different historians of the impact of the 
New Deal on different aspects of American life. The essays are revised and 
expanded versions of papers originally presented at a 1983 symposium at the 
University of New Hampshire.

178
Bibliography
Stampp, Kenneth M., ed. Causes of the Civil War. 3rd rev. ed. New York: 
Touchstone/Simon and Schuster, 1991. This collection of both primary 
and secondary sources provides a useful introduction to the numerous 
interpretations of the war’s causes.
Stephanson, Anders. Manifest Destiny: American Expansionism and 
the Empire of Right. New York: Hill and Wang, 1995. This brief volume 
analyzes the role of exceptionalism as a driving force in the history of 
American expansionism.
Stoler, Mark A. George C. Marshall: Soldier-Statesman of the American 
Century. Boston: Twayne, 1989. This brief biography offers an introduction 
to both Marshall and the rise of the United States as a world power during his 
lifetime. For greater detail on Marshall, see Pogue’s four-volume biography 
cited above. 
Tocqueville, Alexis de. Democracy in America, translated and edited with 
an introduction by Harvey C. Mansﬁ eld and Delba Winthrop. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2002. Originally published in French and in two 
volumes in 1835 and 1840, this classic work is based on the author’s nine-
month sojourn in the United States during 1833. It is generally considered 
one of the most important and insightful texts on the United States during 
this period and in general.
Tyler, Alice Felt. Freedom’s Ferment: Phases of American Social History 
to 1860. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1944. Despite its age, 
this volume remains important for its comprehensive and valuable coverage 
of American religion, communal experiments, and reform movements during 
the ﬁ rst half of the 19th century. 
Ward, John W. Andrew Jackson: Symbol for an Age. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1962. The author analyzes how and why Jackson became a 
symbol of his time and its values.
Weinberg, Gerhard L. “Some Myths of World War II.” Journal of Military 
History 75, no. 3 (July 2011): 701–718. Written by the dean of World War 
II scholars, this essay identiﬁ es and attacks a series of World War II myths. 

179
Weinberg identiﬁ es and attacks even more of them in his monumental A 
World at Arms: A Global History of World War II (New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 1994).
Westad, Orde Arne. The Global Cold War: Third World Interventions and 
the Making of Our Time. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2007. This 
award-winning book focuses on the globalization of the Cold War and its 
impact on the Third World.
Wilentz, Sean. Andrew Jackson. New York: Henry Holt, 2005. In this brief 
volume, the author portrays Jackson as a product of his time and a Democrat, 
despite behavior that is not considered democratic today. 
Williams, William A. The Tragedy of American Diplomacy. 2nd rev. and 
enlarged ed. New York: Dell Publishing Co., 1972, Norton reprint, 1988. 
First published in 1959, this highly inﬂ uential reinterpretation emphasizes 
the economic and informally imperial nature of 20th-century American 
diplomacy stemming from the Open Door Notes of 1899–1900.
Wills, Garry. Cincinnatus: George Washington and the Enlightenment. New 
York: Doubleday, 1984. Wills places Washington’s character and values 
within the context and values of his time, as exempliﬁ ed in his resignation as 
commander in chief of the Continental Army, his role at the Constitutional 
Convention, and his decision to retire after two terms as president.
Wilson, Joan Hoff. Herbert Hoover: Forgotten Progressive. Boston: Little, 
Brown, 1975. This volume provides a brief reinterpretation of Hoover as
a Progressive.
Wood, Gordon S. The Creation of the American Republic, 1776–1787. 
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1969. This major and 
highly regarded interpretive work focuses on the beliefs and ideas that led 
many of the Revolutionary generation to favor establishing a strong central 
government as the only way to preserve American liberty.

180
Bibliography
Woodward, C. Vann. Tom Watson: Agrarian Rebel. New York: Macmillan 
Publishing Company, 1938. This classic biography of one of the major 
Populist ﬁ gures in the South was written by one of the most inﬂ uential U.S. 
historians of the 20th century.

