
w w w . s y n g r e s s . c o m
Syngress is committed to publishing high-quality books for IT Professionals and
delivering those books in media and formats that fit the demands of our cus-
tomers. We are also committed to extending the utility of the book you pur-
chase via additional materials available from our Web site. 
SOLUTIONS WEB SITE
To register your book, visit www.syngress.com/solutions. Once registered, you
can access our solutions@syngress.com Web pages. There you will find an
assortment of value-added features such as free e-booklets related to the topic
of this book, URLs of related Web site, FAQs from the book, corrections, and any
updates from the author(s).
ULTIMATE CDs
Our Ultimate CD product line offers our readers budget-conscious compilations
of some of our best-selling backlist titles in Adobe PDF form. These CDs are the
perfect way to extend your reference library on key topics pertaining to your
area of expertise, including Cisco Engineering, Microsoft Windows System
Administration, CyberCrime Investigation, Open Source Security, and Firewall
Configuration, to name a few.
DOWNLOADABLE EBOOKS
For readers who can’t wait for hard copy, we offer most of our titles in down-
loadable Adobe PDF form. These eBooks are often available weeks before hard
copies, and are priced affordably.
SYNGRESS OUTLET
Our outlet store at syngress.com features overstocked, out-of-print, or slightly
hurt books at significant savings.
SITE LICENSING
Syngress has a well-established program for site licensing our ebooks onto
servers in corporations, educational institutions, and large organizations.
Contact us at sales@syngress.com for more information.
CUSTOM PUBLISHING
Many organizations welcome the ability to combine parts of multiple Syngress
books, as well as their own content, into a single volume for their own internal
use. Contact us at sales@syngress.com for more information.
Visit us at

Robert Slade
Dictionary of
Information
Security

Syngress Publishing, Inc., the author(s), and any person or firm involved in the writing, editing, or production
(collectively “Makers”) of this book (“the Work”) do not guarantee or warrant the results to be obtained
from the Work.
There is no guarantee of any kind, expressed or implied, regarding the Work or its contents.The Work is sold
AS IS and WITHOUT WARRANTY.You may have other legal rights, which vary from state to state.
In no event will Makers be liable to you for damages, including any loss of profits, lost savings, or other inci-
dental or consequential damages arising out from the Work or its contents. Because some states do not allow
the exclusion or limitation of liability for consequential or incidental damages, the above limitation may not
apply to you.
You should always use reasonable care, including backup and other appropriate precautions, when working
with computers, networks, data, and files.
Syngress Media®, Syngress®,“Career Advancement Through Skill Enhancement®,”“Ask the Author
UPDATE®,” and “Hack Proofing®,” are registered trademarks of Syngress Publishing, Inc.“Syngress:The
Definition of a Serious Security Library”™,“Mission Critical™,” and “The Only Way to Stop a Hacker is to
Think Like One™” are trademarks of Syngress Publishing, Inc. Brands and product names mentioned in this
book are trademarks or service marks of their respective companies.
KEY
SERIAL NUMBER
001
HJIRTCV764
002
PO9873D5FG
003
829KM8NJH2
004
5678YG7PMC
005
CVPLQ6WQ23
006
VBP965T5T5
007
HJJJ863WD3E
008
2987GVTWMK
009
629MP5SDJT
010
IMWQ295T6T
PUBLISHED BY
Syngress Publishing, Inc.
800 Hingham Street
Rockland, MA 02370
Dictionary of Information Security
Copyright © 2006 by Syngress Publishing, Inc.All rights reserved. Printed in Canada. Except as permitted
under the Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form
or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the pub-
lisher, with the exception that the program listings may be entered, stored, and executed in a computer
system, but they may not be reproduced for publication.
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  0
ISBN: 1597491152
Publisher:Andrew Williams
Page Layout and Art: Patricia Lupien
Cover Designer: Michael Kavish
Distributed by O’Reilly Media, Inc. in the United States and Canada.
For information on rights, translations, and bulk sales, contact Matt Pedersen, Director of Sales and Rights, at
Syngress Publishing; email matt@syngress.com or fax to 781-681-3585.

Acknowledgments
v
Syngress would like to acknowledge the following people for their
kindness and support in making this book possible.
Syngress books are now distributed in the United States and Canada
by O’Reilly Media, Inc.The enthusiasm and work ethic at O’Reilly
are incredible, and we would like to thank everyone there for their
time and efforts to bring Syngress books to market:Tim O’Reilly,
Laura Baldwin, Mark Brokering, Mike Leonard, Donna Selenko,
Bonnie Sheehan, Cindy Davis, Grant Kikkert, Opol Matsutaro, Steve
Hazelwood, Mark Wilson, Rick Brown,Tim Hinton, Kyle Hart, Sara
Winge, Peter Pardo, Leslie Crandell, Regina Aggio Wilkinson, Pascal
Honscher, Preston Paull, Susan Thompson, Bruce Stewart, Laura
Schmier, Sue Willing, Mark Jacobsen, Betsy Waliszewski, Kathryn
Barrett, John Chodacki, Rob Bullington, Kerry Beck, Karen
Montgomery, and Patrick Dirden.
The incredibly hardworking team at Elsevier Science, including
Jonathan Bunkell, Ian Seager, Duncan Enright, David Burton,
Rosanna Ramacciotti, Robert Fairbrother, Miguel Sanchez, Klaus
Beran, Emma Wyatt, Krista Leppiko, Marcel Koppes, Judy Chappell,
Radek Janousek, Rosie Moss, David Lockley, Nicola Haden, Bill
Kennedy, Martina Morris, Kai Wuerfl-Davidek, Christiane
Leipersberger,Yvonne Grueneklee, Nadia Balavoine, and Chris
Reinders for making certain that our vision remains worldwide in
scope.
David Buckland, Marie Chieng, Lucy Chong, Leslie Lim,Audrey
Gan, Pang Ai Hua, Joseph Chan, June Lim, and Siti Zuraidah Ahmad
of Pansing Distributors for the enthusiasm with which they receive
our books.
David Scott, Tricia Wilden, Marilla Burgess, Annette Scott, Andrew
Swaffer, Stephen O’Donoghue, Bec Lowe, Mark Langley, and Anyo
Geddes of Woodslane for distributing our books throughout Australia,
New Zealand,Papua New Guinea,Fiji,Tonga,Solomon Islands,and the
Cook Islands.

To George Raymond Slade 
January 23, 1925 to January 25, 2005 
who instilled in me the need for terminological exactitude

vii
About the Author
Rob Slade is a data communications, information secu-
rity, and management consultant from North Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada. His first love is teaching (before
research turned him into a virus expert), and he got into
computers because of an interest in what they could do to
improve the education process in the public school system.
He holds a B.Sc. from the University of British Columbia,
an M.S. (in Computer and Information Science
Education) from the University of Oregon, and a Diploma
of Christian Studies from Regent College.
Rob has formal training in data communications and
exploration with the online community, and has done
communications training for a number of international
commercial seminar firms. His technical jobs have involved
everything from support of terminal emulation programs to
satellite communications. In concert with his background
in education, he prepared the technical and interface side of
the World LOGO Conference, the first time an on-site
conference was fully linked to online participants.
His research into computer viral programs started
when they first appeared as a major problem “in the wild.”
Acting initially as the unofficial archivist for the budding
research community, he became known for “Mr. Slade’s
lists” of virus information.While part of the working
group for the VIRUS-L FAQ, he was best known for a
series of review and tutorial articles that were eventually
published as Robert Slade’s Guide to Computer Viruses. In an
attempt to update this material, he coauthored Viruses
Revealed.As an outgrowth of the virus research, he pre-
pared the world’s first course on forensic programming,
which became the first book on Software Forensics.As a

Senior Instructor for (ISC)2, Rob has been working on a
glossary of security terms (which became this book) and
references for CISSP candidate students, describing the
various CISSP study guides and recommended resources
for the different domains. He is also working on the
Community Security Education project, attempting to
promote security awareness for the general public as a
means of reducing overall information security threats.
Despite all of this work, Rob is best known for glee-
fully (and regularly) reviewing technical books, producing
reviews that appear on appropriate newsgroups and
mailing lists, including groups and lists related to the topics
of the individual titles—pointing out the errors in literally
thousands of books written by other people is easier and
more fun than writing real stuff. More information than
anyone would want to know about him is available at
http://victoria.tc.ca/techrev/rms.htm. It is next to impos-
sible to get him to take “bio” writing seriously.
Fred Cohen is best known as the inventor of computer
virus defense techniques, the principal investigator whose
team defined the information assurance problem as it
relates to critical infrastructure protection today, as a sem-
inal researcher in the use of deception for information
protection, and as a topflight information protection con-
sultant. But his work on information protection extends
far beyond these areas. In the 1970s he designed network
protocols for secure digital networks carrying voice, video,
and data; and he helped develop and prototype the elec-
tronic cashwatch for implementing personal digital money
Forewords
viii

systems. In the 1980s, he developed integrity mechanisms
for secure operating systems, consulted for many major
corporations, taught short courses in information protec-
tion to over 10,000 students worldwide, and in 1989, he
won the prestigious international Information Technology
Award for his work on integrity protection.
In the 1990s, he developed protection testing and audit
techniques and systems, secure Internet servers and sys-
tems, defensive information warfare techniques and sys-
tems, early systems using deception for information
protection, and bootable CDs designed for forensics and
secure server applications.All told, the protection tech-
niques he pioneered now help to defend more than three
quarters of all the computers in the world.
Fred has authored almost 200 invited, refereed, and
other scientific and management research articles, writes a
monthly column for Network Security magazine on man-
aging network security, and has written several widely read
books on information protection. His series of “Infosec
Baseline” studies have been widely used by the research
community as stepping off points for further research, his
“50 Ways” series is very popular among practitioners
looking for issues to be addressed, and his most recent
“Protection for Deception” series of papers is widely cited.
As a corporate consultant Fred has helped secure some
of the world’s largest companies in the fields of informa-
tion technology, microelectronics, pharmaceuticals, manu-
facturing, transportation, telecommunications, and the
financial and information industries.As a consultant to and
researcher for the U.S. government, he was the principal
investigator on seminal studies in defensive information
operations. He was the principal investigator on the
national information security technical baseline series of
reports, founded the College Cyber Defenders program at
Sandia National Laboratories that ultimately led to the
formation of the CyberCorps program, and led projects
ix

ranging from “Resilience” to “The Invisible Router.” He
has also worked in critical infrastructure protection, with
law enforcement, and with the intelligence community to
help improve their ability to deal with computer-related
crime and emerging threats to national security. He has
worked on issues of digital forensics, including work for
many large corporations and pro bono and state-funded
work for indigent defendants, and in 2002, won the
“Techno-Security Industry Professional of the Year”Award.
Fred has participated in and created numerous strategic
scenario games. He devised and ran the first Internet-based
strategic information warfare wargame and held several ini-
tial trial Internet-based games involving national defense
and corporate personnel. In 1998, he introduced the
Internet Game for information security policy development,
training, and awareness in corporate, educational, and gov-
ernment environments, and followed this up with the
Sexual Harassment Game, which helps train employees on
sexual harassment policies and processes. His recent intro-
duction of several security games and simulations to the
Internet are excellent examples of the work he has done in
this area. He has also developed several strategic scenarios
for government and private use.
Over the past 25 years, Fred has managed organizations
and projects with as many as 250 employees. Several proj-
ects he led have resulted in new business in excess of $10
million, and one project led to a five-year government
contract with a ceiling of over $1.7 billion. He led a 35-
person research team at Sandia National Laboratories for
almost five years and produced several patents, copyrighted
software programs, and publications in the process.
His combination of management, technical, and com-
munication skills allows him to effectively bridge the gap
between decision makers and implementers. His involve-
ment in and understanding of corporate, national, and
global issues provides a context that allows him to meet
x

challenges of unlimited size and scope.With more than 25
years of experience and a global reputation for integrity,
accuracy, and innovation, Fred Cohen is widely considered
one of the world’s leading authorities in information 
protection.
Jack Holleran has had an interesting career pretending to
be a college professor (adjunct at Anne Arundel
Community College, graduate adjunct at Towson
University and Johns Hopkins University), umpire (base-
ball, softball), commercial instructor (ISC2), Information
Assurance Engineer (Engineering Solutions, Inc.),
Chairman (various roles: National Information Systems
Security Conference, Black Hat, DefCon, and GovSec),
and Technical Director (retired, National Computer
Security Center, National Security Agency).When he isn’t
pretending to work, he is the happy grandfather of three,
and hopes to break Rob’s record of four. Jack graduated
from Duquesne University (B.S.) and Central Michigan
University (M.A.) with postgraduate work in Computer
Science at the University of Maryland.
Peter G. Neumann has doctorates from Harvard and
Darmstadt.After 10 years at Bell Labs in Murray Hill, NJ,
in the 1960s, during which he was heavily involved in the
Multics development jointly with MIT and Honeywell, he
has been in SRI’s Computer Science Lab since September
1971. He is concerned with computer systems and net-
works, trustworthiness/dependability, high assurance, secu-
rity, reliability, survivability, safety, and many risk-related
issues such as voting system integrity, crypto policy, social
implications, and human needs, including privacy. He mod-
erates the ACM Risks Forum, edits CACM’s monthly
Inside Risks column, chairs the ACM Committee on
Computers and Public Policy, and chairs the National
xi

Committee for Voting Integrity (www.epic.org/
privacy/voting). He created ACM SIGSOFT’s Software
Engineering Notes in 1976, was its editor for 19 years, and
still contributes the RISKS section. He cofounded People
For Internet Responsibility (PFIR, www.PFIR.org). His
1995 book, Computer-Related Risks, is still timely! He is a
Fellow of the ACM, IEEE, and AAAS, and an SRI Fellow.
He received the National Computer System Security
Award in 2002 and the ACM SIGSAC Outstanding
Contributions Award in 2005. He is a member of the U.S.
Government Accountability Office Executive Council on
Information Management and Technology, and the
California Office of Privacy Protection advisory council.
He has taught courses at Darmstadt, Stanford, U.C.
Berkeley, and the University of Maryland. See his Web site
(www.csl.sri.com/neumann) for further background,
Senate and House testimonies, papers, bibliography, and 
so forth.
Hal Tipton, currently an independent consultant and past
president of the International Information System Security
Certification Consortium, was Director of Computer
Security for Rockwell International Corporation for about
15 years. He initiated the Rockwell computer and data
security program in 1977 and continued to administer,
develop, enhance, and expand the program to accommo-
date the control needs produced by technological advances
until his retirement from Rockwell in 1994.
He has been a member of the Information Systems
Security Association (ISSA) since 1982, was president of
the Los Angeles Chapter in 1984, and president of the
national organization of ISSA (1987–1989). He was added
to the ISSA Hall of Fame and the ISSA Honor Role in
2000. He was a member of the National Institute for
Standards and Technology (NIST) Computer and
xii

Telecommunications Security Council, and the National
Research Council Secure Systems Study Committee (for
the National Academy of Science). He holds a B.S. in
Engineering from the U.S. Naval Academy, an M.A. in
Personnel Administration from George Washington
University, and a Certificate in Computer Science from the
University of California at Irvine. He is a Certified
Information System Security Professional (CISSP), ISSAP,
and ISSMP.
He has been a speaker at all the major information
security conferences, including Computer Security
Institute, the ISSA Annual Working Conference, the
Computer Security Workshop, MIS Conferences,AIS
Security for Space Operations, DOE Computer Security
Conference, National Computer Security Conference, IIA
Security Conference, EDPAA, UCCEL Security & Audit
Users Conference, and Industrial Security Awareness
Conference.
He has conducted/participated in information security
seminars for (ISC)2, Frost & Sullivan, UCI, CSULB, System
Exchange Seminars, and the Institute for International
Research. He received the Computer Security Institute
“Lifetime Achievement Award” in 1994 and the (ISC)2
“Hal Tipton Award” in 2001.
Dr. Eugene Spafford is a professor with a joint appoint-
ment in Computer Sciences and Electrical and Computer
Engineering at Purdue University, where he has served on
the faculty since 1987. He is also a professor of philosophy
(courtesy) and a professor of communication (courtesy).
He serves on a number of advisory and editorial boards,
and is internationally known for his writing, research, and
speaking on issues of security and ethics. Currently, Spaf (as
he is known to his friends, colleagues, and students) has
xiii

research interests primarily in the areas of information
security, computer crime investigation, and information
ethics.
Spaf is Executive Director of the Purdue CERIAS
(Center for Education and Research in Information
Assurance and Security) and was the founder and director
of the (superseded) COAST Laboratory.
Spaf is also involved in a number of professional soci-
eties and activities outside Purdue, including serving on the
Board of Directors of the Computing Research Association
and as chair of the Association of Computing Machinery’s
(ACM’s) US Public Policy Committee. He was a member
of the President’s Information Technology Advisory
Committee (PITAC) in 2003-2005, and continues to serve
as an adviser to over a dozen federal agencies and major
corporations.
Spaf received his B.A. degree with a double major in
mathematics and computer sciences from the State
University College at Brockport (1979, NY). Upon gradu-
ation, he was honored with a SUNY College President’s
Citation. He then attended the School of Information and
Computer Sciences (now the College of Computing) at
the Georgia Institute of Technology, holding both a
Georgia Tech President’s Fellowship and a National Science
Foundation Graduate Fellowship. He received his M.S. in
1981 and his Ph.D. in 1986 for his design and implementa-
tion of the original Clouds reliable, distributed operating
system kernel, and for his contributions as one of the orig-
inal members of the Clouds design team.
xiv

Carole McClendon of Waterside Productions, my agent, put up
with this project, and me, for many years before it ﬁnally saw
print.
Hal Tipton, whose contributions to both security education
and security literature are too numerous to mention, allowed me
to join “the best instructor corps in the world,” which gave rise
to this whole thing.The CISSP CBK instructors themselves
have been active in promoting the glossary, and in feeding back
errors and omissions. I look forward to seeing you all again at
the next T3.
Gary and Mae Shearman are the powers behind the Victoria
TelecommunityNet.They have, for many years, provided a home
for the online glossary, study resources, and book reviews,
despite my highly irregular updating schedule.
A sincere thank you to my foreworders, who, though
extremely busy, all graciously responded to an emergency
request, at the last minute, when the contract (with a short
deadline) arrived while I was teaching out of town. Each con-
tributed an important perspective to the project (and even spe-
ciﬁc suggestions for additions and corrections).
My thanks to Amorette Pedersen, Co-Founder of Syngress
Publishing, for agreeing that the Oxford English Dictionary is a
valid lexical reference, and for sticking to her commitments in
the face of intransigent copy editors.
Gloria, my copy editor, developmental editor, living style
sheet, fellow player with words, best friend, organizer of outings
with grandchildren, and wife, again checked over this
manuscript, this time interpreting HTML, doing it on a laptop,
and doing it all in a week.
Any remaining errors are due to my stubbornness in not
taking her advice.
xv
Author
Acknowledgments


Why a dictionary?
When I was allowed to join the august ranks of those facilitating
the (ISC)2 (International Information Systems Security
Certiﬁcation Consortium) CISSP (Certiﬁed Information Systems
Security Professional) CBK (Common Body of Knowledge)
review seminar, one thing quickly became very clear: the des-
perate need for a dictionary.All ﬁelds of technology have their
own jargon.Those of us in security tend to be worse than those
in other ﬁelds, because we frequently take perfectly good words
or phrases and invest them with specialized meanings.
In fact, one of the CISSP study guides, the CISSP (Exam
Cram) by Mandy Andress, is essentially a glossary. It is in topical,
and not alphabetical, order, but is presented as a list of key terms
and phrases.
This need for a better explanation of the mass of security
terminology was rather ironic in regard to the CISSP seminars.
The CISSP certiﬁcation is described in a number of ways.
While some security professionals are generalists and others spe-
cialize in diverse ﬁelds, we try to stress to candidates that one of
the beneﬁts of a CISSP designation is that it ensures that the
holder knows what he (or she) is talking about in regard to
security.All CISSPs should, at the very least, be able to talk to
each other. (Actually, I’ve seen this work out in rather dramatic
ways at times.)
xvii
Preface

Hadn’t someone already done that?
There are, and were, other security glossaries. RFC 2828 (avail-
able at www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2828.txt), the Internet Security
Glossary is a complete and careful work intended to outline
security-related terms that should (and some that should not) be
used in Internet Standards Documents (ISDs). I recommend it
for those interested in network security, but, of course, it doesn’t
touch on other security domains.
Corey Schou’s Draft Comprehensive Information Assurance
Dictionary (http://security.isu.edu/pdf/NIATECV30d.pdf) is a
comprehensive document, the result of an enormous amount of
work to determine the origin of various terms. However, it
includes a great deal of material that has no speciﬁc relation to
information security, save that it deals with computers or other
technology. It is also a wonderful source of technology history
trivia. Unfortunately, it’s a bit hefty for those who simply want
to look up a speciﬁc security term.
Governments, particularly the United States government and
military, have a big jump on the rest of us with regard to secu-
rity.A source for government material is the National Information
Systems Security (INFOSEC) Glossary
(www.cultural.com/web/security/infosec.glossary.html), which
dates from 1992. Unfortunately, the military got to be a bit too
specialized, and a number of these terms are used nowhere else.
Two groups involved in security have developed glossaries:
SANS (Sysadmin,Audit, Network, Security) at
www.sans.org/resources/glossary.php, and ISACA (the
Information Systems Audit and Control Association) at
www.isaca.org/glossary.htm.They tend to provide the bare min-
imum in terms of information and the number of entries.
Some vendors have also created glossaries:AuditMyPC at
www.auditmypc.com/freescan/glossary.asp, and ANNA Ltd. at
www.softsecurity.com/doc/glossary_sec.html.These are even
smaller.
www.syngress.com
xviii
Preface

So, it seems there is still a need for a dictionary that covers all
the basic jargon of security, without bloating itself with every
minor variation on a terminological theme. I put together a glos-
sary on a Web page (http://victoria.tc.ca/techrev/
secgloss.htm, through the kind ofﬁces of Victoria
TelecommunityNet), and set about making it more complete.
(Now that this book is ﬁnally in print, the full dictionary has
been removed, but a page with errata and updates will still be
there.)
After I had put together the glossary on the Web, a couple of
printed security dictionaries were published.The ﬁrst was the
Internet Security Dictionary by Vir V. Phoha.This was a valuable
addition to the security bookshelf, as the only printed reference,
but of the 1,400 terms deﬁned in the book, a number are simply
minor variations on a theme. (There are, for example, 12 phrases
beginning with “access.”) Much of the material is based on the
old United States military terminology. Some new and slang
terms have been included, but some of these entries are only
very vaguely related to security. Deﬁnitions tend to be terse,
and many lack necessary detail.
A couple of years later, Urs Gattiker published The
Information Security Dictionary. However, it is incomplete, contains
a number of errors of fact, and many of the entries are inconsis-
tent with other published security literature.
OK, but why me?
In regard to putting together a dictionary, I had a head start. My
background in security was in malware research, and those of us
in the antivirus community tend to make up a lot of specialized
terms as well. I had included a fairly extensive glossary in my
ﬁrst book, and I’d just ﬁnished adding a bunch more entries for
my second. So I already had a core set of terms, albeit in one
particular ﬁeld.
I’m also “the book guy.” I review a lot of the security litera-
ture, and one of things I see is that the meaning of words tends
to drift over time.Therefore, I have an advantage in knowing
www.syngress.com
Preface
xix

which words are currently being used, which ones are being
replaced by others, and which were silly to begin with and
should never have been used in the ﬁrst place.
I have also reviewed a number of dictionaries over the years.
There are a great many in the telecommunications ﬁeld; they
used to be given away as freebies by vendors at trade shows.
There are so many on the market that when I was reviewing
books for a telecommunications magazine some years back,
every year we had a special “dictionaries” column.
Who’s going to read a dictionary?
I assume that the largest single audience for this book will be
students, of one type or another.You may be going for the
CISSP exam. (For most of its life, the Web version was being
used as a resource for CISSP candidates.) You may be writing
another security certiﬁcation.You may be a student in a com-
puter security program in a college or university. Or, you may
simply be a lifelong learner.
Then there are the security professionals. Nobody is an
expert in all the ﬁelds of security, so here is a reference to those
areas in which you have not worked. Finally, you’ll get to know
what your colleagues down the hall have been talking about all
these years. (You’ll also be one of the people who “get” most of
the jokes.)
How about the system and network administrators? Even if
your job isn’t speciﬁcally about security, you have to deal with it
these days as a matter of course. So, you need to know what the
latest vulnerability advisories are discussing, and possibly what
makes a proxy ﬁrewall different from a packet ﬁlter.
Managers, of course, have to address risk management
whether their jobs relate to security or not. But if you have spe-
cial responsibilities for security, even if you have specialists and
professionals who do the hands-on work for you, you need to
know what they are talking about, what the vendors are talking
about when they are trying to sell you something, and whether
what either group is saying actually means anything.
www.syngress.com
xx
Preface

What is this dictionary like?
Dictionaries are usually rather formal in tone. I have deliberately
tried to break that pattern. Formal deﬁnitions do exist in these
pages, but, where a term carries an important concept, I have
tried to speak plainly. I’m sure some readers will consider a
number of the entries ﬂippant; hopefully, I haven’t introduced
too many errors in my wording. (Fred, in his Foreword, found
the fractionally fanciful ﬂavour of this folio.)
(I have not yet succeeded in completely breaking away from
a formal tone.As I am ﬁnishing the manuscript for the dictio-
nary, I am also reviewing “Information Security and Employee
Behaviour,” by Angus McIlwraith. He makes the point that we
in security tend to use a lot of complicated words with Latinate
roots, even where perfectly acceptable simple alternatives exist.
Reading his examples, I cringe, recognizing stuff I haven’t ﬁxed
yet.Too late for this edition, I guess, but I suppose I know what
my ﬁrst job will be once this manuscript ﬁnally gets shipped off
to the printer.) (By the way, I recommend McIlwraith’s book.)
This glossary concentrates on usage of terms. Capitalization
and spelling generally follow the most common usage, except
where such usage can be shown to be based on a speciﬁc error.
Acronyms and phrases have the deﬁnition placed with the most
commonly used form; for example, in most cases the phrase
“denial of service” is used unless it has been previously deﬁned
in an article as the acronym “DoS,” whereas the acronym
“DDoS” is almost universally used in preference to the phrase
“distributed denial of service.” In all cases, an attempt has been
made to have a link from the lesser used form to the deﬁnition.
I have not tried to be exhaustive in listing every variation on
a theme.Therefore, when a term is listed in bold font, indicating
a link to another entry, there may be a slight variation. If, for
example, you see “sanity checking” printed in italics in one deﬁ-
nition, the related entry might be “sanity check.”
There are many security terms that are local. For example, a
large amount of security literature produced in the United States
www.syngress.com
Preface
xxi

makes reference to United States Department of Defense mate-
rials that were not picked up by the security community, or to
U.S. legislation that has no relevance in other countries.When
such material is included here, I have tried to make note of its
origin in the deﬁnition.
Those who are serious about dictionaries as dictionaries will
ﬁnd this one lacking. I have not included pronunciation, and in
most cases, I have no information about the origin and deriva-
tion of terms. I have concentrated on security students and pro-
fessionals; those researching the history of technical language
will probably not ﬁnd what they are looking for here.
Actually, it’s hard to say whether this is a dictionary or an
encyclopedia.At times, I have felt that a simple deﬁnition isn’t
good enough, and have expanded some terms at length. Indeed,
some of the material in this book is subjective and opinionated.
(So am I.)  I know that many are going to disagree in places.
However, I know that a great many people need to come up to
speed in many areas of security, and need more than deﬁnitions
that use a lot of words that have, themselves, to be deﬁned.The
choice of how to do this is subjective. If you disagree with a
decision I’ve made, then contact me, and hopefully we can make
the next edition better.
This work is very much “in process.”There are lots of candi-
dates for the fastest changing area of technology, but I think
security has a lock on the top spot.Whatever else develops in
any area of technology tends to have implications for security.
Therefore, I expect that there will be editions of this dictionary
to come, in years to come, with new and updated terms. Please
report any errors or omissions to slade@victoria.tc.ca or
rslade@computercrime.org. I also set up a mailing list for those
who want to be more involved with the project: you can join at
secgloss-subscribe@egroups.com.
www.syngress.com
xxii
Preface

Science makes progress through the process of hypothesis,
experiment, analysis, and description. Engineering builds on sci-
entiﬁc results.To clearly convey those results and establish a
common frame of reference requires clarity, precision, and
agreed-upon language. Mathematics provides one such system of
communication, but it doesn’t convey everything we might wish
to express. It is left to human language to express concepts and
relationships fundamental to our shared progress.
Computing is a discipline that has matured over the last half-
century as a new ﬁeld of science and engineering.Within that
discipline, we have witnessed the emergence of new specializa-
tions, each with its own particular constructs, terms, ground
truths, formalisms, and challenges. One specialization, addressing
misuse of computing resources, spans many of those other disci-
plines yet retains its own special character.Whether referred to as
cyber security, information security, information assurance, or one
of several other terms, the core holds great challenges and impor-
tance to everyone working in computing... and everyone affected
by computers.As such, having a common lexicon to use when
talking about the area is of growing importance.
Rob Slade has been involved in information security as an
author, researcher, and reviewer for many years. In that time, he
has surveyed most of the literature, and contributed several
important components to it. From that broad experience, he has
compiled this glossary of infosec-related terms.Although not
xxiii
Foreword by
Gene Spafford,
Purdue University

everyone will completely agree with every entry, it provides a
valuable ﬁrst pass at a comprehensive set of deﬁnitions that can
be used by practitioner and end user alike. Rob’s glossary pro-
vides a citable, common source we can all use as we attempt to
describe some of the vexing problems we face with cyber secu-
rity and privacy—and their solutions.
Thank you, Rob.
www.syngress.com
xxiv
Foreword

Foreword: (1) a short piece written by someone with a name to
introduce and elucidate upon the positive values associated with
a written work; (2) a way to get your name into someone else’s
book; (3) something the author asks someone else to do because
it would be unseemly to write it himself; (4) something the
publisher says will increase sales.
Forword: (1) a program that does forensics for Word docu-
ments; (2) a way to get a software product I used in a case once
advertised surreptitiously in someone else’s book; (3) something
I slipped past the editors; (4) something my publisher says will
increase my sales of Forword.
If a “glossary” glosses over things, then Rob Slade has a
“bug” in his title.While most of us have our own deﬁnitions of
words, and there are many terms of art used in the “security”
ﬁeld that are interpreted differently by many of us (see “hacker”
or “hack” as opposed to “cracker” or “crack”), Rob has created
an extensive, if not comprehensive, if not comprehensible,“dis-
closure” of what most in the ﬁeld would ﬁnd reasonably close to
the way we use these terms.Which in an emerging ﬁeld is a
Herculean task.
While I could not “decipher” how “deception” included
“decryption,” I could see how “data diddling” could have cor-
rupted the “data integrity” when a “dark-side hacker” created a
“deadlock.”This reminds me of a program I wrote long ago that
took different kinds of keywords and automatically generated
sequences of them in valid syntax to produce proposals. But
that’s a different story...
Foreword by
Fred Cohen, 
Security Posture,
University of New Haven
xxv

www.syngress.com
xxvi
Foreword
Just between you and me (see “conﬁdentiality”), most of the
people who use most of these words haven’t bothered to make
sure their usage is right (see “integrity”). Of course,“hashing”
out my personal views on “users” of incorrect terminological
expressions should probably be done elsewhere, lest I get a “mail
storm” of “spam” from some “malicious”“evil twin” that
“exploits” a “fail over”“false alarm” to “infect” a ﬁle (see “ﬁle
infector”) that creates a “fault” in a “ﬁlter” that “ﬁrewalls” the
“ﬂow control” that “front ends” the “freeware” used by the
“fraudsters” that “format” the “spam” that I get. For that reason,
I include this “disclaimer”... just kidding—as Rob was when he
wrote the glossary entry for it.
As you probably have an “awareness” by now, it is hard to
write a simple sentence without using one of the words Rob
provides in his glossary.And for complex sentences, such as the
ones I tend to write in ﬂowery introductions such as this one, it
is downright impossible to do so. Okay, that was an exception.
(Actually,“exception” should be in there but isn’t!) But by now,
I think you get my point. If you are going to talk to anyone in
“computer security” (a town in Iowa as I understand it), and you
don’t know most of the words in Rob’s glossary, you can’t
“assure” that their “emanations” will be properly understood.
And from a purely practical perspective, if you want to fake
being a computer security expert, you had better know the dif-
ference between the “conﬁnement property” and the “star 
property.”—FC

During the past 30 or so years, as the ﬁeld of information secu-
rity has grown from ﬂedging status to an overarching giant,
developers in both the private and public sectors have created
thousands of tools and protocols to help ensure the conﬁden-
tiality, integrity, and availability of all types of information
resources. Quite naturally, the terminology and deﬁnitions of
terms and concepts multiplied exponentially. Unfortunately,
during this process, the same term and/or acronym described, in
many cases, very different things.The state today is that we have
difﬁculty communicating our thoughts to each other in this
profession because there is no standard glossary of terms we all
subscribe to and understand.
Several efforts in the past have resulted in compiling exten-
sive terms and listing their several deﬁnitions, but have failed to
solve the problem.What is needed now in the world of infor-
mation security is a single glossary of terms using the preferred
deﬁnition for each term to be published and used throughout
the world.
I personally have come face to face with this deﬁnition
problem as the Chief Instructor over the past dozen years for the
International Information Systems Security Certiﬁcation
Consortium (ISC)2. In that role, I have developed several courses
that addressed topics contained in the Common Body of
Knowledge for the information security ﬁeld that dealt with
concepts and deﬁnitions. I struggled continuously to select the
most appropriate deﬁnition for many of the most important
terms.As a result, I am supportive of the idea of publishing an
Foreword by
Hal Tipton,
CISSP, ISSAP, ISSMP
xxvii

ofﬁcial glossary of terms for information security professionals
and related personnel.
Rob Slade has undertaken this difﬁcult task, and his
Dictionary should prove to be one of the most helpful additions
to the professional library of every one of us working in the
ﬁeld of information security. Obviously, this ﬁrst edition is only
the beginning.As the ﬁeld continues to expand, more and more
terms will be developed that require sorting out and unique def-
initions.This means that the Dictionary will be a living, growing
document for the foreseeable future.
www.syngress.com
xxviii
Foreword

Given that there is no such thing as perfect security, we should
not expect a perfect glossary—because there is always so much
more to be said. However, as a ﬁrst approximation, this glossary
is well conceived and well executed.
Slade’s knowledge of the subject matter is outstanding, as is
his commitment to make this a work in progress. I suspect it
will continue to evolve—perhaps even somewhat like George
Washington’s original axe (which has had many new handles and
many new blades, but is still the same old axe).
Foreword by
Peter G. Neumann,
ACM Risks Forum Moderator
xxix

Welcome to the brave new world of computer security, data
security, information security, information assurance, and, more
often than not, information overload.Yes, I know the ﬁeld has
been around since the 1960s, but we, and this ﬁeld, are still
evolving.
As an individual, it is extremely difﬁcult to have cogent dia-
logue when a listener or reader doesn’t know what values to
assign to terminology. Rob’s Dictionary of Information Security can
remove many of these impediments. Rob provides a consistent,
well-written reference point for students and professionals.
As teachers, professionals, and communicators, our primary
goal is to present our knowledge such that our students, peers,
and management can interpret, communicate, and understand
the ideas as we intended.This dictionary provides the framework
and boundaries for words and terminology that we can use in
our professional venues.
As a CISSP, many of the terms and words we use are suc-
cinct and well deﬁned.When we take certiﬁcation exams, we
will see many of these terms. Knowing their meaning can only
improve our chances of selecting the right answer.
Roget1 provides the term glossary with the synonyms lex-
icon, reference, terminology, and encyclopedia. Indirect syn-
onyms include deﬁnition, explanation, interpretation,
codiﬁcation, and observation.
This book is all of that and more; it helps us provide a better
writer-to-reader dialogue. Our time is valuable; the price of this
book can be amortized in spending less time discussing deﬁni-
tions.This book will have a close location in my reference
library!
1 Source: Roget’s New Millennium Thesaurus, First Edition (v 1.2.1)
©2006 by Lexico Publishing Group, LLC.All rights reserved.
Foreword by
Jack Holleran, CISSP
xxx

Introduction to Infosecspeak
Communities often deﬁne themselves by vocabulary that those
in the inner circle know, and those on the outside do not.
Security people do this as well, and sometimes more than most.
We are, after all, the professionally paranoid, and it is more
important to us than to most other groups to know who
belongs.
This linguistic identiﬁcation can backﬁre. Law enforcement
personnel have a speciﬁc and distinctive vocabulary all their
own. I have been informed by a number of members of police
forces that police ofﬁcers are very susceptible to social engi-
neering, or scams, due to this fact. If you know the language,
you must be “one of us.”
Understanding the language of the security community is
made more difﬁcult because there are multiple security commu-
nities. Security people come from backgrounds such as the mili-
tary, government, academia, industry, system administration, law
enforcement, and the intelligence community.Very often, these
groups don’t talk to each other.
In terms of the security lexicon, the ﬁrst contribution has to
be the government and military, particularly from the United
States.A number of terms arose from the language developed in
that arena, and the formal studies funded from that source.
Several of those deﬁnitions are included here. Usage has fallen
off, in the face of new technologies and use, but they may be of
xxxi
Introduction

historical interest, and still have force in security literature
overall.
The Internet and networking technologies have become
major factors in security.While the older security functions and
concepts are still valid, they are increasingly impacted by net-
work activities.
Therefore, a number of the terms included here relate to
communications. I have tried to reduce the number of these
items to those closely associated with security protection or
attacks.
There are different cultures involved in the technical world.
One of the best examinations of technical culture in general is
the introduction to the “Jargon File.” (Do a Web search on that
term: you’ll ﬁnd lots of copies around the world.)
It is interesting to look at the ﬂow of linguistic practices
through these cultures.Abstract Syntax Notation (ASN.1) begat
various network protocols, which inﬂuenced those developing
object-oriented programming languages, which inspired those
working in multimedia, and the bias popped out in consumer
products.You think I exaggerate? 
Variables, and other naming conventions, in ASN.1 run
words together, separating them by capitalizing the initial letter
of each word, but not the ﬁrst. So what is the hot new tech-
nology on the market right now? The iPod, which is an Internet
(loaded) Pod (for holding music).
(The contraction of Internet to a simple “i” is related to
another technical culture artifact: the tendency, particularly
when using email or other text-based message systems, to reduce
typing as much as possible, and go for acronyms.)
Some phrases in security seem to be chosen strictly for their
contrary nature.You will note that occasional English words are
taken and the spelling deliberately modiﬁed. Other factors seem
to be a tendency toward aggressive language, as beﬁtting a cul-
ture that sees adversaries on every network link, and dangers at
every turn. Security people also tend to feel embattled and iso-
lated, even from those with whom they are working.Therefore,
www.syngress.com
xxxii
Introduction

you will notice a tendency toward pomposity, likely in an
attempt to promote self-importance (and possibly even self-
esteem).
The terms included here have been culled from a variety of
sources over a long period of time.The reader will note that I
have sometimes suggested that a speciﬁc entry should not be
used. I have included these items to give the student or profes-
sional a reference.The objective, however, should be to ensure
that your own communications are as clear as possible.
www.syngress.com
Introduction
xxxiii


Symbols
*-property Bell-La Padula security model rule allowing a
subject write access to an object only if the security
level of the object is higher than, or dominates, the
security level of the subject. In other words, you can
only tell something to someone whose clearance is
equal to or higher than yours is. Pronounced, and
sometimes written, star property.Also called con-
finement property.There is a related strong star prop-
erty in database security.
Numbers
3DES see triple DES

A
ABA Guidelines American Bar Association (ABA) Digital
Signature Guidelines, a framework of legal principles
for using digital signatures and digital certificates in
electronic commerce 
ABEND abnormal termination of a software process or a
system (ABnormal END); a crash.The word derives
from an error message originally displayed on the
IBM 360 computer: it does not appear in error mes-
sages of current operating systems although the term
is still used.Abnormal or unexpected termination
may result in possible security vulnerabilities, and so
the term may also be used to refer to the option to
terminate, in a controlled manner, a processing
activity in a computer system because it is impos-
sible or undesirable for the activity to proceed.
Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1) standard for
describing data objects, this notation format is impor-
tant to security because of its significance in net-
working discussions. OSI (Open System
Interconnection) standards use ASN.1 to specify data
formats for protocols. Syntax is needed to define
abstract objects, and encoding rules are needed to
transform between abstract objects and bit strings. In
ASN.1, formal names are written without spaces,
and separate words in a name are indicated by capi-
talizing the first letter of each word except the first
word. For example, the name of a CRL is
“certificateRevocationList.”

Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) written policy outlining
the usage that may or may not be made of com-
puting or network resources. Previously, this applied
primarily to institutions (such as universities) pro-
viding access to systems such as the Internet.
Although the term is currently not as widely used,
these instructions should still be part of a company’s
security policy.
acceptance inspection the final inspection to determine
whether a facility or system meets the specified
technical and performance standards. Similar to certi-
fication although generally referring to facilities
rather than applications.This inspection is held
immediately following facility and software testing
and is the basis for commissioning or accepting the
information system. If the system is accepted, it
receives accreditation.
access ability and means to communicate with or other-
wise interact with a system: a specific type of inter-
action between a subject and an object that results in
the flow of information from one to the other.A
subject may access a file object to obtain data, or a
subject may access a system resource and give it
command information to obtain service.There is
not full agreement on the definition of access: some
would insist that the simple ability to receive infor-
mation is not access unless the subject can also com-
mand the object.
access control process of limiting access to the resources
of a system only to authorized users, programs,
processes, or other systems (in a network).
Dictionary of Information Security
3

4
Dictionary of Information Security
Synonymous with controlled access and limited
access.Access control may be an administrative,
physical, or technical control, but is most commonly
implemented via technical controls limiting access
to information or resources on a system.Access con-
trol is generally a preventive control.
access control list list of users, programs, and/or processes
and the specifications of access categories to which
each is assigned 
access control mechanism hardware or software features,
operating procedures, management procedures, and
various combinations of these designed to detect
and prevent unauthorized access and to permit
authorized access in an automated system.Access
control lists are a technical access control mecha-
nism.
access level the hierarchical portion of the security level
used to identify the sensitivity of data and the clear-
ance or authorization of users. Note:The access level,
in conjunction with the non-hierarchical categories,
forms the sensitivity label of an object. See category,
security level, and sensitivity label.
access period segment of time, generally expressed on a
daily or weekly basis, during which access rights
prevail 
access type the nature of an access right to a particular
device, program, or file (e.g., read, write, execute,
append, modify, delete, or create) 

accountability in the narrow view of technical security,
the property that enables activities on a system to be
traced to individuals (or entities) who may then be
held responsible for their actions. More broadly,
when dealing with ethics, the duty or voluntary
agreement to be responsible for one’s actions, partic-
ularly with regard to visibility, transparency, or
explanation. In this latter sense, to be accountable,
one may have to freely reduce one’s claim on cer-
tain other properties that are ordinarily considered
part of security, such as privacy.
accreditation formal declaration by the command or
management authority that the system is approved
to operate in a particular security mode using a pre-
scribed set of safeguards.Accreditation is the official
management authorization for operation of a system
and is based on the certification process and other
management considerations.The accreditation state-
ment affixes security responsibility with the manage-
ment or operating authority, and shows that due
care has been taken for security. Essentially, accredi-
tation involves acceptance of the system.
accreditation authority management or command level
with authority to accept a particular system 
activation in business continuity planning, the implementa-
tion of a procedure, activity, or plan in response to
an event or incident
active attack or exploit involving an attempt to change or
influence a system. See also passive, which generally
involves listening or spying.
Dictionary of Information Security
5

active response the system automatically blocks or acts
against the progress of a detected attack.The
response may take one of three forms: amending the
environment (such as changing entries in firewall
tables), collecting more information, or striking back
against the user. (The last option is not recom-
mended.) 
ActiveX ActiveX controls are software modules based on
Microsoft’s Component Object Model (COM)
architecture and appear to be Microsoft’s preferred
form of active content for Web pages.ActiveX con-
trols are, in fact, almost identical in structure to MS
Windows programs, and have full system access.The
only security provision is a digital signature system
called Authenticode, which offers only “run/don’t
run” options, and has additional security limitations.
activity monitor type of antiviral software that checks for
signs of suspicious activity, such as attempts to
rewrite program files, format disks, etc.The term
activity monitor is usually considered to include opera-
tion restrictor type software (also known as activity
blocker or behaviour blocker), but is sometimes dif-
ferentiated in that an activity monitor may just alert
the operator to the attempt, rather than disabling it.
activity blocker see operation restrictor
add-on security the retrofitting of protection mecha-
nisms, implemented by hardware or software 
administrative control see controls
administrative security the management constraints and
supplemental controls established to provide an
6
Dictionary of Information Security

acceptable level of protection for data. Synonymous
with procedural security. More commonly referred to
as administrative controls.
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) standard devel-
oped by the United States National Institute of
Standards and Technology to succeed DES. Intended
to specify an unclassified, publicly disclosed, sym-
metric encryption algorithm, available royalty-free
worldwide.
adversary entity that attacks, or is a threat to, a system 
adware while not necessarily malware, adware is considered
to go beyond the reasonable advertising one might
expect from freeware or shareware.Typically, a separate
program that is installed at the same time as a share-
ware or similar program, adware will usually con-
tinue to generate advertising even when the user is
not running the originally desired program. See also
cookies, spyware, and web bugs.
aggregation circumstance in which higher level informa-
tion (which may be thought to be subject to a
higher level of security clearance) may be inferred
from a large number of lower level data items.As a
result, a collection of information items may require
classification at a higher security level than any of
the individual items that comprise it.
aggregation problem occurrence when a subject’s right
to individual pieces of information results in knowl-
edge to which the subject does not have a right.
This is usually addressed by restricting combinations
of accesses in certain ways.
Dictionary of Information Security
7

AH see Authentication Header
airplane rule complexity increases the possibility of
failure; conversely, simplicity increases robustness.
The name comes from the observation that, while it
appears obvious that having more than one engine
in an airplane increases safety, in fact, a twin-engine
airplane has twice as many engine problems as a
single-engine airplane, and the loss of either engine
may lead to instability.
AIS Automated Information System.Term formerly used
by the United States government and military for
computer or electronic information systems.
Sometimes found in older security texts.
alarm any of a number of devices having three basic com-
ponents: a sensor (that determines or triggers on
some condition), a communications or control
system, and an actuator or annunciator (that takes
some action or alerts a user or operator).Alarms
come in a wide variety of forms and complexities.
Antiviral software may have a scanning engine
(sensor), user interface (control), and report screen
(annunciator). CCTV (Closed Circuit TeleVision)
systems may have cameras (sensor), circuit (commu-
nications), and monitors (annunciator). Simple fire
sprinkler heads have all components in one package:
a plug that melts at high temperature (sensor)
unblocking the flow (control) of the water behind it
(actuator).
alert notification that an event or incident has occurred 
8
Dictionary of Information Security

Dictionary of Information Security
9
alert phase initial phase of a business continuity or disaster
recovery plan, during which the first emergency
actions, and assessments of damage and implications,
take place 
algorithm sequence of steps needed to solve logical or
mathematical problems. In security, the term usually
refers to cryptographic algorithms used in encryption or
decryption of data files and messages and to create dig-
ital signatures, but it may also refer to pattern
matching in virus or intrusion detection that does
not rely on the use of a simple scan string (see signa-
ture).
alias name that an entity uses in place of its real name, in
computing usually for purposes of convenience or
brevity, but in security often for the purpose of
either anonymity or deception 
alternate routing routing of a call or message over a sub-
stitute route when a primary route is unavailable for
immediate use. Note that while this function
increases availability, it may create problems with
integrity or possibly confidentiality.
alternate site site pre-arranged for use in the event of a
business continuity incident. See cold site, warm site, and
hot site.
annual loss expectancy (ALE) the expected yearly dollar
value loss from the system or activity by attacks or
threats. Generally calculated by taking the value of a
single such loss by a given threat or event (single
loss expectancy), and multiplying by the expected
number of events over time (annual rate of occur-

rence) (therefore also known as annualized loss
expectancy).Also, sometimes the sum of a number
of such calculations.
anomaly detection detecting intrusions by looking for
activity that is different from the user’s or system’s
normal behaviour.A type of intrusion detection system.
anonymous the condition of having an identity that is
unknown or concealed.To hide an entity’s real
name, an alias may be used. In some applications,
anonymous entities may be completely untraceable.
See also anonymous login.
anonymous login access control feature (or weakness) in
many Internet hosts that enables users to gain access
to general-purpose or public services and resources
on a host (such as allowing any user to transfer data
using ftp) without having a pre-established, user-
specific account (i.e., username and secret password).
This feature exposes a system to more threats than
when all the users are known, pre-registered entities
who are individually accountable for their actions.
ANSI bomb use of certain codes (escape sequences, usu-
ally embedded in text files or email messages) that
remap keys on the keyboard to commands such as
DELETE or FORMAT. ANSI (the American
National Standards Institute) is a shorthand form
that refers to the ANSI screen formatting rules.
Many early MS-DOS programs relied on these
rules, and required the use of the ANSI.SYS file,
which also allowed keyboard remapping.The use of
ANSI.SYS is very rare nowadays.
10
Dictionary of Information Security

antiviral although an adjective, frequently used as a noun
as a short form for antivirus software or systems of all
types 
antivirus software see scanner, change detection, activity mon-
itor
antivirus virus virus that specifically looks for and removes
other viruses.These entities cannot be said to be
beneficial or useful examples of viruses, since they
have generally created more problems than the
viruses they remove. See benign.
applet small application transported over the networks,
especially as an enhancement to a Web page.Applets
often arrive from systems that cannot be verified as
trusted.Two common applet systems are ActiveX and
Java. Java applets are only allowed access to certain
functions or information: this restriction is often
referred to as the sandbox.
application development control process or method
intended to ensure that an application continues to
operate according to its specifications and continues
to be available 
application level gateway firewall system in which service
is provided by processes that maintain complete
TCP connection state and sequencing.Application
level firewalls often re-address traffic so that out-
going traffic appears to have originated from the
firewall, rather than the internal host. See also proxy
server.
Dictionary of Information Security
11

archive (1) site containing a large number of files, possibly
acquired over time, and often publicly accessible. See
also ftp, particularly anonymous ftp.
(2) file that contains a number of related files, usu-
ally in a compressed format to reduce file size and
transmission (upload or download) time on elec-
tronic bulletin boards or download sites on the
Internet. Most software distributed as shareware (or
similar concepts) is distributed as an archive that
contains all related programs, and documentation
and possibly data files.Archived files, because of the
compression, appear to be encrypted, and therefore,
infected files inside archives may not be detected by
virus or malware scanning software. See also com-
pressed executable, self-extracting.
(3) often synonymous with backup
armoured virus virus that tries to prevent analysts from
examining its code, particularly in terms of resist-
ance to software forensics or forensic programming.The
virus may use various methods to make tracing, dis-
assembling, and reverse engineering its code more
difficult.
ASCII American Standard Code for Information
Interchange, a coding system that assigns numerical
values to characters such as letters, numbers, punctu-
ation, and other symbols, and used in most
American manufactured computers. Often used as a
synonym for text.ASCII allows only seven bits per
character (for a total of 128 characters).
ASCII files files consisting of only ASCII characters, and
generally only the printable characters.With effort,
12
Dictionary of Information Security

it is possible to write program files for Intel-based
computers consisting only of printable characters.
(An example is the EICAR Standard Antivirus Test
File.) Windows batch (BAT) files and Visual Basic
Script files are also typically plain text, but are inter-
preted as program files, rather than being executed
as object code.
ASN.1 see Abstract Syntax Notation One
assembly language computer-oriented language whose
instructions are symbolic and usually in one-to-one
correspondence with direct computer instructions
(machine language).Assembly language is generally
specific to a given CPU (central processing unit),
although a given CPU may have multiple assembly
languages written for it. Machine language is specific
to a given CPU, and there is only one machine lan-
guage for a CPU.
asset entity of value to the business or enterprise, be it a
computer processor, disk, network link, program,
datum, or user 
assurance measure of confidence that the security features
and architecture of a system accurately mediate and
enforce the security policy.The policy need not be
tied solely to issues of confidentiality, but may address
requirements for availability, integrity of data or pro-
cessing, reliability, safety, or other factors.Assurance is
often neglected in planning for security: each secu-
rity function should have an assurance requirement
or metric.Assurance may result from formal
methods, or it may be partially determined by audit,
penetration testing, simulation, testing, or third-party
reviews.
Dictionary of Information Security
13

assurance level specific level on a hierarchical scale repre-
senting successively increased confidence that a
target of evaluation adequately fulfills the require-
ments.The Trusted Computer Security Evaluation
Criteria (TCSEC) is one example of such a hier-
archy, the Common Criteria is another.
assurance testing process used to determine that the
security features of a system are implemented as
designed, and are adequate for the proposed envi-
ronment.This process may include hands-on func-
tional testing, penetration testing, and/or verification.
asymmetric key encryption asymmetric key encryption,
also known as public key encryption, uses two
keys—one publicly known, and one privately held.
There are key management advantages to using
asymmetric encryption, although the work factor, and
therefore the strength of the system, is felt to be
weaker than for symmetric systems with equivalent
key length.
atomic indivisible, or cannot be split up. For example, an
operation may be said to do several things “atomi-
cally” if all the component functions are done
immediately, and there is no chance of the operation
being half-completed or of another being inter-
spersed. Particularly used in terms of database trans-
action processing, where all the parts of a transaction
will be done before any are “committed.”
attack the act of trying to bypass security controls on a
system.An attack may be active, resulting in the
alteration of data; or passive, resulting in the release
14
Dictionary of Information Security

of data. Note:The fact that an attack is made does
not necessarily mean it will succeed.The degree of
success depends on the vulnerability of the system or
activity and the effectiveness of existing countermea-
sures.Attack is often used as a synonym for a specific
exploit. See also brute force, denial of service, distributed
denial of service, hijacking, social engineering, sniffing,
spoofing, trojan horse, and virus.
attack signature activities on, or alterations to, a system
indicating an attack or attempted attack, and partic-
ularly a specific type of attack, often determined by
examination of audit or network logs 
attribute in MS-DOS and Windows systems, the charac-
teristics representing file permissions
audit the collection and analysis of records of activities to
assess their compliance with security policy
audit trail chronological record of system activities that is
sufficient to enable the reconstruction, reviewing,
and examination of the sequence of environments
and activities surrounding or leading to an opera-
tion, a procedure, or an event in a transaction from
its inception to final results. Sometimes specifically
referred to as a security audit trail.
authenticate (1) to verify the identity of a user, device, or
other entity in a computer system, often as a prereq-
uisite to allowing access to resources in a system 
(2) to verify the integrity of data that have been
stored, transmitted, or otherwise exposed to possible
unauthorized modification 
Dictionary of Information Security
15

authentication (1) the process of verifying identity, origin,
or lack of modification of a subject or object.
Authentication of a user is generally based on some-
thing the user knows, is, or has.
(2) the use of some kind of system to ensure that a
file or message that purports to come from a given
individual or company actually does. Many authen-
tication systems are now looking toward public key
encryption, and the calculation of a check based on
the contents of the file or message, and a password
or key. Related concepts are change detection and
integrity.
Authentication Header (AH) Internet IPsec protocol
(RFC 2402) designed to provide connectionless data
integrity service and data origin authentication service
for IP datagrams, and (optionally) to provide protec-
tion against replay attacks.AH may be used alone, in
combination with the IPsec Encapsulating Security
Payload (ESP) protocol, or in a nested fashion with
tunnelling. ESP can provide the same security serv-
ices as AH, and can also provide data confidentiality
service.The main difference between authentication
services provided by ESP and AH is the extent of
the coverage; ESP does not protect IP header fields
unless they are encapsulated by AH.
authentication token portable device used for authenti-
cating a user.Authentication tokens operate by chal-
lenge/response, time-based code sequences, or other
techniques.These may include paper-based lists of
one-time passwords.
16
Dictionary of Information Security

authenticator means used to confirm the identity or to
verify the eligibility of a station, originator, or indi-
vidual.The standard authenticators are something
you have, something you are, or something you
know.A common mistake is to use, as an authenti-
cator, an entity or characteristic that is more suitable
for use as an identifier.As an example, in the United
States a Social Security number (SSN) is unique to
an individual, and therefore suitable for identifica-
tion, but the wide use and availability of this infor-
mation (despite regulations to the contrary) mean
that the SSN is not appropriate as authentication.
(The reverse error is also made: face recognition is
effective as an authenticator under the right condi-
tions, but has spectacularly failed when used, in
large-scale settings, for identification.) Sometimes
referred to as authentication information.
authenticity property of being genuine and capable of
being verified and trusted. It is important, in secu-
rity, not to assume too much about authenticity. For
example, authentication of identity does not prove
anything about the motives, competency, or activi-
ties of the individual so identified. Checksumming
of a program verifies that it has not changed, but
does not prove that it was not originally intended to
be malicious. See also authenticate, authentication, vali-
date, and verify.
Authenticode Microsoft’s security system for ActiveX con-
trols as active Web content, and other program veri-
fication.A digital signature system,Authenticode
verifies only that the code has not changed since it
was signed, and that the certificate used to sign the
Dictionary of Information Security
17

18
Dictionary of Information Security
code was originally issued by the certificate authority.
Authenticode does not provide for any sandbox
restrictions, and, at the time of writing, most systems
and applications using Authenticode do not have
any certificate revocation capabilities.
authorization the granting of access or other rights to a
user, program, or process 
AV abbreviation used to distinguish the antiviral research
community (AV) from those who call themselves
“virus researchers” but are primarily interested in
writing and exchanging viral programs (vx).Also an
abbreviation for antivirus software. See also vx.
availability the state when the system, resources, and data
are in the place needed by the user, at the time the
user needs them, and in the form needed by the
user.Availability is one of the three pillars of security.

B
B1FF fictional character, possibly created by Joe Talmadge,
originally used or referred to in Usenet news post-
ings, portraying the stereotypical “newbie” (novice
or newcomer) on the Net, generally a blackhat
wannabe. Postings from B1FF typically use capital
letters, deliberately misspell words, and replace letters
with non-alphabetic characters (dudes=D00Dz).
Because such people tend to claim “!33t” (elite)
status, !33t has come to replace B1FF in more recent
writings, although there are many variations in
spelling for both terms. B1FF is probably the pre-
ferred one, since it looks like hexadecimal represen-
tation. No relation to the biff mail notification
utility.
back door see backdoor
backdoor hidden software or hardware mechanism that
can be triggered to permit system protection mech-
anisms to be circumvented.The function will gener-
ally provide unusually high, or even full, access to
the system either without an account or from a nor-
mally restricted account. It is activated in some
innocent-appearing manner; for example, a key
sequence at a terminal. Invocation of the backdoor
can also be done by sending a specific packet to a
network port; see RAT. Software developers often
introduce backdoors in their code to enable them to
reenter the system and perform certain functions;
see maintenance hook.The backdoor is sometimes left
in a fully developed system either by design or by
accident. Synonymous with trap door, which was for-

merly the preferred usage. Usage back door is also
very common.
background task task executed by the system that gener-
ally remains invisible to the user. Most processes in
advanced or multi-user systems operate in the back-
ground. Some malware is designed to be executed as
a background task so the user does not realize
unwanted actions are occurring. Many attacks often
take advantage of loopholes in utility processes
operating in the background.
backup (n) a duplicate copy of data made for archiving
purposes or for protecting against damage or loss 
(v) the process of creating duplicate data. Some pro-
grams back up data files while maintaining both the
current version and the preceding version on disk.
However, a backup is not considered secure unless it
is stored away from the original, and so removable
media is preferred.
backup plan procedure for maintaining backups of system
and user data. See contingency plan, differential backup,
full backup, and incremental backup.
bacterium specialized form of virus that does not attach to
a specific file, possibly also related to spread by elec-
tronic mail. Usage obscure: term should not be used.
BAD acronym for Broken As Designed, said of a program
that is useless because of bad design rather than bugs
bait usually used in reference to a file, this refers to a virus
infection target of initially known characteristics.To
trap file infectors that insist on larger files, a string of
null characters of arbitrary length is often used.
20
Dictionary of Information Security

Floppy disks are, of course, used as bait for boot
sector viruses, but the term is not often used in that
way.Another name for bait files is goat or sacrificial
goat files.
banner the initial message given by a system to prompt a
login or identify a connection. Originally called a
“welcome message,” since most banners said some-
thing like “Welcome to XYZ Corp Computer
System,” the term banner is now preferred because
some system intruders used the “welcome” implica-
tion to avoid prosecution.
baseline situation of a system either in normal operation,
or at a particular point in time. Generally, this is
measured by an image or calculation taken on a
system at a given moment.
bastion host system that has been hardened to resist attack
and is installed on a network in such a way that it is
expected to come under attack. Bastion hosts are
often components of firewalls, or may be Web servers
or public access systems connected to an untrusted
or public network.A honeypot is often a bastion host
with additional audit and alerting functions.
battle box in business continuity planning, a collection of
information and other resources necessary for the
operation of a plan packed in a single container so
as to be readily available and transportable as
needed. See also go bag.
behaviour monitor see activity monitor
behaviour blocker see operation restrictor
Dictionary of Information Security
21

Bell-La Padula model formal state transition model of
computer security policy that describes a set of
access control rules. In this formal model, the enti-
ties in a computer system are divided into abstract
sets of subjects and objects.The notion of a secure
state is defined, and it is proven that each state tran-
sition preserves security by moving from secure state
to secure state, thereby inductively proving that the
system is secure.A system state is defined to be
“secure” if the only permitted access modes of sub-
jects to objects are in accordance with a specific
security policy. In order to determine whether a spe-
cific access mode is allowed, the clearance of a sub-
ject is compared to the classification of the object, and
a determination is made as to whether the subject is
authorized for the specific access mode.
More specifically, Bell-La Padula is concerned with
confidentiality. Subjects in the model are forbidden
from obtaining (reading) information from an object
of higher classification, and from divulging (writing)
information to an object of lower classification. See
star property (*-property) and simple security property.
benign somewhat careless term often used to describe a
virus that appears not to be intentionally malicious
in that it does not carry an obviously damaging pay-
load code section. Since viral programs may cause
problems simply by the use of system resources or
the modification of files, many are of the opinion
that a benign or good virus is impossible.
22
Dictionary of Information Security

benign environment non-hostile environment that may
be protected from external hostile elements by 
physical, personnel, and procedural security counter-
measures 
best practice the gold standard for security buzzphrases. In
fact, there was an extended discussion on the use of
the phrase “best practice” on the CISSPforum in
July 2005.The implication of best practice is that it
is an optimum procedure for most situations,
although it may also imply a practice that works in
every situation, or a minimum standard. It was, how-
ever, noted that “best practice” is never a guarantee
or panacea. Other phrases discussed were standard
practice (what most people do), essential practice
(what should be done as an absolute minimum), and
leading practice (what the “best” companies do).
between-the-lines entry unauthorized access obtained by
tapping the temporarily inactive terminal of a legiti-
mate user. See hijacking, and piggyback.The general
condition is referred to as TOC/TOU (Time Of
Check versus Time Of Use, pronounced like “talk
to”), meaning a discrepancy between the time of a
check being made, and the time the resource 
is used.
beyond A1 level of trust defined by the Department of
Defense Trusted Computer System Evaluation
Criteria (TCSEC) that is beyond the technology
available at the time the criteria were developed. It
includes all the A1-level features plus additional ones
not required at the A1 level.
bimodal virus see multipartite
Dictionary of Information Security
23

biometric pertaining to the measurement of the human
body: in security terms, relating to means of authen-
tication based on patterns unique to an individual’s
body, such as fingerprints and retinal patterns, or
behaviour, such as voiceprints or handwriting 
BIOS Basic Input/Output System, the “hardwired”
firmware programming used to start the boot process
in ISA/Wintel computers.The BIOS is located in
the ROM area of the system and is usually stored
permanently.There are many BIOS versions in
ISA/Wintel computers, but they generally assume
the operating system will be interrupt driven (as
MS-DOS is), and start to set up structures to sup-
port that model. Since boot sector infectors run before
the operating system starts, and require only the
BIOS programming, they are sometimes called
BIOS viruses, although the term can create confu-
sion and should be avoided. Some computers now
use EEPROM (Electrically Erasable Programmable
Read Only Memory), and at least one virus now
tries to erase such “flash” BIOS programming.
Otherwise, BIOS cannot be infected or corrupted
by a virus.
bit error rate the number of erroneous bits divided by the
total number of bits transmitted, received, or
processed over some period of time.Also bit error
ratio.Abbreviated BER.
blackhat communities or individuals who attempt to break
into computer systems without prior authorization,
or explore security primarily from an attack perspec-
tive.The term originates from old American western
24
Dictionary of Information Security

genre movies where the “good guys” always wore
white hats and the “bad guys” always wore black.
See also whitehat.
block cipher crypto-algorithm that encrypts data in discrete
blocks of a given size, rather than as a continuous
stream of bits. Compare with stream cipher.
boot to start (cold boot) or reset (warm boot) the com-
puter.The term arises from the phrase “bootstrap
program,” and the idea of lifting oneself by one’s
own bootstraps, or starting with no support.
boot record the program recorded in the first physical or
logical sector mounted on the disk drive, and con-
taining software to get the computer to a working
state.The term is most commonly used in connec-
tion with ISA or Wintel computers, where there are
actually two boot records: the master boot record
(dealing with disk and hardware structure), and the
system boot record (containing pointers to operating
system files). See also boot sector.
boot sector generically, the first sector, or sectors, on any
disk, usually containing programming necessary for
the boot process. In ISA or Wintel computers, the
term is not well defined, although it is generally
accepted to be the system boot record, and thus the
first physical sector on floppy diskettes and the first
logical sector on hard disks. For precision in dealing
with security issues and concerns, it is best to refer
specifically to the master boot record or system boot
record.
Dictionary of Information Security
25

boot sector infector (BSI) virus that places its starting
code in the boot sector, thus being run before any
programming, including the operating system.A BSI
is able to take control of interrupts and machine
functions, may be able to subvert some protection
and detection measures, and is also considered a
virus of the base computer hardware, rather than of
the operating system. In ISA computers, when MS-
DOS was the dominant operating system and before
widespread use of public networks for data transfer,
BSIs were the most successful form of virus, and
were considered BIOS viruses. Some BIOS boot
sector infectors occupied the master boot record, while
others inhabited the system boot record: in most cases,
the displaced record was moved to an unused sector
of the disk so control could be passed to it once the
virus had run, and thus the computer would appear
to have a normal boot process.Also known as boot
sector virus, BSV.
boot sector virus see boot sector infector
bounce message notification message returned to the
sender by a site unable to relay email to the
intended recipient. Reasons might include a nonex-
istent or misspelled username, or a relay site that is
down.
bounds checking testing of computer program results for
access to storage outside authorized or proper limits 
Brain almost certainly the first virus written in the MS-
DOS computing environment that became wide-
spread among normal computer users.An example
of a “strict” boot sector infector and the earliest known
26
Dictionary of Information Security

use of stealth virus programming. Sometimes referred
to as “Brain (C)” or “(C) Brain” due to the presence
of the string “(C) 1986 Brain” in the body of the
virus. (Many books and articles use the copyright
symbol instead of the “(C)” string, but the copyright
symbol does not appear in the body of the virus.) 
breach the successful and repeatable defeat of security con-
trols with or without an arrest of the system itself,
which could result in penetration of the system 
break to stop a program temporarily, so it may be
debugged.The place where it stops is a “break-
point.”
British Standard 7799 (BS7799) standard code of prac-
tice and guidance on how to secure an information
system, and the management framework, objectives,
and control requirements for information security
management systems, in three, increasingly detailed,
parts.Versions were subsequently accepted as ISO
Standards 17799, 27001, and 27002.
Brooks’ Law “Adding manpower to a late software project
makes it later,” a result of the fact that the advantage
from splitting work among N programmers is
expected to be proportional to N, but the overhead
costs associated with coordinating their work is pro-
portional to the square of N.The quote is from Fred
Brooks, a manager of IBM’s OS/360 project and
author of The Mythical Man-Month, an excellent
early book on software engineering.
Dictionary of Information Security
27

browsing the act of searching through storage to locate or
acquire information without necessarily knowing
the existence or the format of the information
being sought 
brute force attack methodology whereby all possible
options are used in turn, usually in a programmed
sequence attempting to use all possible passwords or
decryption keys. See also dictionary attack.
BS7799 see British Standard 7799
BSI see boot sector infector
BSV see boot sector infector
buffer overflow common program error in which input is
not checked for length. Excessive input may over-
flow the memory allotted and, if not discarded, may
create a situation where the program can be forced
to execute arbitrary code or switch operation con-
trol to an arbitrary location.
bug unintentional fault, generally in programming code or
implementation, that may make a system fail or
behave in unexpected ways, and, in any case, causes
actions that neither the programmer nor the user
planned. Common examples of bugs are buffer over-
flows, loopholes, or maintenance hooks left in place
when a project is complete.An error of design is
more correctly referred to as a flaw.
Computer mythology credits Grace Murray Hopper
with the invention of the term “bug,” but it was
known to have been used in engineering circles in
the nineteenth century, and Hopper herself referred
to the “[f]irst actual case of bug being found” in a
28
Dictionary of Information Security

machine.The “moth in the Mark II,” and its subse-
quent use as an excuse to Howard Aiken when he
asked why the machine was not “makin’ numbers,”
may have been the origin of the use of “debugging”
as a verb.The bug can be seen online courtesy of
the Smithsonian institution at http://americanhis-
tory.si.edu/csr/comphist/objects/bug.htm.
build often the final compilation of a software system, but
also the particular program that results.Thus, a build
is similar to a version of software, except that build
is generally more precise. Security and vulnerability
assessments of software will be based on a given
build, and applying an assessment to other versions
could result in incorrect conclusions. See also system
model.
business continuity plan (BCP) plan and preparations
directed toward the immediate recovery of systems
critical to the function of the business, or to the
ability of the business to operate in the temporary
absence of important systems.Activities related to
the preparation and maintenance of such a plan are
usually referred to as business continuity manage-
ment. See also contingency plan and disaster recovery
plan.
business impact analysis (BIA) assessment of the effects
and potential loss resulting from an incident that
might affect business continuity. Similar, but not iden-
tical, to risk analysis.
Dictionary of Information Security
29

C
call back procedure for identifying a remote terminal. In a
call back, the host system disconnects the caller and
then dials the authorized telephone number of the
remote terminal to reestablish the connection. Of
limited use for remote access, and recently subject to
failure because of call forwarding technologies.
Synonymous with dial back or ring back.
call tree structured and generally cascading process for
contacting personnel in an emergency, particularly
in business continuity planning. See also fan out.
capability protected identifier that identifies the object and
specifies the access rights to be allowed to the accessor
(or subject) who possesses the capability. In a capa-
bility-based system, access to protected objects such
as files is granted if the would-be subject possesses a
capability for the object.This can also be used for
authentication (by seeing the system as an object).
Due to the protection of the capability identifier,
the ability to assume false authorization is reduced.
Often implemented as capability tables.
category restrictive label that has been applied to classified
or unclassified data as a means of increasing the pro-
tection of the data and further restricting access to
the data 
cavity virus type of overwriting virus that overwrites either
slack space within or behind the target program file,
or sections of null data within the file, such that it
can infect the host file without increasing the length

of the file while also preserving the host’s function-
ality. Usage rare.
CERT the Computer Emergency Response Team estab-
lished at the Software Engineering Institute (SEI) of
Carnegie-Mellon University after the 1988 Internet
worm attack. Recently, the preferred reference has
been CERT/CC (Computer Emergency Response
Team Coordination Center). CMU has apparently
obtained exclusive use of the name CERT, and rec-
ommends that other emergency teams style them-
selves as CIRTs (Computer Incident Response
Teams).
certificate digitally signed statement that contains informa-
tion about an entity and the entity’s public key
certificate revocation list (CRL) document maintained
and published by a certification authority listing those
certificates previously issued by the CA that are no
longer valid 
certification the comprehensive evaluation of the tech-
nical and nontechnical security features of a system
and other safeguards, made in support of the accredita-
tion process, that establishes the extent to which a
particular design and implementation meets a speci-
fied set of security requirements. Note that certifica-
tion has no relation to an asymmetric key
encryption certificate, or the related authorities 
and lists.
certification authority (CA) central authority for key
management in an overall system for the use of
asymmetric encryption known as a public key 
Dictionary of Information Security
31

infrastructure, or PKI. Certification authority, for
some reason, is generally capitalized, and is usually
referred to by the acronym CA. CA may refer to an
individual office or server, but a single CA is usually
part of a hierarchy, and certification authority may
refer to the entire hierarchy as well.
chain letter message directing the recipient to send out
multiple copies so its circulation increases in a geo-
metric progression as long as the instructions are
carried out.The chain letter is usually described as
having a tripartite structure: a hook to catch interest,
a threat to persuade the recipient to comply, and a
request to copy and spread the message.The content
of the chain letter message often mentions spreading
luck, friendship, some type of urban legend, or a
warning of some kind.A chain letter is a type of
spam, and a virus alert hoax is a type of chain letter.
Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol
(CHAP) peer entity authentication method for PPP
(Point to Point Protocol), using a randomly gener-
ated challenge and requiring a matching response
that depends on a cryptographic hash of the challenge
and a secret key
challenge/response security procedure in which one
communicator requests authentication of another
communicator, and the latter replies with a response
based on data provided by the first.The concepts of
challenge/response, initialization vector, nonce, salt, and
seed are closely related. Challenge/response is gener-
ally used in regard to password and authentication
schemes, initialization vector to block ciphers, nonce
32
Dictionary of Information Security

to short, automated network messages, salt to pass-
word storage, and seed to pseudorandom number 
generation.
change control management tool to provide control and
traceability for all changes made to the system.
Often, reference is made to change management.
change detection antiviral software that looks for changes
in the computer system.A virus must change some-
thing, and it is assumed that program files, disk
system areas, and certain areas of memory should
not change.This software is often referred to as
integrity checking software, but it does not neces-
sarily protect the integrity of data, nor does it always
assess the reasons for a possibly valid change. Change
detection using strong encryption is sometimes also
known as authentication software.
change management formal process for requesting, speci-
fying, approving, developing (or acquiring), testing,
and accepting changes to a software system.
Generally, change management involves new pro-
gramming, or a new purchase of software.
Depending on the criticality of the system, similarly
formal processes may be applied to configuration
changes, or the application of patches (which may
involve protection against security vulnerabilities).
(Note that managers in non-technical environments
may define change management as any process to
reduce disruption from any change to operations.) 
CHAP see Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol
Dictionary of Information Security
33

checkpoint known situation or state of the system or
process, from which processing may continue or be
restarted in the case of a failure or other problem 
checksum calculation based on the content of data, which,
if performed at one time and then compared against
the same calculation at a later time, can be used to
determine if the content of the data has changed. In
its strictest form, a checksum is a calculation based
on adding or summing up all the bytes or 1-bits in a
file or message. Parity bits in asynchronous transmis-
sion are a type of checksum.The term is sometimes
carelessly used to refer to all methods of change detec-
tion or authentication that rely on some level of calcu-
lation based on file contents, such as cyclic redundancy
checking (CRC).
chosen-ciphertext attack cryptanalysis technique in which
the analyst tries to determine the key from knowl-
edge of plaintext that corresponds to ciphertext
selected or dictated by the analyst 
chosen-plaintext attack cryptanalysis technique in which
the analyst tries to determine the key from knowl-
edge of ciphertext that corresponds to plaintext
selected or dictated by the analyst 
CHRISTMA exec specific example of a viral type of
email message, the earliest known script email virus,
using the REXX scripting language.This message
was released in December 1987.The user was asked
to type “CHRISTMA” to generate an electronic
Christmas card, but was not told that the program
also made, and mailed, copies of itself during the
display. (Within the virus research community, the
34
Dictionary of Information Security

Dictionary of Information Security
35
form “CHRISTMA EXEC” is used almost univer-
sally.The more correct form is “CHRISTMA exec,”
since REXX scripts were referred to as “execs” to
distinguish them from the earlier EXEC language in
IBM mainframes.) 
CIAC see Computer Incident Advisory Capability
cipher cryptographic algorithm for encryption and decryption
cipher block chaining (CBC) block cipher mode that
enhances electronic codebook mode by chaining
together blocks of ciphertext it produces.This mode
operates by combining (exclusive OR-ing) the algo-
rithm’s ciphertext output block with the next plain-
text block to form the next input block for the
algorithm.
cipher feedback (CFB) block cipher mode that enhances
electronic codebook mode by chaining together the
blocks of ciphertext it produces and operating on
plaintext segments of variable length less than or
equal to the block length.This mode operates by
using the previously generated ciphertext segment as
the algorithm’s input (i.e., by “feeding back” the
ciphertext) to generate an output block, and then
combining (exclusive OR-ing) that output block with
the next plaintext segment (block length or less) to
form the next ciphertext segment.
ciphertext apparently random string of data, conveying
little or no information to an unauthorized entity,
but from which an original message or plaintext can
be extracted by means of an appropriate key and
algorithm 

ciphertext-only attack cryptanalysis technique in which
the analyst tries to determine the key solely from
knowledge of intercepted ciphertext (although the
analyst may also know other clues, such as the cryp-
tographic algorithm, the language in which the plain-
text was written, the subject matter of the plaintext,
and some probable plaintext words) 
classification (1) a grouping of classified information to
which a hierarchical, restrictive security label is
applied to increase protection of the data 
(2) the level of protection required to be applied to
that information. See also security level.
classified refers to information that is formally required by
a security policy to be given data confidentiality
service and to be marked with a security label to
indicate its protected status.The term is mainly used
in government, especially in the military, and partic-
ularly in the United States Department of Defense.
See also unclassified.
cleartext unencrypted data, also known as plaintext
client system entity that requests and uses a service or
resource provided by another system entity (the
server) 
client-server model of network operation where services
and resources are requested by the client and fulfilled
by the server.The significance to security is that
security policy should be (but is not always)
enforced by the server. In peer-to-peer models of
networking, a more complex security model must
generally be implemented.
36
Dictionary of Information Security

Dictionary of Information Security
37
closed security environment environment in which
both of the following conditions hold true:
(1) application developers (including maintainers)
have sufficient clearances and authorizations to pro-
vide an acceptable presumption that they have not
introduced malicious logic.
(2) configuration control provides sufficient assurance
that applications and the equipment are protected
against the introduction of malicious logic prior to
and during the operation of system applications.
cluster virus virus that makes a change to disk or directory
structure data such that when a valid program is
invoked, the virus is run first. Because the data to be
changed is very small, it can be altered very rapidly,
affecting large numbers of files in a short space of
time, and therefore these viruses were sometimes
called fast infectors.Also known as FAT virus (after
the MS-DOS File Allocation Table directory struc-
ture), sector virus, and system virus.
CMOS stands for complementary metal oxide semicon-
ductor.This technology is used in a form of
memory that can be held in the computer, while
the main power is off, with low-power battery
backup. CMOS memory is used in MS-
DOS/BIOS/ISA computers to hold small tables of
information regarding the basic hardware of the
system. Since the memory is maintained while the
power is off, there is a myth that viruses can hide in
the CMOS. (CMOS memory is too small, and the
contents are never executed as a program.) Also,
when the battery power fails, the computer is tem-
porarily unusable.This is often attributed, falsely, to
viral activity.

CObIT Control Objectives for Information and related
Technology, the set of IT control objectives pub-
lished by the Information Systems Audit and
Control Association (ISACA), the body that certifies
IT security auditors 
code (1) in computer terminology, refers to either human
(source) or machine (object) readable programming
or fragments thereof. Since viruses, before they attach
to a host program, are not complete programs, they
are often referred to as code to distinguish them
from programs that are complete in themselves.
(2) a system of symbols used to represent informa-
tion, which might originally have had some other
meaning.This is often seen as synonymous with
cipher or encryption, but codes usually have fixed
meaning relations, rather than algorithmic transfor-
mations of data. In some cases, specialized types of
codes may be applied to or embedded with data,
supplying redundant information for purposes such
as error detection and correction. See forward error
correction and Hamming code.
Code Red the first variant of a family that possibly
included the almost equally well-known Nimda.
Code Red infected Internet servers running the
Microsoft IIS (Internet Information Server) soft-
ware, and used a known bug in that program to
infect new machines. Probably due to the popularity
of the IIS server on low maintenance sites, Code
Red infected approximately 350,000 machines
within 9 to 13 hours. Despite this success, Code
Red was never as dangerous as it was made out to
be, and was definitely a media virus.
38
Dictionary of Information Security

Dictionary of Information Security
39
cold site in business continuity planning or disaster recovery
planning, an alternate site with necessary electrical and
service connections, but no running system, main-
tained by an organization to facilitate prompt
resumption of service after a disaster. Some organi-
zations now refer to “gradual recovery.” See also
warm site, hot site.
command centre central point for coordination of activi-
ties for emergency operations or business continuity
commercial programs that are sold either directly from
the manufacturer or through normal retail channels,
as opposed to shareware. Users are often told to
“buy only commercial” as a defence against virus
infections or other types of malware. In fact, there is
very little risk of obtaining viruses from shareware,
and there are many known instances of viral pro-
grams infecting commercial software. In terms of
other forms of malware, it is often proposed that the
number of serious bugs in any new commercial
software may rival the number of trojan programs
released in any given period of time. See also free-
ware, public domain, open source, and shareware.
Common Criteria an attempt to harmonize the various
national security standards and security philosophies.
See Common Criteria for Information Technology
Security.

Common Criteria for Information Technology
Security the Common Criteria is a standard for
evaluating information technology products and sys-
tems, such as operating systems, computer networks,
distributed systems, and applications. It states
requirements for security functions and for assurance
measures. Canada, France, Germany, the
Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and the United
States (NIST and NSA) began developing this stan-
dard in 1993, based on the European ITSEC, the
Canadian Trusted Computer Product Evaluation
Criteria (CTCPEC), and the United States “Federal
Criteria for Information Technology Security” (FC)
and its precursor, the TCSEC.Version 2.1 of the
Criteria is equivalent to ISO’s International Standard
15408 (I15408).
communications security (COMSEC) measures taken
to deny unauthorized persons information derived
from telecommunications of the United States
Government concerning national security, and to
ensure the authenticity of such telecommunications.
Communications security includes cryptosecurity,
transmission security, emission security, and physical
security of communications security material and
information.
companion virus type of virus that does not actually
attach to another program, but interposes itself into
the chain of command, so that the virus is executed
before the infected program. Most often, this is done
by using a similar name and the rules of program
precedence to associate itself with a regular pro-
gram.Also referred to as a spawning virus.
40
Dictionary of Information Security

compartment class of information that has need-to-know
access controls beyond those normally provided for
access to multilevel security. Related to multilateral
security and the lattice model.
compartmented security mode see modes of operation
compensation control see controls
compressed executable program file that has been com-
pressed to save disk space, and automatically returns
to executable form when invoked. Because com-
pression appears to be a form of encryption, pro-
grams that are infected with a virus before being
compressed, or those that contain other forms of
malware, may hide the infection from scanning soft-
ware. See also archive, and self-extracting.
compromise (v) to perform an action not in accordance
with the security policy, or to cause a system to do so 
(n) a violation of the security policy of a system
such that unauthorized disclosure of sensitive infor-
mation may have occurred 
compromising emanations unintentional data-related or
intelligence-bearing signals that, if intercepted and
analyzed, disclose the information transmission
received, handled, or otherwise processed by any
information processing equipment. See TEMPEST.
computer abuse the misuse, alteration, disruption, or
destruction of data processing resources.The key
aspect is that it is intentional and improper.
Dictionary of Information Security
41

computer cryptography the use of a crypto-algorithm in a
computer, microprocessor, or microcomputer to per-
form encryption or decryption to protect information
or to authenticate users, sources, or information.
U.S. government or military term.
computer forensics originally the full means of obtaining
legal evidence from computers and computer use,
computer forensics is now limited to recovery of
data from computers and computer media.
Computer forensics has therefore become only one
part of digital forensics.
computer fraud computer-related crimes involving delib-
erate misrepresentation, alteration, or disclosure of
data to obtain something of value (usually for mon-
etary gain).A computer system must have been
involved in the perpetration or cover-up of the act
or series of acts.A computer system might have
been involved through improper manipulation of
input data; output or results; applications programs;
data files; computer operations; communications; or
computer hardware, systems software, or firmware.
Computer Incident Advisory Capability (CIAC) com-
puter emergency response team within the U.S.
Department of Energy, this group is widely known
for a series of highly regarded messages and postings
about security vulnerabilities 
computer security audit independent evaluation of the
controls employed to ensure appropriate protection
of an organization’s information assets.A formal
security audit has goals and procedures somewhat
different from the normal and ongoing audit process.
42
Dictionary of Information Security

computer security subsystem device designed to pro-
vide limited computer security features in a larger
system environment 
Computer Security Technical Vulnerability Reporting
Program (CSTVRP) program that focuses on
technical vulnerabilities in commercially available
hardware, firmware, and software products acquired
by the U.S. Department of Defense. CSTVRP pro-
vides for the reporting, catalouging, and discrete dis-
semination of technical vulnerability and corrective
measure information to Department of Defense
components on a need-to-know basis.
computer viral program Rob Slade’s own invention. In
an attempt to avoid the fights over what constitutes
a “true” virus, he uses the term “viral” to refer to
self-reproducing programs regardless of other dis-
tinctions. So far, he’s gotten away with it.
concealment system method of achieving confidentiality
in which sensitive information is hidden by embed-
ding it in irrelevant data. See also steganography.
Concept probably the first Microsoft Word macro virus,
and certainly the first macro virus to be successful in
the wild
confidentiality the concept of holding sensitive data in
confidence, limited to an appropriate set of individ-
uals or organizations. Confidentiality is considered
one of the three pillars of security.
configuration control the process of controlling modifica-
tions to the system’s hardware, firmware, software, and
documentation that provides sufficient assurance that
Dictionary of Information Security
43

the system is protected against the introduction of
improper modifications prior to, during, and after
system implementation. Compare configuration 
management.
configuration management the management of security
related features and assurances through control of
changes made to a system’s configuration.
Historically, this involved any changes to a system
(see configuration control), but more recently it has
been seen to involve configuration that is short of
changes to the software (see change management).
confinement the prevention of the leaking of sensitive
data from a program 
confinement channel synonymous with covert channel.
Archaic usage.
confinement property see star property (*-property) 
contamination (1) the intermixing of data at different
sensitivity and need-to-know levels.The lower level
data is said to be contaminated by the higher level
data; thus, the contaminating (higher level) data may
not receive the required level of protection.
(2) similarly for data of varying integrity or 
corruption 
contingency plan plan for emergency response, backup
operations, and post-disaster recovery that will
ensure the availability of critical resources and facili-
tate the continuity of operations in an emergency
situation. May be synonymous with disaster plan and
emergency plan, but most commonly held to be
44
Dictionary of Information Security

specifically related to information systems. See also
disaster recovery plan and business continuity plan.
control zone the space, expressed in feet of radius, sur-
rounding equipment processing sensitive informa-
tion, that is under sufficient (primarily) physical and
(possibly) technical control to preclude an unautho-
rized entry or compromise 
controlled access see access control
controlled sharing the condition that exists when access
control is applied to all users and components of a
system 
controls an important, but strangely ill-defined, area of
security, very similar to safeguards and countermeasures,
used to prevent failures of integrity, availability, and
confidentiality. Controls are grouped and discussed in
a number of not quite orthogonal ways. One way of
dividing controls (sometimes referring to categories)
examines administrative (policies, procedures, etc.),
physical (locks, guards, etc.), and technical (encryp-
tion, network auditing, etc.) controls.Another way
of classifying (sometimes referring to types) surveys
preventative/preventive (deterring and blocking an
event), detective (determining and investigating an
event), corrective (restoring and recovering from an
event), deterrent (increasing perceived risk to an
attacker), recovery (restoring lost resources), and
compensation (provision of redundancy or other
means to counteract loss of resources) controls.
Access control is considered a special case, but may
also be considered preventative/preventive and tech-
nical controls. However, access controls could also
Dictionary of Information Security
45

46
Dictionary of Information Security
be considered administrative and deterrent controls.
As you can see, these divisions are not always clear.
cookie (1) a small piece of data originally intended to
maintain state between Web browser accesses to a
site. (HTTP [HyperText Transfer Protocol] 1.0 did
not provide for persistent connections.) Because the
data is stored on the user’s computer, and because it
is possible to store the data in such a way as to allow
it to be world readable, careless setting of cookies, or
the ubiquitous presence of an entity on many Web
sites, may create a situation in which a user’s privacy
is at risk.
(2) the term has been used to indicate some form of
authentication information or ticket, and is specifically
used for a piece of data in the ISAKMP security
association negotiation, but these usages are rela-
tively rare 
copyleft the rights notice (General Public License) carried
by GNU EMACS and other Free Software
Foundation software, granting modification, reuse,
and reproduction rights to all users.The term is
used in somewhat ironic contradistinction to copy-
right, where the creator is granted control, and the
right to restrict usage of, the creation. See also
General Public Virus.
copyright the right of the author of a written or artistic
work to control the use and distribution of the
work. One of the basic intellectual property rights, the
others of which are patent, trademark, and trade
secret.

Dictionary of Information Security
47
core wars computer game in which two or more pro-
grams attempt to destroy each other inside a real or
simulated computer. Originally played with real pro-
grams in the earliest timesharing computers and
inspired by the operations of rogue programs in
early multi-tasking machines. Because one of the
successful strategies was to create a program that
submitted copies of itself to various places in the
address space, this game is often seen as a precursor
of viruses and worms, and is often discussed in con-
nection with the battle between malicious software
and protective software developers. Core Wars (capi-
talized) is now a standardized game using a simu-
lated machine language called Redstone code (or
redcode).
The earliest formal example of core wars was
DARWIN, conceived and developed in 1961 by V.
A.Vyssotsky, M. Douglas McIlroy, and Bob Morris at
Bell Telephone Laboratories in Murray Hill, New
Jersey. It ran on an IBM 7090 mainframe under the
Bell Labs operating system.
corrective control see controls
cost-benefit analysis the assessment of the costs of pro-
viding data protection for a system versus the cost of
losing or compromising the data. Sometimes also
known as cost-risk analysis.
countermeasure any action, device, procedure, technique,
or other measure that reduces the vulnerability of or
threat to a system. See also safeguard.
covert channel communications channel that allows two
cooperating processes to transfer information in a

manner that violates the system’s security policy.
More specifically, a means of information leaking
from a system via a channel not normally consid-
ered a communications medium. Synonymous with
confinement channel.
covert storage channel covert channel that involves the
direct or indirect writing of a storage location by
one process, and the direct or indirect reading of the
storage location by another process. Covert storage
channels typically involve a resource (such as sectors
on a disk) that is shared by two subjects at different
security levels.
covert timing channel covert channel in which one process
signals information to another by modulating its
own use of system resources (for example, CPU
time) in such a way that this manipulation affects
the real response time observed by the second
process 
crab originally,“crabs” was a prank program on Macintosh
and Atari computers that erased the screen display
by having graphical crabs “eat” it.An obscure usage
refers to malicious software that erases screen dis-
plays. (There are very few examples of this type of
activity.) 
cracker (1) someone who tries to break the security of,
and gain access to, someone else’s system without
being invited to do so.This is, of course, an attempt
to avoid the controversial usage of the term hacker.A
more specific usage is that referring to software
piracy aficionados (warez d00dz) who actually per-
form the cracking of copy protection codes, rather
48
Dictionary of Information Security

than simply distributing the pirated packages. See
also adversary, intruder, and blackhat. (2) person who
drives a pickup truck and objects to definition (1) 
CRC see cyclic redundancy check
critical (1) a condition of a service or other system
resource such that denial of access to, or lack of
availability of, that resource would jeopardize a
system user’s ability to perform a primary function
or would result in other serious consequences 
(2) each extension of an X.509 certificate (or CRL)
is marked as being either critical or non-critical. If
an extension is critical and a certificate user (or
CRL user) does not recognize the extension type or
does not implement its semantics, the user is
required to treat the certificate (or CRL) as invalid.
CRL see certificate revocation list
crossover error rate (CER) if the false acceptance rate and
false rejection rate are graphed as the sensitivity of a
security system is varied, false acceptance will start at a
high value and fall, whereas false rejection will start
with a low value and climb.The point at which the
graph of the FAR crosses that of the FRR is the
crossover error rate, and is generally considered a
reasonable overall measure of the accuracy of a
system. (It is easy to demonstrate situations in which
the CER is not the best measure or setting for a
system.) 
cryptanalysis the science that deals with analysis of a cryp-
tographic system to gain knowledge needed to break
or circumvent the protection the system is designed
Dictionary of Information Security
49

to provide. In some cases, this would be conversion
of ciphertext to plaintext, but in other cases, it might
involve forging of digital signatures or certificates.The
basic cryptanalytic attacks on encryption systems are
ciphertext-only, known-plaintext, chosen-plaintext, and
chosen-ciphertext; and these generalize to the other
kinds of cryptography. See also cryptology.
crypto formerly widely used as an abbreviation for cryptog-
raphy, cryptographic, cryptology, or even encryption, this
term probably should not be used because of the
potential for misunderstanding 
cryptographic algorithm well-defined procedure or
sequence of rules or steps used to produce a key
stream or ciphertext from plaintext, and vice versa.
Older usage is crypto-algorithm.
cryptographic checksum one-way function applied to a
file to produce a unique “fingerprint” of the file for
later reference. Often part of the process of creating
a digital signature.
cryptographic key see key
cryptography the principles, means, and methods for ren-
dering information unintelligible, and for restoring
encrypted information to intelligible form. Literally,
hidden writing.
cryptology slightly more general field than cryptography,
cryptology includes cryptanalysis, or code breaking,
and code making 
cryptoperiod the time span during which a particular key
is authorized to be used in a cryptographic system, an
50
Dictionary of Information Security

aspect of key management.Also known as key life-
time and validity period.
cryptosecurity the security or protection resulting from
the proper use of technically sound cryptosystems
cryptosystem complete and functional system for cryptog-
raphy, including a sound crypto-algorithm, provisions
for the required functions of the system, and proper
key choice and management 
cryptovariable becoming the preferred form of key
cyclic redundancy check (CRC) version of change detec-
tion that performs calculation on the data in a file or
message as a matrix.This can detect multiple or
subtle changes that ordinary checksum calculations
miss.Also used extensively in data communications
for ensuring the integrity of file transfers.
cypherpunk community of users and developers dedicated
to creating systems for anonymous communications
and network access. Since the cypherpunk commu-
nity is generally opposed to any invasion of privacy
or any form of surveillance, the law enforcement
community generally perceives them in a negative
light. Unfortunately, there does seem to be a relation
between certain segments of the cypherpunk com-
munity and some groups engaged in software piracy
and other forms of intellectual property theft.
Dictionary of Information Security
51

D
DAC see Discretionary Access Control
DAME Dark Avenger’s Mutation Engine. See MtE.
Dark Avenger the pseudonym of a Bulgarian virus writer
thought to be responsible for the “Eddie” family of
viral programs (among others) and the polymorphic
code known as the MtE
dark side hacker criminal or malicious hacker, cracker, or
blackhat.The reference is from the Star Wars saga: the
dark side of the Force is evil.The opposite of a
dark-side hacker is a samurai, a specifically technical
type of whitehat.
data diddling generally refers to an activity that makes
small, random, or incremental changes to informa-
tion, rather than complete erasure of files or pur-
poseful changing of data. Use of this term is not
recommended since the phrase is vague and there is
little agreement on meaning.
Data Encryption Algorithm (DEA) symmetric block
cipher, defined as part of the U.S. government’s Data
Encryption Standard. Generally speaking, in U.S. gov-
ernment systems, there will be an algorithm, which
is the mathematical engine, and a standard, which is
the fully working implementation.
Data Encryption Standard (DES) cryptographic algo-
rithm for the protection of unclassified data, pub-
lished in United States Federal Information
Processing Standard (FIPS) 46.The DES, which was

approved by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, was intended for public and govern-
ment use.A stronger version is provided by triple
DES (or 3DES), which comes in a variety of forms.
The grand old DES algorithm is no longer the offi-
cially sanctioned standard.
data flow control synonymous with information flow control
data integrity the property that data are unmodified, or
meet an expectation of quality 
data mirror system whereby data writes or other disk
activity is written to two or more disks simultane-
ously so if one fails, the data is still available 
data owner the authority, individual, or organization that
has original responsibility for the data by statute,
executive order, or directive 
data security the protection of data from unauthorized
(accidental or intentional) modification, destruction,
or disclosure 
DDoS Distributed Denial of Service.A form of network
denial of service (DoS) attack in which a master com-
puter controls a number of client computers to
flood the target (or victim) with traffic, using back-
door agent, client, or zombie software on a number of
client machines.The master computer will attempt
to control these machines and coordinate an attack
on a target.The master computer never contacts the
target directly, and the large number of zombie
machines multiplies the force of the attack.The
zombie program is generally distributed as some
form of trojan horse, although zombies may be
Dictionary of Information Security
53

installed if control has already been obtained by
means of a remote access trojan (RAT). Usage of the
acronym DDoS in preference to the full phrase is
almost universal.
DEA see Data Encryption Algorithm
DEADBEEF the hexadecimal word-fill pattern for freshly
allocated memory (decimal -21524111) under a
number of IBM environments, including the
RS/6000. Some modern debugging tools deliber-
ately fill freed memory with this value.
deadlock situation wherein two or more processes are
unable to proceed because each is waiting for one of
the others to do something.An example arises in
database management, where two users may have
obtained permission to update a given record, but
are unable to do so because the record is locked
awaiting the update.Another is a program commu-
nicating to a server, which may find itself waiting
for output from the server before sending anything
more to it, while the server is similarly waiting for
more input from the controlling program before
outputting anything.
deception to present false or forged identity or authentica-
tion to break security policy. See also social engineering,
and spoofing.
decipher see decryption
declassification administrative decision or procedure to
remove or reduce the security classification of the
object or information 
54
Dictionary of Information Security

decryption the process of extracting an original message,
or plaintext, from a ciphertext by the application of an
appropriate key and algorithm 
dedicated security mode see modes of operation
default account system login account that has been pre-
defined in a manufactured system to permit access
when the system is first put into service. Sometimes,
the default username and password are the same in
each copy of the system. In any case, when the
system is put into service, the default password should
immediately be changed or the default account
should be disabled.
default classification temporary classification reflecting
the highest classification being processed in a
system.The default classification is included in the
caution statement affixed to the object.
default password the password on system administration
or service accounts when a system is shipped from
the manufacturer. Failing to change default pass-
words or default accounts is a major security risk.
defence in depth security approach whereby each system
on the network is secured to the greatest possible
degree, using layers of defences whereby penetra-
tions successful at one point will be caught by
another safeguard
degauss to reduce magnetic flux density to zero by
applying a reverse magnetizing field. Degaussing
destroys information on magnetic media: hence the
warning not to store backup floppies by sticking
them to your computer with a magnet.
Dictionary of Information Security
55

degausser electrical device that can generate a magnetic
field for the purpose of degaussing magnetic storage
media 
degree of trust level of confidence in security mecha-
nisms and procedures to correctly enforce a speci-
fied security policy
delayed disclosure form of vulnerability disclosure in which
information about the vulnerability is not released
to the general public until it has first been made
known to the product vendor 
DES see Data Encryption Standard
denial of service (DoS) any action or series of actions
that prevent any part of a system from functioning
in accordance with its intended purpose.This
includes any action that causes unauthorized delay
of service. More specifically, DoS refers to an action
that does not destroy data or resources, but prevents
access or use. In network operations, flooding a
node or link with traffic is an effective form of
denial of service.This form of malicious attack is
particularly suited to viruses where no data is actually
erased or corrupted, but where system resources are
occupied to the extent that normal service is
restricted.The CHRISTMA exec did not corrupt
data, but occupied mail links to the point where
normal transfers could not take place.The Internet
Worm did not erase files, but multiple copies of the
process eventually meant almost all processing was
devoted to the Worm. Modern Internet DoS attacks
typically try to flood a machine with synchroniza-
tion requests from non-existent addresses. Not to be
56
Dictionary of Information Security

confused with DOS, which stands for Disk
Operating System, and particularly the MS-DOS
operating system and its variants. Synonymous with
interdiction. Usage of the phrase (denial of service)
or the acronym (DoS) is inconsistent, although there
is a slight preference for the full phrase to avoid
confusion with DOS.
dependency reliance of one process, component, or
resource upon the existence or operation of another.
Failure to analyze dependencies may result in lack of
provision for single points of failure.
Descriptive Top-Level Specification (DTLS) top-level
specification that is written in a natural language
(e.g., English), an informal design notation, or a
combination of the two 
Designated Approving Authority (DAA) the official
who has the authority to decide on accepting the
security safeguards prescribed for an Automated
Information System (AIS), or that official who may
be responsible for issuing an accreditation statement
that records the decision to accept those safeguards.
U.S. government or military.
detective control see controls
deterrent control see controls
dial back synonymous with call back
dial-up the service whereby a computer terminal can use
the telephone to initiate and effect communication
with a computer or network 
Dictionary of Information Security
57

dictionary attack version of a brute force attack, refined by
the assumption that, for example, passwords are
more likely to be real words rather than random
character strings, and so trying only words found in
a dictionary file, or other common source 
differential backup backup process that copies only such
items that have been changed since the last full
backup.A differential backup plan requires only the
last full backup and the latest differential backup for
complete restoration. See also incremental backup.
Diffie-Hellman algorithm (DH) public key (asymmetric)
algorithm primarily used for secure key exchange.
In 1976,Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman pub-
lished the first paper to describe what has now
become known as asymmetric cryptography. Ralph
Merkle described the same concept, at the same
time (with a different algorithm), but his paper was,
unfortunately, rejected as “uninteresting.”
digest string of data of specific length, calculated from a file
or message, in such a way that there is a high proba-
bility that any change to the original will result in a
change to the digest. Usually part of a digital signa-
ture.Also known as hash or message digest. See also
cryptographic checksum.
digital forensics sometimes known as digital forensic
research or digital forensic science, this has recently
become the umbrella term for all forms of research
and analysis of computers and computer use
directed at obtaining evidence of intrusion, attack,
or wrongdoing.The First Digital Forensic Research
Workshop defined digital forensic science as “[t]he
58
Dictionary of Information Security

use of scientifically derived and proven methods
toward the preservation, collection, validation, iden-
tification, analysis, interpretation, documentation and
presentation of digital evidence derived from digital
sources for the purpose of facilitating or furthering
the reconstruction of events found to be criminal, or
helping to anticipate unauthorized actions shown to
be disruptive to planned operations.”Three major
fields of digital forensics are computer forensics, forensic
programming, and network forensics.
digital signature piece of information generated by crypto-
graphic methods, whereby it can be demonstrated
that an original message or file has not been deliber-
ately altered or accidentally corrupted, and that the
identity of the originator of the file can be authenti-
cated
Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) asymmetric crypto-
graphic algorithm that produces a digital signature in the
form of a pair of large numbers. Used in the Digital
Signature Standard.
Digital Signature Standard (DSS) U.S. government
standard that specifies the Digital Signature Algorithm
(DSA) 
digital watermarking computing techniques for insepa-
rably embedding unobtrusive marks or labels as bits
in digital data—text, graphics, images, video, or
audio—and for detecting or extracting the marks
later.The set of embedded bits (the digital water-
mark) is sometimes hidden, usually imperceptible,
and always intended to be unobtrusive. Depending
on the particular technique used, digital 
Dictionary of Information Security
59

watermarking can assist in proving ownership, con-
trolling duplication, tracing distribution, ensuring
data integrity, and performing other functions to
protect intellectual property rights. See also 
steganography.
direct action virus virus that immediately loads itself into
memory, infects other files, and then unloads itself
from memory 
dirty power electrical utility power that is damaging to
computers or other delicate electronic equipment.
Spikes, brownouts, voltage significantly higher or
lower than normal, or line noise can all cause prob-
lems of varying severity and are collectively known
as “power hits.”
disaster plan synonymous with contingency plan
disaster recovery plan (DRP) plan and preparations
directed toward the resumption of business and the
recovery of systems after catastrophic loss of impor-
tant systems.A disaster recovery plan is generally
concerned with longer time frames than a business
continuity plan. Sometimes also referred to as a busi-
ness resumption plan.
disclaimer The content of this Web page or book (if I’ve
managed to sell it) is distributed on an “as is” basis,
without surety, warranty, or assurance of any kind as
to accuracy of content, quality of writing, punctua-
tion, spelling, grammar, usefulness of the ideas pre-
sented, merchantability, liability, correctness or
readability of concepts, or correspondence of (a) the
definitions with the actual terms used, (ii) domain
60
Dictionary of Information Security

name references in the URL (if any) with the actual
site used, and (4) any reference link with where the
link ends up. Illustrations may have been originally
necessary to understand this material: neither the
author nor the ISP accept any responsibility for the
fact that ASCII doesn’t support them.Any resem-
blance of the author or his or her likeness or name
to any person, living or dead, or their heirs or
assigns (even if grandchildren), is coincidental; all
references to people, places, or events have been or
should have been fictionalized or at least randomly
chosen from the Quesnel phone directory and may
or may not have any factual basis, even if reported as
authentic. Similarities to existing works of fact, ref-
erence, art, literature, song, dance, puppetry, reality
television program, radio talk show, random conver-
sation, or movie scripts is pure fluke. References
have been chosen at random from the author’s own
written works (for purposes of self-promotion) or
fertile imagination. Neither the author(s) nor the
publisher shall have any liability whatever to any
person, corporation, animal (whether feral or
domesticated), mineral, vegetable, or other corporeal,
incorporeal, or supracorporeal entity with respect to
any loss, damage, misunderstanding, puzzlement, or
death from choking with laughter (I wish) or
apoplexy (more likely) at or due to, respectively, the
contents; that is caused or is alleged to be caused by
any party, whether directly or indirectly due to the
information or lack of information that may or may
not be found in this alleged work. No representa-
tion is made as to the correctness of the IP address
or date of publication as our Pentium isn’t good
Dictionary of Information Security
61

with numbers and errors of spelling and usage are
attributable solely to bugs in the spelling and
grammar checker in Microsoft Word even though
the author does not use it. If sold without a header,
this message will be shorter than those sold with a
header. Slightly higher west of the Rockies. (The
elevation, dummy, not the number of entries.) You
do not own this page or book, but have acquired
only a revocable non-exclusive licence to read the
material contained herein.You may not read it aloud
to any third party, regardless of any ability or
inability of that third party to read it for themselves.
This disclaimer is held to be valid under the laws of
wherever I can best make it stick.This disclaimer is
a copyrighted work of Robert M. Slade, first pub-
lished in 2004, and is distributed “as is,” without
guarantee, warranty, or attestation as to quality of
humour, trenchancy of critique, sharpness of scorn,
or aptness of jape.Any similarity to any book dis-
claimer by Jef Raskin is purest accident.
disclosure (1) the act of providing access to specific infor-
mation, usually without restriction 
(2) relating to a philosophical debate about the value
or necessity of making information about security
vulnerabilities or exploits publicly available. Proponents
of full disclosure would state that the information,
including full details and possibly working exploit
code to demonstrate the problem, needs to be made
available to everyone to ensure that anyone charged
with security provision has access to it, and to force
vendors to face up to the fact that the problem
exists. Proponents of non-disclosure insist that
making information available means that it is made
62
Dictionary of Information Security

available to those who would use it to attack sys-
tems. Most would recommend some form of partial
disclosure, such as making the information available
to the vendor for a month before publishing a
warning about the existence of the problem. See
also limited disclosure, delayed disclosure, and security by
obscurity.
discretionary access control (DAC) means of restricting
access to objects based on the identity and need-to-
know of the user, process, and/or groups to which
they belong.The controls are discretionary in the
sense that a subject with a certain access permission is
capable of passing that permission (perhaps indi-
rectly) on to any other subject. Compare mandatory
access control.
disinfection in virus work, the term can mean either the
disabling of a virus’ ability to operate, the removal of
virus code, or the return of the system to a state
identical to that prior to infection. Since these defini-
tions can differ substantially in practice, discussions
of the ability to disinfect an infected system can be
problematic. Disinfection is the means users gener-
ally prefer to use in dealing with virus infections,
but the safest means of dealing with an infection is
to delete all infected objects and replace them with
safe files from backup.
disk compression real-time compression and decompres-
sion of files on disk to effectively increase disk space.
(Disk compression programs typically promise to
double the size of the hard disk and are sometimes
known as disk doublers.) Because compression is a
Dictionary of Information Security
63

form of encryption, scanning a compressed disk
without the compression software running will typi-
cally hide viruses and other malware from a scanner.
Disk compression is less of an issue of late given the
drop in prices for large capacity disks.
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) distributed
denial of service is almost universally referred to by
its acronym, DDoS
DNS spoofing assuming the DNS (Domain Name
Service) name of another system by either cor-
rupting the name service cache of a victim system,
or by compromising a domain name server for a
valid domain 
DMZ de-militarized zone, originally an area between two
opposing armies or nations, not used by either side,
and stripped of any cover to avoid penetration
attempts by either side. (Similar to “no man’s land”
in World War I.) Now frequently used to describe
the unused or unimportant area, physical or logical,
between two layers of control in a defence in depth
system. In particular, a firewall architecture where
internal company networks are separated from pub-
licly accessible servers, such as Web servers, which
are themselves separated from the public Internet by
another firewall.
DoD Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria
(TCSEC) document published by the United
States National Computer Security Center con-
taining a uniform set of basic requirements and eval-
uation classes for assessing degrees of assurance in the
effectiveness of hardware and software security con-
64
Dictionary of Information Security

trols built into systems.These criteria were intended
for use in the design and evaluation of systems that
would process and/or store sensitive or classified
data.This document is United States Government
Standard Department of Defense (DoD) 5200.28-
STD and is frequently referred to as “The Orange
Book.” It was one of the standards that went into
the production of the Common Criteria.
domain the unique context (e.g., access control parame-
ters) in which a program is operating; in effect, the
set of objects a subject has the ability to access. Should
not be confused with the domain names used in
Internet addressing. See process and subject.
dominate security level S1 is said to dominate security level
S2 if the hierarchical classification of S1 is greater
than or equal to that of S2, and the nonhierarchical
categories of S1 include all those of S2 as a subset 
dongle portable, physical, electronic device that is required
to be attached to a computer to enable a particular
software program to run.A form of authentication
token.
DoS see denial of service
DOS Disk Operating System. Generally, any computer
operating system, although currently often used as
shorthand for Microsoft’s MS-DOS or the related
PC-DOS and DR-DOS. Not to be confused with
DoS (denial of service).
dropper program, not itself infected, that will install a virus
on a computer system.Virus authors often use drop-
pers to seed their creations in the wild, particularly in
the case of boot sector infectors.The term injector may
Dictionary of Information Security
65

refer to a dropper that installs a virus only in
memory.
DSA see Digital Signature Algorithm
DSS see Digital Signature Standard
DTLS See Descriptive Top-Level Specification
dual homed host system that has two or more network
interfaces, each of which is connected to a different
network. In firewall configurations, a dual homed
host usually acts to block or filter some or all of the
traffic trying to pass between the networks.
Sometimes called dual homed gateway.
dual infector see multipartite
due care required, just, proper, and sufficient care, so far as
the circumstances demand; prudent.The absence of
negligence.That degree of care a prudent person
can be expected to exercise to avoid harm that is
reasonably foreseeable if such care is not taken.
due diligence proof (usually documented) that due care
has been exercised 
dumpster diving practice of collecting and analysing
garbage from a company installation to retrieve con-
fidential data, especially security compromising
information. (Dumpster is an American term for
what is elsewhere called a skip.) In industrial espi-
onage, the same activity is known as a “trash cover.”
DWIM the opcode, not yet implemented on any known
computer, that will resolve all problems; i.e.,“Do
What I Mean”
66
Dictionary of Information Security

E
e-mail or email use email. I’ve studied the various
telecom dictionaries, and they are about equally
split. However, net and tech users (aside from B1FF)
avoid extraneous characters (and, indeed, any extra
characters at all). (If you do not know that email is
“electronic mail,” sending text-based messages
through store and forward computer network sys-
tems, you shouldn’t be reading this book.) 
easter egg undocumented function in a program, generally
intended as a prank on or treat for frequent users.
Easter eggs range greatly in scope from mildly
amusing error messages to the full implementation
of a kind of flight simulator that appeared in one
version of Microsoft’s Excel spreadsheet program.
Opinion regarding easter eggs varies, from those
who see them as simply harmless jokes to those
who consider the more complex inclusions to be
trojan horses. In general, however, the practice of
including easter eggs and other undocumented code
in programs is detrimental to strict security. (OK,
yes, this glossary is full of easter eggs.) 
eavesdropping passive wiretapping done secretly, without
the knowledge of the originator or the intended
recipients of the communication 
ECB see electronic codebook
economy of mechanism principle that each security
mechanism should be designed to be as simple as
possible, so the mechanism can be correctly imple-
mented, can be implemented in most situations, and

so that it can be verified that the operation of the
mechanism enforces the containing system’s security
policy
EICAR European Institute of Computer Anti-Virus
Research. See also EICAR Standard Antivirus Test File.
EICAR Standard Antivirus Test File In conjunction
with several antivirus software companies, EICAR
has developed a test file for antivirus software.This
text file consists of one line of 68 printable charac-
ters; if saved as EICAR.COM, it can be executed
and displays the message “EICAR-STANDARD-
ANTIVIRUS-TEST-FILE!”This provides an easily
reproducible executable file that many antiviral
developers have agreed to detect with their pro-
grams. It thus affords a safe and simple way of
testing whether an antiviral scanner is operating
without using a real virus.The actual string is:
X5O!P%@AP[4\PZX54(P^)7CC)7}$EICAR-STANDARD-ANTIVIRUS-TEST-FILE!$H+H*
El Gamal algorithm unpatented algorithm for asymmetric
cryptography, invented in 1985 by Taher El Gamal,
that is based on the difficulty of calculating discrete
logarithms and can be used for both encryption and
digital signatures 
electronic codebook (ECB) block cipher mode that uses
no feedback. Identical blocks of plaintext are trans-
formed into identical ciphertext blocks. Considered
the weakest form of block cipher.
electronic emission security measures taken to protect
transmissions or emanations, particularly inadvertent
68
Dictionary of Information Security

and inherent, from interception and electronic
analysis.The most famous form was TEMPEST.
electronic vaulting transfer of data to a remote facility
(for storage purposes) via a communications channel 
elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) type of asymmetric
cryptography based on mathematics of groups that are
defined by the points on a curve.The most efficient
implementation of ECC is claimed to be stronger
per bit of key length than any other known form of
asymmetric cryptography. ECC can be used to
define an algorithm for key agreement that is an
analog of the Diffie-Hellman, and an algorithm for
digital signature that is an analog of the Digital
Signature Algorithm.
emanations see compromising emanations
embedded system system that performs or controls a
function, either in whole or in part, as an integral
element of a larger system or subsystem 
emergency sudden, generally unexpected event that does
or could do harm to people, the environment,
resources, property, or institutions 
emergency plan synonymous with contingency plan
emission security protection resulting from all measures
taken to deny unauthorized persons information of
value that might be derived from intercept and from
an analysis of compromising emanations from systems 
Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) Internet IPsec
protocol (RFC 2406) designed to provide a mix of
Dictionary of Information Security
69

security services—especially data confidentiality
service—in the Internet Protocol. See also
Authentication Header. ESP may be used alone, in
combination with the IPsec AH protocol, or in a
nested fashion with tunnelling.The ESP header is
encapsulated by the IP header, and the ESP header
encapsulates either the upper layer protocol header
(transport mode) or an IP header (tunnel mode).
ESP can provide confidentiality service, origin
authentication service, connectionless data integrity
service, an anti-replay service, and limited traffic
flow confidentiality.
encrypted virus virus whose code begins with a decryp-
tion algorithm and continues with scrambled or
encrypted code for the remainder of the virus. Each
time it infects, a different encryption key is chosen
to avoid providing a consistent scan string to use as
a signature.Through this method, the virus tries to
avoid detection by antivirus software.The term
“encrypted virus” is a loose one, and seldom used in
the antiviral research community. More rigorously,
the term “self-encryption” is used, as a specific type
of polymorphic activity.
encryption process of transforming a message (or plaintext)
into apparently random noise (or ciphertext) such
that the message can be extracted by those in pos-
session of an appropriate key, but is difficult or
impossible to extract by unauthorized parties.Also,
the process of placing a coffin in a mausoleum—
GJS per ME.
70
Dictionary of Information Security

encryption algorithm set of logical or mathematical rules
for rendering data unintelligible, through a series of
transformations to the normal representation of the
information, usually controlled by a key or cryptovari-
able. See also cryptographic algorithm.
end-to-end encryption protection of information passed
in a telecommunications system by cryptographic
means, from point of origin to point of destination,
provided by encrypting data when it leaves its
source, leaving it encrypted while it passes through
any intermediate computers (such as routers), and
decrypting only when the data arrives at the
intended destination.When two points are separated
by multiple communication links that are connected
by one or more intermediate relays, end-to-end
encryption enables the source and destination sys-
tems to protect their communications without
depending on the intermediate systems to provide
the protection.The alternate system for communica-
tions encryption is link encryption.
Endorsed Tools List (ETL) list of formal verification
tools endorsed by the NCSC (National Computer
Security Center) for the development of systems
with high levels of trust. U.S. government and 
military.
entrapment deliberate planting of apparent flaws in a
system for the purpose of detecting attempted pene-
trations. See honeypot and pseudo flaw.This technical
definition of entrapment should not be confused
with the legal sense of the word, which is the spe-
cific incitement to a particular illegal act.
Dictionary of Information Security
71

environment aggregate of external procedures, conditions,
and objects that affect the development, operation,
and maintenance of a system 
ephemeral key key that is relatively short-lived. See session
key
erasure process by which a signal recorded on magnetic
media is removed. Complete erasure is usually
accomplished by applying a magnetic field to the
media. Deleting a file, particularly under a desktop
operating system, does not necessarily erase the con-
tents of the file.
Eris the Greek goddess of Chaos, Discord, Confusion, and
Things You Know Not Of; the connection to secu-
rity is obvious. See also Sisyphus the Perplexed.
error log file created by the operating system that may be
useful for review as part of the audit process 
escalation increasing the level of reporting or action in
regard to an event or incident, particularly as evidence
accumulates that the scope or significance of the
incident is greater than originally thought 
ESP see Encapsulating Security Payload
ethical hacker the way the term is used, an “ethical
hacker” is simply a penetration tester, one who assesses
the security of an installation, or, in the most
generic use, an IT security auditor. Since we know
what a penetration tester is, and the term “ethical
hacker” is both emotionally loaded and not terribly
clear, use of the term should be avoided.
72
Dictionary of Information Security

Dictionary of Information Security
73
ethics principles of conduct governing an individual or
group 
evacuation (1) controlled movement of personnel from a
site under threat to a safe location 
(2) no, we aren’t interested in any nursing jokes 
Evaluated Products List (EPL) list of equipment, hard-
ware, software, and/or firmware that have been eval-
uated against, and found to be technically compliant
with, the U.S. Department of Defense TCSEC by
the NCSC (National Computer Security Center) at
a particular level of trust. U.S. government and mili-
tary.
event any untoward or potentially negative single occur-
rence.A collection of events may make up an inci-
dent.
evil twin wireless LAN access point, set up to appear to be
an Internet access hotspot.When a user connects to
the site, the evil twin can sniff all traffic, collecting
information such as passwords and credit card num-
bers. Often known as a rogue access point.
exception error condition generated by hardware or soft-
ware. Developers must consider possible errors and
exceptions to normal operation, and provide excep-
tion handling, often through special software mod-
ules known as exception handlers. Failure to address
exceptions may result in bugs such as buffer overflows.
Less critical types of exception handling may involve
protection of data integrity, such as sanity checking.
(Thanks, Fred.) 

executive state one of several states in which a system
may operate and the only one in which certain
privileged instructions may be executed. Such
instructions cannot be executed when the system is
operating in other (user) states. Synonymous with
supervisor state.
exploit specific attack or vulnerability used to take advantage
of a particular loophole or weakness in security meas-
ures.Very similar in meaning to exposure, and some-
times the two terms are used synonymously.
exploitable channel any information channel that is
usable or detectable by subjects external to the
trusted computing base whose purpose is to violate
the security policy of the system. See covert channel.
exposure particular weakness or vulnerability to a specific
attack.Also, the measure of risk to a particular threat.
external label visible marking on the outside or cover of
media that reflects the classification and sensitivity of
the information resident within media. See also
internal label and label.
74
Dictionary of Information Security

F
fail over design or condition where the failure or over-
loading of a component or system transfers demand
or function to another, usually identical, unit.
Systems designed for fail over are usually arranged
with multiple units in sequence.
fail safe automatic protection of programs and/or pro-
cessing systems to maintain safety when a hardware
or software failure is detected in a system.The over-
riding principle is that failure of one part or com-
ponent will not result in the failure or termination
of the system as a whole. In terms of security, fail
safe is sometimes seen as a tendency to fail open:
failure of access controls, for example, will ensure
that access continues to be granted—sometimes
even to those to whom it should not be granted.
Compare with fail secure.
fail secure in the event of a failure of a part or component
of the system, the system itself will terminate or fail,
rather than suffer any loss of security. Compare with
fail safe.
fail soft pertaining to the selective termination of affected
nonessential processing when a hardware or software
failure is detected in a system.The term “graceful
degradation” is sometimes used.
failure access unauthorized and usually inadvertent access
to data resulting from a hardware or software failure
in the system 

failure control method used to detect and provide fail safe
or fail soft recovery from hardware and software fail-
ures in a system 
false acceptance error condition where a subject, object, or
operation is accepted as valid, when it should have
been rejected as invalid, incorrect, or a compromise of
the security policy.Also known as a Type II error. See
also false rejection, false negative, and crossover error rate.
false acceptance rate (FAR) measure of the accuracy of
a security safeguard, expressed as a proportion or
percentage of the number of false acceptance, or Type
II, errors against the total number of events. See also
crossover error rate.
false alarm see false rejection and false positive
false negative there are two types of false reports from
antiviral software.A false negative report is when an
antiviral reports no viral activity or presence, when
there is a virus present. References to false negatives
are usually only made in technical reports. Most
people simply refer to an antiviral “missing” a virus.
A false negative is more generally known in the
security community as a false acceptance, or a Type II
error.
false positive the second kind of false report an antiviral
can make is to report the activity or presence of a
virus when there is, in fact, no virus. False positive
has come to be widely used among those who
know about viral and antiviral programs.Very few
use the analogous term, false alarm.A false positive is
76
Dictionary of Information Security

more generally known in the security community as
a false rejection, or a Type I error.
false rejection error condition where a subject, object, or
operation that should be accepted as valid is rejected
as invalid, incorrect, or a compromise of the security
policy.Also known as a Type I error. See also false
acceptance, false positive, and crossover error rate.
false rejection rate (FRR) measure of the accuracy of a
security safeguard, expressed as a proportion or per-
centage of the number of false rejection, or Type I,
errors against the total number of events. See also
crossover error rate.
fan out in terms of incident response, a system whereby each
person notified of the incident has the responsibility
to call additional personnel, thus speeding the con-
tact process. It should be noted that provision should
be made for redundancy in such a system to prevent
situations in which a failure at one point would pre-
vent contact of an entire segment of the team. See
also call tree.
fast burner virus, usually email or network based, that
spreads around the world within hours. Melissa and
Loveletter are considered the prototypical fast
burners.The original Internet Worm and Code Red
certainly spread around the world within hours, but
only created tens or hundreds of thousands of
copies, whereas true fast burners are generally meas-
ured in the millions.
fast infector originally, this referred to a virus that infected
any program file opened, even if the program was
Dictionary of Information Security
77

78
Dictionary of Information Security
not executed. Later viruses were able to search for
and infect files even if they were not opened, so the
distinction became meaningless.This term is seldom
used in virus research any longer.
FAT virus see cluster virus
fault condition that causes a device or system component
to fail to perform in a required manner 
fault tolerance ability of a system or component to con-
tinue normal operation despite the presence of
hardware or software faults.Also the number of
faults a system or component can withstand before
normal operation is impaired.
fetch protection system-provided restriction to prevent a
program from accessing data in another user’s seg-
ment of storage 
File Allocation Table (FAT) MS-DOS specific term for
that area of system information on the disk that
refers to the physical areas of the disk that are taken
up by files or portions of files. Certain viral pro-
grams are said to take over a file pointer without
affecting directory information by manipulating
FAT information.This is not quite accurate, and
most researchers tend to prefer the use of the term
cluster virus or system virus.
file infector virus that attaches itself to, or associates itself
with, a file, usually a program file. File infectors most
often append or prepend themselves to regular pro-
gram files, or overwrite program code.The file
infector class is often also used to refer to programs
that do not physically attach to files but associate

themselves with program filenames. See also system
virus and companion virus.
file protection aggregate of all processes and procedures in
a system designed to inhibit unauthorized access to,
contamination of, or elimination of a file 
file security means by which access to computer files is
limited to authorized users only 
filter program that processes an input data stream into an
output data stream in some well-defined way.This
has implications for various security applications,
most particularly in terms of firewalls.
filtering router internetwork router that selectively pre-
vents the passage of data packets according to a secu-
rity policy.A filtering router may be used as a firewall
or part of a firewall.A router usually receives a
packet from a network and decides where to for-
ward it on a second network.A filtering router does
the same, but first decides whether the packet
should be forwarded at all, according to specific
security policy.The policy is implemented by rules
(packet filters) loaded into the router.The rules
mostly involve values of data packet control fields,
especially source and destination addresses, protocol
fields, and port numbers.
firewall secured system passing and examining traffic
between an internal trusted network and an external
untrusted network such as the Internet. Firewalls
can be used to detect, prevent, or mitigate certain
types of network attack. See also application level
gateway and proxy server.
Dictionary of Information Security
79

firmware computer programs and data stored in hard-
ware—typically in read-only memory (ROM) or
programmable read-only memory (PROM)—such
that the programs and data cannot be dynamically
written or modified during execution of the pro-
grams.An important exception is flash EEPROM
(Electrically Erasable Programmable Read-Only
Memory), which can be rewritten in some circum-
stances. See also BIOS.
FIRST see Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams
flag (1) in data transmission, an indicator, such as a signal,
symbol, character, or digit, used for identification 
(2) a variable or quantity that can take one of two
values; a bit, particularly one that is used to indicate
one of two outcomes or is used to control which of
two things is to be done 
flame to post an email message intended to insult and pro-
voke. Sometimes, flames are sent deliberately to start
an argument or “flame war,” an action known as
trolling.
flaw defect in the design of software, as opposed to a bug,
which is an error in implementation 
flaw hypothesis methodology systems analysis and pene-
tration technique in which specifications and docu-
mentation for the system are analyzed and then flaws
in the system are hypothesized.The list of hypothe-
sized flaws is then priorized on the basis of the esti-
mated probability that a flaw exists and, assuming a
flaw does exist, on the ease of exploiting the flaw,
and on the extent of control or compromise the flaw
80
Dictionary of Information Security

would provide.The prioritized list is used to direct a
penetration attack against the system.This is similar
to scenario based planning.
flow control see information flow control
forensic programming originally from the field of com-
puter virus research, forensic programming involves
the analysis of code for evidence of intent, program
identity, or authorship. Outside of virus research,
forensic is often referred to as code analysis,
although code analysis may be limited to analysis of
source code, whereas forensic programming fre-
quently deals with object code when object code is
the only evidence available.The broader field, exam-
ining all forms of code, is becoming known as soft-
ware forensics. One of the major divisions of digital
forensics.
formal access approval documented approval by a data
owner to allow access to a particular category of
information 
formal proof complete and convincing mathematical
argument, presenting the full logical justification for
each proof step, and for the truth of a theorem or
set of theorems 
formal security policy model mathematically precise
statement of a security policy.To be adequately pre-
cise, such a model must represent the initial state of
a system, the way in which the system progresses
from one state to another, and a definition of a
“secure” state of the system.To be acceptable as a
basis for a TCB (Trusted Computing Base), the
Dictionary of Information Security
81

model must be supported by a formal proof that if
the initial state of the system satisfies the definition
of a “secure” state and if all assumptions required by
the model hold, then all future states of the system
will be secure. Some formal modelling techniques
include state transition models, denotational seman-
tics models, and algebraic specification models. See
Bell-La Padula model and security policy model.
Formal Top-Level Specification (FTLS) top-level spec-
ification that is written in a formal mathematical
language to allow theorems showing the correspon-
dence of the system specification to its formal
requirements to be hypothesized and formally
proven 
formal verification process of using formal proofs to
demonstrate the consistency between a formal spec-
ification of a system and a formal security policy
model (design verification), or between the formal
specification and its high-level program implemen-
tation (implementation verification) 
format structure of a data file, or a storage device or
medium containing information, and particularly
the command to prepare such media for holding
information. Because issuing a format command
generally results in the loss of ability to retrieve files
previously stored, it is generally felt that the format
command is an effective means of erasure of data. In
fact, in many situations (particularly under Microsoft
Windows), the format command does not erase data
at all. On other platforms (such as UNIX), the
format command may take other options, some of
82
Dictionary of Information Security

which may support functions such as overwriting
delete.
Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams
(FIRST) international consortium of CSIRTs
(Computer Security Incident Response Teams) that
work together to handle computer security inci-
dents and promote preventive activities. FIRST was
founded in 1990 and, as of September 1999 had
nearly 70 members spanning the globe. It attempts
to provide members with technical information,
tools, methods, assistance, and guidance; coordinate
proactive liaison activities and analytical support;
encourage development of quality products and
services; improve national and international infor-
mation security for government, private industry,
academia, and the individual; and enhance the image
and status of the CSIRT community.
forward error correction system of error control for data
transmission wherein the receiving device has the
capability to detect and correct any character or
code block that contains fewer than a predeter-
mined number of symbols in error. Hamming code is
an example.
forward secrecy for a key agreement protocol based on
asymmetric cryptography, the property that ensures that
a session key derived from a set of long-term public
and private keys will not be compromised if one of
the private keys is compromised in the future.The
term “perfect forward secrecy” is frequently used in
this regard, but is not defined precisely.The term
“public-key forward secrecy” (suggested by Hilarie
Dictionary of Information Security
83

Orman) is probably more accurate, but, because of
the various terms using the phrase “forward secrecy”
it is the phrase defined in this glossary.There are also
discussions of “backward” security, but there does
not seem to be agreement on whether this refers to
a weakening of a private key if the derived session
key is compromised, or if a compromise of one ses-
sion key weakens session keys used previously.
Symmetric systems probably do not have any similar
property, since compromise of the key compromises
the entire system.
fraud intentional perversion of truth for the purpose of
obtaining some benefit or resource from the person
in control of it 
freeware software to which the author or developer still
retains copyright (unlike public domain), but for the use
of which there is no charge (unlike shareware or com-
mercial software).There are sometimes restrictions on
the use or distribution of freeware. See also open
source.
front end intermediary computer that does setup and fil-
tering for another (usually more powerful but less
friendly) machine (a back end).Also, software that
provides an interface to another program behind it.
front-end security filter security filter, which could be
implemented in hardware or software, that is logi-
cally separated from the remainder of the system to
protect the system’s integrity 
ftp ftp has little to do with security at all, it has just come
to be such a very common term among those who
84
Dictionary of Information Security

work on the Internet that we use it a number of
times without ever defining it. ftp (almost always
written in lowercase: despite the fact that it is an
acronym, the usage stems from the fact that UNIX
programs are generally lowercase) is the file transfer
protocol of the Internet: the way to copy files
between computers. It is often used as a verb, as in
“Where do I find the latest copy of DISKSE-
CURE?”“Oh, you can ftp it from urvax.”A com-
puter set up to provide files for all callers from
anywhere on the Internet is known as an “ftp site”:
more commonly now called an anonymous ftp site,
since most sites do not require the use of an estab-
lished account. See anonymous login.
full backup backup process that makes a copy of all data
and/or software on a system, or such a copy.A full
backup is the only item needed for complete system
restoration, but takes the longest to perform. See
also differential backup and incremental backup.
full disclosure extreme form of vulnerability disclosure that
holds that information about any vulnerability
should be released to the general public with no
restrictions. Full disclosure may also hold that
announcements of vulnerabilities should be accom-
panied by working exploit code, possibly demon-
strating the most dangerous possible exploit.While
full disclosure is sometimes advocated by members
of the security research community, the AV virus
research community has always held that notification
of the existence of viruses is desirable, but distribu-
tion of exploit code (working viruses) is to be
extremely limited.
Dictionary of Information Security
85

functional testing segment of security testing in which
the advertised security mechanisms of the system are
tested, under operational conditions, for correct
operation 
86
Dictionary of Information Security

G
gap analysis examination of discrepancies between secu-
rity requirements and controls or safeguards in place 
garbage collection particular class of strategies for
dynamically but transparently reallocating computer
memory in running applications. One such strategy
involves periodically scanning all the data in
memory: locations with useless data items are then
made available so the memory they occupy can be
recycled and used for another purpose. If the data is
not cleared from these locations before reallocation,
the information may be made available to processes
or users despite normal access restrictions.
General Public Virus pejorative or ironic name for some
versions of the GNU (Gnu’s Not UNIX) project
copyleft or General Public License (GPL), which
requires that any open source tools or applications
incorporating copylefted code must be source-dis-
tributed on the same counter-commercial terms as
GNU material.Thus, it is alleged that the copyleft
“infects” software generated with GNU tools, which
may in turn infect other software that reuses any of
its code.
generic (1) activity monitoring and change detection software,
since they look for viral-like activity rather than
specific virus signatures, are often referred to as
generic antivirals. Heuristic scanners are often included
since they are a special case of activity monitors.
(2) a virus scan string that matches more than one
virus.The usefulness of generic signatures is some-
times questioned.

(3) the use of error recovery or heuristic techniques
for disinfection.
germ like bacterium, this is another term for a viral pro-
gram that does not directly attach to programs.
Usage obscure.
Get A Life! way of suggesting that the target is taking
some obscure issue too seriously. It is generally held
that the majority of blackhats, and particularly the
obsessive wannabe script kiddies, do not Have A Life.
GIGO acronym for “Garbage In, Garbage Out,” an expla-
nation that systems behave improperly when given
imperfect input or are otherwise mistreated in some
way.Also commonly used to describe failures in
human decision making due to faulty, incomplete, or
imprecise data.The original statement of this
premise, although not so concise, goes all the way
back to Charles Babbage:“On two occasions I have
been asked (by members of Parliament!),‘Pray, Mr.
Babbage, if you put into the machine wrong figures,
will the right answers come out?’ I am not able
rightly to apprehend the kind of confusion of ideas
that could provoke such a question.” More recently,
the expression “Garbage In, Gospel Out” has
become a sardonic comment on the tendency
human beings have to put excessive trust in com-
puterized data or systems. See also Trust the
Machines.
go bag in emergency planning, a bag, pack, or other single
container holding resources necessary for someone
to operate in the initial stages of an emergency and
for some hours thereafter. See also battle box.
88
Dictionary of Information Security

goat see bait
gold standard the best practice in describing your standard,
if you want people to buy into it 
granularity expression of the relative size of a data object;
e.g., protection at the file level is considered coarse
granularity, whereas protection at record or field
level is considered to be of a finer granularity 
green machine computer or peripheral device that has
been designed and built to military specifications for
field equipment (that is, to withstand mechanical
shock, extremes of temperature and humidity, and so
forth). Comes from the olive-drab uniform paint
used for military equipment.
guard processor that provides a filter between two disparate
systems operating at different security levels or
between a user terminal and a database to filter out
data the user is not authorized to access 
guest login see anonymous login
guideline usually a part of a security policy, a guideline is a
suggestion or recommendation as opposed to a
required standard.A guideline may also be informa-
tive, such as a list of “best practices” or an evaluation
criteria.
Dictionary of Information Security
89

H
hacker originally, the term meant one who was skilled in
the use of computer systems, particularly if that skill
was acquired in an exploratory manner. Later, the
term evolved to be applied to those, skilled or
unskilled, who break security systems.Actually, you
can generally determine people’s level of technical
expertise by how they use the term.A person who
uses “hacker” for “expert” is someone who really
does advanced technical work. Someone who uses
“hacker” as meaning a bad guy may have a technical
background of some type, or a technical job, but
usually is nowhere near the cutting edge.
hacktivism system penetration or corruption with a polit-
ical or social intent.The term is considered slang,
and is not carefully defined, but is generally accept-
able.
Hamming code error-detecting and -correcting binary
code used in data transmission that can detect all
single and double bit errors and can correct all
single bit errors. Hamming codes must satisfy
k=m(m–1) and m=n–k, where n is the number of
bits in the block, k is the number of information
bits in the block, and m is the number of check bits
in the block. See also forward error correction code.
handshaking procedure dialogue between two entities
(e.g., a user and a computer, a computer and
another computer, or a program and another pro-
gram) used for identification and authentication of the
entities to one another 

Hanlon’s Razor “Never attribute to malice that which
can be adequately explained by stupidity.”
hardcopy information or data in some fixed media.
Hardcopy generally refers to a medium that is diffi-
cult to modify, and usually in human-readable form,
such as printed on paper. Hardcopy may be the pre-
ferred form of backup in cases where the data may
need to outlast the lifetime of certain forms of
storage technology. Hardcopy is also usually pre-
ferred in many situations for evidentiary purposes,
especially in regard to presentation in courts of law.
hash see digest
hash function algorithm that computes a value based on a
data object (such as a message or file; usually vari-
able length; possibly very large), thereby mapping
the data object to a smaller data object (the hash
result) that is usually a fixed-size value.A checksum is
a very simplistic hash function.A good hash func-
tion is such that the results of applying the function
to a set of values in the domain will be evenly dis-
tributed (and apparently at random) over the range.
The kind of hash function needed for security
applications is called a cryptographic hash function, an
algorithm for which it is computationally infeasible
to find either (a) a data object that maps to a pre-
specified hash result (the “one-way” property), or 
(b) two data objects that map to the same hash
result (the “collision-free” property).
hash result output of a hash function, also known as a
hash value.The output produced by a hash function
upon processing a message or file.
Dictionary of Information Security
91

help desk most common name for that person or office in
an organization where users are directed for tech-
nical support or assistance. Help desk personnel
should receive at least basic security education and
training, since they will likely receive the first
reports of anomalies that may indicate an attack or
other security problem.
heuristic in antiviral terms, the examination of program
code for functions known to be associated with viral
activity. In most cases, this is similar to activity moni-
toring but without actually executing the program; in
other cases, code is run under some type of emula-
tion.There has also been a heuristic disinfection
program that attempted to remove viral infections
by examination of unknown code. In more general
computing discussions, heuristic may have a
meaning similar to algorithm, or it may relate to
shortcuts to solutions taken on the basis of a “best
guess.”Thus, a dictionary attack may be seen as a
heuristic type of brute force attack.
heuristic scanner antiviral program that attempts to detect
new or unknown viruses or malware by the examina-
tion of program code for functions known to be
associated with viral or malicious activity 
hijacking attack whereby an active, established session is
intercepted and used by the attacker 
HMAC keyed hash (RFC 2104) that can be based on any
iterated cryptographic hash.The goals of HMAC are
to use available cryptographic hash functions without
modification (particularly functions that perform
well in software and for which software is freely and
92
Dictionary of Information Security

widely available), to preserve the original perform-
ance of the selected hash without significant degra-
dation, to use and handle keys in a simple way, to
have a well-understood cryptographic analysis of the
strength of the mechanism based on reasonable
assumptions about the underlying hash function, and
to enable easy replacement of the hash function in
case a faster or stronger hash is found or required.
There does not appear to be an official expansion
for the acronym HMAC. It may be similar to Hash-
keyed Message Authentication Code: the title of the
RFC (Request For Comments) is “Keyed Hashing
for Message Authentication.”
hoax literally, of course, a joke, fraud, or other form of
spoofing.The term “hoax” has developed a specific
technical meaning in virus research in reference to a
form of chain letter, carrying a false warning of a
non-existent virus. Originally (1988) referred to in
the research community as a metavirus, this type of
activity was more widely seen in the late 1990s in
the “Good Times,”“Penpals,”“Budweiser Frogs,”
“Jesus Loves You,” and “SULFNBK.EXE” hoaxes.
Hoaxes are characterized by a lack of technical
detail and valid contact information, references to
false authorities, warnings of extreme damage that
the putative virus will cause, all uppercase
“SHOUTING” and exclamation marks in the text,
and, frequently, statements that the virus is too new
or spreading too rapidly for legitimate virus
researchers to know anything about.The one uni-
versal factor in hoaxes is the attempt to have the
reader forward the message to all friends, relatives,
Dictionary of Information Security
93

and contacts, which is, of course, the viral compo-
nent: the hoax message uses the user to retransmit
and spread. Recent writings about hoaxes often
make use of the term meme or meme virus.
honeypot system, or portion of a system, deliberately
established to be enticing to an intruder or system
cracker. Honeypots generally have additional func-
tionality and intrusion detection systems built into
them to gather information on the intruders. See
also entrapment.
host-based security technique of securing an individual
system from attack. Host-based security is operating
system and version dependent.
host to front-end protocol set of conventions governing
the format and control of data that are passed from a
host to a front-end machine 
hot site standby site fully configured with compatible
computer and communications equipment, ready to
operate as soon as data can be loaded. Other than
fully redundant operation, the highest level provided
for in a disaster recovery plan. Some organizations 
now refer to “immediate recovery.” Compare with
cold site.
https when used as the protocol specifier in the first part of
a URL this term indicates the use of HTTP
enhanced by Secure Sockets Layer (SSL). It should
not be confused with S-HTTP (Secure HTTP).
hybrid encryption application of cryptography that com-
bines two or more encryption algorithms, particu-
larly a combination of symmetric and asymmetric
94
Dictionary of Information Security

encryption.Asymmetric algorithms require more
computation than equivalently strong symmetric
ones.Thus, asymmetric encryption is not normally
used for data confidentiality except in distributing
symmetric keys in applications where the key data is
usually short compared to the data it protects.
Probably the most widely known example of a
hybrid system is PGP.
Hybris most specialists would probably define Hybris as a
worm rather than a virus, since it sends copies of itself
as email attachments. Hybris will generally come in
a message with a coy indication that the attachment
is pornography.The attachment is often named with
a .SCR extension.The extension is traditionally
used to indicate screen savers, but the file format is
the same as any normal executable Windows pro-
gram.The notable feature of Hybris is that, when
active, it checks for replacement and upgrade mod-
ules on the alt.comp.virus newsgroup. Other viruses,
such as Loveletter, have attempted to establish such a
modular extension function, but Hybris extended
the concept further, and used an anonymous com-
munications facility.
Dictionary of Information Security
95

I
IBM compatible originally, hardware compatible with
IBM mainframe systems, later hardware and/or soft-
ware compatible with IBM mainframes or mini-
computers. In the 1980s, the phrase came to be
associated with compatibility with ISA and MS-
DOS (and later Windows) systems.
ICMP Internet Control Message Protocol. Since these
packets, as the name suggests, relate to various types
of control information for the Internet, there are a
number of Internet security implications.
ICMP flood denial of service attack that sends a host more
ICMP (Internet Control Message Protocol) echo
request (“ping”) packets than the protocol imple-
mentation can handle 
identification process that enables recognition of an entity
by a system, generally by the use of unique
machine-readable usernames 
identity theft use of personal information to impersonate
someone, usually for the purpose of fraud 
impact extent to which an incident will affect operations or
the overall organization. See business impact analysis.
impersonation synonymous with spoofing
implementation phase of the system development process
in which the detailed specifications are translated
into actual system components 
in the clear not encrypted. See cleartext and plaintext.

in the wild initially a jargon reference to those viruses that
have been released into, and successfully spread in,
the normal computer user community and environ-
ment. It is used to distinguish those viral programs
that are written and tested in a controlled research
environment, without escaping, from those that are
uncontrolled in the wild or in the field. (The term
“itw” is sometimes also used, or “ItW” in specific
reference to the list of common viruses known as
the WildList.) The term is now also being used to
refer to vulnerabilities discovered and exploited by
attackers before being discovered by defenders or
researchers.
incident occurrence that has been assessed as having an
adverse effect on the security or performance of a
system. Note that this definition is somewhat vague,
particularly in regard to the level of assessment.
Those from a law enforcement background tend to
see incidents in terms of attacks with (potentially)
identifiable intruders.Those from a systems adminis-
tration or support background tend to see an inci-
dent as any anomaly in the system that might affect
performance or service.
incident response reaction, generally by a pre-designated
team, to a detrimental incident.At this time, incident
response literature is primarily concerned with the
collection and preservation of evidence in a manner
appropriate for presentation in a court of law.
incomplete parameter checking system design flaw that
results when all parameters have not been fully
Dictionary of Information Security
97

anticipated for accuracy and consistency, thus
making the system vulnerable to penetration 
incremental backup backup process that copies only data
or changes since the last backup of any type, or such
a copy. Incremental backup is the fastest form of
backup, but restoration of the system requires the
last full backup, and every incremental backup since.
See also differential backup.
individual accountability ability to associate positively
the identity of a user with the time, method, and
degree of access to a system 
infectable object to which virus code can attach or become
associated with, in such a manner that invocation of
the object will also invoke the virus 
infection condition in which virus code has become
attached to or associated with an object or system, in
such a manner that invocation of the object or
system will also invoke the virus.An infection, on a
given system, does not take place until a virus has
become active, reproduced, or made a change to the
system.A user or system may receive a virus as a file
transfer, virus infected piece of software, or email
attachment, and not necessarily become infected.As
long as a user does not invoke the virus, or a worm
does not find a specific vulnerability to exploit, the
infected file may remain dormant on the system,
without the system itself becoming infected.
However, a system may also be considered infected
if the virus has either placed itself in a situation such
that the operating system will activate it during a
common occurrence (such as at boot time), or if a
98
Dictionary of Information Security

user is likely to call an infected, and commonly
used, program. See also disinfection.
information flow analysis tracing the flow of specific
information types through an information system to
determine whether the controls applied to this
information are appropriate 
information flow control procedure to ensure that infor-
mation transfers within a system are not made from
a higher security level object to an object of a lower
security level. See covert channel, simple security prop-
erty, and *-property. Synonymous with data flow con-
trol and flow control.
information label piece of information that accurately
and completely represents the sensitivity of the data
in a subject or object. More frequently just used as
label.
information sensitivity relative worth of information to
an organization. See also classification.
information system security measures and controls that
protect a system against denial of service and unautho-
rized (accidental or intentional) disclosure, modifica-
tion, or destruction of systems and data. System
security includes consideration of all hardware
and/or software functions, characteristics and/or fea-
tures; operational procedures, accountability proce-
dures, and access controls at the central computer
facility, remote computer, and terminal facilities;
management constraints; physical structures and
devices; and personnel and communication controls
needed to provide an acceptable level of risk for the
Dictionary of Information Security
99

system and for the data and information contained
in the system. It includes the totality of security safe-
guards needed to provide an acceptable protection
level for a system and for data handled by a system.
Information System Security Officer (ISSO) the
person responsible to the Designated Approving
Authority for ensuring that security is provided for
and implemented throughout the life cycle of a
system from the beginning of the concept develop-
ment plan through its design, development, opera-
tion, maintenance, and secure disposal 
initialization vector (IV) sequence of random bytes
appended to the front of the plaintext before encryp-
tion by a block cipher, or used as a part of the first step
in a block cipher procedure that uses some form of
chaining. Use of the initialization vector eliminates
the possibility of having the initial ciphertext block
the same for any two messages.The concepts of chal-
lenge/response, initialization vector, nonce, and salt are
closely related. Challenge/response is generally used
in regard to password and authentication schemes,
initialization vector to block ciphers, nonce to short
automated network messages, and salt to password
storage.Also known as initialization value.
infector program, not itself infected, that will place a virus
in memory and render it active, without writing the
virus to disk. Seldom used in antivirus research. See
dropper.
insider attack attack involving an employee or other
trusted individual, generally one with a higher than
normal level of access
100
Dictionary of Information Security

Dictionary of Information Security
101
integrity sound, unimpaired, or perfect condition. Integrity
is one of the three pillars of security.
integrity checking see change detection
intellectual property ideas, concepts, expressions,
processes, or devices created by original thought and
work and claimed by individuals or corporate enti-
ties under legal provisions.There are specific provi-
sions for devices (patent), expressions (copyright),
processes (trade secret), and perceptible and obvious
design (trademark).
intellectual property rights right to that body of knowl-
edge, ideas, or concepts produced by an entity that is
claimed by that entity to be original and of quality
and value 
interdiction see denial of service
internal label marking of an item of information, to
reflect the classification and sensitivity of the infor-
mation, within the confines of the media containing
the information 
internal security controls hardware, firmware, and soft-
ware features within a system that restrict access to
resources (hardware, software, and data) to author-
ized subjects only (persons, programs, or devices) 
International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA)
symmetric block cipher that uses a 128-bit key and
operates on 64-bit blocks 
Internet Protocol security (IPsec) (1) the name of the
IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force) working

102
Dictionary of Information Security
group that is specifying a security architecture (RFC
2401) and related protocols to provide security serv-
ices for Internet Protocol traffic. IPsec is an Internet
Protocol version 6 (IPv6) protocol suite, but will
work under the current IPv4.
(2) a collective name for that architecture and set of
protocols.The IPsec architecture specifies (a) secu-
rity protocols (AH and ESP, the Authentication
Header and Encapsulating Security Payload), (b) secu-
rity associations (what they are, how they work, how
they are managed, and associated processing), (c) key
management (IKE), and (d) algorithms for authenti-
cation and encryption.The set of security services
includes access control service, connectionless data
integrity service, data origin authentication service,
protection against replays (detection of the arrival of
duplicate datagrams, within a constrained window),
data confidentiality service, and limited traffic flow
confidentiality.
Internet Security Association and Key Management
Protocol (ISAKMP) Internet IPsec protocol (RFC
2408) to negotiate, establish, modify, and delete
security associations, and to exchange key genera-
tion and authentication data, independent of the
details of any specific key generation technique, key
establishment protocol, encryption algorithm, or
authentication mechanism.
Internet Worm also known as the UNIX Worm after the
operating system it used, or the Morris Worm after
the author, or, specifically, the Internet/Morris/
UNIX Worm, or sometimes simply the Worm, as
the only one to be so capitalized. Launched in

Dictionary of Information Security
103
November 1988, it spread to some three to four
thousand machines connected to the Internet,
wasting CPU cycles and clogging mail spools. It
affected mail traffic (in particular) on the Internet as
a whole for a few days and is probably the viral pro-
gram most widely known to the general public
prior to Michelangelo, Melissa, Loveletter, and 
Code Red.
intrusion attacks or attempted attacks from outside the
security perimeter of a system 
intrusion detection system (IDS) automated system for
alerting operators to a penetration or other contra-
vention of a security policy. Some intrusion detection
systems may also have means for responding to a
penetration by shutting down access or gathering
more information on the intruder. See also anomaly
detection and network forensics.
IP spoofing attack whereby an active, established session is
intercepted and co-opted by the attacker by
assuming the IP (Internet Protocol) numeric
address, and usually redirecting the routing for that
address. IP spoof attacks may occur after an authenti-
cation has been made, permitting the attacker to
assume the role of an already authorized user.
Primary protections against IP spoofing rely on
encryption at the session or network layer.Also
known as IP hijacking or IP splicing.
IPsec see Internet Protocol security

ISA Industry Standard Architecture, the name given by
IBM to the basic structure of the IBM PC and XT
computers, those referred to at the time as IBM or
PC compatible.The designation is commonly held
to apply to computers based on Intel
8088/8086/80x86/Pentium family processors, inter-
rupt-based BIOS boot programming, and the associ-
ated bus, which is actually what ISA referred to, and
is, ironically, the part of the machine that has under-
gone the greatest change.The ability of these com-
puters to run the Microsoft MS-DOS and Windows
operating systems, and the use of Intel CPUs, has
also led to the use of the term “Wintel,” although
this architecture is also the most popular platform
for those using the Linux operating system.The
term does not have any specific security meanings,
and is included here solely because Wintel com-
puters play such a large factor in the overall com-
puting environment that a number of
system-specific details must be mentioned in this
document.
Wintel is probably the more recognizable term, and
ISA is really not completely accurate to describe
architecture as it currently stands. On the other
hand,Wintel is slang. On balance, I probably could
have chosen to define either. So why choose ISA
rather than Wintel as the entry to be fully defined?
In the end, probably because it came first in the
alphabet.
ISAKMP see Internet Security Association and Key
Management Protocol
104
Dictionary of Information Security

ISC2 International Information Systems Security
Certification Consortium (IISSCC), group respon-
sible for the Certified Information Systems Security
Professional (CISSP) and other designations.The
group is generally abbreviated ISC2, or (ISC)2, or
(ISC)^2, which are all usable in text or email, or,
most properly, (ISC)2, which cannot be represented
in printable, text-only, characters.The organization
has a Web site at www.isc2.org.
isolation containment of subjects and objects in a system in
such a way that they are separated from one
another, and from the protection controls of the
operating system 
ISSA Information Systems Security Association, non-profit
society for security professionals.The organization
has a Web site at www.issa.org, and has many local
chapters.
ITIL Information Technology Infrastructure Library from
the Office of Government Commerce (OGC) in
the U.K.This is a set of guides and recommenda-
tions on the management of IT systems and serv-
ices.As part of management, it has implications for
the security of systems.
iterative simply means repeating or repeated.When used in
respect of software development, refers to a method
that allows for a return to a previous stage. From the
perspective of security, non-iterative methods are
preferred, since they force discipline in the process
and design of software. Non-iterative methods
include the waterfall, structured programming,
cleanroom, and spiral. (Spiral is particularly useful for
Dictionary of Information Security
105

secure software development, since it imposes even
more structure on the process, including an assess-
ment step at each phase of the process.) Iterative
development methods include such models as Joint
Analysis Development (JAD), prototyping, Rapid
Application Development (RAD), Modified
Prototype Model (MPM), and exploratory.
106
Dictionary of Information Security

J
Jerusalem one of the earliest MS-DOS file infector viruses
known to be in the wild. Originally discovered and
probably written in Israel. Originally known as the
Israeli virus, it has also been called PLO, Friday the
13th, and 1813. Still one of the most widespread of
file infecting viral programs and widely used as a
template for the development of variant viral strains.
joke program see prank
journalling storage, or transfer to storage, of transactions,
rather than the resultant data.The idea is that trans-
actions are easier to reproduce than (say) an entire
database, and the database can be reproduced, at
need, by a batch processing of the journalled trans-
actions.

K
Kerberos single sign-on system that uses symmetric key encryp-
tion via a ticket-oriented mechanism 
key data used in cryptosystems to perform encryption.
Sometimes called a cryptovariable.
key length since most modern encryption algorithms are
mathematically based, the length of keys is a major
determining element in the strength of an algo-
rithm, or the work factor involved in breaking a
cryptographic system. See also key space.
key management process of handling and controlling
cryptographic keys and related material (such as intial-
ization values) during their life cycle in a crypto-
graphic system, including ordering, generating,
distributing, storing, loading, escrowing, archiving,
auditing, and destroying the material.
key pair in an asymmetric encryption system, a private, or
confidential, key and its (mathematically) related
public key. See also private key and public key.
key space range of possible values of a cryptographic key, or
the number of distinct transformations supported by
a particular cryptographic algorithm. Key space is
actually a better determinant of cryptographic
strength than simple key length.
keyed hash cryptographic hash or digest in which the map-
ping to a hash result is varied by a second input
parameter that is a cryptographic key. If the input
data object is changed, a new hash result cannot be
correctly computed without knowledge of the

secret key.Thus, the secret key protects the hash
result so it can be used as a checksum even when
there is a threat of an active attack on the data.
keylogger type of keystroke monitor as employed in malware
keystroke monitor device or system that records every
key struck by a user. See also key logger.
KISS principle “Keep It Simple, Stupid,” a maxim often
invoked when discussing design to fend off creeping
featurism and control development complexity. In
regard to security, espousing the belief that sim-
plicity is inherently more secure, as per C.A. R.
Hoare,“There are two ways of constructing a soft-
ware design: one way is to make it so simple that
there are obviously no deficiencies, and the other
way is to make it so complicated that there are no
obvious deficiencies,” and somewhat seconded by
Niklaus Wirth,“Increasingly, people seem to misin-
terpret complexity as sophistication, which is baf-
fling—the incomprehensible should cause suspicion
rather than admiration.”
kit refers to a program that produces a virus from a menu
or a list of characteristics. Use of a virus kit involves
no skill on the part of the author. Fortunately, most
virus kits produce easily identifiable code. Packages
of antiviral utilities are sometimes referred to as tool
kits, occasionally leading to confusion of the terms.
Dictionary of Information Security
109

knowledge base data structure consisting of a set of struc-
tures and a set of association descriptions that repre-
sents (possibly uncertain) knowledge about a given
field.The relevance to security lies in the fact that
decisions are often made based on the assumption
that the knowledge is certain, a definite lack of
integrity.
known-plaintext attack cryptanalysis technique in which
the analyst tries to determine the key from knowl-
edge of some plaintext-ciphertext pairs, although the
analyst may also have other clues, such as knowing
the cryptographic algorithm
110
Dictionary of Information Security

L
label piece of information that represents the security level
of an object and describes the sensitivity of the infor-
mation in the object 
labelling means to identify the sensitivity of a unit of
information (object) or a process (subject), or, in a
system supporting mandatory access controls, the assign-
ment of sensitivity labels to every subject or object
in the system 
latency situation in which a system may be penetrated but
some time may elapse between the penetration and
further activity.This term is generally used in con-
nection with malware such as viruses and worms.A
virus with a long latent period may have time to
reproduce and spread further before an overt payload
renders detection likely. On the other hand, since
viruses in the wild are regularly detected within
hours of release, a latent period may simply ensure
that the virus is eliminated before it has a chance to
trigger.
latent flaw vulnerability unintentionally introduced during
development, before it has been discovered by
attackers, or the developer, researchers, or users.
Although this term refers to the flaw itself, it is most
commonly used in regard to discussions of disclosure
in terms of the period between the release of a
product for use, and the discovery of the vulnera-
bility. See also zero day.

lattice model security model for information flow control
in a system, based on the lattice that is formed by
the security levels in a system and their partial
ordering, possibly by subject or content.A simple
example might be a grid with levels of security
(management, internal, public) and different topic
areas (customer data, research data, payroll).A man-
ager in accounting would need to have management
level access to payroll data, but would not necessarily
need more than public access to research data.
Layer 2 Tunnelling Protocol (L2TP) Internet client-
server protocol that combines aspects of PPTP
(Point-to-Point Tunnelling Protocol) and L2F (Layer
2 Forwarding) and supports tunnelling of PPP
(Point-to-Point Protocol) over an IP network or
over frame relay or other switched network: it is a
type of virtual private network. PPP can in turn
encapsulate any OSI layer 3 protocol.Thus, L2TP
does not specify security services; it depends on pro-
tocols layered above and below it to provide any
needed security.
leapfrog attack use of information, access, or resources
obtained illicitly from one host to compromise
another host.Also, the act of connecting through
one or more hosts to confuse a trace.
least privilege principle that requires that each subject be
granted the most restrictive set of privileges needed
for the performance of authorized tasks.The appli-
cation of this principle limits the damage that can
result from accident, error, or unauthorized use.
112
Dictionary of Information Security

Lehigh one of the first MS-DOS virus programs, which
only infected copies of the COMMAND.COM
program. It is thought to have been isolated to the
campus of Lehigh University where it was discov-
ered, but most researchers and vx bulletin boards
have copies.The limited use of bootable MS-DOS
diskettes makes it unlikely that the virus would suc-
cessfully spread if re-released.
letterbomb piece of email crafted to contain data that will
be executed under certain conditions, usually related
to the terminal or program used to display it, and
intended to do nefarious things to the recipient’s
machine or terminal. Under UNIX, a letterbomb
can try to get part of its contents interpreted as a
shell command. See also ANSI bomb and trojan horse.
Usage now somewhat archaic.
limited access synonymous with access control
limited disclosure form of vulnerability disclosure that holds
that information about the vulnerability to the gen-
eral public should be restricted in some manner,
possibly being limited to announcements of the
existence of the loophole, actions to be taken to
restrict possible exploits, the existence of vendor
patches, and so forth. Most often, restrictions are rec-
ommended in regard to the existence and distribu-
tion of exploit code.The term is not well defined or
agreed to in general usage, and should be defined
where used. Sometimes also restricted disclosure.
link the virus related term “link” is not used very widely and
is used in a variety of ways.Amiga and Atari users talk
about a link virus as a file infector. Some others use
link to refer to a system virus or cluster virus.
Dictionary of Information Security
113

114
Dictionary of Information Security
link encryption application of online encryption or cryp-
tographic operations to individual links of a com-
munications system so that all information passing
over the link is encrypted. See also end-to-end encryp-
tion.
list-oriented computer protection system in which each
protected object has a list of all subjects authorized to
access it. Compare ticket-oriented.
lock-and-key protection system protection system that
involves matching a key or password with a specific
access requirement 
logic bomb resident computer program that triggers the
perpetration of an unauthorized act when particular
states of the system are realized or particular events
occur.This may be a section of code, pre-
programmed into a larger program, which waits for
some trigger event to perform some damaging
function.A virus may contain a logic bomb as a pay-
load. Logic bombs that trigger on time events are
sometimes known as time bombs, although this
usage is not favored.
login act of a system entity gaining access to a session in
which the entity can use system resources; usually
accomplished by providing a username and password
to an access control system that authenticates the user.
loophole error of omission or oversight in software or
hardware that permits circumventing the system
security policy. Compare trap door or maintenance
hook.

Loveletter a script email virus that used Outlook and
Windows Script Host.The virus spread itself as an
email with an attachment called LOVE-LETTER-
FOR-YOU.TXT.vbs.The filename was an inter-
esting piece of social engineering, in that people
were supposed to notice the .TXT and think the
file was only a text file, and obviously were not sup-
posed to notice the .vbs, the real extension that
identifies the file as a script. Initially, the virus was
widely referred to as the “Love Bug,” but the more
correct Loveletter or Love-Letter are now most
common. Since Loveletter did not attach to other
files, many call it a worm, but the virus did require
user interaction, which a worm does not.
Dictionary of Information Security
115

M
machine language computer language composed of
machine instructions that can be executed directly
by a computer without further modification 
MacMag early Macintosh virus known also as Brandow,
after the instigator (the publisher of the MacMag
magazine), and Peace, after the message payload.
MacMag has the dubious distinction of being the
first virus known to have infected commercial
software.
macro virus a macro is a small piece of programming in a
simple language, used to perform a simple, repetitive
function. Microsoft’s Word Basic and VBA macro
languages can include macros in data files, and have
sufficient functionality to write complete viruses.
Macro viruses therefore broke the long-held belief
that viruses only infected executable files, and that
data files were safe. Script viruses are similar in that
they contain their own source code, although a
macro virus is embedded in the data file, and a
script virus is generally a standalone object.
magnetic remanence measure of the magnetic flux den-
sity remaining after removal of the applied magnetic
force. Refers to any data remaining on magnetic
storage media after removal of the power. Used both
to assess the stability of magnetic media and to assess
the likelihood of traces of data remaining after being
deleted or overwritten.

mail storm condition in which many redundant messages
are generated and sent, usually resulting from auto-
mated mail handling (such as vacation auto-respon-
ders replying to automatic forwarding mailing lists).
Most modern mail systems have capabilities for
dealing with common causes of mail storms.
mailbomb (n) excessively large volume of email (typically
many thousands of messages) or one large message
sent to a user’s email account, for the purpose of
crashing the system, or preventing genuine messages
from being received 
(v) to send a mailbomb 
maintainability characteristic of design and installation
that is expressed as the probability that an item will
be retained in or restored to a specified condition
within a given period of time 
maintenance action taken to retain materiel, systems, or
units in, or to restore to, a specified condition,
including inspection, testing, servicing, classification
as to serviceability, repair, rebuilding, reclamation,
and sometimes additional feature development 
maintenance hook special instructions in software to
allow easy maintenance and additional feature devel-
opment.These are not clearly defined during access
for design specification. Hooks frequently allow
entry into the code at unusual points or without the
usual checks, so they are a serious security risk if
they are not removed prior to live implementation.
Maintenance hooks are special types of backdoors or
trap doors.
Dictionary of Information Security
117

malicious virus known to carry an intentionally damaging
payload that will erase or corrupt files or data. It is
felt by many antiviral researchers that all viral pro-
grams carry the potential for unintentional damage,
since all viral programs change the target environ-
ment, and therefore the term “malicious virus” is
assumed redundant. See also benign.
malicious logic hardware, software, or firmware that is
intentionally included in a system for an unautho-
rized purpose; e.g., a trojan horse (military origin:
limited usage, similarly for malicious code) 
malware collective term including the many varieties of
deliberately malicious software; that is, software
written for the purpose of causing inconvenience,
destruction, or the breaking of security policies or
provisions. Malware is generally considered to
include programs such as DDoS clients (or zombies),
logic bombs, RATs, trojan horses, viruses, and worms.
Malware is generally not considered to include
unintentional problems in software, such as bugs, or
deliberately written software that is not intended to
do harm, such as pranks.
man-in-the-middle form of active wiretapping attack in
which the attacker intercepts and selectively modi-
fies communicated data to masquerade as one or
more of the entities involved in a communication
association. Similar to hijacking. For example, suppose
Alice and Bob try to establish a session key by using
the Diffie-Hellman algorithm without data origin
authentication service.A “man in the middle” could
(a) block direct communication between Alice and
118
Dictionary of Information Security

Bob, then (b) masquerade as Alice sending data to
Bob, (c) masquerade as Bob sending data to Alice,
(d) establish separate session keys with each of them,
and (e) function as a clandestine proxy server
between them to capture or modify sensitive infor-
mation that Alice and Bob think they are sending
only to each other. Sometimes abbreviated MITM.
mandatory access control (MAC) means of restricting
access to objects based on the sensitivity (as repre-
sented by a label) of the information contained in
the objects and the formal authorization (i.e., clear-
ance) of subjects to access information of such sensi-
tivity. Compare discretionary access control.
marking process of placing a sensitivity designator or label
with data such that its sensitivity is communicated.
Marking is not restricted to the physical placement
of a sensitivity designator, as might be done with a
rubber stamp, but can involve the use of headers for
network messages, special fields in databases, and so
forth.
masquerading synonymous with spoofing
master boot record (MBR) on ISA or Wintel com-
puters, the first physical (not logical) sector on the
hard drive.The programming on this sector is called
by the BIOS as part of the boot process, and the
record also contains data about the structure of the
hard drive in the partition table. See also boot record,
boot sector, and system boot record.
maturity based on the Capability Maturity Model (CMM)
originally developed at Carnegie-Mellon University,
Dictionary of Information Security
119

the concept of maturity is being applied to
increasing numbers of enterprises and systems,
including software, security, and business processes.
Most of the resulting models use variations of the
original five maturity levels, representing the experi-
ence and development of an institution.The levels
are (1) initial (chaotic, immature), (2) repeatable (dis-
ciplined, capable), (3) defined (documented, consis-
tent), (4) managed (predictable), and (5) optimising
(constant improvement).
MBR see master boot record
media virus virus that catches the attention of the public,
and particularly the media, generally out of propor-
tion to its significance as a threat
meet in the middle specific form of cryptanalytic attack in
which the attacker uses known-plaintext and the cor-
responding ciphertext to do both encryption and
decryption to determine a multi-part key
Melissa type of Microsoft Word macro virus that also used
functions in the Microsoft Outlook email program
to spread itself very successfully and quickly.
Technically, the Melissa code was not a macro, but a
VBA (Visual Basic for Applications) script. Melissa is
not considered a script virus since it was contained in
a document.
meme expression first coined by Richard Dawkins (in the
book The Selfish Gene, derived from the word
mimeme to sound more like gene) for a unit of cul-
tural transmission or imitation.The word meme has
come to be used as a sort of standalone or quantum
120
Dictionary of Information Security

idea, and an idea considered as a replicator, particu-
larly with the connotation that memes parasitize
people into propagating them, much as viruses do.
See hoax and sig virus.
meme virus see hoax
memory resident virus virus that stays in memory after it
executes, and infects other files when certain condi-
tions are met. In contrast, non-memory resident
viruses, called direct action, are active only while an
infected application runs.
message authentication code (MAC) data element asso-
ciated with a message that allows a receiver to verify
the integrity of the message 
message digest see digest
metavirus see hoax
Michelangelo “descendent” of the Stoned boot
sector/MBR virus, this program carries a damaging
payload that triggers when the computer is booted
on March 6th, the birth date of the Renaissance
painter and sculptor. First discovered in early 1991,
the virus gained notoriety during the “Michelangelo
scare” leading up to March 1992.Although consid-
ered by many to have been media hype, the atten-
tion generated did disclose many thousands and
possibly millions of infections prior to March 6th,
which were disinfected and therefore never trig-
gered. Michelangelo did survive 1992 and struck
again in subsequent years, in some countries being
the most widely reported virus as late as 1996.
Dictionary of Information Security
121

microfortnight 1/1,000,000 of the basic unit of time in
the Furlong/Firkin/Fortnight system of measure-
ment, or 1.2096 second. (A furlong is 1/8th of a
mile; a firkin is 1/4th of a barrel; the mass unit of
the system is taken to be that of a firkin of water.) 
Millennium Bug see Y2K
mimicking synonymous with spoofing
minimal protection (TCSEC Class D) class reserved for
those systems that have been evaluated but fail to
meet the requirements for a higher evaluation. Class
D is frequently, and incorrectly, said to mean “no
protection.”
modes of operation description of the conditions under
which a system functions, based on the sensitivity of
data processed and the clearance levels and authori-
zations of the users. Four modes of operation are
authorized (note that these modes originate with
the U.S. government and military):
(1) Dedicated Mode—each user with direct or indi-
rect individual access to the system, its peripherals,
remote terminals, or remote hosts, has all of the 
following:
(a) A valid personnel clearance for all information
on the system.
(b) Formal access approval for, and has signed
nondisclosure agreements for all the information
stored and/or processed (including all compart-
ments, subcompartments, and/or special access 
programs).
(c) A valid need-to-know for all information con-
tained within the system.
122
Dictionary of Information Security

(2) System-High Mode—each user with direct or
indirect access to the system, its peripherals, remote
terminals, or remote hosts has all of the following:
(a) A valid personnel clearance for all information
on the system.
(b) Formal access approval for, and has signed
nondisclosure agreements for all the information
stored and/or processed (including all compart-
ments, subcompartments, and/or special access 
programs).
(c) A valid need-to-know for some of the informa-
tion contained within the system.
(3) Compartmented Mode—each user with direct
or indirect access to the system, its peripherals,
remote terminals, or remote hosts, has all of the 
following:
(a) A valid personnel clearance for the most
restricted information processed in the system.
(b) Formal access approval for, and has signed
nondisclosure agreements for that information to
which he/she is to have access.
(c) A valid need-to-know for that information to
which he/she is to have access.
(4) Multilevel Mode—all the following statements
are satisfied concerning the users with direct or
indirect access to the system, its peripherals, remote
terminals, or remote hosts:
(a) Some do not have a valid personnel clearance for
all the information processed in the system.
(b) All have the proper clearance and the appro-
priate formal access approval for that information to
which he/she is to have access.
Dictionary of Information Security
123

(c) All have a valid need-to-know for that informa-
tion to which they are to have access.
Moore’s Law the logic density of silicon integrated circuits
has closely followed a geometric curve; that is, the
amount of information storable on a given amount
of silicon, and the relative processing power, has
roughly doubled every year, since the technology
was invented. (The original prediction was made in
1965. In a much later interview, Gordon Moore
admitted that he could not recall whether his orig-
inal estimate was nine months, a year, eighteen
months, or two years, but a pencil sketch made at
the time seems to support a year.) This has implica-
tions for calculations of cryptographic work factor
and the duration during which a given key length
will be secure.
Morris Worm see Internet Worm
MtE most widely used abbreviation for the polymorphic or
mutation engine written by the virus author known
as Dark Avenger. Not a virus itself, this is a section of
code that can be attached to any virus, giving the
virus polymorphic features.Also known, less widely,
as DAME (Dark Avenger’s Mutation Engine).
MTX multipartite virus that reproduces by sending itself as
an email message and by infecting program files.
MTX will take control of the Internet connection
of an infected machine, and seeks to bar access to
many antiviral Web sites.
multilateral security as opposed to the usual multilevel
security model (of information on different levels of
124
Dictionary of Information Security

Dictionary of Information Security
125
security, such as top secret, secret, confidential, and
public), multilateral security notes the differing
needs for access based on the subject or content of
the information. In military situations, for example,
someone in a logistics and support position would
need to know about overall troop movements, but
would not need to know about strategy or tactics to
be used.
multilevel device device that is used in a manner that
permits it to simultaneously process data of two or
more security levels without risk of compromise.To
accomplish this, sensitivity labels are normally stored
on the same physical medium and in the same form
(i.e., machine-readable or human-readable) as the
data being processed.
multilevel secure class of system containing information
with different sensitivities that simultaneously per-
mits access by users with different security clear-
ances and needs-to-know, but prevents users from
obtaining access to information for which they lack
authorization 
multilevel security mode see modes of operation
multipartite formerly a viral program that would infect
both boot sector/MBRs and files. Now used to refer
to a virus that will infect multiple types of objects, or
reproduces in multiple ways.
multiple access rights terminal terminal that may be
used by more than one class of users; for example,
users with different access rights to data 

multiuser mode of operation mode of operation
designed for systems that process sensitive unclassi-
fied information in which users may not have a
need-to-know for all information processed in the
system.This mode is also for microcomputers pro-
cessing sensitive unclassified information that cannot
meet the requirements of the standalone mode of
operation.
Murphy’s Law commonly stated as “If anything can go
wrong it will.”This fatalistic sentiment is, in fact, a
corruption of the original assertion, by engineer
Edward A. Murphy, Jr. in 1949, that if you design a
system or component that a technician (or user) can
connect (or use) improperly, at some point he or she
will. If the world can misunderstand your famous
quote, it will.
mutating virus see polymorphic
mutual suspicion state that exists between interacting
processes (subsystems or programs) in which neither
process can expect the other process to function
securely with respect to some property.Also
describes the expected behaviour of individuals in
any group of Famous Security Experts.
126
Dictionary of Information Security

N
National Computer Security Center (NCSC) origi-
nally named the Department of Defense Computer
Security Center, the NCSC is responsible for
encouraging the widespread availability of trusted
computer systems throughout the U.S. Federal
Government 
National Security Decision Directive 145 
(NSDD 145) signed by U.S. President Reagan on
September 17, l984, this directive is entitled
“National Policy on Telecommunications and
Automated Information Systems Security.” It pro-
vides initial objectives, policies, and an organiza-
tional structure to guide the conduct of national
activities toward safeguarding systems that process,
store, or communicate sensitive information; estab-
lishes a mechanism for policy development; and
assigns implementation responsibilities.
National Telecommunications and 
Information Systems Security Advisory
Memoranda/Instructions (NTISSAM, NTISSI)
NTISS Advisory Memoranda and Instructions pro-
vide advice, assistance, or information of general
interest on telecommunications and systems security
to all applicable U.S. federal departments and agen-
cies. NTISSAMs/NTISSIs are promulgated by the
U.S. National Manager for Telecommunications and
Automated Information Systems Security and are
recommendations rather than legislation.

National Telecommunications and Information
System Security Directives (NTISSD) NTISS
Directives establish national-level decisions relating
to NTISS policies, plans, programs, systems, or orga-
nizational delegations of authority. NTISSDs are
promulgated by the Executive Agent of the
Government for Telecommunications and
Information Systems Security, or by the Chairman
of the NTISSC when so delegated by the Executive
Agent. NTISSDs are binding upon all federal
departments and agencies. U.S. government and 
military.
need to know necessity for access to, knowledge of, or
possession of specific information required to carry
out official duties. Using a play on the phrases “need
to know” and “need to know, now,” a British
mailing list, NTKnow, collects news items of interest
to the stereotypical computer geek, but takes
greatest delight in any instance of government,“offi-
cial,” or corporate actions detrimental to networking
and computing, particularly in relation to security.
netiquette (network etiquette) conventions of polite
behaviour recognized on Usenet and in mailing lists,
such as avoidance of cross-posting to inappropriate
groups, proper use of “out of office” automated
replies, and refraining from commercial advertising 
NAT network address translation means to allow a net-
work to use one set of IP addresses (usually non-
routable) for internal traffic and a second set of
addresses for external traffic.The NAT server
changes the source address, and usually also the port,
128
Dictionary of Information Security

of outgoing packets from the internal to the
external address and reverses it for packets returning.
NAT can be used to map a large number of com-
puters onto a small assigned address space, but also
hides the internal structure of the network from
attackers and probes.
network forensics collection and analysis of evidence of
intrusion or malfeasance from network activity and
data. Closely related to intrusion detection systems and
one of the major divisions of digital forensics.
network front end device that implements the necessary
network protocols, including security-related proto-
cols, to allow a computer system to be attached to a
network 
network weaving technique using different communica-
tion networks to gain access to a target system.
Although the technique is widely known, this term
is seldom used. It seems to relate primarily to the
use of commercial networks.
newage unexamined and syncretistic beliefs, generally used
in social engineering activity.The term derives from
the messy melange of creeds known as the “New
Age Movement.”The term can be used as either an
adjective or noun, and rhymes with “sewage.”
Nimda based on the earlier Code Red worm or virus, and
possibly programmed by the same author(s), Nimda
corrected earlier errors and refined the targeting
algorithms. It also extended the variety of ways it
travelled and the type of infection mechanisms used,
bringing multipartite technology to server worms.
Dictionary of Information Security
129

Ninety-Ninety Rule “The first 90% of the code accounts
for the first 90% of the development time.The
remaining 10% of the code accounts for the other
90% of the development time.”Attributed to Tom
Cargill of Bell Labs.
no-lone zone room or other space to which no person
may have unaccompanied access and that, when
occupied, is required to be occupied by two or
more appropriately authorized persons 
No-OP (NOP) opcode that performs no operation.Also
known as null-OP or NOP. Frequently used by
wannabe virus writers (vxers) who will take an
existing virus and modify it by sprinkling NOPs
through the code until signature scanners no longer
recognize it.Also sometimes used in buffer overflows: a
string of NOPs creates a “No-OP sled” that pro-
vides a path to the code the attacker wants to 
execute.
noise disturbances superimposed upon a signal that tend to
obscure its information content 
nonce randomly generated value used to defeat replay
attacks.The concepts of challenge/response, initializa-
tion vector, nonce, and salt are closely related.
Challenge/response is generally used in regard to
password and authentication schemes, initialization
vector to block ciphers, nonce to short, automated
network messages, and salt to password storage.
non-discretionary security possibly the original term for
what is now known as mandatory access control.There
may be a possible difference in that non-
130
Dictionary of Information Security

discretionary security explicitly requires both multi-
level and multilateral security: restricting by clearance
level and by topic.
non-inference model computer systems model that gives
the impression to a user that he or she owns the
entire resources of the machine.All responses to a
user’s request for resources are as if no other users
are on the machine.
non-interference model computer systems model that
prevents one user from interfering with or per-
turbing the resources or processing done by another.
Most modern computer systems would follow this
model to a greater or lesser extent.
nonrepudiation property of a system or service that pro-
vides protection against false denial of involvement
in a communication.Although more properly
written as “non-repudiation,” the non-hyphenated
version is more prevalent in actual usage.
NSDD 145 see National Security Decision Directive 145
nVIR early Macintosh virus, the source code for which was
inadvertently published electronically. Shortly there-
after, two versions were found in the wild.
Dictionary of Information Security
131

O
object passive entity that contains or receives information.
Access to an object potentially implies access to the
information it contains. Examples of objects are
records, blocks, pages, segments, files, directories,
directory trees, and programs, and bits, bytes, words,
fields, processors, video displays, keyboards, clocks,
printers, and network nodes.
object reuse reassignment and reuse of a storage medium
(e.g., page frame, disk sector, magnetic tape) that
once contained one or more objects.To be securely
reused and assigned to a new subject, storage media
must contain no residual data (magnetic remanence)
from the object(s) previously contained in the
media.
ohnosecond that minuscule fraction of time between hit-
ting the “send” button and realizing that you have
just posted your private key to alt.script-kiddies 
on-access scanner real-time virus scanner that scans disks
and files automatically and often in the background.
An on-access scanner scans files for viruses as the
computer accesses the files. Previously known as a
resident scanner.
on-demand scanner virus scanner started manually by the
user, or invoked under certain conditions or a reg-
ular schedule. Most on-demand scanners allow the
user to set various configurations and to scan spe-
cific files, folders, or disks. Previously known as a
manual scanner.

one-time pad encryption system based on a series of keys,
each of which is used only once. Given certain
limits on the length of the key in relation to the
length of the message, and the use of a secure
channel for transmission of the pad, one-time pads
are considered unbreakable.
one-time password authentication token meant to be used
for a single instance, and then discarded 
one-way encryption irreversible transformation of plain-
text to ciphertext, such that the plaintext cannot be
recovered from the ciphertext by other than exhaus-
tive procedures even if the cryptographic key is
known. One-way encryption may seem odd, but it
does have legitimate uses, such as storage of pass-
words.
onion routing technique for anonymizing routing, and
therefore making traffic analysis and tracing more dif-
ficult.The packets transiting a chain of onion routers
(from among the group in existence in the public
network) have encrypted headers, and are passed from
one to another before being sent to the eventual
destination. Each router has the task of encrypting
the socket connections and to act in turn as a proxy
in the chain.The concept is similar to that used by
the cypherpunks remailers for anonymous email 
communications.
opcode machine language instruction, usually consisting of
a single byte, frequently with two or three bytes of
argument following 
Dictionary of Information Security
133

open security environment environment that includes
those systems in which at least one of the following
conditions holds true: (l) Application developers
(including maintainers) do not have sufficient clear-
ance or authorization to provide an acceptable pre-
sumption that they have not introduced malicious
logic. (2) Configuration control does not provide
sufficient assurance that applications are protected
against the introduction of malicious logic prior to
and during the operation of system applications.
open source software development philosophy based on
the premise that the source code for software must
be made available to the user, and that restrictions
cannot be made on the user’s modification of the
code, as long as the user is also bound by the same
proviso.There are some disagreements about the
precise use of open source, but it is generally seen as
being akin but not equal to both public domain soft-
ware and freeware. However, open source software is
also seen as a viable commercial model. Compare with
shareware.
operation restrictor similar to an activity monitor, an
operation restrictor alerts the user to unusual or
dangerous computer operations, and actually restricts
them.Also known as activity blocker or behaviour
blocker.
Operations Security (OPSEC) analytical process by
which the U.S. government and its supporting con-
tractors can deny to potential adversaries informa-
tion about capabilities and intentions by identifying,
134
Dictionary of Information Security

controlling, and protecting evidence of the planning
and execution of sensitive activities and operations.
Orange Book alternate name for the U.S. Department of
Defense Trusted Computer Security Evaluation
Criteria, because of the colour of the cover of the
printed manual.The books in this series are collec-
tively known as the Rainbow Series or the Rainbow
Books because of the various colours used for
covers.
out of band transfer of information using a channel that is
outside or separate from the channel that is nor-
mally used. Out of band mechanisms are often used
to distribute shared secrets (e.g., a symmetric key) or
other sensitive information items that are needed to
initialize or otherwise enable the operation of cryp-
tography or other security mechanisms. In addition,
the transfer of command information on the same
channels as other data can lead to security problems,
such as happened with older phone systems where
trunk access and other controls were transmitted by
tones within the voice band. See also covert channel.
output feedback (OFB) block cipher mode that modifies
electronic codebook mode to operate on plaintext seg-
ments of variable length less than or equal to the
block length.This mode operates by directly using
the algorithm’s previously generated output block as
the algorithm’s next input block (i.e., by “feeding
back” the output block) and combining (exclusive
XOR-ing) the output block with the next plaintext
segment (of block length or less) to form the next
ciphertext segment.
Dictionary of Information Security
135

overt channel path within a computer system or network
that is designed for the authorized transfer of data.
Compare covert channel.
overwrite procedure process or stimulation to change the
state of a bit or other data, which generally makes it
impossible to recover original data without physi-
cally examining the media. Note that care must be
taken to ensure that all slack,“unused,” and system
swap areas are overwritten, or residual data traces
may be recovered. See also format and magnetic rema-
nence.
owner individual or group that has responsibility for spe-
cific data, data types, or systems, and is charged with
the communication of the need for certain security-
related handling procedures to both the users and
custodians of this data. Frequently now denoted as
data owner.
136
Dictionary of Information Security

P
packet in data communication, a sequence of binary digits,
including data and control signals, that is transmitted
and switched as a composite whole.The data, con-
trol signals, and possibly error control information
are arranged in a specific format, according to the
communications protocol. In the TCP/IP world,
packets have specific names under different protocols
and different layers.At the application layer,TCP
(Transmission Control Protocol) has streams and
UDP (User Datagram Protocol) messages.At the
transport layer,TCP has segments and UDP packets.
At the Internet (network) layer are datagrams, and at
the network access (data link) layer are frames.
packet filter one of the simplest and earliest forms of a
firewall, a packet filter accepts or rejects traffic based
on source and destination addresses, and possibly the
type of traffic 
padding string of random data, typically added to plaintext
in a block cipher when the last plaintext block is
short, or the original data contains long strings of
null data 
pagejacking contraction of “Web page hijacking.”A mas-
querade attack in which the attacker copies a home
page or other material from the target server, rehosts
the page on a server the attacker controls, and causes
the rehosted page to be indexed by the major Web
search services, thereby diverting browsers from the
target server to the attacker’s server.This practice is
infrequent, and usage of this term is rare.This term

should not be confused with other forms of Web
diversion.
parity (1) error correcting code that will detect and pos-
sibly repair any single-bit error in the data block to
which it is applied. See also code, checksum, forward
error correction, and redundancy.
(2) state of equality or balance.
partitioned security mode mode of operation wherein
all personnel have the clearance but not necessarily
formal access approval and need to know for all infor-
mation contained in the system. Not to be confused
with compartmented security mode (see modes of
operation).
passive attack that does not result in an unauthorized state
change, such as an attack that only monitors and/or
records data. See active.
password protected/private character string used to authen-
ticate an identity 
password attack attempt to obtain or decrypt a legitimate
user’s password.Attackers can use password diction-
aries, cracking programs, and password sniffers in
password attacks. Defence against password attacks is
rather limited, but usually consists of a password
policy including a minimum length, unrecognizable
words, and frequent changes. See also dictionary attack
and password sniffing.
password length equation equation that determines an
appropriate password length, M, which provides an
acceptable probability, P, that a password will be
guessed in its lifetime.The password length is given
138
Dictionary of Information Security

by M = (log S)/(log N), where S is the size of the
password space and N is the number of characters
available.The password space is given by S = LR/P,
where L is the maximum lifetime of a password and
R is the number of guesses per unit of time. See
also password length parameter and key space.
password length parameter basic parameter affecting the
password length needed to provide a given degree of
security. Password length parameters are related by
the expression P = LR/S, where P is the probability
that a password can be guessed in its lifetime, L is
the maximum lifetime a password can be used to log
in to a system, R is the number of guesses per unit
of time, and S is the number of unique passwords
(the password space).The degree of password secu-
rity is determined by the probability that a password
can be guessed in its lifetime.
password sniffing use of a network sniffer program to cap-
ture passwords as they cross a network.The network
could be a local area network, or the Internet itself.
The sniffer can be hardware or software. Most snif-
fers are passive and have sufficient intelligence to log
only passwords.
password space total number of possible passwords that
can be created by a given password generation
scheme 
patch quick modification of a program, which is some-
times a temporary fix until the problem can be
solved in a more rigorous manner.A patch is gener-
ally a section of code that is overlaid on an existing
program or system, similar to a patch on fabric.
Dictionary of Information Security
139

Patches have two relations to security.A security vul-
nerability or loophole in a system may be fixed with a
patch. However, because patches are not always sub-
ject to rigorous systems development procedures,
they may also introduce vulnerabilities and loop-
holes into a system. Because of this, many enter-
prises are now instituting formal patch management
procedures, similar to change management.
payload destructive or security-breaking activity, usually
considered separately from its delivery mechanism,
which may be a trojan horse, virus, or other means of
transmission or emplacement. Payloads may be
simple messages, or may be logic bombs, trap doors, or
other functions. See also malware.
PC compatible see ISA
penetration successful act of bypassing the security mecha-
nisms of a system 
penetration signature characteristics or identifying marks
that may be produced by a penetration.This signa-
ture may be used in intrusion detection systems.
penetration study study to determine the feasibility and
methods for defeating controls of a system 
penetration testing portion of security testing in which
the evaluators attempt to circumvent the security
features of a system.The evaluators may be assumed
to use all system design and implementation docu-
mentation, which may include listings of system
source code, manuals, and circuit diagrams.The eval-
uators work under the same constraints applied to
ordinary users. Frequently abbreviated to pen test.
140
Dictionary of Information Security

perfect forward secrecy see forward secrecy
perimeter-based security technique of securing a net-
work or system by controlling access to all entry and
exit points 
periods processing processing of various levels of sensitive
information at distinctly different times. Under
periods processing, the system must be purged of all
information from one processing period before tran-
sitioning to the next when there are different users
with differing authorizations. See also temporal 
isolation.
permission description of the type of authorized interac-
tions a subject can have with an object. Examples
include read, write, execute, add, modify, and delete.
Sometimes referred to as privilege or rights.
persistent storage any storage medium that remains intact
when the power to it is disconnected.Also known
as non-volatile storage.
personnel security procedures established to ensure that
all personnel who have access to sensitive informa-
tion have the required authority and appropriate
clearances 
PGP widely used and highly regarded encryption program
using a hybrid symmetric/ asymmetric encryption
system and a non-hierarchical web of trust certificate
model. Many versions exist, including commercial,
international, and open source. Not all versions are
compatible in all functional areas.
Dictionary of Information Security
141

142
Dictionary of Information Security
phage another of the (many) idiosyncratic terms for virus
or malware. Imprecise: should not be used.
pharming maliciously redirecting a Web browser to an
alternate Web site (not the site the user is expecting)
to fool the user into providing confidential data,
which is then generally used for identity theft or
other forms of fraud 
phishing posting of a fraudulent message to a large number
of people via spam or other general posting asking
them to submit personal or security information,
which is then used for further fraud or identity theft.
The term is possibly an extension of trolling, which
is the posting of an outrageous message or point of
view (see flame) in a newsgroup or mailing list in
the hope that someone will “bite” and respond to it.
phreak those who are interested in breaking into or other-
wise manipulating the telephone system are referred
to (and refer to themselves) as “phone phreaks,”
using the punning variant spelling.This is generally
shortened to phreaks in common usage.The act of
manipulating the phone system is known as
phreaking.
physical control see controls
physical security application of physical barriers and con-
trol procedures as preventive measures or counter-
measures against threats to resources and sensitive
information 

piggyback gaining unauthorized access to a system via
another user’s legitimate connection. See between-the-
lines entry and TOC/TOU.
ping of death attack that sends an improperly large ICMP
echo request packet (a “ping”), with the intent of
overflowing the input buffers of the destination
machine and causing it to crash 
ping sweep attack that sends ICMP echo requests
(“pings”) to a range of IP addresses, with the goal of
finding hosts that can be probed for vulnerabilities
PKI Public Key Infrastructure, a framework established to
issue, maintain, and revoke public key certificates
accommodating a variety of security technologies 
plaintext original, or extracted, message, before the process
of encryption or after the process of decryption.
Generally also known as cleartext. However, techni-
cally, plaintext can be ciphertext that was the output
of a prior stage in multiple stage encryption,
whereas cleartext is always assumed to be intelligible
to anyone.
pnambic (acronym from the scene in the film version of
The Wizard of Oz in which the true nature of the
wizard is first discovered:“Pay no attention to the
man behind the curtain.”) Of or pertaining to a
process or function whose apparent operations are
wholly or partially falsified. See also security by 
obscurity.
policy organizational-level rules governing acceptable use
of computing resources, security practices, and
guiding development of operational procedures.
Dictionary of Information Security
143

Policies are supported by more detailed guidelines,
procedures, and standards.
polymorphic pertaining to techniques that use some
system of changing the form of a virus on each infec-
tion to try to avoid detection by signature scanning
software. (The Greek roots literally mean “many
forms.) Less sophisticated systems are referred to as
self-encrypting.
port scan attack that sends client requests to a range of
server port addresses on a host, with the goal of
finding an active port and exploiting a known vulner-
ability of that service 
prank software that appears to cause problems or damage,
but in fact does not. In a sense, the inverse of the
trojan horse. Books and programs are now being sold
that perform these “stupid computer tricks.” May
cause heart problems, but no erasure of data. (It is,
however, sometimes difficult to draw a hard and fast
line between pranks and malware. Pranks generally
cause some denial of service, but hopefully only for a
short time.) 
Preferred Products List (PPL) list of commercially pro-
duced equipment that meets TEMPEST and other
requirements prescribed by the U.S. National
Security Agency.
Pretty Good Privacy see PGP
preventative control see controls
preventive control see controls
144
Dictionary of Information Security

preventive maintenance systematic and/or prescribed
actions intended to reduce the probability of failure 
print suppression eliminating the displaying of characters
to preserve their secrecy; e.g., not displaying the
characters of a password as it is keyed at the input
terminal 
privacy the concept of privacy is very difficult to nail
down.Technically, it is often defined as the condi-
tion of being isolated from view, or secret.Those
more concerned with social aspects generally speak
of the ability to control information about oneself.
Some definitions are:
(1) The right of an entity (normally a person), acting
on its own behalf, to determine the degree to which
it will interact with its environment, including the
degree to which the entity is willing to share infor-
mation about itself with others.
(2) The right of individuals to control or influence
what information related to them may be collected
and stored, and by whom, and to whom, that infor-
mation may be disclosed.
You should not use this term as a synonym for confi-
dentiality, which is a different concept. Privacy is a
reason for security rather than a kind of security. For
example, a system that stores personal data needs to
protect the data to prevent harm, embarrassment,
inconvenience, or unfairness to any person about
whom data is maintained, and to protect the
person’s privacy. For that reason, the system may
need to provide data confidentiality service. See also
anonymity.
Dictionary of Information Security
145

private key term often used to refer either to the shared
key in a symmetric encryption system, or the confiden-
tial part of the key pair used in an asymmetric system 
privilege see permission
privileged instructions set of instructions (e.g., interrupt
handling or special computer instructions) to con-
trol features (such as storage protection features) that
are generally executable only when the automated
system is operating in the executive state 
probe device or program used to gather information about
a system or its users 
procedural security synonymous with administrative secu-
rity
procedure part of the supporting structure of a security
policy, a procedure is a set of steps and instructions
to be specifically followed under certain conditions 
process program in execution. See domain and subject.
promiscuous mode state where a network interface can
capture all network traffic irrespective of the packet
destination address. Promiscuous mode is required
for many network attacks, but also for various net-
work utilities.
proprietary refers to information (or other property) that
is owned by an individual or organization and for
which the use is restricted by that entity 
protection-critical portions of the TCB those portions
of the TCB whose normal function is to deal with
the control of access between subjects and objects.
146
Dictionary of Information Security

Their correct operation is essential to the protection
of the data on the system.
protection philosophy informal description of the overall
design of a system that delineates each of the pro-
tection mechanisms employed.A combination,
appropriate to the evaluation class, of formal and
informal techniques is used to show that the mecha-
nisms are adequate to enforce the security policy.
protection ring one of a hierarchy of privileged modes of
a system that gives certain access rights to user pro-
grams and processes authorized to operate in a given
mode.This term is now commonly applied to oper-
ating modes of the Intel Pentium processor, and the
Windows NT and 2000 operating systems, although
the later usage may not be fully consistent with ear-
lier definitions.
protocol set of rules and formats, semantic and syntactic,
that permits entities to exchange information 
proxy server computer attached to two or more networks,
providing service to more than one client or server
as if to a single machine. Most often used to con-
nect multiple machines on a local area network to a
public network such as the Internet. Often used as a
type of firewall, since the proxy server can be hard-
ened, and attacks will be directed against the proxy
server rather than the actual servers behind it. See
also application level gateway and compare with packet
filter.
Dictionary of Information Security
147

pseudo flaw apparent loophole deliberately implanted in
an operating system program as a trap for intruders.
See also honeypot and entrapment.
pseudorandom the generation of random numbers is very
important to operations related to cryptography.As
Robert R. Coveyou has said,“[t]he generation of
random numbers is too important to be left to
chance.” If, for example, keys are not chosen at
random, then key choice may be determinable, and
thus the cryptographic system may be compromised.
However, it is not possible to produce truly random
numbers with a program.The great John Louis von
Neumann himself stated,“[a]nyone who considers
arithmetical methods of producing random numbers
is, of course, in a state of sin.” (The Dilbert cartoon
strip made a profound observation on October 25,
2001 when, in response to a random number gener-
ator that produced only nines, Dilbert asked if it was
truly random, and was told “That’s the problem with
randomness.You can never be sure.”) Therefore,
extensive efforts are put into creating functions that
randomize input, and include event data (such as
system clock times, time sequences between key-
strokes, and even electronic noise) as input to obtain
data that is as random as possible for use in crypto-
graphic systems.
public domain legal term that carries the same meaning
in regard to software that it does in the field of liter-
ature. Software in the public domain may be used by
anyone, for any purpose, in any manner, without
restriction.This term is often used carelessly to refer
to freeware, which requires no payment, but for
148
Dictionary of Information Security

Dictionary of Information Security
149
which the author still assumes copyright and con-
trol, and shareware, which does, in fact, require pay-
ment for continued use. See also commercial and open
source.
public key sometimes used to refer generically to asym-
metric encryption systems, but more properly referring
to the non-confidential portion of a key pair in
asymmetric systems 
public key forward secrecy see forward secrecy
Public Law 100-235 (P.L. 100-235) also known as the
Computer Security Act of 1987, this U.S. law cre-
ated minimum acceptable security practices for
improving the security and privacy of sensitive
information in federal computer systems.This law
assigned to the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) responsibility for developing
standards and guidelines for federal computer sys-
tems processing unclassified data.The law also
required establishment of security plans by all opera-
tors of federal computer systems that contained sen-
sitive information.
purge removal of sensitive data from a system, system
storage device, or peripheral device with storage
capacity, at the end of a processing period.This
action is performed in such a way that there is assur-
ance proportional to the sensitivity of the data that
the data may not be reconstructed.A system must
be disconnected from any external network before a
purge.After a purge, the medium can be declassified
by observing the review procedures of the respective
agency.

Q
quantum encryption system has been developed using
polarized photons to communicate over fibre optic
cable.This may be used for negotiation of a session
key since an adversary listening in on the line can
obtain only half of the required information.This
should not be confused with the conjectural use of
computer circuits that may be able to calculate all
possible solutions to a problem simultaneously to
find the correct one, thus being hypothetically able
to perform brute force attacks of arbitrary size.

R
rabbit virus that generates multiple copies of itself without
attaching to other programs. Generally, this type of
attack is a denial of service based on excessive use of
disk or memory space or CPU cycles. Usage rare.
See wabbit.
RADIUS see Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service
Rainbow Series set of more than 30 technical and policy
publications issued by the National Computer
Security Center (NCSC) and informally named for
the colours of the covers.The Orange Book
(TCSEC) is possibly the best known of the series.
random in mathematics, random means unpredictable.A
sequence of values is called random if each succes-
sive value is obtained merely by chance and does
not depend on the preceding values of the
sequence, and a selected individual value is called
random if each of the values in the total population
of possibilities has equal probability of being
selected. In cryptography and other security applica-
tions, random means unpredictable, and unguessable.
When selecting data values to use for cryptographic
keys, the requirement is for data that an adversary
has a very low probability of guessing or deter-
mining. See pseudorandom.
RAT (Remote Access Trojan) program designed to pro-
vide access to, and control over, a network-attached
computer from a remote computer or location, in
effect providing a backdoor. Interestingly, RATs are
often described by their creators as “Remote

Administration Tools” in an attempt to present them
as legitimate utility software.The distinction
between valid remote tools and RATs generally lies
in the provisions for RATs to be installed without
the direct knowledge of the user or operator of the
computer to be controlled, and additional functions
to announce the installation of the RAT, and the
address of the computer being controlled, to public
venues such as Usenet newsgroups and IRC
(Internet Relay Chat).
read fundamental operation that results only in the flow of
information from an object to a subject
read access permission to read information 
real time pertaining to the performance of a computation
during the actual time the related event occurs, so
results of the computation can be used in guiding
the physical process, or transactions can be processed
and the data immediately available, rather than being
batched for later processing. Real-time processing
has particular security concerns since control sys-
tems frequently reduce operating system controls to
improve performance, and database sharing and
locking controls have their own security issues.
real-time scanner see on-access scanner
recertification ongoing reassurance that a previously certi-
fied unclassified computer application processing
sensitive information has been periodically
reviewed, that compliance with established protec-
tion policies and procedures remains in effect, and
that security risks remain at an acceptable level 
152
Dictionary of Information Security

reconciliation in auditing, the identification and analysis
of differences between values contained in two sub-
stantially similar files or between a detail file and a
control total 
recovery control see controls
recovery procedures actions necessary to restore a
system’s computational capability and data files after
a system failure. See also business continuity plan and
disaster recovery plan.
recursion see recursion. Recursion is a situation in which a
process calls itself, possibly with modified parame-
ters. Recursion does have a place in discussions of
applications security, since improperly bounded or
handled recursion can exhaust memory or create
other problems for the program in operation.
redundancy duplication of system components (such as
hard drives, power sources, or processors), informa-
tion (such as backup copies of software or archived
files), data symbols (such as parity or Hamming code),
or personnel intended to increase the reliability or
availability of service and/or decrease the risk of
information loss 
reference monitor access control concept that refers to an
abstract machine that mediates all accesses to objects
by subjects
reference validation mechanism implementation of the
reference monitor concept.A security kernel is a type of
reference validation mechanism.
Registry see Windows Registry
Dictionary of Information Security
153

reliability probability of a given system performing its mis-
sion adequately for a specified period of time under
the expected operating conditions. Reliability is
generally considered as availability with the addition
of the expectation of proper outcomes from pro-
cessing: a sort of cumulative availability.
remap to make a software or configuration data modifica-
tion that redirects system associations.The extent of
remapping can vary widely. ANSI bombs can be used
to remap the keyboard to invoke a payload com-
mand with a single keystroke. Other remapping may
involve changes to network routing tables that may
redirect the user from a trusted site to an unknown
site. In a sense, the classic man-in-the-middle attack is a
form of remapping.
remediation deliberate precautionary measures undertaken
to improve the reliability, availability, and survivability
of critical assets and/or infrastructures, particularly
with regard to specific known vulnerabilities and
threats. Remediation is a part of risk management and
is closely allied to the concept of a safeguard or coun-
termeasure.
Remote Access Trojan see RAT
Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service
(RADIUS) Internet protocol (RFC 2138) for car-
rying dial-in users’ authentication information and
configuration information between a shared, central-
ized authentication server (the RADIUS server) and
a network access server (the RADIUS client) that
needs to authenticate the users of its network access
ports.A user of the RADIUS client presents
154
Dictionary of Information Security

authentication information to the client, and the
client passes that information to the RADIUS
server.The server authenticates the client using a
shared secret value, then checks the user’s authenti-
cation information, and finally returns to the client
all authorization and configuration information
needed by the client to deliver service to the user.
replay attack attack in which a valid data transmission is
maliciously or fraudulently repeated, either by the
originator or by an adversary who intercepts the
data and retransmits it, possibly as part of a mas-
querade attack 
replicate in general, copying or reproduction. In virus
research, the term “replicate,” or sometimes “repro-
duction,” is often used to distinguish the clandestine
copying action done by a virus from the normal and
deliberate duplication performed by the user.
repudiation denial by a system entity that was involved in
an association (especially an association that transfers
information) of having participated in the relation-
ship. See accountability and nonrepudiation.
resident program that stays in the memory of the com-
puter while other programs are running, waiting for
a specific trigger event.Accessory software is often of
this type, as is activity monitoring and resident or on-
access virus scanning software.Viral programs often
attempt to “go resident,” and so this is one of the
functions an activity monitor may check.Also
known as “memory resident” and, in MS-DOS cir-
cles,TSR (Terminate and Stay Resident).The
Microsoft Windows equivalent is a VxD or service,
Dictionary of Information Security
155

156
Dictionary of Information Security
while the Novell NetWare version is NLM
(Netware Loadable Module). UNIX resident pro-
grams are generally known as daemons, although
there is a tendency to restrict this usage to network
server software.
residual risk portion of risk that remains after security
measures have been applied.The risk of a given vul-
nerability after the application of specific safeguards.
residue data left in storage after processing operations are
complete, but before degaussing or rewriting has
taken place 
resilience ability of a system to withstand the impact of a
failure or interruption 
resource encapsulation process of ensuring that a
resource not be directly accessible by a subject, but
that it be protected so the reference monitor can prop-
erly mediate accesses to it.
restricted area any area to which access is subject to spe-
cial restrictions or controls for reasons of security 
retrovirus this term has been used to describe a virus that
attempts to ensure that all backup copies of software
are infected (presumably before setting off some kind
of payload), or attempts to disable antivirus software.
Neither meaning is accepted as a standard within
virus research, and this term is not used within the
research community.
reverse engineer to determine the internal workings of a
system from externally available indications of 
function 

RFC Request For Comments. In business and government,
an RFC is just that. On the Internet, a proposal for
a new protocol, usually made as a request for com-
ments on the proposal, was frequently accepted as a
useful tool if nobody had a better idea.Therefore,
the term came to be used for the standards of the
Internet. Most documents and standards are pub-
lished as RFCs; there are also editorial and back-
ground papers, and even a few jokes.
risk expectation of loss expressed as the probability that a
particular threat will exploit a particular vulnerability
with a particular harmful result 
risk acceptance decision to participate in an activity
where a risk is known, but acceptable on the basis
of the potential benefit of the activity 
risk analysis also known as risk assessment, a process that
systematically identifies valuable system resources
and threats to those resources, quantifies loss expo-
sures (i.e., loss potential) based on estimated fre-
quencies and costs of occurrence, and (optionally)
recommends how to allocate resources to counter-
measures to minimize total exposure.The analysis
lists risks in order of cost and criticality, thereby
determining where countermeasures should be
applied first. It is usually financially and technically
infeasible to counteract all aspects of risk, so some
residual risk will remain, even after all available coun-
termeasures have been deployed.
risk avoidance decision not to participate in an activity
where the potential benefit is perceived to be unac-
ceptable due to a known risk 
Dictionary of Information Security
157

risk management process of identifying, controlling, and
eliminating or minimizing uncertain events that may
affect system resources 
risk transference attempt to transfer risk or uncertainty to
another party. Insurance is a form of risk transfer-
ence.
robust ability to recover gracefully from a whole range of
inputs and situations in a given environment. See
also exception.
rogue program that breaks or escapes bounds in a parti-
tioned computer, more generically used to describe
any type of malicious or buggy software: a program
that, because of a bug in programming, interferes
with normal system operation.The damage caused
by a rogue is unintentional. Used primarily in main-
frame circles and now relatively rare.
ROM read only memory.A static memory type used to
hold programming, regardless of power conditions.
Primarily used for the “boot strap” programming for
microcomputers. Until recently, this memory has
been non-writable in normal operation, and so, safe
from virus and other attacks, but this may change
with the recent promotion and use of “flash”
EEPROMs.
root authority certification authority (CA) at the top of a
CA hierarchy 
root kit script, set of scripts, or package of modified system
programs used for gaining or keeping unauthorized
root privileges (or equivalent supervisory powers)
on a compromised system. Recently, media usage
158
Dictionary of Information Security

has expanded this definition to include any software
that can hide software or processes on a system, but
this usage is vague and should be avoided.Also
rootkit.
rot13 from “rotate alphabet 13 places,” simple Caesar-
cypher encryption that replaces each English letter
with the one 13 places forward or back along the
alphabet 
RSA asymmetric cryptographic algorithm named for its 1977
inventors—Ron Rivest,Adi Shamir, and Leonard
Adleman. RSA uses exponentiation modulo the
product of two large prime numbers.The difficulty
of breaking RSA is believed to be equivalent to the
difficulty of factoring integers that are the product
of two large prime numbers of approximately 
equal size.
Dictionary of Information Security
159

S
safeguard any protective measure or control that is pre-
scribed to meet the security requirements specified
for a system. Safeguards may include but are not
necessarily limited to hardware and software security
features, operating procedures, accountability proce-
dures, access and distribution controls, management
constraints, personnel security, and physical structures,
areas, and devices.Also sometimes specifically called
security safeguards. See also countermeasure and
control.
salami a story of a program that takes advantage of very
active systems to make incremental changes.The
usual tale is of a banking system that siphons frac-
tions of a penny at a time into the programmer’s
account. In spite of the lack of evidence for the
existence of attacks of this type, increasing numbers
of security books make reference to it.
salt random data added to small amounts of information,
such as passwords or session keys, prior to encryption to
make dictionary attacks (a type of brute force attack)
more difficult or time consuming.When used, salt is
generally placed in front of the encrypted data.The
concepts of challenge/response, initialization vector,
nonce, and seed are closely related.
Challenge/response is generally used in regard to
password and authentication schemes, initialization
vector to block ciphers, nonce to short, automated
network messages, and salt to password storage. Salt
is also what you should take any guarantee of per-
fect security with a large grain of.

Dictionary of Information Security
161
samurai hacker (technically astute individual) who hires out
for legal cracking jobs, penetration tests, or semi-legal
corporate intelligence. Usage limited and obscure.
See also dark-side hacker and whitehat.
sandbox security model providing that code or programs
from untrusted sources can be run in an environ-
ment that restricts potentially dangerous activities
and functions. Originally arising from and applied to
the Java language applet system, it may now refer
also to the general concept.
sanitize to delete sensitive data from a file, a device, or a
system; or modify data to be able to downgrade its
classification level 
sanity check programming whereby the application auto-
matically checks input data for “reasonableness.” For
example, entry of non-numeric data in a numeric
field should raise an error to be dealt with. Sanity
checking is a type of exception handling.
sarchasm gulf of understanding, between speaker and
hearer, so vast that the listener does not even realize
the speaker is making fun of him/her. Sarchasm fre-
quently backfires on security professionals: users are
quite willing to assume that “Well, let’s just elimi-
nate passwords altogether, if those are too hard to
remember!” is a really good idea, rather than an
insult (based on suggestion by SW).
scan string see signature
scanner (1) program that reads the contents of a file
looking for code known to exist in specific virus
programs.Also referred to as known virus scanning
(KVS).

(2) program that examines computers and network
systems, examining configurations and looking for
security vulnerabilities.This type of program can be
used by both defenders and attackers. SATAN
(Security Administrators Tool for Analysing
Networks) is an example of this type of scanner.
scavenging searching through object residue to acquire
unauthorized data 
Scores Macintosh virus that seems to have been written
with intent to cause problems for a specific com-
pany and software program. Because one of the
most widely published reports of infection was from
an office at NASA, it has also been referred to by
that name.
scratch monkey a mythic story in computerdom, based
on a true event involving the death of a monkey
(Mabel, a research subject at the University of
Toronto) due to troubleshooting and reconfiguration
that interfered with specialized hardware.The
exhortation to “always mount a scratch monkey” is a
reminder never to do testing or development on a
live system or data.
screened subnet isolated subnet created behind a screening
router to protect the private network.The degree to
which the subnet may be accessed depends on the
screening rules in the router.
screening router router configured to permit or deny
traffic using filtering techniques based on a set of
permission rules installed by the administrator.A
component of many firewalls usually used to block
162
Dictionary of Information Security

traffic between the network and specific hosts on an
IP port level. Generally considered the lowest form
of a firewall, it is used when speed or network per-
formance is the major decision criteria.
script virus it is difficult to make a strong distinction
between script and macro programming languages,
but generally, a script virus is a standalone object, con-
tained in a text file or email message.A macro virus is
generally contained in a data file, such as a Microsoft
Word document.
sector predetermined, addressable angular part of a track or
a band on a magnetic drum or magnetic disk.
Because the data laid down in a sector is a function
of the speed and timing of the rotation speed, and
because a margin is allowed for variation in that
speed, a second form of slack space may be available,
within that margin space, for those able to access
and control the physical attributes of the hard disk.
sector virus see cluster virus
secure configuration management set of procedures
appropriate for controlling changes to a system’s
hardware and software structure for the purpose of
ensuring that changes will not lead to violations of
the system’s security policy
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) Internet protocol (originally
developed by Netscape Communications, Inc.) that
uses connection-oriented end-to-end encryption to
provide data confidentiality service and data integrity
service for traffic between a client and a server, and
that can optionally provide peer entity authentication
Dictionary of Information Security
163

between the client and the server. SSL is layered
below HTTP and above a reliable transport protocol
(TCP). SSL is independent of the application it
encapsulates, and any higher level protocol can layer
on top of SSL transparently. SSL has two layers: (a)
SSL’s lower layer, the SSL Record Protocol, is lay-
ered on top of the transport protocol and encapsu-
lates higher level protocols. (b) SSL’s upper layer
provides asymmetric cryptography for server authenti-
cation (verifying the server’s identity to the client)
and optional client authentication (verifying the
client’s identity to the server), and also enables them
to negotiate a symmetric encryption algorithm and
secret session key (to use for data confidentiality)
before the application protocol transmits or receives
data.A keyed hash provides data integrity service for
encapsulated data.
secure state as originally defined in the formal models that
dealt only with confidentiality, a condition in which
no subject can access any object in an unauthorized
manner. Modern models may also include integrity
and availability.
secure subsystem subsystem that contains its own imple-
mentation of the reference monitor concept for those
resources it controls. However, the secure subsystem
must depend on other controls and the base oper-
ating system for the control of subjects and the more
primitive system objects.
security architecture plan and set of principles that
describe (a) the security services a system is required
to provide to meet the needs of its users, (b) the
164
Dictionary of Information Security

system elements required to implement the services,
and (c) the performance levels required in the ele-
ments to deal with the threat environment.A com-
plete system security architecture includes
administrative security, communication security,
computer security, emanations security, personnel
security, and physical security.A complete security
architecture needs to deal with both intentional,
intelligent threats and accidental kinds of threats. See
also security policy.
security association (1) a relationship established between
two or more entities to enable them to protect data
they exchange.The relationship is used to negotiate
characteristics of protection mechanisms, but does
not include the mechanisms themselves.
(2) in IPsec usage, a simplex (uni-directional) logical
connection created for security purposes and imple-
mented with either AH or ESP (but not both).The
security services offered by a security association
depend on the protocol selected, the IPsec mode
(transport or tunnel), the endpoints, and the election
of optional services within the protocol.A security
association is identified by a (data) “triple” consisting
of (a) a destination IP address, (b) a protocol (AH or
ESP) identifier, and (c) a Security Parameter Index.
security audit independent review and examination of a
system’s policy, records, and activities to determine
the adequacy of system controls, ensure compliance
with established security policy and procedures, detect
breaches in security services, and recommend any
changes that are indicated for countermeasures.The
basic audit objective is to establish accountability for
Dictionary of Information Security
165

system entities that initiate or participate in security-
relevant events and actions.Thus, means are needed
to generate and record security audit information
and to review and analyze the audit trail to discover
and investigate attacks and security compromises.
security by obscurity term used, usually pejoratively, to
refer to the practice of attempting to secure a system
by failing to publish information about it, in the
hope that nobody will be able to figure out how it
works 
security cost benefit analysis detailed study of security
measures, their technical and operational feasibility,
and their associated costs and benefits 
security critical mechanisms those security mechanisms
whose correct operation is necessary to ensure the
security policy is enforced 
security domain set of objects a subject has the ability to
access
security evaluation evaluation done to assess the degree
of trust or assurance that can be placed in systems for
the secure handling of sensitive information. One
type, a product evaluation, is performed on the
hardware and software features and assurances of a
computer product from a perspective that excludes
the application environment.The other type, a
system evaluation, is done for the purpose of
assessing a system’s security safeguards with respect to
a specific operational mission and is a major step in
the certification and accreditation process.
166
Dictionary of Information Security

security fault analysis security analysis, usually performed
on hardware at gate level, to determine the security
properties of a device when a hardware fault is
encountered 
security features security-relevant functions, mechanisms,
and characteristics of system hardware and software.
Security features are a subset of system security safe-
guards.
security filter trusted subsystem that enforces a security
policy on the data that passes through it 
security flaw error of commission or omission in a system
that may allow protection mechanisms or safeguards
to be bypassed. See also loophole.
security flow analysis security analysis performed on a
formal system specification that locates potential
flows of information within the system 
security kernel hardware, firmware, and software elements
of a TCB that implement the reference monitor con-
cept. It must mediate all accesses, be protected from
modification, and be verifiable as correct.
security label piece of information that represents the
security level of an object
security level combination of a hierarchical classification
and a set of nonhierarchical categories that repre-
sents the sensitivity of information 
Dictionary of Information Security
167

security measures elements of software, firmware, hard-
ware, or procedures that are included in a system for
the satisfaction of security specifications or security
policy
security perimeter boundary where security controls are
in effect to protect assets
security policy set of laws, rules, and practices that regu-
late how an organization manages, protects, and dis-
tributes sensitive information 
security policy model formal presentation of the security
policy enforced by the system. It must identify the set
of rules and practices that regulate how a system
manages, protects, and distributes sensitive informa-
tion. See Bell-La Padula model and formal security
policy model.
security range highest and lowest security levels that are
permitted in or on a system, system component,
subsystem, or network 
security requirements types and levels of protection nec-
essary for equipment, data, information, applications,
and facilities to meet security policy
security requirements baseline description of minimum
requirements necessary for a system to maintain an
acceptable level of security 
security review periodic assessment of the effectiveness
and need for various controls.A security review may
be conducted by the entity responsible for security
provision, whereas a security audit should always be
conducted by a separate entity.
168
Dictionary of Information Security

security safeguards see safeguard
security specifications detailed description of the safe-
guards required to protect a system 
security test and evaluation examination and analysis of
the security safeguards of a system as they have been
applied in an operational environment to determine
the security posture of the system 
security testing process used to determine that the security
features of a system are implemented as designed.
This includes hands-on functional testing, penetration
testing, and verification.
seed value, which should be chosen as randomly as pos-
sible, used to start the process of generating pseudo-
random numbers for cryptographic processes. See also
related terms nonce and salt.
self-extracting file file that contains software to decom-
press part of itself into one or more parts when exe-
cuted. Software authors and distributors often use
this file type to transmit files and software via the
Internet since the compressed files conserve disk
space, reduce download time, and do not require the
end user to obtain decompression programs.
Although popular with neophyte Internet users
because it does not require separate de-archiving
programs, it presents a number of potential security
vulnerabilities. Since compression provides a form of
encryption, self-extracting files may hide viruses and
other malware. In addition, many self-extracting for-
mats contain functions to execute files immediately
after extraction.
Dictionary of Information Security
169

self-garbling virus see polymorphic
sensitive information any information that the loss,
misuse, modification of, or unauthorized access to
could affect the specific interest of the enterprise.
U.S. government and military entities have specific
regulations in this regard.
sensitivity label piece of information that represents the
security level of an object. Sensitivity labels are used by
the TCB as the basis for mandatory access control deci-
sions.
separation of duties practice of dividing the steps in a
system function among different individuals, to keep
a single individual from subverting the process. In
particular, a person doing audit or check functions
should not be the person performing the operation.
Originally part of the Clark-Wilson integrity
model, where it refers to processes, rather than
people.
session key key used for symmetric encryption to protect a
single instance or session of communication.The
key may be calculated or negotiated (the Diffie-
Hellman system is an example), or it may be gener-
ated randomly or pseudorandomly, exchanged out of
band or protected by asymmetric encryption (or a
long-term shared symmetric key), and then dis-
carded.The reason for the use of a session key, in the
case of a pre-existing shared symmetric key, is that
frequent use of symmetric keys gives away informa-
tion about the key. See also ephemeral key, forward
secrecy, man-in-the-middle,quantum encryption, and salt.
170
Dictionary of Information Security

shareware software that is distributed widely, usually made
available on anonymous download servers and Web
sites. Users are encouraged to “try before you buy,”
but users who continue to use the software are sup-
posed to pay for the programs.The honour system
of distribution reduces overhead costs, and shareware
is generally cheaper than commercial software. See
also freeware, open source, and public domain.
shell scrap object Microsoft file format, one of the many
that may include executable content.The shell scrap
file extensions, .SHS and .SHB, will not display in
normal Windows file dialogue boxes and the
Windows Explorer unless a change is made to the
Registry.
shrink wrap plastic film used to protect the packaging of
commercial software.“Shrink wrapped software” is
often used as a synonym for commercial software.
Many people feel shrink wrap is some kind of pro-
tection, guarantee, or warranty. It isn’t, since anyone
with a roll of film, a hot wire, and a blow dryer can
“shrink wrap” a package.
sig virus parasitic meme embedded in a signature block in
email messages or postings.There was a meme
plague or fad for these on Usenet in late 1991. Most
were along the lines of “I am a sig virus, please
reproduce me in your sig block.”The sig virus’
memetic hook is the amusement value of going
along with the gag.
signature distinctive pattern used to detect a virus infection
or system penetration (see intrusion detection system).
In virus detection, the signature may be a fixed
Dictionary of Information Security
171

string of bytes, known as a scan string, although
intricate signatures may be algorithmically based.
System penetration signatures are generally more
complex, and may involve comparison of data from
a number of forms of audit and logging. See scanner.
simple integrity property the Biba integrity model
essentially inverts the Bell-La Padula confidentiality
model, and therefore the simple integrity property
inverts the simple security property and states that, to
preserve integrity, a subject cannot read from an object
of lesser integrity 
simple security condition see simple security property
simple security property Bell-La Padula security model
rule allowing a subject read access to an object only if
the security level of the subject dominates the security
level of the object. In other words, you can read a
file if your level is equal to or higher than that of
the file. Synonymous with simple security 
condition.
single-level device device that is used to process data of
only a single security level at any one time 
single point of failure necessary resource or operation for
which no redundancy exists, or which multiple
redundant resources rely on for operation.
Negligence in eliminating single points of failure is
astoundingly common in disasters.
single sign-on system or procedure whereby a user is
authenticated once, and thereafter has access to a
number of disparate systems 
172
Dictionary of Information Security

Sisyphus the Perplexed patron saint of information 
security. See also Eris. Per AJA.
slack space generally, space allocated to a disk file, but not
actually used to store information.Also note that
data laid down in a sector is a function of the speed
and timing of the rotation speed, and because a
margin is allowed for variation in that speed, a
second form of slack space may be available, within
that margin space, for those able to access and con-
trol the physical attributes of the hard disk. Slack
space can be used either in searching for locations
from which evidence can be extracted in computer
forensics, or to find hiding places for writing sections
of malware.
smurfing denial of service attack exploiting IP broadcast
addressing and ICMP ping packets to cause flooding.
A smurf program builds a network packet that
appears to originate from another address, that of
the “victim,” either a host or an IP router.The
packet contains an ICMP ping message that is
addressed to an IP broadcast address, to all IP
addresses in a given network.The echo responses to
the ping message return to the victim’s address.The
goal of smurfing may be to deny service at a partic-
ular host or to flood all or part of an IP network.A
related attack, called fraggle, performs the same
activity using UDP (User Datagram Protocol)
packets.
sniffer program that monitors network traffic.Attackers use
sniffers to capture data transmitted via a network.
See password sniffing.
Dictionary of Information Security
173

social engineering attacking or penetrating a system by
tricking or subverting operators or users, rather than
by means of a technical attack. More generally, the use
of fraud, spoofing, or other social or psychological
measures to get legitimate users to break security
policy.
SOCKS Internet protocol (RFC 1928) that provides a
generalized proxy server that enables client-server
applications—such as telnet, ftp, and HTTP; running
over either TCP or UDP—to use the services of a
firewall. SOCKS is layered under the application
layer and above the transport layer.When a client
inside a firewall wishes to establish a connection to
an object that is reachable only through the firewall,
it uses TCP to connect to the SOCKS server, nego-
tiates with the server for the authentication method to
be used, authenticates with the chosen method, and
then sends a relay request.The SOCKS server evalu-
ates the request, typically based on source and desti-
nation addresses, and either establishes the
appropriate connection or denies it.
Software Development Methodologies methodologies
for specifying and verifying design programs for
system development. See also iterative.
software security general-purpose (executive, utility, or
software development) tools and applications pro-
grams or routines that protect data handled by a
system 
software system test and evaluation process process
that plans, develops, and documents the quantitative
174
Dictionary of Information Security

demonstration of the fulfillment of all baseline func-
tional performance, operational, and interface
requirements 
spam (1) (v) to indiscriminately send unsolicited,
unwanted, irrelevant, or inappropriate messages,
especially commercial advertising, in mass quantities.
In sufficient volume, spam can cause denial of service.
(2) (n) electronic “junk mail”
Yes, the term “spam,” used in reference to masses of
unwanted email or newsgroup postings, does derive
from SPAM the canned meat.There is an opinion
that says the term was used because spam pretends
to be information in the same way SPAM pretends
to be ... well, Hormel is a good sport about the
neologistic appropriation of its trade name, so we
won’t belabor the point, beyond noting that the
same speculation also makes an analogy between
nonsense-content and fat-content. Hormel says,“We
do not object to use of this slang term [spam] to
describe [unsolicited commercial email (UCE)],
although we do object to the use of our product
image in association with that term.Also, if the term
is to be used, it should be used in all lowercase let-
ters to distinguish it from our trademark SPAM,
which should be used with all uppercase letters.”
The more commonly accepted derivation is that the
term comes from a comedy sketch, by the British
group Monty Python, involving a restaurant where
the menu items contain increasing amounts of
SPAM, and the Viking clientele eventually drown
out all dialogue by singing about “SPAM, SPAM,
SPAM, SPAM, SPAM, SPAM, SPAM, SPAM” in a
Dictionary of Information Security
175

kind of conversational denial of service. Hormel
themselves note this in a page at www.spam.com/ci/
ci_in.htm.
(And where did Monty Python get the idea for the
sketch? Well, Hormel also claims the honour of the
world’s first commercial radio jingle.You can hear it,
as a UNIX .au format audio file, by going to their
“SPAM in Time” page for the 1930s at
www.spam.com/it/it_30frame.htm.You’ll have to
enable JavaScript to click on the link for the jingle,
but the danger is almost worth it. Listen for yourself
and see if you think there is a similarity between the
jingle and the Viking’s song ...) 
spawning see companion virus
spear phishing phishing attacks targeted to a select group
of individuals, usually within a company, rather than
being spammed indiscriminately 
spoofing attempt to gain access to a system by posing as an
authorized user. Synonymous with impersonating,
masquerading, or mimicking.
spyware type of malware that reports on the contents,
status, or operation of the computer to a remote
system or user. Generically, this could be almost any
type of information gathering software. More specif-
ically, it usually refers to modules or functions in
software that report to the author, publisher, or
service provider of an otherwise legitimate system.
Spyware ranges from functions that report on ver-
sion levels to the host system, through packages that
report the presence of other software from the same
manufacturer, through systems that gather informa-
176
Dictionary of Information Security

tion on all software installed including those from
competing vendors, all the way to modules that
report on the user’s Web surfing. Justifications pro-
posed for spyware include the need to ensure ver-
sions are kept up to date to provide proper service,
concerns about software piracy, concerns about use
for illegal or unacceptable purposes, and the gath-
ering of marketing information. See also adware,
cookie, and web bug.
standalone, shared system system that is physically and
electrically isolated from all other systems, and is
intended to be used by more than one person,
either simultaneously (e.g., a system with multiple
terminals) or serially, with data belonging to one
user remaining available to the system while another
user is using the system (e.g., a personal computer
with nonremovable storage media such as a hard
disk). U.S. government and military.
standalone, single-user system system that is physically
and electrically isolated from all other systems, and is
intended to be used by one person at a time, with
no data belonging to other users remaining in the
system (e.g., a personal computer with removable
storage media such as a floppy disk). U.S. govern-
ment and military.
standard part of the supporting detail of a security policy, a
standard is a specific item of hardware or software,
configuration, or level of performance that is to be
adhered to in operations 
star property see *-property
Dictionary of Information Security
177

State Delta Verification System system designed to give
high confidence regarding microcode performance
by using formulae that represent isolated states of a
computation to check proofs concerning the course
of that computation. U.S. government and military.
state variable variable that represents either the state of
the system or the state of some system resource 
stateful inspection form of firewall somewhat more
advanced than a screening router, in which filtering is
based on the contents of a sequence of packets,
rather than a single packet 
stealth various technologies used by viral programs to
avoid detection on disk.At least one virus has been
named “Stealth” by its author, but the term properly
refers to the technology, and not a particular virus.
steganography activity of concealing a message by hiding
the fact that communication is happening.
Steganography is often referred to as “hiding in
plain sight.” Classical steganography systems depend
on keeping the encoding system secret, but modern
steganography is detectable only if secret informa-
tion is known (e.g., a secret key). However, because
of their invasive nature, most steganography systems
leave detectable traces within a medium’s character-
istics.This allows an eavesdropper to detect media
that has been modified, revealing that secret com-
munication is taking place.Although the secrecy of
the information is not degraded, its hidden nature
may be revealed, defeating the main purpose of
steganography.
178
Dictionary of Information Security

stepanography writing a secret message on the back of a
duck (per APP) 
Stoned extremely successful MS-DOS virus, in terms of
the number of copies made and systems infected.A
BSI of MBR type, it has, like most successful viral
programs, been used as a template for numerous
other viral strains, including Michelangelo.
storage object object that supports both read and write
accesses
stream cipher cipher that serially encrypts data, one bit at a
time. Compare with block cipher.
subject active entity, generally in the form of a person,
process, or device that causes information to flow
among objects or changes the system state.
Technically, a process/domain pair.
subject security level subject’s security level is equal to the
security level of the objects to which it has both read
and write access.A subject’s security level must always
be dominated by the clearance of the user with
which the subject is associated.
super-user user with full and unrestricted access to all
aspects and resources of the system. Frequently
referred to, particularly in UNIX circles where it is
the name of the privileged account, as root, hence
root kit.
supervisor state synonymous with executive state
surveillance systematic observation or monitoring of
places, persons, or things by visual, aural, electronic,
photographic, or other means 
Dictionary of Information Security
179

symmetric key encryption symmetric key encryption,
otherwise known as private key encryption, uses the
same, private, key for encryption and decryption, the
key being shared between the two parties to the
communication. Symmetric key systems do not
require a public key infrastructure, as does asymmetric
key encryption, but do require key exchange via a
secure channel.
SYN flood denial of service attack that sends a host more
TCP SYN packets (request to synchronize sequence
numbers, used when opening a connection) than
the protocol implementation can handle 
system boot record on ISA or Wintel computers the first
logical (not physical) sector of the master hard drive,
or the first physical sector on a floppy diskette.The
programming in the system boot record is called by
the programming in the master boot record and points
to the files needed to continue the boot process for
the specific operating system being run. See also boot
record, boot sector, and master boot record.
System Development Methodologies methodologies
developed through software engineering to manage
the complexity of system development.
Development methodologies include software engi-
neering aids and high-level design analysis tools.
system high security mode see modes of operation
system model collection of source code files, compilation
and related tools, option and configuration informa-
tion for the use of the tools, and instructions for the
creation of a given application.A system model is
180
Dictionary of Information Security

similar to a build, although in modern application
development it may be much more complex.A
given development environment or CASE
(Computer Aided Software Engineering) tool may
be used to create the system model.As with
building, testing must be applied to the correct
system model, or it may give invalid results.
system virus virus that redirects system pointers and infor-
mation to infect a file without actually changing the
infected program file.This is a type of stealth tech-
nology. In MS-DOS, often referred to as a FAT or
cluster virus. In Windows, system infectors usually
make changes to the Windows Registry.
system integrity quality a system has when it performs its
intended function in an unimpaired manner, free
from deliberate or inadvertent unauthorized manip-
ulation of the system 
system low lowest security level supported by a system at
a particular time or in a particular environment 
System Security Officer (SSO) see Information System
Security Officer
system virus sometimes used as a synonym for cluster virus,
sometimes used to refer to a virus that makes
changes to system structures such as the MS
Windows Registry or program search paths 
Dictionary of Information Security
181

T
tampering unauthorized modification that alters the
proper functioning of equipment or a system in a
manner that degrades the security or functionality it
provides 
tarpit term is used for three slightly related means of
delaying and disrupting unwanted behaviour.A
group in Germany used the term “teergrube” to
refer to a mail transfer agent that uses SMTP con-
tinuation lines to hold a mail connection open for
long periods of time to disrupt spamming (www.iks-
jena.de/mitarb/lutz/usenet/teergrube.en.html).The
term is also used to describe throttling of the
number of connections a computer can make to
reduce the spread of worms.There is also a product
that uses the term tarpit to refer to a single machine
that emulates a large number of non-existent
machines in a kind of honeypot configuration to pro-
vide delaying camouflage to divert an intruder.
TCB (Trusted Computing Base) the totality of protec-
tion mechanisms within a computer system,
including hardware, firmware, and software, the
combination of which is responsible for enforcing a
security policy.A TCB consists of one or more com-
ponents that together enforce a unified security
policy over a product or system.The ability of a
TCB to enforce correctly a unified security policy
depends solely on the mechanisms within the TCB
and on the correct input by system administrative
personnel of parameters (e.g., a user’s clearance
level) related to the security policy.The term

“Trusted Computing Base” is now often applied to
parts of Windows NT or 2000, regardless of certifi-
cation or configuration, and Windows security liter-
ature usage in this regard is very confused between
the operating system kernel, basic services running
before user logon, and the Winlogon.exe program
itself.
TCSEC see DoD Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria
technical attack attack that can be perpetrated by circum-
venting or nullifying hardware and software protec-
tion mechanisms, rather than by subverting system
personnel or other users. Contrast with social engi-
neering.
technical control see controls
technical vulnerability hardware, firmware, communica-
tion, or software flaw that leaves a computer pro-
cessing system open for potential exploitation, either
externally or internally, thereby resulting in risk for
the owner, user, or manager of the system 
TEMPEST study and control of spurious electronic signals
emitted by electrical equipment, particularly in
regard to the use of those emissions as a covert
channel. I have been semi-reliably informed that,
despite the capitalization,TEMPEST is not actually
an acronym.
template file containing a Microsoft Word macro.
Traditionally, templates are named with a .DOT
extension, while documents have a .DOC exten-
sion, but either file can actually have any extension,
or none.Technically, a Word document cannot con-
Dictionary of Information Security
183

184
Dictionary of Information Security
tain a macro, but a template file can contain data.
Therefore, .DOC files infected with macro viruses are
templates, not documents.The user, of course,
cannot tell the difference. (This technology modified
with the release of Microsoft Office 2000.) 
temporal isolation means of separating information and
processing of information of differing levels of sensi-
tivity by loading and processing data of such dif-
fering levels at different times. See also periods
processing.
Terminal Access Controller Access Control System
(TACACS) UDP (User Datagram Protocol) based
authentication and access control protocol (RFC
1492) in which a network access server receives an
identifier and password from a remote terminal and
passes them to a separate authentication server for
verification.TACACS uses centralized authentica-
tion servers and serves network access servers,
routers, and other networked computing devices.
TACACS+ is a TCP (Transmission Control
Protocol) based protocol that improves on TACACS
and XTACACS by separating the functions of
authentication, authorization, and accounting and by
encrypting all traffic between the network access
server and authentication server. It is extensible to
allow any authentication mechanism to be used
with TACACS+ clients.
terminal identification means used to uniquely identify a
terminal to a system 

threat any circumstance or event with the potential to
cause harm to a system in the form of destruction,
disclosure, modification of data, and/or denial of
service.Threat is the broadest category in a classifica-
tion, becoming more specific as it moves through
vulnerability, exploit, and attack.
threat agent method used to exploit a vulnerability in a
system, operation, or facility, or an entity generating
such an exploit
threat analysis examination of all actions and events that
might adversely affect a system or operation 
threat monitoring analysis, assessment, and review of
audit trails and other data collected for the purpose
of searching out system events that may constitute
violations or attempted violations of system security.
See also intrusion detection system.
three pillars three basic aspects of security are considered
to be confidentiality, integrity, and availability, often
referred to by the mnemonic CIA.As with almost
any aspect of security, even the “three pillars” are
subject to debate: some would say that there are
only two (integrity is a “special case” of availability),
while others argue for additional factors.
ticket-oriented computer protection system in which
each subject maintains a list of unforgeable bit pat-
terns, called tickets, one for each object the subject is
authorized to access. Compare list-oriented.
time bomb sometimes used to refer to a logic bomb that
triggers on a time event 
Dictionary of Information Security
185

time dependent password password that is valid only at a
certain time of day or during a specified interval of
time 
TOAST acronym first used by Padgett Peterson to refer to
antiviral software that makes extravagant claims, or
where a company spends more on advertising than
on development.The origin was a product that
advertised itself as,“The Only Antivirus Software
That Won’t Be Obsolete By The Time You Finish
Reading This Ad.”
TOC/TOU (pronounced “talk to”) a discrepancy between
the time of a check being made, and the time the
resource is used (Time Of Check versus Time Of
Use). See between-the-lines entry, hijacking, and piggy-
back.
token authentication tool, a device used to hold key or
authentication values, or calculate, and possibly send
and receive, responses to challenges during the user
authentication process.Tokens may be small, hand-
held hardware devices similar to pocket calculators
or credit cards.
top-level specification nonprocedural description of
system behaviour at the most abstract level; typically,
a functional specification that omits all implementa-
tion details 
TPE Trident Polymorphic Engine.Another version of the
“mutation engine” type of function (see MtE) but
done by a different group.
traffic analysis inference of information from observable
characteristics of data flow(s), even when the data is
encrypted or otherwise not directly available. Such
186
Dictionary of Information Security

characteristics include the identities and locations of
the source(s) and destination(s), and the presence,
amount, frequency, and duration of occurrence.Also,
analysis of pizza deliveries to the Pentagon.
traffic padding generation of spurious instances of com-
munication, spurious data units, and/or spurious
data within data units, intended to defeat traffic
analysis. (The CIA orders pizza even when nothing
is going on.) 
tranquility security model rule stating that the security level
of an object cannot change while the object is being
processed by a system.Also, a state never achieved by
a security practitioner.
transponder transmitter that only operates having received
(and usually been powered by) a radio signal. Most
“contactless” identity cards are transponders.
trap door see backdoor
trigger in regard to viruses and other malware, most com-
monly refers to the event, or code waiting for an
event, that stimulates the activity of the payload. In
special cases, may also refer to the event or code that
causes reproduction or replication of the virus, if the
virus does not seek out suitable targets upon activa-
tion.
triple DES (3DES) any of a number of variations on the
DES block cipher symmetric algorithm. One of the
most widely used forms encrypts plaintext with one
key, decrypts the resulting ciphertext with a second
key (which, because the key is different, does not
actually decrypt the data but re-encrypts it in a 
Dictionary of Information Security
187

different way), and finally encrypts the result of the
second operation with the first key again. Double
DES, without the third phase, is subject to an attack
known as meet in the middle, which attempts decryp-
tions from both sides until a match appears.The pat-
tern of encryption/decryption/encryption also
provides for compatibility with single DES, if only
one key is used.
trojan horse program that either pretends to have, or is
described as having, a (beneficial) set of features but,
either instead, or in addition, contains a damaging
payload. Often, the functions surreptitiously exploit
the legitimate authorizations of the invoking process
or user to the detriment of security or integrity.The
extent of the pretence and damage can vary widely.
Most frequently, the usage is shortened to trojan.
There is little agreement on whether the term
should be capitalized, or how, but the most common
usage tends to be “trojan horse” and “trojan,” some-
times justified by the fact that the “Trojan Horse”
should properly refer to what happened at Troy,
although probably merely because techies do not
like using the shift key if they don’t have to.
“Trojan” generally refers to a name brand of pro-
phylactic.
trojanize to modify an existing program to include an
unwanted or negative payload
188
Dictionary of Information Security

trust extent to which one can have confidence that the
system meets its objectives; that is, the system does
what it claims to do and does not perform
unwanted functions.This is in line with Gene
Spafford’s famous definition that a secure computer
is one that does what it is supposed to.
Trust the Machines bumper sticker seen in Florida
during and following the 2000 U.S. Presidential
campaign, referring to the fact that the voting
machines employed in the process used proprietary
(and secret) programming, and had no verifiable
audit trail. See also GIGO.
Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria see
DoD Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria
trusted computer system system that employs sufficient
hardware and software assurance measures to allow its
use for simultaneous processing of a range of sensitive
or classified information.
Trusted Computing Base see TCB
trusted distribution trusted method for distributing the
TCB hardware, software, and firmware components,
both originals and updates, that provides methods
for protecting the TCB from modification during
distribution and for detection of any changes to the
TCB that may occur during distribution 
trusted identification forwarding identification method
used in networks whereby the sending host can
verify that an authorized user on its system is
attempting a connection to another host.The
Dictionary of Information Security
189

sending host transmits the required user authentica-
tion information to the receiving host.The receiving
host can then verify that the user is validated for
access to its system.This operation may be trans-
parent to the user. See also single sign-on and
Kerberos.
trusted path mechanism by which a person at a terminal
can communicate directly with the TCB.This
mechanism can only be activated by the person or
the TCB and cannot be imitated by untrusted soft-
ware.
trusted process process whose incorrect or malicious exe-
cution is capable of violating system security policy
trusted software software portion of the TCB
TSR “Terminate and Stay Resident.” See resident.
tunnelling techniques that involve the tracing of the
system interrupts to the final programming. Used by
both viral and antiviral programs to detect or disable
opposing programs.
tunnelling router router or system capable of routing
traffic by encapsulating it for transmission across an
untrusted network, or across a network using a dif-
ferent communications protocol. See also virtual pri-
vate network.
two-factor authentication authentication based on at least
two of the three major types of authentication:
something a user knows, is, or has.To access a
system, the user must demonstrate both factors.
190
Dictionary of Information Security

U
untrusted process process that has not been evaluated or
examined for adherence to the security policy. It may
include incorrect or malicious code that attempts to
circumvent the security mechanisms.
user person or process accessing a system by direct or indi-
rect connections. Considered by many experts to be
the entity responsible for the greatest range of secu-
rity problems.
user ID unique symbol or character string that is used by a
system to identify a specific user
user profile patterns of a user’s activity that can be used to
detect changes in normal routines 
usual suspect the term is, as the saying has it,“known to
the police,” and is probably most famous from the
1942 version of Casablanca, in which Capt. Renault
(Claude Rains) keeps repeating it. It has a particular
meaning for those who are members of the
CISSPforum mailing list, and is associated with mis-
takenly replying to mailing lists, rather than privately
forwarding comments. However, it has greatest
application in something of a warning during inves-
tigations. Concentrating, and sometimes fixating, on
those we consider guilty can prejudice the inquiry,
and, should we manage to convince ourselves that a
“usual suspect” is guilty, we are at risk of letting the
real culprit go free, and continue to attack. (In this
regard, we come full circle back to Casablanca: Capt.
Renault uses the phrase, at the end of the movie, to
distract the chase from himself and Rick, played by
Humphrey Bogart.) 

V
vaccine program or code module that is attached, or
attaches itself, to an executable program to perform
a change detection check and warn if there have been
any changes. Sometimes used as an antiviral, and
sometimes simply to check for program corruption.
The term “vaccine” is poorly defined, and infre-
quently used.
vampire data data the suspect in a case had thought dead,
but was recovered in a computer forensics or digital
forensics process to come back and bite them on the
neck. (OK, it’s slang, and it doesn’t really have a
meaning, but it’s too cute to leave out.) 
vampire tap means of tapping into coaxial (network)
cable, by drilling through the layers of insulation and
outer conductor, and attaching conductors to both
the inner and outer conductors of the cable.This
was actually the normal means of attaching connec-
tions to coaxial network cable.With the prevalence
of twisted pair cabling, the technology is not used
much any more.A similar operation can be per-
formed on twisted pair cable, although the “vampire
tap” term is generally not used in that regard.
variant modified version of a virus. Usually produced on
purpose by the virus author or another person
amending the virus code. If changes to the original
are small, most antivirus products will also detect
variants. However, if the changes are large, the
variant may go undetected by anti-virus software.

verification process of comparing two levels of system
specification for proper correspondence (e.g., security
policy model with top-level specification, top-level
specification with source code, or source code with
object code).This process may or may not be auto-
mated.
viral having the features of a virus, particularly self-
reproduction 
virtual 
If it’s     there and you can   see it, it’s real
If it’s     there and you can’t see it, it’s transparent
If it’s not there and you can   see it, it’s virtual
If it’s not there and you can’t see it, it’s gone
virtual memory memory as it appears to the operating
programs running in the CPU; this memory may
appear smaller, equal to, or larger than the real
memory present in the system. Currently, the most
frequent usage of the term is in regard to the prac-
tice of swapping or paging sections of physical
memory to storage in disk, to make the memory
space appear to be larger.
virtual private network (VPN) restricted-use, logical
(that is, artificial or simulated) computer network
that is constructed from the system resources of a
relatively public, physical network (such as the
Internet or the Public Switched Telephone
Network—PSTN), often by using encryption (located
at hosts or gateways), and often by tunnelling links of
Dictionary of Information Security
193

the virtual network across the real network. Note
that a VPN has more to do with network manage-
ment than confidentiality: encryption is not required
for a VPN.
virus self-replicating and propagating program, usually
operating with some form of input from the user,
although generally the user is unaware of the intent
of the virus. Often considered a self-propagating
trojan horse, composed of a mission component, a
trigger component, and a self-propagating compo-
nent.A final definition has not yet been agreed
upon by all researchers.A common definition is,“a
program that modifies other programs to contain a
possibly altered version of itself.”This definition is
generally attributed to Fred Cohen, although Dr.
Cohen’s actual definition is in mathematical form.
Another possible definition is,“an entity that uses
the resources of the host (system or computer) to
reproduce itself and spread, without informed oper-
ator action.”
virus hoax see hoax
vulnerability weakness in system security procedures,
system design, implementation, internal controls, and
so forth that could be exploited to violate system
security policy; the possibility of an exploit or exposure
to a threat, specific to a given platform 
vulnerability analysis systematic examination of systems
to determine the adequacy of security measures,
identify security deficiencies, and provide data from
which to predict the effectiveness of proposed secu-
rity measures 
194
Dictionary of Information Security

vulnerability assessment measurement of vulnerability that
includes the susceptibility of a particular system to a
specific attack and the opportunities available to a
threat agent to mount that attack 
vx abbreviated reference to the “Virus eXchange” commu-
nity; those people who consider it proper and right
to write, share, and release viral programs, including
those with damaging payloads. Originated by Sarah
Gordon who has done extensive studies of the virus
exchange and security breaking community and has
an aversion to using the shift key.
Dictionary of Information Security
195

W
wabbit (term almost certainly derived from Elmer Fudd’s
repeated line,“You wascawwy wabbit!” in the
Looney Tunes cartoon series) mythical program
reported, circa 1978, on a System/360 computer.
The concept may have descended from a program
called RABBITS reported from 1969 on a
Burroughs 55000 at the University of Washington
Computer Center.The program would allegedly
make two copies of itself every time it was run,
eventually crashing the system. (The existence of the
two reported programs has not been confirmed.)
See rabbit.
waiver permission to operate while not in compliance.
Depending on who does the permitting, and what
you aren’t complying with, lawyers may salivate
when this happens.
walk traversal of a data structure, especially an array or
linked-list data structure in memory. In forensic pro-
gramming, it is common to “walk the code” looking
for modules, jumps, and operations: in computer foren-
sics, frequently a utility will “walk the disk” checking
for lost or apparently invalid pointers to data.
(Walking the disk should not be confused with
“walking drives,” which was the practice of estab-
lishing a resonant frequency for moving [large] drive
heads in old [large] disk drives, thus causing the
drives to incrementally move across the floor.) 
wannabe individual who “wants to be” accorded a higher
status than he or she actually holds or rates.

Frequently seen in areas of the blackhat communi-
ties, where warez d00dz wannabe virus writers, virus
writers wannabe script kiddiez, script kiddiez
wannabe crackers, and crackers wannabe hackers.
warchalking similar to wardriving, warchalking generally
involves walking around with a portable computer
and wireless card.When a network is detected, a
chalk mark is made on a wall or sidewalk indicating
the existence of the network and the level of secu-
rity. Despite the popularity of references to war-
chalking, the actual practice appears to be extremely
limited. (Initially, in fact, the practice of warchalking
was suggested for those wanting to make their own
wireless network connections accessible to others.) 
wardialling using a program to repeatedly dial numbers,
usually in a sequential range, to determine which
ones responded with modem tones. Generally of
greater importance in the days when modems were
the primary means of remote communications with
computers. Modems are still generally left unsecured
or poorly secured.
wardriving driving around an area (generally a business or
light industrial area) with a portable computer
(laptop or handheld) equipped with a wireless net-
work card and detecting wireless network access
points. Usually, wardriving systems are also equipped
with GPS capability and software such as
NetStumbler to determine security or encryption
levels.A number of groups use collected informa-
tion to produce maps showing accessible networks
and their level of security.
Dictionary of Information Security
197

warez cracked versions of commercial software from which
copy protection has been removed.Those who do
the stripping of copy protection are generally
known as crackers or warez d00dz, although the
“warez d00dz” term also refers to those who only
trade pirated software.
warhead see payload
web bug link on a given Web page or embedded in an
email message that contains a reference and connec-
tion to a different Web site and therefore, unknown
to the user, passes a call, and information, to a
remote site. Most commonly, a web bug is either
invisible or unnoticeable (typically it is one pixel in
size) in order not to alert the user to its presence.
See also adware, cookie, and spyware.
web of trust PKI (Public Key Infrastructure) technique
used in PGP for building a file of validated public
keys by making personal judgments about being able
to trust certain people to be properly vouching for
the certified keys of other people 
wild, in the see in the wild
Wild, In the (ItW) specific reference to those viruses for-
mally mentioned in the WildList.The capitalization
is in distinction to viruses found in the wild but not
mentioned in the WildList.
Windows Registry database holding system startup, con-
figuration, security, and file association information
in Microsoft Windows 9x, Me, NT, and 2000 sys-
tems.This is the central repository of all such infor-
mation, replacing the old CONFIG.SYS,
198
Dictionary of Information Security

AUTOEXEC.BAT, and .INI files (although those
files do still exist, and are sometimes used).The
Registry is an enormous object, often holding
megabytes of data, and difficult to search. It is now
being used to start viruses at boot time, without
placing the viruses in identifiable startup directories.
Viruses affecting the Registry can be seen as system
infectors, although changing the Registry is much
easier than the programming the old MS-DOS
system infectors had to use.
Windows Script Host (WSH) language similar to Visual
Basic for Application (VBA) and Visual Basic Script
(VBScript) that will run scripts on certain Windows
systems.The LoveLetter virus was a Windows script
virus and used WSH.
Wintel see ISA
whitehat in an attempt to avoid debates about “good”
hackers versus “bad” hackers versus crackers versus
phone phreaks versus virus writers versus vxers, the
security community has taken to describing those
who attempt to explore security solely from the
perspective of defence as the “white hats.”The term
originates from old American western genre movies
where the “good guys” always wore white hats. See
also blackhat.
work-around means of avoiding a problem or security
issue, usually by avoiding using the resource known
to have a vulnerability.Work-arounds are usually tem-
porary fixes. Over-reliance on work-arounds can be
dangerous, as they are generally informal, undocu-
mented, and may not be communicated to workers
using the system subsequently.
Dictionary of Information Security
199

work factor estimate of the effort or time needed by a
potential penetrator with specified expertise and
resources to overcome a protective measure. Often
applied to cryptanalysis.
worm self-reproducing program that is distinguished from
a virus by copying itself without being attached to a
program file, or spreads over computer networks,
particularly via email. Originally used (by John
Shoch and Jon Hupp of the Xerox Palo Alto
Research Center) to specify a distributed type of
network program with many segments.
Worm “the” worm, the Internet/Morris/UNIX Worm of
November 1988. See also Code Red, Hybris, Interent
Worm, latency, Loveletter, malware, Nimda, and tarpit.
write fundamental operation that results only in the flow
of information from a subject to an object
write access permission to write to an object
200
Dictionary of Information Security

X
XOR exclusive OR.A Boolean operation that yields true
only if one of its operands is true and the other is
false. If both operands are the same (either true or
false), the operation yields false. Because the opera-
tion is bitwise, and reversed if performed twice with
the same operand, XOR is frequently used for
simple encryption, or as a part of encryption
processes.

Y
Y2K reference to the situation when the year changed
from 1999 to 2000, and the concern that time-
sensitive systems using two-digit year date fields
would fail, or behave unpredictably, when that hap-
pened.Aside from the massive exercise in retrofitting
systems, a major security concern was that the
urgent redevelopment and patching of large num-
bers of systems would create loopholes and vulnera-
bilities. It should be noted that, due to the patching
practice known as windowing, an unknown number
of systems may still be vulnerable to failure as they
reach the end of their windowing range.

Z
zero day originally, the term [certain period] vulnerability
or exploit indicated relative ease of exploitation of
vulnerabilities or activity on the part of the blackhat
community: a “zero day” exploit was the theoretical
limit of vulnerability. However, recently the media
has used it in regard to software or video piracy,
generic antivirus detection, reward programs for
finding vulnerabilities, or even little known system
vulnerabilities or dangerous practices.Therefore, the
term has now been diluted to the point where it is
unlikely to be a useful reference, and may engender
confusion.
zerofill to fill unused storage locations with the value zero,
or representation of the character denoting it.Also
sometimes zeroize. See also DEADBEEF.
zine electronically distributed newsletter or magazine.The
term is now widely used for all kinds of electronic
journals, but initially referred to periodic compila-
tions of security breaking techniques distributed by
blackhat groups.
zombie specialized type of backdoor or remote access pro-
gram designed as the agent, or client (middle layer)
component of a DDoS (Distributed Denial of
Service) network. Once a zombie is installed on a
computer, it identifies itself to a master computer,
and then waits for instructions from the master
computer. Upon receipt of instructions from the
Dictionary of Information Security
203

master computer, a number of zombie machines will
send attack packets to a target computer. Zombie
may refer to the control program run to control one
of the middle layer computers, or to a computer so
controlled. See also backdoor, DDoS, and RAT.
zoo jargon reference to a set of virus programs of known
characteristics used to test antiviral software 
204
Dictionary of Information Security

References
The terms included in this dictionary come from the vast ﬁeld
of security literature.There are, of course, works in any ﬁeld that
are more valuable or less so. I have, over a number of years,
maintained a Web page for the use of CISSP candidates, citing
recommended books in the particular domains of security. It is
available at http://victoria.tc.ca/techrev/mnbksccd.htm (again,
thanks to Gary and Mae Shearman).
In terms of breadth of scope, and currency of information,
no single source can compare with the Information Security
Management Handbook edited by Hal Tipton and Micki Krause.
It is best to think of the ISMH not as a single book as such,
since new editions and volumes come out regularly.Think of it
as a fat, hardcover, expensive, but very valuable annual 
periodical.
I have noted other security dictionaries and glossaries in the
Preface.There are additional dictionaries, in diverse ﬁelds of
technology, which may be helpful. I’ve maintained a list of these
at http://victoria.tc.ca/techrev/mnbkdc.htm.
As noted, communications has almost an embarrassment of
riches in the number of dictionaries. Probably the most widely
used and regarded is Newton’s Telecom Dictionary, which has deﬁ-
nitely been an inspiration for what I would like to do with this
one. (Harry publishes new versions annually, and frequently
205
Appendix A

more often.)  Another valuable reference that straddles the ency-
clopedia/dictionary line is the McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of
Networking and Telecommunications by Tom Sheldon.The huge
Communications Standard Dictionary by Martin H.Weik has an
enormous number of entries, is good in engineering and the
military, although it has gaps elsewhere, particularly in regard to
the Internet and recent technologies. Julie Petersen’s Data and
Telecommunications Dictionary is particularly interesting as a histor-
ical and illustrative reference.
For general computer terminology, Mitchell Shnier’s
Computer Dictionary has certain holes, but is one of only two
serious contenders.We are used to having Microsoft view the
world in an isolated and idiosyncratic way, but the Microsoft Press
Computer Dictionary is surprisingly careful and broadly based.
Then there are, well,“other” dictionaries.The ultimate is, of
course, the Jargon File (use your favorite search engine to ﬁnd
the latest version online), which has been published by MIT
Press as The New Hacker’s Dictionary, and is an excellent intro-
duction to hacker language and culture and society. (The Jargon
File has been another major inﬂuence as I’ve been writing this
dictionary.) The Computer Contradictionary by Stan Kelly-Bootle
is a hilarious look at the jargon of the so-called “management”
of information systems.
www.syngress.com
206
Foreword

Appendix B
The Lagos Creeper Box
Stealing the Network: How to Own a Continent is fiction
(more a series of short stories or scenarios than a novel), but the
authors intend the book to be taken as a serious addition to secu-
rity literature. In Chapter 2 the technical aspects are fairly
detailed and suitably realistic. (I can personally vouch for the fact
that the description of the physical attributes of that specific hotel
are bang on, although the ... umm ... social amenities 
are not.)  
As with any volume where multiple authors work on separate
chapters, the quality of the writing varies. Overall, most of the
book is readable as fiction, although it may not qualify as thriller
level plotting.
This book is certainly interesting enough (albeit rather dis-
jointed) as fiction, and technical enough for everyone tired of the
usual Hollywood view of computers.The security risks noted are
real, and therefore a read through the book could be used to alert
non-specialists to a number of security issues and vulnerabilities. I
enjoyed it and I think it's got a place in a careful security 
awareness program.—Rob Slade

Nigeria was a dump. Charlos now understood why nobody wanted
to work there. It’s Africa like you see it on CNN.And yet this was
the country that had the largest oil reserve on the continent.
Military rule for the past 30 years ensured that the money ended
up mostly in some dictator’s pocket and not on the streets where it
belonged.
When Charlos got off the plane it was 00h30.The air was still
sticky and hot, but unlike Miami, it smelled of rotten food. Charlos
was used to it—it’s the same smell you find in tropical regions like
Kuala Lumpur, Brazil, and Jakarta. He has been to many such
places, usually to perform the same type of function he was con-
tracted to do here. He was tired, tired to the bone.The kind of
tired that you get from sleeping too little for too long. How did he
get himself in this rat hole of a place? 
Laura19
It all started five years ago—he was working for an IT security
development house, in charge of providing the glue between the
developers and project management teams.As a side line “hobby”
to keep the boredom at bay, he slowly became involved in the
hacking scene—writing his own code, tinkering with code he
copied from projects at work, hanging out in the right IRC chan-
nels, and participating on covert mailing lists. Life was peachy—
with no real concern over who he annoyed with his hacking
efforts, he owned systems on a regular basis.
The problems began when he read the mail of girl he met on
IRC who called herself Laura19. She studied computer science at
the University of Sussen; the same university where he studied
electronic engineering. He had seen her on campus and from day
one had a thing for her. He suspected that she disliked him, some-
thing that irritated him immensely. Having had access to the pass-
word file on one of the university’s main UNIX machines, he put
his machine to the task of cracking her password. It took a while,
but after a couple of days Jack the Ripper struck gold - he had it.
He proceeded to log in to the host with her password and page
through her e-mail. It was seriously spicy—she was having rela-
tionships with two students at the same time and the e-mails they

exchanged were hectically sexually charged. One night on IRC,
Laura19 was dissing him in the public channel again. He had a
couple of beers, was tired and depressed, and wasn’t in the mood
for getting his ego trampled on again. It was time for revenge. He
opened her mailbox and started copy-and-pasting her mail to the
public channel.After every paragraph he would add some cheesy
comments.
In the end it was she who had the last laugh.The short ver-
sion of events was this—Laura19 had a nervous breakdown. She
also had very rich (and overly protective) parents. Her dad blamed
her nervous breakdown (with good reason) on Charlos and his
IRC session, and dragged him to court.The court threw out the
case, but Charlos lost his job, and the local newspaper (where her
mom worked) had a field day with the story. Now nobody would
touch him—he applied for several jobs but as soon as potential
employers recognized his name they would suddenly lose interest.
To top it off his girlfriend read the newspaper article and
promptly dumped him.
In those days he lived off the money he had accumulated
during the previous years. He rented a small flat in a seedy part of
town, ate junk food, drank black tea (his milk never lasted since he
didn’t have a fridge), and buried himself in his hobby. He cancelled
his normal telephone line and his mobile phone contract because
the only people he cared to talk to were online and not IRL. He
lost interest in anything outside of his Internet connection.When
his cash flow got tight he sold his TV and his car —he could walk
to the McDonalds and supermarket. In real life he wasn’t going
anywhere. He told his family that he was working on a project for
Microtech in the East, and mailed them every month from a hot-
mail address.When his friends (now quite worried) would come
over to his flat he would pretend not to be there. Life continued
like this for nearly 18 months.Then his cash ran out, the space
heater ran out of diesel, and he caught bronchitis.
He was hospitalized and nearly died.When he recovered he
had a huge amount of debt. He couldn’t sell anything else simply
because he didn’t have anything else to sell.And there wasn’t any
money coming in.The turning point in his life came when he was
asked by someone on IRC if he could “recover” a password.The
The Lagos Creeper Box • Appendix B
209

210
Dictionary of Information Security
person had a Microsoft Word file that was password protected and
“lost” the password. Charlos normally would do it for free but he
was pressed for cash and asked the person $350 to crack the pass-
word.To his total surprise the stranger agreed.
He used $50 for food and paid the rest to his debtors. It was
the fastest $350 he made in last year and a half.And so it turned
out that he registered a hushmail account and posted “will break
any system—price negotiable” on all the mailing lists where he
hung out.There was a flurry of responses, most of them copied to
the mailing list, most of them people telling him how ridiculous he
was. But two days later he received e-mail from a woman calling
herself SuzieQ.The e-mail asked if he could obtain access to a
mailbox. It was written in clear wording, and looked as if it was
written by a person outside of the hacking scene. It also had a tele-
phone number in the signature.
Charlos phoned the number from a payphone.When a woman
answered the phone he asked for Suzie.“Suzie” said that she heard
about his services from a friend; she offered $3000 if he could get
access to a mailbox located at a little known ISP in Miami. She
clearly wasn’t technical—if he could get access to the mailbox, she
wanted him to print out all the mail and fax it to her. Upon
receiving the first page she would verify that it held valid content
and wire half of the funds.After receiving the rest of the pages she
would wire the rest. Charlos agreed—of course he agreed.
His friends at the telephone company told him that the fax
number she gave him belonged to a company called FreeSpeak in
Miami. Browsing the FreeSpeak Web site, Charlos found a Suzanne
Conzales working in the HR department.The e-mail address he
had received from Suzie was antonio.c@lantic.com. Her husband?
Perhaps her brother or father? Looking it up, he found Atlantic was
a small ISP with a shoddy Web site that seems to specialize in dial-
up accounts. It was run by a crowd that was clearly not very secu-
rity aware. Linked from the main page was a site where you could
recover your dial-up password if you could answer some personal
questions.
Charlos phoned Suzie, took a chance and asked her if she
knew what her husband’s mother’s maiden name was.The shock
and confusion in her voice told him that he was right; she was

checking on her husband’s e-mail account.After getting the neces-
sary details from her he told her that she should get the wire
transfer ready and keep the fax line open.
It was easy money, like shooting fish in a barrel. Charlos was
totally amazed by the ignorance of “normal” people. He was
amazed at how easily he could obtain information, mostly without
any technical “l33tness.” Life was getting better; he paid off his
debt, was eating well again, and was doing ultimately exciting
work. Life was peachy; that is, until Antonio Conzales’s goons
showed up one day on his doorstep and proceeded to knock him
unconscious.
Events and timelines quickly blurred as he awoke to find him-
self on a yacht, looking up at the barrel of a 9mm pistol.
“So kid, you like spying on people?” the voice said above him.
Charlos’ mind was rolling, trying to see through the fog of a
concussion and blinding headache to the shadow of a man standing
before him. He quickly tried to evaluate his situation. He didn’t
know where he was, or who held the gun, but he did know that
the 9mm was moments from going off if he didn’t do some
talking.
“Listen, I don’t know who you are, man.”
“My name is Antonio Conzales, you hacked into my e-mail,
and I don’t take too kindly to that as you can see. Normally you
would be dead already, but I wanted to make sure it was my wife
that hired you and not anyone else.”
It spun back to Charlos quickly. He tried to look past the
muzzle of the gun to the man that was holding it. Making sure to
steady his voice, he said,
“Yeah, just your wife, I don’t know what you’re about, I didn’t
see anything, I was just hired to deliver some information to her.”
Charlos could see Antonio was more than just a little angry at
him for breaking into his mailbox, and angry at his wife for hiring
Charlos to do just that.Antonio seemed to be the type of guy who
was very sensitive about his privacy, and as Charlos began to find
out, he had good reason.
“Well, that’s good to know.” He said as the gun slowly lowered,
“But I have a couple more questions I want to ask you before we
decide what to do with you.”
The Lagos Creeper Box • Appendix B
211

Antonio Conzales turned out to be into high tech, busty
blondes, killing people and throwing them off his boat, and smug-
gling huge amounts of cocaine into America.The porn (featuring
said busty blondes) that he was posting to various mailing lists in
fact contained stego-encoded messages to his couriers throughout
the country. Naturally paranoid when Charlos hacked into his
business, he was also keen to pick up on a potential money-maker
when he saw one.Antonio was a dirty player, but not stupid; he
saw that Charlos had a talent that could be exploited and he was in
a situation where he couldn’t say no.
He grilled Charlos on the extent of his hacking capabilities
before offering him an ultimatum. For having stuck his nose where
it didn’t belong, Charlos could either work for him, or “sleep with
the fishes.” For Charlos, the choice was simple: live another day.
Antonio became Charlos’s agent after he consulted for him on
his network security and set up an international network between
various dealers, all communicated via images of naked women.
Antonio quickly found himself in a new role as information
broker, taking a 20 percent cut of his projects.With Antonio’s
extensive network of contacts, many in shady places, Charlos
would get to do all the fun work and take 80 percent of the con-
tract value.
Over the years Charlos got tired of the whole hacking scene—
the geeks and nerds that call themselves hackers would spend
months trying to bypass a firewall, get RAS credentials, or deliver a
logic bomb via e-mail. He still had his hacking skill set but now his
focus was more on getting the job done on time and less on the
technical thrill of a perfectly cool hack. He found that hacking with
real criminal intent was much more effective if you walk into a cor-
poration with a suit and tie, sit down at an unoccupied cubicle, plug
in a notebook, and walk out without a trace.And going physical
always had that extra rush—he pushed the envelope to the point of
having technical staff log him into their routers and security staff
opening server closets.
Once inside he would map the network via SNMP (as most
companies never set community strings on internal routers) and
use his gentle asyncro portscanner to find boxes open on juicy
ports such as 1433 (Microsoft SQL) or 139/445 (Microsoft RPC).
212
Dictionary of Information Security

Using standard ARP cache poisoning he would try to sniff creden-
tials going to POP3/IMAP servers, hashes of credentials to domain
controllers, or even just good old Telnet passwords going in the
clear. Most companies never patch their internal boxes; in his
toolbox Charlos would have a bunch of industrial strength exploits.
Armed with a network map, some credentials, and this toolbox he
walked out of many large corporations with minutes of meetings,
budget spreadsheets, confidential e-mails, and in the case of the job
in Stockholm, even source code.Although such a semi-physical
attack worked wonders, he still saw the merits in a methodical,
covert approach. In fact, his current project started a month ago,
back in the United States.
NOC NOC, Who’s There?
The contract arrived from Antonio through the usual channels—a
long-legged blonde with a tattoo of a spider on her hip.The job
was a big one, and required traveling to Nigeria.The target was
Paul Meyer, security officer for the NOC (Nigerian Oil
Company), the largest exporter of crude oil in Nigeria.The
assignment called for Charlos to obtain Meyer’s credentials and a
reliable channel to the NOC internal network.As a secondary
objective, any information found on Meyer’s hard drive was con-
sidered a bonus, which meant a bonus for Charlos. In other proj-
ects Charlos usually found out half-way through why the target
was of importance: a political figure, the CFO of a company, a
military leader, and so on.This one was straightforward; whoever
employed him wanted unlimited access to NOC’s network.Their
motive for having access to NOC’s network, however, was still a
mystery.
As usual, Charlos started his project by Googling for Paul
Meyer. Meyer appeared to be a South African contractor working
in Nigeria for NOC. He was part of SALUG, the South African
Linux user group. He made several posts about kernel modifica-
tions and firewall rule base management. From his posts Charlos
figured that Meyer was no dummy, and more important, security
aware. Meyer also made some posts from his NOC e-mail address.
These were more subdued; he clearly didn’t want to give away too
The Lagos Creeper Box • Appendix B
213

much about the infrastructure or technologies of NOC. Meyer
appeared to be an online-type person, like most good security
officers; he frequently made posts, was quoted on chat rooms, and
even had his own homepage.This was all good news for
Charlos—the more he could learn from his target, the better.
Owning Meyer online clearly would not work. From his posts
Charlos could deduce that the man probably could not be conned
into running a Trojan, had his personal machine neatly firewalled,
and took care to install the most recent service packs. He also fig-
ured that Meyer’s PC was running a particular flavor of UNIX.
Charlos wondered if his employers went down the same route, that
NOC itself was a heavily fortified network and that they couldn’t
get to Meyer in the usual ways. Perhaps they hit a brick wall trying
to get into NOC from the Internet, then targeted Meyer only to
find out that he couldn’t be taken.Which would explain why he
was contacted—to go do the meat thing in Nigeria.Though
Antonio usually provided interesting work it seldom required an
elegant hack.
A big break for Charlos was finding out that Paul Meyer used
MSN, probably to communicate with his friends and family back
in South Africa. MSN’s search function had proved to be a good
source of intelligence before. If he could convince Meyer to add
him as a contact he could possibly find a pattern in his online
behavior, maybe even social engineer some details of the NOC
network. Charlos started looking for people that Meyer spoke to in
his online capacity. Jacob Verhoef was one of these people. Meyer
frequently responded to Verhoef’s posts, and some additional
Googling proved that these two studied together. He created the e-
mail address with as much detail as possible, to convince Meyer it
belonged to his friend Jacob, hoping that Meyer automatically
would assume it was the real Verhoef.What were the chances that
Meyer and Verhoef have been talking online already? It was a
chance he had to take. Charlos registered a hotmail account:
jacob.verhoef1@hotmail.com. He filled in all the registration forms
as accurately as possible.
It worked—Meyer allowed him to be added as a contact and
“Jacob Verhoef” had some interesting chats with him.Whenever
Meyer starting referring to their varsity days,“Verhoef” became
214
Appendix B • The Lagos Creeper Box

vague and switched his status to offline, blaming South African
Telkom for their poor service when he went back online.A bigger
challenge (that Charlos never thought about) was the language; it
turned out that both Meyer and Verhoef spoke Afrikaans.When
Meyer typed in Afrikaans, Charlos would always respond in
English, and soon Meyer would follow suit.They didn’t speak too
much; whenever Charlos steered the conversation to the NOC’s
network, Meyer just sidestepped it. But this was enough for
Charlos—he could monitor exactly when Meyer was at work and
at home. His target followed a strict routine—his status changed
from Away to Online from about 7h00 in the morning, there was a
break from about 7h50 to 8h30 (while he was traveling to work,
which, thanks to traffic in Lagos was typically a long commute), he
stayed online most of the day until exactly 17h00, and then would
head back home, being online from 20h00 to around midnight.
Weekends were different, with no apparent pattern.
And so he found himself at passport control at Lagos
International Airport. He was there as a computer forensic expert
working on a case for the First Standard National Bank of Nigeria
(SNBN)—though SNBN did not really exist. Having traded some
personal details of wealthy business men in Lisbon (which was
“bonus” material from another project) with a group of 419 scam-
mers he now had all the right papers. Charlos knew that sticking
close to the story was essential. If they opened his notebook bag
and found his equipment it would be difficult to explain; that is,
unless he was a computer forensic expert on a job for SNBN.
He took a taxi to Hotel Le Meridian. Everything in Lagos was
dirty and broken. Even with its four stars and a price tag of $300
per night, the hotel’s water had the same color as Dr. Pepper.You
couldn’t even brush your teeth in this water let alone drink it. He
went down to the bar area, and had a Star Beer and chili chicken
pizza. It was not long before the prostitutes hanging around made
their way to him. He was blunt but polite with them—he was in
no mood for a dose of exotic STDs, and besides, he had work to
do the next morning.
Lagos is rotten with wireless communication systems—satellite,
WiFi, microwave—you name it. Since the decay of public services,
the only way to communicate fairly reliably with the outside was
The Lagos Creeper Box • Appendix B
215

via wireless systems. Charlos decided to take a cab to the NOC’s
compound—every taxi driver knows the exact location of these
compounds.The compounds are the retreats for foreign nationals
working in Lagos—the only way that a company can get contrac-
tors to work for them is to place them securely in a compound.
There they have access to running water, Internet connectivity,
personal drivers, and internal canteens.“It’s a bit like an internal
network,” Charlos thought. Once inside the gates of the compound
you are trusted, especially if you are white and have a foreign
accent.
Once inside the taxi he booted his notebook and started
NetStumbler.Along the way to the compound Charlos stumbled
across many networks, most of them without any type of encryp-
tion. He asked the driver how far away they were from the NOC
compound.When they were about ten minutes from the com-
pound, Charlos told the driver to stop. He was DHCP-ed into the
internal network of a bank, with unhindered access to the Internet.
He logged into MSN as Jacob Verhoef. Meyer was logged in. It was
10 A.M.—chances were good that he was at work. He told the
driver to continue.
Doing the Meat Thing
Security at the main gate of the compound was probably as good
as physical security could be in Nigeria—a guard armed with an
AK47 and a logbook in a hut.As the taxi stopped, Charlos rolled
down his window. Charlos was dressed in a white flannel shirt, dark
brown pants, and sandals. He hid the notebook under the seat and
smiled at the security guard.“Hi, my name is Robert Redford. I
came here to visit Paul Meyer; he works for the NOC.”
“Did you make an appointment?”
Charlos didn’t expect this but kept his cool.“I am in Lagos for
business. Paul is an old friend of mine; we used to study together...”
“Sorry sir, without an appointment you cannot pass.”
Charlos reached for his pocket and pulled out a couple of 100
Naira bills.“Please,” he said, holding out the notes,“I am only here
today.Tomorrow I fly back again.”The guard eagerly took the
money.“Do you know which room I could find him?” Charlos
216
Appendix B • The Lagos Creeper Box

pushed his luck. But the guard did not know and Charlos’s taxi
rolled into the compound.
He walked toward what appeared to be the entertainment
area—a big screen TV tuned to some sports channel was situated in
the corner.There was a Sony PlayStation II hooked up to the TV
and a stack of pirated DVDs lying on a coffee table. On the couch
a man was sleeping; his forehead was covered in sweat and Charlos
figured he was sweating out a malaria attack. Charlos woke him up.
“Do you know where I can find Paul Meyer?”
“He’s not here, he’s at work, where else?!” the man grunted.
He spoke with a thick Australian accent and it was clear that he
was in pain and annoyed that someone woke him from his feverish
dreams.
Charlos pushed on,“I’m an old friend of his, he said to meet
me here at 10:30.”
“Room 216, west wing.”
The door at Meyer’s flat was locked, and there was no key-
hole—a numeric keypad was installed. Probably because of the
high volume of contractors that stay for only a month, pack up
their stuff and leave at night, Charlos thought. Charlos was feeling
a bit disappointed that he never asked Meyer about access to his
room. He slipped with that little detail. His lock picking equip-
ment was rendered useless. He tried 1234 as a PIN; it didn’t work.
He tried 0000; it didn’t work either. Charlos remembered from his
research that Meyer’s birthday was the 14th of May and he was 31
years old. He remembered it because Meyer shared his birthday
with Charlos’s ex-wife. He tried 1405; no luck. 0514 didn’t work.
Finally, Charlos tried 1973 and he could hear the door click open.
He was lucky this time.
Once inside the room Charlos was in known territory. He
gently closed the door behind him, put on his surgical gloves, and
took out his palm-sized digital camera. He took a few pictures of
the room.This served two purposes: to ensure he left everything
exactly the way it was when he walked into the room, and as addi-
tional proof to his employers that he had indeed reached his target.
The place was a mess of computer equipment; Charlos smiled.The
less organized, the less chance of Meyer finding anything out of
place. Meyer’s flat had a double bed, a walk-in kitchenette, bath-
The Lagos Creeper Box • Appendix B
217

room, and living area.The living area had been transformed into an
office/lab environment.There were several Ethernet cables hanging
from the table,WiFi APs, computers without their covers, and
audio equipment.These were decorated with coffee mugs, empty
soft drink cans, and snubbed out cigarette butts—one or two days’
worth, not more.“My kind of place,” Charlos muttered. He picked
up the telephone in Meyer’s room and phoned his prepaid cell
phone (it was a habit of his to get his target’s phone number).
Charlos started looking around for Meyer’s main computer. In the
center of the table were two 17” flat panels, an optical trackball
mouse, and a keyboard. No computer.A Sun Sparc 10 sat perched
on the floor, without a screen, but with a keyboard on top of it.
Then he saw it—a Dell docking station attached to the main key-
board, and a clear open space on the table where the notebook
must be. Meyer apparently took his notebook with him to work
and brought it back here.This meant complications for Charlos. He
could bug the keyboard here in the flat, but it meant missing out
on his bonus, the files on Meyer’s machine. Did Meyer even con-
nect to the NOC network from home? Would he be able to steal
credentials to the NOC network from here? Charlos started by
installing the keystroke logger first.
He gently opened the keyboard with his electric screwdriver.
When you’ve done this hundreds of times it becomes second
nature.The keyboard’s coiled wire plugged into the keyboard via a
small white clip.The keyboard logger chip that Charlos used had
two white clips on it, a male and a female.The chip clips in where
the keyboard normally plugs in, and the coiled cabled plugs into
the chip. Finally, the chip secures neatly to the keyboard’s plastic
cover with some double-sided tape. Keyboard logger manufacturers
quickly discovered that the speed at which a device can be com-
missioned was a major selling point. Gone were the days of cutting
wires and struggling with a soldering iron.
Charlos put the beige-colored keyboard cover back on and
shook the keyboard. No rattles, no loose keys, as good as new.
Nobody would ever think the device was bugged. He plugged the
keyboard back into the docking station. In a sense he was lucky—
he didn’t have to take any chances with plugging out the keyboard
on a live machine.This sometimes required a reboot of the
218
Appendix B • The Lagos Creeper Box

machine—not a big problem in Nigeria with its unreliable power
supply.
He looked at his watch: 11h36. He still had plenty of time to
install the creeper box.The creeper box was worth its weight in
gold.A very small PC with a footprint of about 12x12x4 cm,
equipped with a single Ethernet and tri-band GSM modem, the
creeper could be installed virtually anywhere there was power,
GSM coverage, and Ethernet.Whatever the assignment, Charlos
always packed a creeper box. Once installed, the creeper would
periodically dial out via GPRS to the Internet, making it a box
that can be controlled from anywhere in the world.As soon as the
machine connected to the Internet it would SMS him its IP
number, a machine on the internal network totally under his con-
trol.The box packed all the latest exploits, tools needed to sniff the
network, inject packets, and scanners. It could be remotely booted
into a choice of either Linux or XP.
Charlos booted his notebook.The idea was to plug into the
hub and get a sense of the traffic that was floating on the network
in order to assign the creeper an IP address on Meyer’s internal
network. But something strange happened.With his notebook
booted into Windows XP it registered a wireless network.The
SSID of the network name was NOCCOMP—the NOC com-
pound.A DHCP server already assigned an IP address to his note-
book. No WEP, nothing. Charlos smiled. In fact, he laughed out
loud, added an “ipconfig /all”, and noted the IP number.
The question now was, how deep in the NOC network was
this compound wireless network? Charlos dialed into the Internet
from his GSM phone, and tried a zone transfer of the noc.co.ng
domain. It was refused. He ran his DNS brute forcer and within
five minutes saw that the server intranet-1.noc.co.ng had an IP
address of 172.16.0.7.The IP given to him by the compound’s
DHCP server was in the 10 range. Both IP numbers were assigned
to internal networks, but that meant nothing.The networks could
be totally separate or maybe filtered by a nasty firewall. Charlos ter-
minated his call and reconnected to the wireless network.Again he
received an IP address in the 10 range. His fingers trembled as he
entered “ping 172.16.0.7”.And voilà, it responded less than 100ms.
Not local, but not far away. Now for the major test:A quick
The Lagos Creeper Box • Appendix B
219

portscan would reveal if the machine was indeed filtered. Charlos
whipped up an Nmap.The results came in fast and furious:
21,80,139,443,445,1433. Default state: closed.This meant that the
server was totally open from his IP—no filtering or firewalling was
done. Charlos was tempted to take a further look at the wide-open
network, but thought otherwise. He was contracted to get Meyer’s
credentials and create a channel into the NOC network.
From his bag of tricks Charlos took a PCMCIA cradle and
unscrewed the Ethernet card from the creeper.Who needs to hook
into Meyer’s network if you have unhindered access to the NOC
internal network via the wireless network? He slid one of his
802.11b cards into the cradle and closed the creeper again.This was
just beautiful—he had GSM on the one interface,WiFi on the
other—all he needed was power. He didn’t even have to place the
box in Meyer’s room; it could be anywhere in the compound!
Meyer’s room was as good as any place; he would probably notice
the device only when he moved out of his flat. Charlos started
looking around for a good hiding place for the machine.With
trouble he moved the 2m high bookcase away from the wall. He
was indeed lucky. Behind the bookcase was a power outlet. He
gave the creeper power and set it down on top of the bookcase. He
moved the case back against the wall, and started walking around in
the room, making sure the box was not visible from any point in
the flat.While still doing so his cell phone vibrated inside his
pocket—it was the creeper reporting in over the Internet.
Before leaving the apartment, Charlos checked the pictures on
his digital camera. He moved the keyboard a few inches to the
left, not that he thought Meyer would ever notice, but he took
pride in his work. Everything had to be perfect. He checked his
watch: 12h44. He was hungry. His taxi was still waiting for him in
the parking lot. He was in time to get a Star and a chili chicken
pizza at the hotel for lunch.
Back at the hotel, Charlos had lunch and a quick nap; the jet
lag still hadn’t worn off. By the time he woke up it was 16h55 and
he had another SMS from his creeper box, faithfully checking in
every four hours and disconnecting from the Internet after five
minutes of inactivity. His next window was at around 20h40. He
should check that everything is in place. He hung around the hotel
220
Appendix B • The Lagos Creeper Box

for the next couple of hours taking a swim, going to the gym,
smoking a couple of cigarettes, watching CNN. Just after eight,
Charlos dialed up to the Internet from his GSM phone. From his
MSN window Charlos would see that Meyer was online.At 20h38
his phone signaled the awakening of the creeper again. He SSH-ed
into the box on port 9022, configured the wireless interface, and
received an IP address from the compound’s DHCP server.There
was significant lag on the line, but that was just because of his slow
9600 baud connection. It was time to conclude his little project.
Charlos fired up Tethereal on the creeper. He could see a lot of
traffic floating over the wireless network—mostly HTTP requests
to porn sites, MSN, e-mail, and some IRC. He entered into con-
versation with Paul Meyer.The idea was to see if he could see
Meyer’s traffic.Was Meyer’s little “home” network connected to the
NOC’s compound network via the same wireless network? It was
indeed.As “Jacob Verhoef” chatted to Paul Meyer, Charlos could
see the conversation on his creeper’s sniffer. Charlos remembered
the APs he saw in Paul’s place.This was good, really good.
Although Charlos didn’t own Meyer’s machine it felt like he did.
Now all he had to do was get him to log into the NOC domain,
perhaps some firewalls, a router here, a fileserver there.Although
most of the protocols are encrypted, his keystroke recorder would
record every keystroke, including usernames, passwords, and so on.
It didn’t happen that night or the night after that. Charlos was
getting totally sick of Stars, chili chicken pizza, playing pool at the
bar, and keeping the prostitutes at bay. His patience was running
out fast. He had credentials as domain controller to the NOC
domain, Meyer’s personal mailbox, his MSN account, and more,
but he lacked credentials to the firewalls and routers. Four days
after he planted the bugs he made a bold move—he faked a CERT
advisory to the “Full Disclosure” mailing list stating that a terrible
virus is sweeping across the world using IP protocol 82 and 89.All
Cisco routers should be patched, and administrators must make
sure they block these protocols on their firewalls. Charlos sent the
advisory at around 8:00, making sure that Meyer would receive the
alert while at home. It proved to be very effective.As a good secu-
rity officer Meyer was logging into every router and firewall in the
NOC network, blocking these protocols with ACLs on the routers
and packet filters on the firewalls.
The Lagos Creeper Box • Appendix B
221

Charlos gave his logger another week - it had the capacity for
half a million keystrokes and he was starting to ease into a routine
at the hotel. Full disclosure discredited the CERT advisory. It
became just another topic of pointless discussion, but it served its
purpose.Two weeks since he arrived in Lagos, Charlos paid Meyer’s
room another visit. Knowing the combination to his room and
using his “only here for a day” excuse with the gate guard Charlos
slipped into Paul Meyer’s room, removed the chip from his key-
board, and headed back to the hotel. He put the chip into a plastic
bag, along with the chip’s password. In another bag he inserted the
GSM SIM card, the SIM card’s PIN, and instructions on the
schedule of the creeper plus how to connect to it over the
Internet. He added some of the photos he took of Meyer’s room to
the bag. Finally, he made a list of passwords and IP numbers he
obtained from the chip on a single piece of paper.All this was
inserted into a small wooden box, wrapped in heavy duty brown
paper. He made sure he wiped his fingerprints from the bag and
the package—you can never be too sure. On his way to the airport
Charlos stopped at DHL offices and mailed the package to the
address given to him by Antonio.The name on the address was just
“Knuth,” no last name or first name.That seemed a little odd to
Charlos, but as he had found out, curiosity could get him killed, so
he just moved forward with what he was hired to do. He wiped
the prepaid cell phone clean of any fingerprints and dropped it
with the SIM card intact into the river.
And just like that… he disappeared.
To read more, visit www.syngress.com.
222
Appendix B • The Lagos Creeper Box

