www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
Mark Shuttleworth  
&                       
 Moira Cowie

© Mark Shuttleworth & Moira Cowie 1997
Cover design by Steve Fieldhouse, Oldham, UK 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record of this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data
I. Shuttleworth, Mark          II. Cowie, Moira
Dictionary of translation studies / Mark Shuttleworth & Moira Cowie
Includes bibliographical references
1. Translating and interpreting
2. Dictionaries
P306.2.S65    1997
418/.02/03  21          98-209732
First published 1997 by St. Jerome Publishing
 
Published 2014 by Routledge 
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017, USA
 
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or
by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission
in writing from the publishers.
 
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience
broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical
treatment may become necessary.
 
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In
using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of
others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
 
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors,
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products
liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products,
instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein. 
 
ISBN 13: 978-1900650-03-8 (pbk) 
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

This page intentionally left blank
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction
Translation Studies − A discipline and its terminology
The 1990s are an exciting time for Translation Studies. Worldwide, 
the study of translation-based topics is assuming an increasingly 
high profile. International conferences are being organized, PhDs 
are being written, and new MA programmes are being set up all 
the time; in Great Britain alone, for example, at the time of writing 
postgraduate programmes in various aspects of Translation Studies 
are being offered by at least ten universities. Similarly, new textbooks 
and monographs are being produced at such a rate that it is becom-
ing increasingly difficult to keep abreast of all the developments in 
thinking about translation. Furthermore, the whole endeavour has 
been characterized by a sheer determination to move forward in what 
can be meaningfully, usefully and − perhaps most importantly − non-
trivially said about the practices of translation and the characteristics 
of translations. There is a positive feeling in the air that, while our 
grasp of certain matters connected with translation remains somewhat 
hazy, we are gradually increasing our knowledge and understanding 
of this intriguing yet highly complex subject.
However, Translation Studies as a discipline is in many ways still 
in a state of flux. Translation can be seen as a point of intersection 
between many different academic subjects; it is an area in which 
many other disciplines have legitimately expressed an interest, and 
conversely one which has provided its own experts with insights 
which can profitably be shared elsewhere. There is for example a 
considerable exchange of knowledge, insights and methodologies 
between Translation Studies and fields as diverse as literary studies, 
philosophy, anthropology and linguistics; indeed, such is the level of 
intellectual cross-fertilization that some writers have suggested that 
the field should be known as an interdiscipline (see Snell-Hornby 
1991, 1994). Similarly, there are a number of equally legitimate rea-
sons which scholars have had for pursuing an interest in Translation 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
vi
Studies. For example, some are motivated by highly practical con-
cerns, such as the need to provide future translators or interpreters 
with training which is of the highest possible quality, the desire to 
raise the professional profile of translators and interpreters, or the wish 
to develop increasingly powerful machine translation systems; others, 
on the other hand, simply seek to provide ever more accurate and 
comprehensive explanations for certain phenomena in the world about 
us, without being primarily concerned with the possible practical 
applications which may accrue. Thus goals and objectives can vary 
considerably within the discipline. Of course, Translation Studies 
has been enriched by dint of possessing such a multi-faceted nature. 
However, at the same time this very nature has meant that there is 
still considerable lack of agreement on the irreducible minimum of 
concepts which should form the foundation on which to build; added 
to this is the fact that Translation Studies is a relatively new discipline 
which is in many ways still “finding its feet”. The result of such a situ-
ation has often been that different branches of the discipline have at 
times experimented with widely differing methodologies, some of 
which have been imported wholesale from other areas of academic 
study, and not all of which, unfortunately, have been entirely germane 
to the study of translation. This is perhaps particularly true of certain 
approaches adopted from various branches of linguistics.
The impact that this situation has had on the evolving terminology 
of Translation Studies has of course been considerable. Along with 
their methodologies, whole terminologies designed as the descriptive 
apparatus for completely different areas have been taken over by the 
discipline. A particular instance of this is the way in which a number 
of writers interested in investigating translation from a linguistic 
angle have in the past adopted terms coined in linguistics, often 
optimistically assuming that these terms and the notions which lie 
behind them are equally valuable in the investigation of translation. 
However, there have of course been many occasions where terms have 
been borrowed and successfully adapted to their new environment; in 
this way the terminology of Translation Studies has been enriched 
by imports from disciplines as varied as linguistics, literary theory 
and even mathematics and biology. Finally − and probably most 
significantly from the point of view of the long-term health of the 
discipline as a whole − there has also been a huge amount of “na-
tive” terminology, or in other words terms which have been coined 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
vii
in order to describe concepts and phenomena specifically relevant to 
the study of translation.
This last category of terms − which is the area on which the Dic-
tionary is almost exclusively focused − can be said to derive from a 
number of sources. First of all, many terms have been coined using 
what one might call “standard terminological morphemes”. For exam-
ple, a number of terms contain that highly productive suffix -eme (for 
example architranseme and repertoreme). Similarly, other terms have 
been formulated by using recognizable roots to create a semantically 
transparent compound (such as minimax, polysystem and translatol-
ogy). However, such coinings are probably in a minority, as most of 
the terms in the Dictionary are quite simply “normal” English words 
which are being used in a new, technical sense. Indeed, the English 
language (among others) has been rifled for ideas which might cast 
new light on some aspect of translation. Abusive translation, com-
pensation, identity, loyalty, mapping, overt translation, protest, target 
language, thick translation, third code, unbounded translation and 
voids are all examples of such terms. 
In this connection words containing the prefixes re- (e.g. recodi-
fication, recomposition, re-creation, reformulation, restatement 
and rewriting) and trans- (e.g. transcendence, transfer, transfu-
sion, transmission, transmutation and transplantation) have (quite 
understandably, given the nature of translation) found a particularly 
widespread application.
In each case, the meaning (or one of the meanings) of the word in 
question is figuratively extended so as to encompass the translational 
phenomenon to which it refers. Moreover, some of these uses (such as 
mapping, target language and transfusion) are clearly metaphorical 
in that they invite comparison between (some aspect of) translation 
and some other real-world phenomenon. Clearly, as Nida points out 
when talking about models of the translation process, our choice 
of terms must above all be dictated by “their practical usefulness 
and their explanatory power” (1969:489). Of course, most terms − 
including those listed above − succeed in reflecting important aspects 
of translation. However, there is surely a sense in which the terms 
which we choose to coin will influence the way in which we view 
translation. Many words could be used as translation terms but for 
some reason are not. Indeed it would be possible to argue that a 
large proportion of the words in any standard English dictionary are 
at least potentially applicable to translation; however, it is purely a 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
viii
matter of speculation whether Translation Studies would have been 
channelled in a significantly different direction had another, parallel 
set of terms been selected. We must therefore conclude − as Nida 
does in the case of models − that, while terms are “essential aids to 
comprehension”, they must not be allowed to “dictate the nature of 
what they are supposed to explicate” (1969:488).
However, if the terminology affects the way thinking develops, 
its precise shape can also in some ways be said to provide a kind of 
profile of the way the discipline of Translation Studies as a whole 
has been evolving. Thus, for example, a considerable number of 
terms have arisen to describe types of translation which represent 
various stages between the extremes of literal and free translation 
(e.g. interlinear translation, word-for-word translation, metaphrase, 
idiomatic translation and imitation), while a large number of 
(generally speaking more recent) terms bear witness to the remarkable 
parallel evolution of the idea of distinguishing translation according 
to the extent to which the function of the original can or needs to 
be reproduced in the translation (e.g. covert translation, secondary 
translation, observational receiver and documentary translation). In 
this way, many of the issues which have occupied centre stage in the 
discipline over the last few decades are reflected in the sheer number 
of synonymous or related terms which refer to them. Detractors 
might wish to argue that this situation represents a conceptual log-
jam in which a small number of concepts are endlessly reworded 
and relabelled without anything being brought into sharper focus. 
On the other hand, it could also be taken as evidence that people 
working in different parts of the world − and often in different 
languages and traditions − have frequently shared concerns and 
preoccupations which have been remarkably similar. While those 
who hold such a view would argue that translation is infuriatingly 
difficult to pin down with a single theory, always keeping one step 
ahead of one’s attempts to categorize it in some way, they might also 
hope to see the terminology undergo a process of crystallization as 
various clearly defined approaches and commonly accepted insights 
gradually emerge.
Aims of the Dictionary
It is against this background that the Dictionary has been written. 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
ix
For this reason one of its aims is − within the limitations of a refer-
ence work of such dimensions − to provide an overview of some of 
the issues, insights and debates in Translation Studies, inasmuch as 
these are reflected in the discipline’s terminology. What this means 
in practical terms is investigated below.
Firstly, as stated in the previous section non-Translation Studies 
terms have been kept to a minimum in order to be able to devote as 
much space as possible to terminology specific to the study of transla-
tion. This means that while such terms are sometimes given a brief 
gloss in the discussion of a translation term, they rarely themselves 
form the subject of a separate entry. 
Secondly, as a kind of “snapshot” of the discipline, the Diction-
ary tends to concentrate on work produced within the last three or 
four decades. This is not to say that nothing has been included which 
originates from before this period; however, most of the earlier works 
which have been consulted (such as Dryden, Schleiermacher and 
Walter Benjamin) are generally considered to be classics.
Thirdly, in order to give the Dictionary a broader overview it has 
been decided to include some important non-English terms. These 
have mostly been taken from works by the major scholars writing in 
French or German. However, it should be pointed out that the Diction-
ary is not intended as a multilingual glossary. It is thus not the work to 
consult if you are wanting to know the German for pseudotranslation, 
for example; similarly, very few entries are included with the main 
purpose of explaining interlingual differences in usage. The principle 
reason for discussing foreign terms is simply to provide monolingual 
readers of English with access to some of the important approaches 
which have been developed in these languages by making available 
in English some of the terms which they have generated.
The fourth point concerns the need to provide a reasonable breadth 
of perspective on terms, rather than just one point of view. Translation 
Studies contains many different and often conflicting perceptions, 
insights and beliefs, and reflecting this, the Dictionary does not 
exclusively follow one single approach. It is therefore possible to find 
statements in different entries which, taken out of context, seem to 
contradict each other. For example, terms such as exegetical fidelity 
reflect the conviction of most Bible translators that their source text 
has a single, correct meaning which has to be retrieved and conveyed, 
while in the entries on information offer or metatext, for example, one 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
x
finds the opposite view that the meaning of a text is determined not 
only by the author’s original intentions, but also to a large extent by 
the language in which it is written, the context in which it is meant to 
be read and indeed the personality, interests and beliefs of the reader 
(or, of course, translator). A further, natural consequence of trying to 
provide a balanced overview is that no particular attempt has been 
made to reconcile differing attitudes to the validity and applicability 
of such translation strategies as adaptation or literal translation. 
However, it is of course impossible to rid oneself of all bias, although 
the attempt has been made, for example, to avoid using certain terms 
and stylistic effects (such as target-oriented, traditional, pre-scientific 
and prescriptive, or unnecessary inverted commas) in such a way that 
they might appear to be conferring either strong approval or strong 
disapproval on what they are being applied to.
The Dictionary is thus designed to follow a basically uncritical, 
“hands-off” approach. In line with this, it seeks to document the 
accumulation of knowledge and insights which has occurred over 
the last few decades, rather than introduce large numbers of new 
terminological distinctions. The one main exception to this is that 
on occasion attempts have been made to suggest ways of distinguish-
ing between various terms which refer to a similar phenomenon 
(such as third code, third language and translationese), or in areas 
where some confusion seems to exist (such as the terminology used to 
describe different types of corpora). However, there will no doubt be 
those who argue with the emphases that the Dictionary contains or 
consider that a particular group of terms should not have been given 
the prominence accorded it. In response to such potential criticism, it 
should be pointed out that a work of this type inevitably represents 
a selection, and one can only hope that the criteria used are not too 
personal, partisan or slanted in any other way.
While the Dictionary offers an overview of the discipline in the 
ways described above, it is essential to remember that it is a diction-
ary of terms, not topics. Consequently the Dictionary has tended to 
draw mainly from sources which are rich in terminology, regardless of 
how well established they are considered to be. Reading the Dictionary 
the user might thus get the impression that certain very important 
figures in the discipline (such as George Steiner and Georges Mounin) 
are not properly represented. It should be stressed that this is not due 
to any lack of appreciation for the major contributions which these 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
xi
writers have made to the discipline; it is simply a result of the fact that 
their contributions, important as they are, are not terminology-rich. 
Similarly, many important topics (such as literary translation, the 
translation of names or the impossibility of translation) have not been 
included as entries in their own right, although many of the issues 
which they involve are raised in the discussion of specific terms. 
Readers can properly expect all prominent authors and major themes 
to be better represented in encyclopaedias, which essentially deal 
with topics and not with terms (see for example An Encyclopaedia 
of Translation: Chinese-English- English-Chinese published by the 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, the Routledge Encyclopedia of 
Translation Studies (1998) and the de Gruyter encyclopaedia, which 
is due to appear some time after the year 2000).
Some theoretical problems 
The problems involved in writing a dictionary of this type are con-
siderable. Many of them do not need to be aired in public; however, 
in order for the user to obtain a fuller understanding of the nature of 
translation-specific terminology, it will be necessary to discuss two 
particularly problematic areas.
Firstly, as stated above, there is the question of selection. It is clear 
that no reference work can hope to be completely exhaustive; in the 
case of the present Dictionary, there were certainly a large number 
of terms which were considered for inclusion, but were eventually 
rejected, at least as separate entries. Thus for example, many minor 
terms have either been omitted entirely, or explained briefly in the 
context of a more important term (so that junction is explained under 
texteme, and cultural filter under covert translation). Furthermore, 
there would quite simply not have been room to accommodate all 
the “normal” English (let alone French or German) words which are 
constantly being press-ganged into service in Translation Studies. 
Many words of this type are used in ways which are clear and trans-
parent, and often also informal and ad hoc; consequently, no separate 
entry has been considered necessary for such items as cover-to-cover 
translation, content-based translation, naturalization, or reader-
oriented translation, as well as for many of the re- and trans- words 
listed above.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
xii
Of course, selection problems do not cease once the basic head-
word list has been settled. Probably more significant than decisions 
about including or excluding a particular term are the problems 
involved in determining the shape of each article. Which sources 
should be used? Whose pronouncements on a given term should be 
considered most definitive? Issues like these need to be confronted 
for each entry if the Dictionary is going to combine its unavoidable 
brevity with a high level of informativeness.
The second problematic area concerns what is sometimes term-
ed fuzziness, or in other words the tendency of natural phenomena 
to resist classification in rigid, clear-cut categories. It is sometimes 
thought that the fuzziness of meaning does not extend to terminology; 
however, while this may be the case with terms specially coined with a 
precise function in mind, there are nonetheless several important ways 
in which the drawing of cut-and-dried distinctions is problematic.
Firstly − and probably least problematically − is the fact that most 
pairs or groups of terms which are seemingly intended to contrast 
with each other in reality usually represent different tendencies, or 
different positions on a cline, rather than being polar opposites. This 
means that notions such as overt and covert translation or rules, 
norms and conventions are quite clearly overlapping concepts, at 
least to some extent.
Secondly, it must be emphasized that the terminology of Trans-
lation Studies does not break down into uniform, discrete units. 
This means for a start that a particular item (such as adequacy or 
competence) will sometimes be used in a special technical sense, 
but sometimes in a way which is to a greater or lesser extent more 
in accordance with its “normal”, everyday meaning. However, there 
are in addition further dimensions along which the limits of different 
terms can be difficult to determine. Usage of a particular term will 
vary among writers. For example, some writers treat word-for-word 
translation as distinct from literal translation, while others consider 
it as a special type of this latter category; similarly, there is consid-
erable variation in the use of the various terms denoting different 
types of corpora. In the case of some of the more central terms it 
thus becomes difficult to decide whether writers who opt for differ-
ent terms reflect subtle distinctions in meaning, or simply the fact 
that the terms are largely interchangeable (a problem which arises 
with faithfulness and fidelity, for example). Probably more serious 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
xiii
than this is the Pandora’s box of deciding when and how major terms 
should be broken down into more than one separate meaning. On the 
basis of what criteria does one decide if a term really is being used 
differently in a variety of contexts, rather than the usages found in 
different authors simply being examples of parole, i.e. permissible 
variations within the limits of a single definition? (In this respect 
back-translation and linguistic translation are both problematic 
entries, since for both of these a whole range of sub-meanings could 
be distinguished, although in the event the Dictionary does not in 
fact subdivide the former and crystallizes out only three separate 
meanings for the latter.) Furthermore, what does one do when an 
author includes a standard term in a typology alongside a number of 
his or her own coinings (as Lefevere does with literal translation, for 
example)? Is one to split the entry or deal with both usages within 
one unified entry? Once again, it is only possible to judge each case 
on its own particular merits, and the decisions one reaches will of 
course always contain a subjective element.
The third important way in which fuzziness manifests itself is 
in the treatment of foreign terms. There is some debate within the 
discipline about whether the terms used in different languages to 
denote major concepts can in fact be assumed to be completely 
symmetrical (see for example Snell-Hornby 1988/1995:15-19 for a 
discussion of English equivalence and German Äquivalenz). Thus 
the decision has to be taken whether to treat “similar” terms from 
different languages as separate entries with distinctive definitions, 
or whether the obvious “family resemblances” which exist between 
them should be taken as sufficient grounds for handling them as single 
entities. The Dictionary’s general favouring of the latter policy can be 
justified not only in the light of the above comments on permissible 
variation, but also simply because most of the more important work 
on translation is read, absorbed and developed by scholars writing in 
other languages, thus creating a reasonable level of interpenetration 
and interdependence between the ideas, concepts and terms produced 
in different languages.
How to use the Dictionary
The Dictionary is intended to be used as a reference tool by students, 
teachers and researchers working in the field of Translation Studies. 
It aims for a high level of transparency, flexibility and accessibility, 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
xiv
and with this purpose in mind each article follows the same basic 
format and uses the same general conventions. These are described 
briefly in the following paragraphs.
Broadly speaking, each term is presented and defined within the 
context in which it first occurred. Major entries also generally include 
a discussion of a number of different viewpoints on the term as well 
as comments on how usage and application might have developed 
since it was first coined or used. In the interests of consistency and 
accessibility nearly all foreign terms are cited in English translation 
(e.g. loyalty and coherence rather than Loyalität and Kohärenz), even 
if this has on occasion meant coining a new term (e.g. verifiability); 
conversely, if a headword is supplied with a translation in another 
language this usually indicates that the term originates from − or is 
at least widely used within − that particular language.
In addition to the information it contains, each entry includes two 
important features which should be utilized if maximum use is to be 
made of the Dictionary. These are the extensive cross-referencing to 
other entries and the suggestions for further reading.
While every entry is intended to be as free-standing and intelligi-
ble as possible in its own right, it is hoped that in the case of major 
theories and approaches enough articles have been included in the 
Dictionary to enable the user to acquire a systematic knowledge 
of a given theme through an intelligent use of the suggested cross-
references. Any headwords which could profitably be read in 
conjunction with a particular entry are indicated in small capitals, 
either in the body of the entry or in the “see also” section at the end. 
While the “see also” section is fairly self-explanatory, the following 
brief points need to be made about cross-references which occur in 
the body of an entry:
• To avoid littering the text with large amounts of extra formatting, 
a headword is generally given in small capitals only the first time 
it is mentioned in any particular entry.
• When a major article is broken up into sub-entries, the first is 
usually the most general one. When cross-referencing to such 
entries, in the interests of readability the number 1 is frequently 
omitted; thus a cross-reference to literal translation, for example, 
implies that the reader should consult literal translation 1.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
xv
• In some of its cross-references the Dictionary may use just a 
keyword (e.g. descriptive and literal for Descriptive Translation 
Studies and literal translation) or a variety of grammatical forms 
which may differ slightly from the actual headword (e.g. dynami-
cally equivalent, map and rewriters for dynamic equivalence, 
mapping and rewriting). The purpose of this is to make cross-
referencing as flexible and as unobtrusive as possible. (This also 
explains why the Dictionary prefers the term faithfulness to the 
virtually synonymous but perhaps slightly commoner fidelity: 
quite simply, the former has a cognate adjective (“faithful”), while 
the latter does not.
• An  item is not cross-referenced if it is felt that in that particular 
context it is not being used in its technical sense. Similarly, very 
basic terms such as source language, translation and so forth are 
not generally cited in small capitals unless there is a good reason for 
doing so (for example source text in the entry on target text).
Suggestions for further reading are given at the end of nearly every 
entry. These are listed alphabetically, rather than in some kind of 
order of importance; in the case of foreign terms, at least one English 
reference is given wherever possible. It should be noted that the works 
chosen for inclusion in this section are not necessarily those which 
are cited in the course of the entry, some of which might contain just 
a single relevant sound-bite; they have been selected simply because 
they are important sources for information on the term under discus-
sion. Sometimes the further reading section includes works which do 
not mention the term as such, but clearly address the same subject, 
e.g. Lehmuskallio et al. (1991) in degree of differentiation.
Abbreviations
The following very standard abbreviations are used throughout the 
Dictionary:
SL Source Language
ST Source Text
TL Target Language
TT Target Text

Dictionary of Translation Studies
xvi
Any other abbreviations used are glossed in the article in which they 
occur.
Note on quotations
All quotations from non-English sources, unless otherwise stated, 
have been translated specially for the Dictionary.
Acknowledgements
Finally, writing a work of this kind inevitably − and rightly − involves 
the participation, help and encouragement of many people. I am 
lucky to be surrounded by colleagues at the University of Leeds who 
have on every occasion shown themselves more than willing to offer 
assistance in various ways. In this connection I should in particular 
like to thank Professor Michael Holman for his constant encourage-
ment, and also for his unflagging willingness to lend me books. My 
sincere thanks go to the staff of the inter-library loans section of the 
Brotherton Library, and in particular to Pat Shute and Carol Coggill, 
for the patient and helpful way in which they tracked down innumer-
able works for me. I should also like to acknowledge with gratitude 
the advice of Tony Fox, Peter Fuller, Peter Millican and Ian Moxon, 
all of whom helped to resolve various queries which arose.
I am very much indebted to Mona Baker for much encouragement, 
innumerable pieces of advice and the loan of many books, articles 
and other material.
I should also like to thank Moira Cowie for her contribution to the 
writing of the Dictionary.
I am very grateful to Yelena Belyaeva of Voronezh State Univer-
sity and Peter Fawcett of Bradford University for initial guidance 
on Russian and German writers respectively. Peter Fawcett and Juan 
Sager read the entire manuscript and offered much valuable advice 
on possible ways of improving it, and Kirsten Malmkjær offered on 
more than one occasion some very useful comments on the difficult 
area of the Quinean terms.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
xvii
I should finally like to express my gratitude to my wife Tanya and 
my mother, brother and all my friends for being so patient with my 
prolonged unsociability.
It goes without saying that none of the people mentioned above 
bears any responsibility for any mistakes or deficiencies which the 
Dictionary may contain.
Mark Shuttleworth

This page intentionally left blank
www.ebook3000.com

Absolute Translation (French Traduction Absolue) According to 
Gouadec (1989, 1990), one of seven types of translation which can 
be used by professional translators to respond to the various transla-
tion requirements which can arise during the course of their work. In 
absolute translation the whole of ST is transferred into TL, with no 
alteration to the content or the form of the original document. Clearly, 
there are constraints on this type of translation, as if the “quantity of 
information” and “quality of communication” (1990:335, translated) 
are to be retained in this way, there can be no technical or linguistic 
variation from the original text, and all terminology must be exactly 
as in ST (1989:28). See also abstract translation, diagrammatic 
translation, keyword translation, reconstructions (translation 
with), selective translation and sight translation. Further reading: 
Gouadec 1989, 1990; Sager 1994.
Abstract Translation (French Traduction Synoptique) One of seven 
strategies proposed by Gouadec (1990) to fulfil the various translation 
needs which arise in a professional environment. In abstract transla-
tion a condensed translation of all the information in ST is made in 
order to give the client “rapid access to specific types of information” 
(1990:335, translated). This may be done in various ways. Firstly, the 
generic themes of the text may be translated; secondly, a description 
may be given of the generic content and the objectives of the text 
and its sub-units; thirdly, an abridged translation of all the useful 
content of the text may be supplied (1990:335). See also absolute 
translation, diagrammatic translation, keyword translation, re-
constructions (translation with), selective translation and sight 
translation. Further reading: Gouadec 1990; Sager 1994.
Abusive Translation A term used by Lewis (1985) to refer to a radical 
alternative approach to literary translation. Conceived on the basis 
of Derrida’s (1978) comment that “a ‘good’ translation must always 
commit abuses” (quoted in Lewis 1985:39), abusive translation 
is based on a view of translation as “a form of representation that 
necessarily entails interpretation” (Lewis 1985:39) and also as a 
process which produces gain as well as loss (1985:40). Lewis stresses 
the importance of avoiding “weak, servile translation” (1985:40), 
or in other words translation in which the translator compromises 
by “[giving] primacy to message, context, or concept over language 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
2
texture” (1985:41). He argues that the translator should instead opt for 
“whatever might upset or force or abuse language and thought, might 
seek after the unthought or unthinkable in the unsaid or unsayable” 
(1985:41); what he means by this might include the idea of attempting 
to use types of discourse and modes of expression which are not in 
any way typical of TL. He therefore defines abusive translation as 
“strong, forceful translation that values experimentation, tampers 
with usage, seeks to match the polyvalencies or plurivocities or 
expressive stresses of the original by producing its own” (1985:41). 
In this way the adoption of abusive translation gives rise to a new 
concept of faithfulness (1985:42), as the translator compensates for 
the inevitable loss incurred in translation by directing the abusive 
move towards “clusters of textual energy” (1985:43) in order to 
“renew the energy and signifying behavior” of the original (1985:42). 
However, Lewis also states that “the translator’s aim is to rearticulate 
analogically the abuse that occurs in the original text ... [and] also 
to displace, remobilize, and extend this abuse in another milieu” 
(1985:43); abusive translation therefore constitutes a complex 
compromise between reproducing the abuse found in the original, and 
adapting or extending ST for the purpose of compensating for any 
loss caused by the act of translation (1985:45). See also foreignizing 
translation and resistancy. Further reading: Lewis 1985.
Acceptability A term used by Toury (1980, 1995) to denote one of 
two tendencies which can be observed in translated texts. Toury’s 
approach to literary translation rejects any notion of there being 
one “proper” way to translate, and aims rather to describe the trans-
lational norms which operate in the output of a single translator or 
which typify the translational practices prevalent in a particular 
literature at a given time. In Toury’s model, translation is seen as 
involving “an encounter, if not a confrontation, between two sets 
of norms” (1980:55), one of which is drawn from ST or SL and 
the other from TL. Any translated text occupies a position between 
the two poles of adequacy 2 − or adherence to the norms (both 
linguistic and textual) of the source system − and acceptability − 
or adherence to those of the target system. Which of these poles 
is favoured by a given translation is determined by the value of 
the initial norm, although almost all TTs represent a compromise 
between the two tendencies. Translations which lean towards ac-
ceptability can thus be thought of as fulfilling the requirement of 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation  Studies
3
“reading as an original” written in TL rather than that of “reading 
as the original” (1980:75), and consequently generally have a more 
natural “feel”. See also descriptive translation studies and target 
text-oriented translation studies. Further reading: Puurtinen 1989; 
Toury 1980, 1995.
Accuracy A term used in translation evaluation to refer to the extent 
to which a translation matches its original. While it usually refers to 
preservation of the information content of ST in TT, with an accurate 
translation being generally literal rather than free, its actual mean-
ing in the context of a given translation must depend on the type of 
equivalence found in the translation; thus − to take an extreme ex-
ample − accuracy in the Zukofskys’ translation of Catullus would be 
primarily a question of copying the sound patterns of the original as 
closely as possible (see phonemic translation). Put in more general 
terms this means that, as Venuti argues, the “canons of accuracy are 
culturally specific and historically variable” (1995:37). The establish-
ment of accuracy for a given translation is of course a painstaking 
procedure which in practice has to be carried out “unit by unit at the 
level of the phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph and the whole text” 
(Sager 1994:148). Because of its prescriptive nature, departures from 
strict accuracy are frequently perceived as shortcomings; however, 
in reality such deviations − especially in the translation of literary 
texts − are often inevitable, as the translator will need to introduce 
shifts in order to reproduce the original “in its totality, as an organic 
whole” (Popovič 1970:80). See also faithfulness and naturalness. 
Further reading: Chukovsky 1966, 1984.
Action, Translatorial See translatorial action.
Adaptation 1 A term traditionally used to refer to any TT in which 
a particularly free translation strategy has been adopted. The term 
usually implies that considerable changes have been made in order 
to make the text more suitable for a specific audience (e.g. children) 
or for the particular purpose behind the translation. However, the 
phenomenon has frequently been approached from a prescriptive 
point of view, and many comments have been pejorative. For ex-
ample, Nida & Taber equate adaptation with cultural translation 
2 (1969/1982:134); thus for them − who are writing about Bible 
translation − an adaptation cannot be considered faithful. In a simi-

Dictionary of Translation Studies
4
lar vein, but perhaps more extreme, Radó characterizes adaptation 
as a type of pseudotranslation 2, or in other words not as “real” 
translation at all (1979:192). Indeed, source text-oriented com-
ments of this nature abound. However, other writers take a more 
flexible view of the subject. Nord, for example, views adaptation as 
a relative quantity reflecting a translation’s skopos; according to her, 
any one translation will be characterized by the relative proportion 
(or percentage) of adaptation which it contains (1991a:29-30). Ap-
proaching the subject from a different angle, Bassnett, writing about 
literary translation, observes that much time and ink has been wasted 
“attempting to differentiate between translations, versions, adapta-
tions and the establishment of a hierarchy of ‘correctness’ between 
these categories” (1980/1991:78-79). She argues that the reason 
for this is that the text has been perceived as “an object that should 
only produce a single invariant reading”, so that “any ‘deviation’ on 
the part of the reader/translator will be judged as a transgression” 
(1980/1991:79). Like Bassnett, Toury also views the phenomenon from 
a non-normative perspective; he thus sees prescriptive comments like 
those cited above as examples of “a priori, and hence non-cultural 
and ahistorical” distinctions which can be imposed on translation 
(Toury 1995:31). Another descriptive approach, this time concerned 
with how literary systems develop, sees adaptations simply as one 
of a number of different types of rewriting. See also imitation 1 & 
2 and version 1 & 2.
2 (French Adaptation) A term used by Vinay & Darbelnet (1958, 
1958/1995) to refer to one of seven translation procedures. Adapta-
tion is described as a type of oblique translation, which means that it 
does not rely on the existence of structural and conceptual parallels 
between SL and TL (1958:46-47, 1958/1995:31). According to Vinay 
& Darbelnet, adaptation is a strategy which should be used when 
the situation referred to in ST does not exist in the target culture, 
or does not have the same relevance or connotations as it does in 
the source context. As such it is a kind of “situational equivalence” 
(1958/1995:39; see equivalence 2) as it works by replacing ST 
elements by TL items which in some way serve the same function 
and are thus “equivalent”. For example, a reference to cricket as a 
popular sport in England could be replaced in a French translation 
by a reference to the Tour de France (1958:53, 1958/1995:39). Vinay 
& Darbelnet argue that adaptation represents “the extreme limit of 
translation” (1958:52, 1958/1995:39), in that it involves a consider-
able amount of rewording. They also point out that an avoidance of 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation  Studies
5
adaptation can result in a text which is perfectly correct, yet retains the 
unmistakable feel of a translation (1958:53, 1958/1995:39). See also 
borrowing, calque, literal translation, modulation 1 and transposi-
tion. Further reading: Vinay & Darbelnet 1958, 1958/1995.
Adequacy 1 A term used by some commentators on translation to 
discuss the nature of the relationship between ST and TT. However, 
even where it does occur there is little agreement over the proper 
application of the term, as it is used sometimes synonymously with, 
sometimes instead of, and sometimes in contrast with the related term 
equivalence. Various definitions for adequacy have been suggested 
by various writers; in most of these the term has an evaluative, even 
normative character (in contrast to adequacy 2 below). However, 
where the two terms are used side by side, adequacy generally refers 
to a looser, less absolute ST-TT relationship than equivalence. Thus 
Reiss & Vermeer, for example, use adequacy within their skopos 
theory model when referring to a translation which has a different 
communicative function from ST; in this context it therefore denotes 
“the relationship between ST and TT with due regard to a purpose 
(or skopos) which is being followed in the translation process” 
(1984:139, translated). Shveitser, who writes in a tradition which 
views equivalence as an absolute criterion, defines adequacy in terms 
of the translator’s response to the communicative situation: “adequacy 
proceeds from the assumption that a decision taken by the translator 
frequently has the nature of a compromise, that translation demands 
sacrifices, and that in the translation process the translator frequently 
has to resign himself to certain losses for the sake of conveying 
the main, essential aspects of ST (i.e. its predominant functions)” 
(1988:96, translated). Thus a translation can be adequate even if it is 
equivalent with ST only in one functional dimension; however, it is 
necessary that “any deviation from equivalence should be dictated 
by objective necessity, not by the will of the translator” (1988:96, 
translated). See also correspondence. Further reading: Reiss & 
Vermeer 1984; Shveitser 1988, 1993; Turk 1990.
2 According to Toury (1980, 1995), one of the two poles of the 
continuum which relates to the norms used in the translation process. 
A translation is termed adequate if the translator seeks throughout to 
follow source rather than target linguistic and literary norms. In other 
words, a translator who is translating adequately will perform only 
those translational shifts which are truly obligatory, thus producing 
a TT which where possible retains ST features unchanged. Such a 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
6
translational procedure may of course produce a TT which in some 
respects is incompatible with target linguistic or literary norms. The 
reason for this is that “... the translation is not being made into TL 
at all, but into a model-language, which is at best some part of TL 
and at worst an artificial, as such non-existing language, and that 
TT is not introduced into the target literary polysystem but imposed 
on it” (Toury 1980:56; see polysystem theory). However, such an 
imposition can have positive as well as negative consequences, as not 
only violations but also innovations may be introduced into the target 
linguistic and literary system. Clearly, most TTs are a compromise 
between adequacy and the opposite pole of acceptability, in some 
matters following ST norms and in others conforming to those of the 
target system. Toury (1980) also suggests using a maximally adequate 
translation, which he terms “the Adequate Translation” and which 
contains only obligatory shifts, as an “invariant of the comparison” 
(or tertium comparationis; 1980:49); the purpose of this is to reveal 
what kind of optional shifts have occurred in a translation, and 
consequently, the type of translational strategies which the translator 
has been using. However, Toury (1995) rejects this notion as being 
an unnecessary factor in the process of translation analysis. See also 
initial norm, target text-oriented translation studies, third code 
and translationese. Further reading: Hermans 1995; Toury 1980, 
1995.
Adjustment According to Nida, a set of techniques used in Bible 
translation which are designed to “produce correct equivalents” in TL 
(1964:226) and thus help a translation achieve dynamic equivalence. 
More specifically, Nida defines the purposes of these techniques as 
follows: “(1) permit adjustment of the form of the message to the 
requirements of the structure of the receptor language; (2) produce 
semantically equivalent structures; (3) provide equivalent stylis-
tic appropriateness; and (4) carry an equivalent communication 
load” (1964:226). Although such aims will frequently entail minor 
changes in form, Nida emphasizes that the translator’s task is to 
reproduce, not to improve. Radical changes may be necessary in 
certain circumstances, however, if use of a close formal equivalent 
gives a translation which is meaningless or causes TT to convey a 
wrong meaning (1964:226). Techniques used in adjustment include 
addition or subtraction of material, alteration, inclusion of footnotes 
(explaining literal translations which are preserved in the text) and 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation  Studies
7
modification of the language to fit the experience of the target audi-
ence. It should be pointed out that the notion of adjustment was replaced 
in Nida & Taber (1969/1982) by transfer and restructuring. See 
also communication load. Further reading: Nida 1964.
Aesthetic-Poetic Translation According to Casagrande (1954), one 
of four types of translation. Casagrande’s classification relates to the 
possible purposes which may lie behind the act of translation; aesthetic-
poetic translation thus refers to the translation of poetic texts, where 
it is necessary to retain the expressive and stylistic features of the 
author’s work to as large an extent as possible. Casagrande states that, 
while the content is clearly important, “express consideration is given 
to the literary or aesthetic form of the message in both languages” 
(1954:335). This type of translation thus places heavy demands on 
the translator, since elements of poetic or aesthetic expression such as 
rhyme, metre or metaphor are “precisely those aspects of language 
which are most resistant to translation” as they “partake of the 
unique qualities of the individual language” (1954:336). See also 
ethnographic translation, linguistic translation 2 and pragmatic 
translation 2. Further reading: Casagrande 1954.
Agent A term used by Sager to refer to the person who is “in an 
intermediary position between a translator and an end user of a 
translation” (1994:321). According to Sager, any translation process 
will involve a number of participants. These include text producers, 
mediators who modify the text (for example abstractors, editors, 
revisors and translators; see 1994:111), communication agents, who 
commission and send the text, and recipients, or end users, although 
it is possible that one person may perform more than one of these 
functions (but may not, of course, be both producer and recipient). 
The agent of a translation may be a publisher who commissions a 
translation, or any other person who assigns a job to a translator. He 
or she is independent of both writer and reader and decides whether 
or not a document is to be translated. According to Sager, the agent 
“is at the beginning and the end of the speech act of translation; the 
previous speech act of writing the document, and the subsequent 
speech act of a reader receiving the document are both temporally, 
spatially and causally quite independent” (1994:140). Further reading: 
Sager 1994.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
8
A.I.I.C. (Association Internationale des Interprètes de Conférence) 
An organization founded in November 1953 to protect the interests of 
conference interpreters. The A.I.I.C. numbers among its aims the as-
sessment and maintaining of levels of linguistic competence among 
its members, the development of professional and ethical codes of 
practice, the monitoring of working conditions and agreements with 
international organizations, and the improvement of standards of 
training. The two main organs of the association are the Assembly 
and the Council, while a number of Commissions and Committees 
monitor such issues as interpreter qualifications and grading, and 
the setting of International Standards for interpreting booths. The 
A.I.I.C. furthermore conducts negotiations with various international 
bodies (such as the United Nations, the European Union and NATO) 
on matters relating to working conditions, rates of pay, and suchlike. 
See also conference interpreting, f.i.t. and interpreting. Further 
reading: Osers 1983.
Analogical Form According to Holmes (1988d), one of four ap-
proaches which a translator may use when translating verse form. An 
analogical form is defined as a TL verse form which fulfils a similar 
function to that of the SL form in the source culture. Holmes gives 
the example of a translator choosing to translate an SL epic into TL 
verse form which, although different from that used in ST, is the one 
traditionally associated with epics in TL. As Holmes points out, the 
effect of using an analogical form is to “naturalize” an ST by making 
it conform to traditionally accepted target norms; such a technique is 
typical of introspective, self-sufficient cultures and ages (1988d:27). 
Along with mimetic form, Holmes classifies analogical form as one 
of two types of form-derivative form. See also content-derivative 
form, extraneous form, mapping and metapoem. Further reading: 
Holmes 1988d.
Analysis A term used by Nida & Taber (1969/1982) to describe the 
first of the three stages of the translation process (see also transfer 
2 and restructuring). The model which Nida & Taber describe is 
intended first and foremost to provide Bible translators with guidelines 
on how to approach the task of rendering the ancient STs effectively 
into modern TLs whose structure may differ radically from the 
languages in which the originals were written. Using elements of 
Chomsky’s transformational grammar as their starting-point (see 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation  Studies
9
for example Chomsky 1965), they define translation as a process 
in which “the translator first analyses the message of the SOURCE 
language into its simplest and structurally clearest forms, transfers 
it at this level, and then restructures it to the level in the RECEPTOR 
language which is most appropriate for the audience which he 
intends to reach” (Nida 1969:484, emphasis original). The act of 
translation is thus likened to that of travelling downstream to cross 
a river at an easier place (Nida 1969:484). Analysis, the first stage 
in this process, is defined as “the set of procedures, including back 
transformation and componential analysis, which aim at discovering 
the kernels underlying the source text and the clearest understanding 
of the meaning, in preparation for the transfer” (Nida & Taber 
1969/1982:197, emphasis removed). The term kernel is used in a 
broadly Chomskyan sense to denote “the basic structural elements” 
(Nida & Taber 1969/1982:39) which can be said to underlie the 
syntactically more elaborate “surface structure” of any language. 
The rationale for Nida & Taber’s model thus lies in the fact that 
languages “agree far more on the level of the kernels than on the 
level of the more elaborate structures” (Nida & Taber 1969/1982:39). 
According to Nida, kernels consist of combinations of items from four 
structural categories − “objects, events (including actions), abstracts 
(as features of objects, events, and other abstracts), and relationals” 
(1969:485) − while the kernels in any language are “the minimal 
number of structures from which the rest can be most efficiently and 
relevantly derived” (Nida 1964:66). Kernel sentences are derived 
from the actual sentences of an ST by means of back-transformation, 
a kind of paraphrase in which surface structures are replaced by 
structures of the types listed above; if translating from English, this 
would among other things entail transforming “event nouns” into 
verbal expressions (Nida 1969:485). In this way back-transformation 
analyzes the grammatical relationships of ST. At the same time, the 
referential meaning of the individual items of the original message 
undergoes componential analysis, by means of which the meanings 
of words are broken down on the basis of “shared and contrastive 
features” (Nida 1964:82); finally, stylistics and connotative meaning 
are also analyzed and noted. Further reading: Gentzler 1993; Nida 
1969; Nida & Taber 1969/1982.
Appeal-focused Texts (German Appellbetonte Texte) See operative 
texts.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
10
Applied Translation Studies The area of investigation within 
translation studies contrasted by Holmes (1988e) with theoreti-
cal and descriptive translation studies (the two of which together 
make up the field of pure translation studies). In Holmes’ scheme, 
Applied Translation Studies is further divided into four subsections. 
The first of these is translator training, and is probably the main area 
of concern. The second is the production of translation aids such as 
lexicographical and terminological reference works, and grammars 
which are tailor-made to suit the needs of translators (to which list 
one might now want to add the various aids associated with machine-
aided translation). The third area is the establishment of translation 
policy, where the task of the translation scholar is “to render informed 
advice to others in defining the place and role of translators, translating, 
and translations in society at large” (1988e:77-78). Finally there is 
the activity of translation criticism, the level of which is frequently 
“very low, and in many countries still quite uninfluenced by develop-
ments within the field of translation studies” (1988e:78). Other people 
have also written about the applied “sub-discipline” and have suggested 
further areas which it should include; Wilss for example characterizes 
the applied science of translation as essentially language-pair-bound 
(Wilss 1982:80), and lists error analysis, translation criticism, transla-
tion teaching and the study of translation difficulties as the four main 
areas of interest (1982:159; see also prospective and retrospective 
translation). As pointed out by Toury, such applied “extensions” 
tend by their very nature to be prescriptive, as they are intended to 
“set norms in a more or less conscious way” (1995:19). Further reading: 
Holmes 1988e; Toury 1995; Wilss 1977, 1982.
Archaism (or Archaicism) A term which refers to the use of obso-
lescent language in a translation (or alternatively, a single instance 
of such usage). While a simple tendency to avoid modern idiom is 
a very widespread translation practice, a more deliberate archaiz-
ing strategy is sometimes employed to translate an ST which dates 
from an earlier historical period; its purpose is to attempt to create 
the illusion that the translation, like its original, is not a product of 
modern culture. Sometimes a translator attempts to produce a TT in 
language actually contemporary with the original (e.g. a new transla-
tion of Shakespeare formulated in late sixteenth century Hungarian), 
but perhaps more frequently only aims to create a text which seems 
to stem from an earlier historical period; however, in extreme cases 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation  Studies
11
translations have been produced which are written in such obscure 
language that they are only accessible to a few. When producing an 
archaizing translation, the danger is that the translator will be unable 
to maintain his or her use of older language with complete consist-
ency and will thus produce a hybrid text, the language of which does 
not properly reflect older usage (Steiner 1975/1992:360). However, 
according to Steiner, even when the translator manages to archaize 
consistently, a more fundamental problem arises, which is that the old-
fashioned language used in the translation cannot be separated from 
the connotations or alternative meanings which it has subsequently 
acquired, and which will inevitably be uppermost in the mind of the 
modern reader (1975/1992:352). In spite of such drawbacks, Steiner 
suggests that the strategy of archaism serves at least one important 
function, which is to give the impression that a translation is firmly 
rooted in the target culture, as if it were (and always had been) part of 
the native tradition (1975/1992:365). As an example of such a trans-
lation Steiner cites the King James Bible, which he argues owed its 
original success partly to the seventeenth-century translators’ policy 
of using language which was two or three generations out of date 
(1975/1992:366-67). See also intertemporal translation. Further 
reading: Bassnett 1980/1991; Diller 1992; Holmes 1988h; Steiner 
1975/1992; Zimmer 1981.
Architranseme (or ATR) A term coined by van Leuven-Zwart (1989, 
1990) to designate a theoretical concept used in the close linguistic 
comparison of literary texts and their translations. To facilitate such 
a comparison, van Leuven-Zwart suggests dividing both ST and 
TT up into phrase-length units which she terms transemes; she 
then introduces the architranseme as a kind of theoretical common 
denominator which is used as the basis for comparing ST and TT 
transemes. The common features reflected in an architranseme are 
expressed in terms of the content words shared by the ST and TT 
transemes, or by paraphrases, so that the architranseme of “His 
wife saw him” would be “wife + to see”, while that of “He bent 
down” would be “to curve the body from a standing position” (see 
van Leuven-Zwart 1989:157-58). On the basis of the aspects of 
conjunction (similarity) and disjunction (dissimilarity) which are 
observed between the ST and/or TT transeme and the architranseme 
it is possible to posit one of three types of microstructural shift: 
modulation 2, modification or mutation. If clear trends emerge from 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
12
the comparison of a large number of transemes and architransemes, 
then light is shed on the translator’s opinions, interpretation and 
translational policy, and concrete insight is gained into the ways 
in which ST and TT differ. See also generalization, integral 
translation, specification and tertium comparationis. Further 
reading: van Leuven-Zwart 1989, 1990.
Area-restricted Theories of Translation Defined by Holmes as 
partial theories of translation which are restricted with regard 
to the languages and/or cultures which are being considered 
(1988e:74). Such theories may be pair-restricted (e.g. translation 
between German and English), group-restricted (e.g. translation 
within the cultures of Western Europe) or group-pair restricted 
(e.g. translation between Slavonic and Germanic languages). 
Research undertaken in language-restricted areas shares many 
insights with the fields of comparative linguistics and stylistics, 
while there has up to now been little work done on any detailed 
culture-restricted theories. Area-restricted theories of translation 
sometimes claim a greater generality, but in fact are usually only 
relevant to certain (generally Western) cultures (1988e:75). See also 
medium-restricted, problem-restricted, rank-restricted, text-type 
restricted and time-restricted theories of translation. Further 
reading: Holmes 1988e.
ATR See architranseme.
Audio-medial Texts (German Audio-mediale Texte) See multi-
medial texts.
Auftrag See commission.
Automatic Translation See machine translation.
Autonomy Spectrum A concept introduced by Rose (1981) to 
provide a framework for categorizing translations. Described by 
Leighton as “one of the important breakthroughs” of modern trans-
lation study (1991:62), the autonomy spectrum is distinguished from 
previous attempts at translation classification by the fact that it forms 
a continuous scale, rather than a simple binary contrast (such as 
the age-old literal versus free dichotomy) or a choice between a 
limited number of discrete categories. The autonomy spectrum is a 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation  Studies
13
continuum, the two poles of which are “source text autonomy” and 
“target audience needs” (Rose 1981:33). A translation’s position on 
the autonomy spectrum in this way reflects the translator’s relation 
to the source material and the translation’s relation to its intended 
audience; at one end, “the complete textual autonomy of the source 
text is observed” (1981:33), while at the other, “complete adaptation” 
to target conventions and expectations occurs (1981:34). Since the 
autonomy spectrum is defined in relatively general terms it can be 
used to categorize translations according to type, function or process. 
Further reading: Rose 1981.
Autotranslation (or Self Translation) Defined by Popovič as “the 
translation of an original work into another language by the author 
himself” ([1976]:19). However, while Popovič argues that the 
autotranslation “cannot be regarded as a variant of the original text 
but as a true translation” ([1976]:19), Koller distinguishes between 
autotranslation and “true” translation by saying that the issue of 
faithfulness is different in the case of autotranslation, as the author-
translator will feel justified in introducing changes into the text 
(1979/1992:197) where an “ordinary” translator might hesitate to 
do so. Little work has been done on autotranslation; however, it is 
possible that closer study could yield some interesting insights into the 
nature of bilingualism and the relationship between language, thought 
and personality. It should be pointed out that while the standard terms 
for this phenomenon are autotranslation and self translation, Popovič 
also refers to it as authorized translation. Famous autotranslators 
have included Beckett, Nabokov and Tagore. Further reading: Fitch 
1983, 1985, 1988; Grutman 1994; Koller 1979/1992; Popovič [1976]; 
Sengupta 1990; Steiner 1972.
Babel, Tower of A biblical narrative explaining why man is destined 
to speak a multiplicity of different languages. The story takes place 
at a time when “the whole earth was of one language”, and tells of 
man’s attempts to build a tower “whose top may reach unto heaven”. 
God is angered by such an act of overweening pride, as “now nothing 
will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do”; to 
punish man’s wickedness and prevent another such enterprise from 
ever being undertaken He proceeds to “confound their language, that 
they may not understand one another’s speech” and then to “scat-
ter them abroad upon the face of all the earth” (Genesis chapter 11 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
14
verses 1-9, quoted in the Authorized Version). According to Christian 
theology the disaster of Babel is seen as the act which completes the 
Fall of man into a state of sin, while the symbolic reversal of its ef-
fects at Pentecost − when Christ’s apostles were filled with the Holy 
Ghost and “began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them 
utterance” (Acts of the Apostles chapter 2 verse 4) − looks forward 
to a time in the future where the whole of redeemed mankind will 
once again speak a single language. The Tower of Babel can be seen 
metaphysically not only as the event which gave rise to the need for 
translators and interpreters, but also more specifically as “the spark 
which set off a discussion of translation theory and method ... from a 
theological, philosophical, aesthetic, psychological, and ethnographic 
point of view” (Wilss 1982:27). In this context the confounding of 
mankind’s speech can be viewed positively as well as negatively. 
Barnstone (1993), for example, talks of the world being enriched 
by “diverse linguistic cultures, iconic and verbal” (1993:237); he 
regards the destruction of the original tower as a challenge to build 
a second Babel by means of the act of translation (1993:3). Steiner, 
in a vision of the almost messianic role of translation, talks of it 
as “a teleological imperative, a stubborn searching out of all the 
apertures, translucencies, sluice-gates through which the divided 
streams of human speech pursue their destined return to a single sea” 
(1975/1992:256-67). In this way he looks forward to the redemption 
of language in much the same way that Walter Benjamin does in 
his discussion of the recovery of pure language through the agency 
of translation. Rosenzweig goes even further, stating boldly that 
“every translation is a messianic act, which brings redemption nearer” 
(quoted in Steiner 1975/1992:257). Further reading: Barnstone 1993; 
W. Benjamin 1923/1963, 1923/1970; Derrida 1980, 1985; Eco 1995; 
Steiner 1975/1992; Wilss 1977, 1982.
Back-transformation See analysis.
Back-translation A process in which a text which has been trans-
lated into a given language is retranslated into SL. The procedure of 
back-translation has been used for various different purposes. For 
example, since at least the middle of the 1970s the term has been used 
in the literature on Bible translation to illustrate the sometimes vast 
structural and conceptual differences which exist between SL and 
TL; however, it is also sometimes simply used to refer to a gloss 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation  Studies
15
translation of the original Biblical text (Gutt 1991). Such back-
translations are by necessity highly literal, although the precise 
degree of literalness will vary depending on the particular feature 
that needs to be highlighted. Similarly, back-translation is sometimes 
used in contrastive linguistics as a technique for comparing specific 
syntactic, morphological or lexical features from two or more lan-
guages. An early use of the term in this context can be found in 
Spalatin (1967), while Ivir (1981) defines back-translation as “a check on 
the semantic content” (1981:59) which can be used to reveal instances 
of formal correspondence. Casagrande (1954) proposes a similar 
procedure to diagnose “trouble-points in the process of transcoding” 
(1954:339). However, Toury is sceptical of any such apparent insights 
which back-translation may provide, arguing that the irreversible 
nature of translation makes all such general conclusions invalid 
(1980:23-24). Holmes (1988a), on the other hand, uses the evidence 
of back-translation to argue against the possibility of there being any 
“real” equivalence between a poem and its translation. According to 
his reasoning, a hypothetical experiment in which a poem is translated 
by five independent translators, and then each of the five inevitably 
different translations are back-translated to produce 25 versions, all 
distinct from each other and from the original text, demonstrates 
that any claim of equivalence is “perverse” (1988a:53). Similar 
experiments have been both suggested and actually carried out to 
investigate certain areas of translational behaviour. For example, Levý 
posits that an examination of a number of parallel back-translations of 
a single text would provide useful insights into at least two universals 
of translation (1965:78-79), and also argues that “tendencies 
operative in the course of decision processes may be observed with 
great clarity, if the same text passes several times through the process 
of translation from language A into language B, and back again into 
A” (1967:1176); in support of this latter proposition he cites an 
experiment carried out by van der Pol (1956) into how the choice of 
specific lexical items varied during the (repeated) back-translation 
of a text. See also interlinear translation, parallel translation 
and serial translation. Further reading: Baker 1992; Brislin 1976; 
Holmes 1988a; Gutt 1991; Ivir 1969, 1981; Levý 1965, 1967.
Bilateral Interpreting See liaison interpreting.
Bilingual Corpora 1 See parallel corpora.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
16
2 A term sometimes used to refer to both multilingual corpora and 
parallel corpora. Further reading: Granger 1996.
Bi-text A term introduced by Harris (1988) to refer to a construct 
comprising both ST and TT, which exists as a psychological reality 
for the translator (or the bilingual reader). Harris conceives ST and 
TT as being “simultaneously present and intimately interconnected” 
(1988:8) in the translator’s mind, and defines the resulting bi-text as 
“ST and TT as they co-exist in the translator’s mind at the moment of 
translating” (1988:8). Harris likens the concept to a “single text in two 
dimensions, each of which is a language” (1988:8). However, only a 
fragment of a bi-text will exist at any one time, as the translation process 
proceeds sequentially through ST. Consequently, Harris prefers the 
metaphor of a “roll of two laminated materials of different colours” 
(1988:8), which more explicitly conveys the way that individual ST 
and TT units of translation are mapped onto each other throughout 
the length of the bi-text. There are of course problems associated with 
representing on paper what is essentially a psychological concept, 
although the most convenient format is probably that of the interlinear 
translation. While reflecting a basically psychological phenomenon, 
the concept of bi-text was proposed with a view to its possible use in 
machine-aided translation, as a large amount of machine-readable 
bi-text would provide a database of translation solutions used to solve 
previous translation problems similar to the one in hand. A resource 
of this kind could provide the translator with “translations of words in 
context; a memory-perfect exploitation of the translator’s own previous 
experience; near-translations of non-conventional phraseology and 
even longer units” (1988:9). Such practical applications are similar to 
some of those proposed for parallel corpora. Further reading: Harris 
1988; Toury 1995.
Blank Spaces See voids.
Blank Verse Translation Presented by Lefevere (1975) as one of 
seven strategies for translating poetry. Lefevere’s categorization 
relates directly to his analysis of different English translations of 
a single poem by Catullus. Throughout his examination of blank 
verse translation he highlights the extra difficulties entailed by 
“working with pre-selected and pre-arranged material” (Lefevere 
1975:61): although this particular strategy is less restricting than 
other strategies such as metrical or rhymed translation, in blank 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation  Studies
17
verse translation the translator needs to observe the requirement 
of balancing a general metrical predictability with the necessity of 
providing some occasional rhythmic variation. Both these aims can 
be achieved by devices such as expansion or compression of the line, 
use of enjambment, and alteration of the word order. The advantages 
of the strategy are a greater accuracy and higher degree of literariness 
than is typically produced by many other strategies which entail 
translating into verse. On the negative, side Lefevere argues that 
blank verse translation concentrates on only one aspect of ST to the 
detriment of others (such as the meaning), and can lead to TTs which 
are clumsy, distorted and at times even nonsensical (1975:76). See 
also extraneous form, imitation 2, interpretation, literal trans-
lation 2, phonemic translation, poetry into prose and version 2. 
Further reading: Lefevere 1975.
Borrowing (French Emprunt) One of seven translation procedures 
described by Vinay & Darbelnet (1958, 1958/1995). Borrowing is 
defined as a type of direct translation 4 in that elements of ST are 
replaced by “parallel” TL elements (1958:46, 1958/1995:31). Vinay 
& Darbelnet describe the procedure as the simplest type of translation, 
since it merely involves the transfer of an SL word into TT without 
it being modified in any way. The reason for this transfer is usually 
that the translator needs to overcome a lacuna (see voids), or − more 
significantly − wishes to create a particular stylistic effect, or to 
introduce some local colour into TT. Vinay & Darbelnet cite Russian 
verst or pood and Spanish tequila or tortillas as words which might 
give a translation a Russian or Mexican flavour when introduced as 
borrowings (1958:47, 1958/1995:32). In a similar way they suggest 
that when referring to the English office of coroner in a French text, it 
is probably better to retain the English word than to struggle to find an 
equivalent title amongst French magistrates (1958:47, 1958/1995:32). 
Vinay & Darbelnet also point out that borrowings or loan words 
often enter a language after being introduced in a translation, and 
that many such words come to be so widely accepted in TL that they 
cease to be perceived as foreign items (1958:47, 1958/1995:32). 
See also adaptation 2, calque, equivalence 2, literal translation, 
modulation 1 and transposition. Further reading: Vinay & Darbelnet 
1958, 1958/1995.
Calque (or Loan Translation; French Calque) A term used to denote 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
18
the process whereby the individual elements of an SL item (e.g. 
morphemes in the case of a single word) are translated literally to 
produce a TL equivalent. Vinay & Darbelnet classify calque as a 
type of direct translation 4 and list it as one of seven translation 
procedures (1958:47, 1958/1995:32; see also adaptation 2, borrowing, 
equivalence 2, literal translation, modulation 1 and transposition). 
Along similar lines, Hervey & Higgins (1992) define calque as one 
of five types of cultural transposition (see also communicative 
translation 3, cultural borrowing, cultural transplantation, 
and exoticism); according to them, calque differs from the similar 
procedure of cultural borrowing in that it appropriates only the model 
of SL grammatical structures, and does not borrow expressions 
verbatim from ST (1992:33). Some expressions which were originally 
examples of calque become the standard TL cultural equivalents of 
their SL models; examples of this are French poids mouche, calqued 
on English flyweight, or Spanish rascacielos calqued on American 
English skyscraper. Further reading: Hervey & Higgins 1992; Vinay 
& Darbelnet 1958, 1958/1995.
CAT (Computer-aided Translation or Computer-assisted Transla-
tion) See machine-aided translation.
Category Shift A term used by Catford to denote one of two major 
types of shift, or departure “from formal correspondence in the proc-
ess of going from the SL to the TL” (1965:73). The term is generic, 
and may refer to shifts involving any of the four “fundamental cat-
egories of linguistic theory”: the class, the structure, the system and 
the unit (1965:5-7). Category shifts will occur only in unbounded 
translation, where it is possible to translate an SL item of a certain 
rank by a TL item of a different rank (e.g. a word by a group, a sen-
tence by a clause, etc.). See also class shift, formal correspondence, 
intra-system shift, level shift, linguistic translation 1, structure 
shift, unit of translation and unit shift. Further reading: Catford 
1965.
Chuchotage See whispered interpreting.
Class Shift A type of category shift which involves translating an 
SL item by means of a TL item belonging to a different grammatical 
class. The term class is understood along Hallidayan lines (Halliday 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
19
1961; see also Halliday, McIntosh & Strevens 1964) as being “that 
grouping of members of a given unit which is defined by operation in 
the structure of the unit next above” (Catford 1965:78), so that for 
example those adjectives which precede their noun and those which 
follow it would, on the basis of their function in the nominal group 
structure, be defined as separate classes of adjective. Consequently, 
the translation of a white house into French une maison blanche with 
its concomitant substitution of the English pre-positional adjective 
white with the French post-positional adjective blanche would entail 
a class shift. Note that instances of class shift are generally the result 
of differences between the linguistic systems of SL and TL, rather 
than representing a deliberate choice by the translator. See also intra-
system shift, level shift, modification, shifts, structure shift and 
unit shift. Further reading: Catford 1965.
Close Translation A generic term used by some writers (for exam-
ple Newmark 1988) to refer to translation strategies which favour 
exact correspondence between SL and TL linguistic units over an 
emphasis on conveying the overall meaning or spirit of ST. See also 
gloss translation, interlinear translation, literal translation 
1, metaphrase and word-for-word translation. Further reading: 
Newmark 1988.
Coherence (German Kohärenz) Defined in general terms as “the 
agreement of a text with its situation” (Baker 1993:239, after Vermeer 
1983). The term was introduced by Reiss & Vermeer (1984) to the 
study of translation; according to these authors, there are two types of 
coherence, intratextual and intertextual. The first of these concerns 
the way in which TT per se is received in the target situation. This 
depends on the “coherence rule”, which states that “the message 
(or TT) produced by the translator must be interpretable in a way 
that is coherent with the target recipient’s situation” (Reiss & 
Vermeer 1984:113, translated). If this is the case, the recipient’s 
feedback (German Rückkoppelung), or reaction, will indicate that 
the text has been understood and the interaction has succeeded 
(see success). However, the intratextual coherence of a TT may be 
affected by translation which is too literal, by lapses on the part of 
the translator, or by a failure to take into consideration the different 
levels of knowledge which the ST and TT readers will bring to their 
respective texts. The second type of coherence, the intertextual − also 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
20
known as fidelity (German Fidelität) − is the coherence which exists 
between TT and ST. It is usually subordinated to the first type, as a 
TT has first of all to be understood before it can be compared with 
its ST. Intertextual coherence depends on how the translator understands 
ST, and also on TT’s skopos, and will be judged to be present to the 
extent that there is consistency between a) the original ST message 
intended by the text producer, b) the way the translator interprets this 
message, and c) the way in which the translator encodes the message 
for the TT recipient. If there is coherence between these three factors 
then the “fidelity rule” is being followed. See also information offer 
and protest. Further reading: Nord 1991b; Reiss & Vermeer 1984; 
Vermeer 1983.
Commission (German Auftrag) A term used by Vermeer (1989) 
within the framework of translatorial action to refer to the speci-
fications which the translator works with when producing a TT. A 
commission may come from a client or other third party as a set of 
explicit instructions or requirements; in this case, the translator as 
“expert” should be able to contribute towards its development. On 
the other hand, the commission is frequently simply a collection 
of implicit principles or preferences internalized by the translator. 
However, Vermeer argues that one way or another every translation 
should be based on a commission stating firstly the goal (or skopos) 
of TT, and secondly the conditions under which this goal should be 
achieved (1989:183). Ideally these latter should include not only 
details of practicalities such as deadlines and fees, but also indica-
tions of TT’s intended text-type, the translation strategies which the 
translator should use, and so forth. Further reading: Holz-Mänttäri 
1984; Vermeer 1989.
Communication Load (or Information Load) A term used in Nida’s 
(1964) model of the translation process, and defined by Nida & Taber 
as “the degree of difficulty of a message” (1969/1982:198). Nida 
bases his discussion of communication load (or information load) on 
a model of the communication process in which the source communi-
cates the information contained by the message via the decoder’s (or 
receptor’s) channel, which will vary in capacity depending on such 
factors as the receptor’s personal qualities, education and cultural 
background (Nida & Taber 1969/1982:198). Communication load 
consists of both formal and semantic elements and is measured by 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
21
“the ratio between the number of units of information and the number 
of formal units (i.e. words)” (Nida & Taber 1969/1982:198). The more 
information that a message contains, the less predictable it is likely to 
be and thus the harder for the receptor to understand; therefore it 
is always necessary to ensure that a message contains an amount of 
redundancy appropriate to the audience in question, in order to prevent 
the receptor’s channel from becoming overloaded (1964:131). In the 
context of interlingual communication, this means that a translation 
which is based on the principle of dynamic equivalence will require 
proper adjustment and the addition of a certain amount of redundancy 
to allow for differences between the linguistic and cultural backgrounds 
of the two audiences; conversely, a literal translation will generally be 
harder for TL receptors to process than ST was for its original audience, 
since it will be likely to contain a degree of “linguistic awkwardness” 
(1964:131). Further reading: Nida 1964.
Communicative Translation 1 (or Communicative Approach) 
A term used to refer to any approach which views translation as a 
“communicative process which takes place within a social context” 
(Hatim & Mason 1990:3, emphasis removed). Obviously, all ap-
proaches will to some extent consider translation as communication; 
however, a so-called communicative translation will typically be 
generally oriented towards the needs of the TL reader or recipient. 
Thus for example a translator who is translating communicatively 
will treat ST as a message rather than a mere string of linguistic units, 
and will be concerned to preserve ST’s original function and to 
reproduce its effect on the new audience. In other words, a com-
municative translation is one which contrasts with, for example, 
interlinear translation, literal translation 1 or word-for-word 
translation in that it treats the ST wording as merely one of a 
number of factors which need to be borne in mind by the translator. 
An example of a translation model based on this type of approach 
is provided by Roberts, who argues that translation which adheres 
too closely to the original wording “does not often result in effective 
communication in the other language”, but rather can frequently lead 
to “distortion of the message” (1985:158). Roberts uses Spilka’s 
definition of a translator as a mediator between “two parties who 
would otherwise be unable to communicate” (Spilka 1978, quoted 
in Roberts 1985:142); it is the translator’s function to transmit 
the source message (ibid), which Roberts understands as the ST 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
22
words plus not only the context in which they occur, but also four 
non-linguistic ST parameters (1985:158). These are the source, or 
originator of the message, the intended receptor, the object, or purpose 
of the communication, and the vector, or the spacial and temporal 
circumstances in which the translation was produced (1985:143-45, 
based on Pergnier 1980:58). In the translation, depending on whether 
ST is expressive, informative or imperative in nature (see Nida & 
Taber 1969/1982:24-27), the source, object or intended receptor will 
be emphasized respectively in order for the translation to elicit the 
same reaction as ST did from the original recipients (1985:149-50). 
However, since “translation involves a double act of communication” 
(1985:146), a second set of parameters is generated in the translation 
process which relates specifically to the translated message 
(1985:147). Roberts’ model is by no means the only communicative 
approach, as idiomatic translation, communicative translation 2 
and translation according to the principle of dynamic equivalence 
can all be said to be further examples of this type of translation. See 
also pragmatic translation 1. Further reading: Hatim & Mason 1990; 
Roberts 1985.
2 Defined by Newmark as one of two modes of translation (see 
also semantic translation), in which “the translator attempts to 
produce the same effect on the TL readers as was produced by the 
original on the SL readers” (1981/1988:22). This means that in 
communicative translation the emphasis should be on conveying the 
message of the original in a form which conforms to the linguistic, 
cultural and pragmatic conventions of TL rather than mirroring the 
actual words of ST as closely as is possible without infringing the TL 
norms. When producing a communicative translation, the translator 
is permitted greater freedom to interpret ST and will consequently 
smooth over irregularities of style, remove ambiguities and even 
correct the author’s factual errors, and in doing so will limit the 
semantic potential of ST by seeking to make TT fulfil one specific 
communicative function which is determined by the type of TL reader 
envisaged. Examples of text-types for which this mode of translation 
would be appropriate include journalistic writing, textbooks, public 
notices and indeed most non-literary genres. It should be noted that 
communicative translation is not intended to be a completely cut-
and-dried category; furthermore, along with semantic translation it 
is intended to represent the “‘middle ground’ of translation practice” 
(Hatim & Mason 1990:7), and does not extend to the extremes of 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
23
adaptation and interlinear translation (see Newmark 1988:45). See 
also covert translation and indirect translation 2. Further reading: 
Newmark 1981/1988, 1988.
3 A term used by Hervey & Higgins (1992) to describe a type of 
cultural transposition. They define communicative translation as 
a style of free translation which involves “the substitution for ST 
expressions of their contextually/situationally appropriate cultural 
equivalents in the TL”, or in other words, a strategy in which “the 
TT uses situationally apt target culture equivalents in preference to 
literal translation” (1992:248, emphasis removed). Hervey & Higgins 
point out that, although this is a technique which should not be freely 
used, it is often obligatory in situations where literal translation is 
impossible, such as in the translation of notices and conversational 
clichés; as examples they cite translating Objets Trouvés as Lost 
Property, and Je vous en prie as Don’t mention it. See also calque, 
cultural borrowing, cultural transplantation and exoticism. Further 
reading: Hervey & Higgins 1992.
Community Interpreting (or Dialogue Interpreting, or Public 
Service Interpreting) A form of interpreting which is distinguished 
by the contexts in which it is employed. Its purpose is to provide access 
to a public service for a person who does not speak the majority language 
of the community in which he or she lives; the settings in which it is 
used include “police and (non-courtroom) legal encounters, schools 
(parent-teacher conferences), public safety, employment interviews, 
and community agency services, as well as health and mental health 
care settings” (Downing & Helms Tillery 1992:2). It is most frequently 
used in countries such as Sweden, Germany, Britain and the USA, where 
there are large ethnic minorities. While a few decades ago community 
interpreting was regularly performed by untrained bilinguals it is now 
acquiring a more professional profile in response to the increasingly 
multicultural and multilingual nature of many modern societies. 
Community interpreting normally occurs in a one-to-one setting, and 
tends to be bi-directional; it is generally performed consecutively, 
although differs from consecutive interpreting proper in that the message 
is usually interpreted sentence by sentence and the interpreter does not 
therefore generally need to take notes (see liaison interpreting). Because 
of the contexts where it typically occurs most community interpreting 
involves a significant element of intercultural transcoding; there is 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
24
therefore likely to be a high level of “mismatch” not only between 
participants’ modes of expression but also in their understanding of 
their own role in the given interaction and their expectations of how 
their interlocutor is going to act (Zimman 1994:218). Thus as with 
court interpreting − which some would consider to be a type of 
community interpreting − there is a degree of controversy regarding 
the extent to which community interpreters should intervene in 
encounters in which they are mediating. The Guide to Good Practice 
(1989) suggests that the interpreter is justified in intervening if a) 
he or she needs further clarification, b) the client has simply not 
understood, c) the client seems to have missed an inference or d) 
the client needs to be asked to modify his or her way of speaking to 
facilitate the interpreting (quoted in Zimman 1994:219). However, 
while some of these recommendations are uncontroversial, many 
people believe that intervention in contexts such as those outlined in 
the second and third points lie beyond the community interpreter’s 
brief; thus community interpreters need to learn to strike a balance 
between simply translating the words which are said, and completely 
dominating the interview (Zimman 1994:219). Further reading: Guide 
to Good Practice 1989; Downing & Helms Tillery 1992; Shackman 
1984; Wadensjö 1992, 1995; Zimman 1994.
Commutation See textual equivalence 1.
Comparable Corpora A term used by Baker to refer to “two sepa-
rate collections of texts in the same language”, of which “one corpus 
consists of original texts in the language in question and the other 
consists of translations in that language from a given source language 
or languages” (1995:234). The fact that comparable corpora are mono-
lingual collections of texts distinguishes them from other types of 
corpora used in Translation Studies. Also, unlike other corpus types, 
comparable corpora have no clear role to play in translator training, 
materials writing or the development of machine translation systems. 
However, where they promise to make a significant contribution is in 
the “elucidation of the nature of translated text as a mediated com-
municative event” (Baker 1993:243). In other words, the information 
which they contain is likely to yield rich insights into the kind of 
linguistic features which are typical of translated text, regardless of 
the language of ST. More specifically, it is hoped that an analysis of 
comparable corpora will increase our understanding of the nature of 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
25
universals of translation. Little work has so far been carried out with 
comparable corpora. However, Gellerstam (1986) employs them in 
an examination of certain features of Swedish translationese, while 
Laviosa-Braithwaite (1997) is the first serious attempt to investigate 
universals of translation using this type of methodology. It should 
be pointed out that since the use of corpora in Translation Studies 
is a relatively new development, a certain degree of fluidity still 
exists in the usage of this term (see Baker 1995:240 n. 7). See also 
multilingual corpora, parallel corpora and third code. Further 
reading: Baker 1993, 1995, 1996; Gellerstam 1986; Granger 1996; 
Laviosa-Braithwaite 1997.
Compensation A term in general use for a number of decades, and 
defined by Hervey & Higgins as “the technique of making up for the 
translation loss of important ST features by approximating their effects 
in the TT through means other than those used in the ST” (1992:248, 
emphasis removed). Hervey & Higgins describe translation as a 
process “fraught with compromise” (1992:34), and present various 
strategies of compensation as a means of partly overcoming this 
situation. They list four different types of compensation. Compensation 
in kind involves “making up for one type of textual effect in the ST 
by another type in the TT” (1992:35); one of the examples which they 
cite entails the substitution of a narrative tense not available in TL 
by other TL features which have a similar stylistic effect (1992:35-
36). Compensation in place makes up for the loss of a particular 
effect at a certain place in ST by recreating this effect at a different 
place in TT (1992:37); Hervey & Higgins cite as an example of this 
the omission of an untranslatable pun on one word and subsequent 
punning on another word. Compensation by merging “[condenses] ST 
features carried over a relatively long stretch of text (say, a complex 
phrase) into a relatively short stretch of the TT (say, a single word or 
a simple phrase)” (1992:38); this practice often involves substituting 
a TL word for a longer ST item which has no literal TL equivalent. 
Conversely, where there is no one TL word which covers the same 
range of meanings as the SL word, compensation by splitting may 
be used, for example by translating the title of a technical article on 
Les papillons as Moths and butterflies (1992:39). However, Harvey 
argues that the term compensation should be reserved for “essentially 
stylistic, text-specific features and effects” (1995:71), rather than 
also including features which are “systemic [and] language-specific” 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
26
(1995:71) in nature; he consequently doubts the validity of Hervey 
& Higgins’ last two categories, which he considers to be simply 
reflections of “the difference between two lexical systems” (1995:76). 
Harvey proposes a descriptive model for compensation which is based 
on three axes (1995:77-85). The first of these is the typological; it 
is concerned with recognizing specific instances of compensation. 
The second, the correspondence axis, has to do with describing the 
“degree of linguistic correspondence between the devices used to 
achieve the effect in source and target texts” (1995:79), while the 
third, the topographical, provides a framework for analyzing how 
such devices are located relative to each other in their respective 
texts. In this connection Harvey also makes the point that use of a 
compensation device at a great distance from the ST effect which it 
is replacing necessarily leads to the whole text being viewed as the 
unit of translation (1995:83). Further reading: Harvey 1995; Hervey 
& Higgins 1992; Vinay & Darbelnet 1958, 1958/1995.
Competence A term used by Toury (1980, 1995) for investigating 
certain aspects of translation practice. Following Chomsky’s (1965) 
famous distinction, Toury defines translational competence (as opposed 
to performance) as the total system of ST-TT relationships which could 
theoretically be manifested in a translation, but which will to a large 
extent remain unrealized. In other words, translational competence 
is the linguistic (and also for example stylistic and literary) resource 
which a translator will draw on while searching for translational 
solutions, rather than those solutions which are commonly turned 
to (norms) or those which may be found in a particular translation 
(performance). Given the nature of translational competence as a 
source of potential solutions it is generally studied from a theoretical 
rather than a descriptive viewpoint. Further reading: Toury 1980.
Componential Analysis See analysis.
Computer-aided Translation (or Computer-assisted Translation) 
(CAT) See machine-aided translation.
Concordance See verbal consistency.
Conference Interpreting A term used to refer to the type of 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
27
interpreting which occurs in international conferences as well as 
other high-profile settings such as lectures, television broadcasts or 
summit meetings; as such it is one of the forms of interpreting which 
is defined according to the context in which it is used. Conference 
interpreters need to be proficient in a variety of interpreting 
techniques, as although simultaneous interpreting is the main mode 
used, there is also occasional call for consecutive interpreting or even 
whispered interpreting. For the purposes of conference interpreting, 
languages which interpreters know are categorized into three types: A 
languages, in which they have a native-like fluency and which they 
work both from and into; B languages, which are known to an almost 
native level, and which interpreters are also expected to be able to 
interpret into (at least in the consecutive mode); and C languages, 
which interpreters only interpret from (Gile 1995a:209). The rôle of 
conference interpreters is one of mediating between a knowledgeable 
speaker and his or her audience; problems therefore sometimes arise 
since interpreters cannot always be expected to share the knowledge 
background which a speaker’s audience is assumed to possess. To 
reduce this potential knowledge shortfall conference interpreters 
always try to prepare carefully for each assignment; such preparation 
may take the form of either studying the specialist field itself, or 
simply concentrating on the terminology which is likely to occur 
(Gile 1995a:149). Conference interpreting is a relatively recent form 
of interpreting, with a history stretching back no more than eighty 
years, although it was only after the development of simultaneous 
interpreting techniques and the associated technology that it gained 
recognition as a separate category of interpreting. See also a.i.i.c., 
effort models, pivot language and relay interpreting. Further 
reading: Gile 1995a & 1995b; Gran & Taylor 1990; Mackintosh 1995; 
Seleskovitch 1968, 1968/1978.
Consecutive Interpreting A term used to refer to one of the two 
basic modes of interpreting (see also simultaneous interpreting). 
While some forms of interpreting (such as community interpreting 
and liaison interpreting) are performed in a man-ner which may be 
loosely designated “consecutive”, strictly speaking the term should 
be reserved for the more rigorous set of procedures used when 
interpreting for large audiences in formal settings such as conferences 
or courtrooms (see conference interpreting and court interpreting). 
Consecutive interpreting understood in this way proceeds as follows. 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
28
The interpreter listens to a (sometimes fairly lengthy) section of 
a speech delivered in SL, and makes notes; such notes tend to 
serve simply as a brief memory aid rather than being a shorthand 
transcription of all that is said. The speaker then pauses to allow the 
interpreter to render what has been said into TL; when the section has 
been interpreted the speaker resumes with the next section, until the 
whole speech has been delivered and interpreted into TL. Consecutive 
interpreting thus entails a number of different abilities and skills, 
including a high level of SL comprehension, advanced notetaking 
skills, excellent general knowledge, an accurate memory and a 
confident manner of delivery (see also effort models). The procedure 
differs from simultaneous interpreting in that the comprehension and 
production of speech are separated (Gile 1995a:180); furthermore, 
since the speaker and the interpreter do not talk at the same time it is 
clearly a more prolonged process than the simultaneous variety. See 
also whispered interpreting. Further reading: Gile 1995a & 1995c; 
Seleskovitch & Lederer 1989.
Constitutive Translational Conventions According to Nord (1991b), 
one of two types of translational convention. Nord bases the term 
on Searle’s (1969) notion of constitutive rules; such rules not only 
regulate, but “create or define new forms of behavior” (1969:33), 
as would be the case, for example, with the rules of a game. By 
analogy, Nord defines constitutive translational conventions as 
those conventions which “determine what a particular culture 
community accepts as a translation (as opposed to an adaptation or 
version or other forms of intercultural text transfer)” (1991b:100; 
see adaptation and version). In other words, the constitutive 
translational conventions determine the expectations with which the 
reader is likely to approach the text, as well as the way in which the 
translator will typically tackle specific translational problems. As a 
possible way of determining the particular constitutive translational 
conventions obtaining in a given cultural context, Nord suggests 
analysing the solutions to concrete translation problems which are 
generally adopted by translators working within that context. See 
also expectancy norms and regulative translational conventions. 
Further reading: Nord 1991b.
Content-derivative Form (or Organic Form) A term used by 
Holmes (1988d) to denote one of four possible approaches open to a 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
29
translator when faced with the problem of rendering verse form in TL. 
A content-derivative form is one which is created when a translator 
“starts from the semantic material, allowing it to take on its own unique 
poetic shape as the translation develops” (1988d:27). In other words, 
such a TL form is in no way a reflection of the ST form, but is rather 
a form which has been allowed to develop “organically” from “the 
inward workings of the text itself” (1988d:28). See also analogical 
form, extraneous form, form-derivative forms, mapping, metapoem 
and mimetic form. Further reading: Holmes 1988d.
Content-focused Texts (German Inhaltsbetonte Texte) See infor-
mative texts.
Contextual Consistency A term used by Nida & Taber to describe 
“the quality which results from translating a source language word 
by that expression in the receptor language which best fits each context 
rather than by the same expression in all contexts” (1969/1982:199). 
In other words, a translator who adopts a policy of contextual 
consistency − rather than its opposite, verbal consistency − is 
merely recognizing the fact that the words in different languages do 
not necessarily mesh together in terms of the semantic areas which 
they cover, and therefore cannot be translated without regard for the 
context in which they occur (1969/1982:15). As an example of the 
application of this principle Nida & Taber consider the translation of 
the Greek word soma in different passages of the Bible, and observe 
that in one English-language version it is variously translated as body, 
herself, corpse, your very selves and lower nature (1969/1982:15). 
Nida & Taber consider that such a strategy has priority over verbal 
consistency, and point out that contextual consistency is one aspect 
of dynamic equivalence. Further reading: Nida & Taber 1969/1982.
Controlled Language Defined by Arnold et al. as “a specially simpli-
fied version of a language” (1994:211). While originally conceived 
as “partial solution[s] to ... perceived communication problem[s]” 
(1994:211), such languages are now commonly used as a means of 
improving the performance of machine translation systems. Within 
this context a controlled language is in essence a variant of SL a) 
in which texts are composed according to a set of rules designed 
to enhance the clarity and readability of what is said, and b) which 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
30
uses only a limited number of basic words (including a clearly cir-
cumscribed technical vocabulary), each of which typically has only 
one meaning. For example, Basic English, the original controlled 
language dating from the 1920s, is based on a very limited number 
of grammatical forms and a vocabulary of 850 words which can be 
extended as appropriate to include specialized terms from a particu-
lar field. Writing or pre-editing machine translation input so that it 
conforms to the parameters of a controlled language considerably 
enhances the performance of most systems as it removes many of 
the ambiguities which ST would otherwise contain and which the 
computer might be unable to analyse. See also sublanguage. Further 
reading: Arnold et al. 1994.
Conventions A term used by Nord (1991b). Starting from a general 
definition of the word convention, Nord reasons that translation, 
like any other form of social behaviour, will necessarily take place 
within parameters which are socially and culturally determined. Nord 
recognizes three levels of parameter: rules, norms and conventions. 
These three concepts form a hierarchy, with each term implying a 
level of obligation less binding than the previous one. Nord defines 
conventions as “specific realizations of norms” (1991b:96); they are 
“not explicitly formulated, nor are they binding” (1991b:96), but 
are based simply on common knowledge and shared expectations 
(1991b:96). Any one act of translation represents a careful juggling 
of three distinct sets of conventions: those related to the source-
culture, the target-culture and the translation process itself. Depending 
on their precise function, translational conventions will be either 
constitutive or regulative in nature. As a concrete example of a 
translational practice governed by conventions Nord describes how 
English relative clauses are regularly replaced by other, more natural-
sounding constructions when translated into German (1991b:98-99). 
See also loyalty. Further reading: Hermans 1991; Nord 1991b; Sager 
et al. 1980.
Corpora (singular Corpus) A term traditionally used in Translation 
Studies to refer to relatively small-scale collections of texts, (parts 
of) which are searched manually for examples of features which 
are of interest. In machine translation a corpus is defined as “the 
finite collection of grammatical sentences that is used as a basis for 
the descriptive analysis of a language” (Newton 1992:223); in other 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
31
words, it is a set of examples from which the software analogizes 
when producing a translation (Schubert 1992:87-88). In descriptive 
translation studies the term is now frequently understood to mean “a 
collection of texts held in machine-readable form and capable of being 
analysed automatically or semi-automatically in a variety of ways” 
(Baker 1995:225). However, while in linguistic research corpora of 
this kind typically contain many millions of words, there has as yet 
been little or no research in Translation Studies based on corpora of 
similar size. See also comparable corpora, multilingual corpora and 
parallel corpora. Further reading: Baker 1993, 1995.
Correctability (German Korrigierbarkeit) According to Reiss & 
Vermeer (1984), one of two features which need to apply to a given act 
of translation in order for it to be considered an instance of übersetzen 
(i.e. written translation) rather than dolmetschen (i.e. interpreting). 
The notion of correctability is dependent on the entire ST and TT 
being available to the translator during and after the actual process 
of translation so as to permit correction of TT by the translator; it is 
considered to be present in those cases where the translator is able to 
correct his or her work, for example by cross-referencing with other 
parts of ST. See also verifiability. Further reading: Kade 1968; Reiss 
& Vermeer 1984.
Correspondence A term used to refer to the relationship which exists 
between elements of SL and TL that are in some way considered to 
be counterparts of each other. Correspondence is usually presented 
as a somewhat weaker notion than the perhaps more frequently 
encountered concept of equivalence (Hermans 1991: 157), although 
the relationship between the two terms varies from author to 
author. Nida (1964), for example, uses the term correspondence 
to denote a broad concept which covers both dynamic and formal 
equivalence. For him correspondence represents the relationship 
not only between individual SL and TL symbols, but also between 
the ways such units are arranged within the structures of the two 
languages (1964:156). Nida (1964:193) distinguishes two main 
types of correspondence, structural (which is of a purely formal, 
decontextualized nature) and dynamic (where account is also 
taken of factors such as context and effect). However, he states 
that “there can be no absolute correspondence between languages” 
(Nida 1964:156), and talks about correspondences and contrasts as 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
32
complementary aspects of the same phenomenon (1964:193). Turk, 
on the other hand, sees correspondence as one of two alternative 
criteria which can determine the type of equivalence which is created 
through the translator’s decisions (1990:68; see also adequacy 1). He 
describes correspondence as a “progressive homogeneity” between 
ST and TT (1990:68, translated), and defines it as a “symmetrical or 
complementary relationship, without reference to a third entity” (Turk 
1990:78-79, translated). Holmes, in a discussion of the translation 
process, talks about how a translator uses correspondence rules in 
order to determine “the way in which he develops his target-text map 
from his source-text map” (1988b:84; see mapping). For Holmes, the 
correspondences − or instances of ST-TT matching (1988b:84) − 
which occur can be of various types, depending on the level on which 
the translator is trying to establish similarity between ST and TT. He 
suggests three basic kinds: homologues, which correspond in form 
but not function, analogues, where correspondence is on the level 
of function, not form, and the half-joking coinages semantologues 
or semasiologues, which correspond in neither form nor function, 
but in meaning (1988b:85; see also hierarchy of correspondences). 
Finally, Koller suggests that the term correspondence is better suited 
for contrastive linguistics, and reserves the term equivalence for use in 
translation studies (1979/ 1992: 217). This is because − for Koller at 
least − the establishing of correspondence means assigning SL items 
to specific and fixed TL items with which they are structurally parallel 
(1979/1992:223-24), whereas Translation Studies concerns itself 
with describing “all possible denotatively equivalent TL variants, 
as well as the various linguistic, textual and situational conditions 
in which they are possible” (1979/1992:223, translated). In other 
words, correspondence for Koller is a matter of “formal similarity” 
(1979/1992:223, translated) rather than one-off appropriateness. 
See also formal correspondence, identity and invariance. Further 
reading: Holmes 1988b; Koller 1979/1992; Nida 1964; Turk 1990.
Correspondences, Hierarchy of  See hierarchy of correspondences.
Court Interpreting A type of interpreting which is defined by the 
context in which it occurs. Although the term most typically des-
ignates interpreting which takes place in a courtroom, it also covers the 
interpreter’s activity in other legal settings, such as a prison or a police 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
33
station. The client is usually the defendant or a witness, and generally 
belongs to an immigrant community. The basic purpose of court 
interpreting is to enable the client to participate in proceedings; such 
interpreting therefore needs to be bi-directional. Court interpreting 
is generally consecutive or liaison, although other modes − such as 
simultaneous (e.g. for high-profile televised trials) and whispered − 
may also be employed. The court interpreter is bound by a code of 
ethics which requires, among other things, secrecy and impartiality 
(Edwards 1995:63-71). He or she is also required to swear to interpret 
accurately and faithfully. However, this in practice raises a number of 
important issues which concern the very nature of interpreting. For 
example, a common expectation on the part of members of the legal 
professions is that the interpreting process should be “performed in a 
mechanical fashion by a transparent presence” (Morris 1995:27). Thus 
interpreters are not permitted to offer an “interpretation” − in the sense 
of “decoding and attempting to convey their understanding of speaker 
meanings and intentions” (Morris 1995:26) − and any discretion 
or latitude which they exercise can be perceived as intrusiveness 
(Shlesinger 1991:147). This situation is, however, in tension with 
the fact that “the product of the interpreting process is almost always 
treated as a legally valid equivalent of the original utterance” (Morris 
1995:29) and indeed with the fact that it is the interpreted rather than 
original utterances which are kept on record. Thus the court interpreter 
often finds him or herself caught in a dilemma, on the one hand being 
required to transmit information as literally as possible (and to include 
prosodic features such as hesitations), yet on the other aware of the 
fact that linguistic and cultural differences between the client and the 
court mean that adhering to this policy can potentially lead to one or 
other side being seriously misrepresented. Further reading: Barsky 
1996; Berk-Seligson 1990; Colin & Morris 1996; Edwards 1995; 
González et al. 1991; Morris 1995; Shlesinger 1991.
Covert Translation A term introduced by House (1977) to refer to 
one of two contrasting modes of translation (see also overt trans-
lation). The purpose of covert translation is to produce a TT which 
is “as immediately and ‘originally’ relevant as it is for the source 
language addressees” (1986:188). The production of a covert trans-
lation can therefore be viewed as an attempt to conceal the translated 
nature of a TT by producing a text which is functionally equivalent 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
34
to ST. According to House’s model, such an approach is appropriate 
for STs which have no independent status in the source culture, or in 
other words which are not inextricably associated with the language, 
traditions, history or any other aspect of the source culture. Because 
of this lack of rootedness in any particular culture it is argued that 
the original function of a text (the purpose which it serves) can in 
such instances be reproduced in translation, although the application 
of a “cultural filter” is required in order to produce a cultural con-
figuration in TT which is equivalent to that found in ST; however, 
unjustified use of a cultural filter will result in a covert version, which 
is defined as being an inadequate translation. Advertising, journal-
istic and technical material are all examples of text-types for which 
covert translation is held to be appropriate; furthermore, most Bible 
translators will employ something like this approach in order to make 
the message which they are seeking to convey maximally relevant to 
new audiences. See also communicative translation 2, instrumental 
translation and semantic translation. Further reading: House 1977, 
1986; Gutt 1991.
Cross-temporal Theories of Translation See time-restricted 
theories of translation.
Cross-temporal Translation See intertemporal translation.
Cultural Approach See cultural translation 1.
Cultural Borrowing A term used by Hervey & Higgins (1992) to 
describe the type of cultural transposition in which an SL expression 
is transferred verbatim into TL because it is not possible to translate 
it by a suitable TL equivalent (1992:31). The borrowed term may 
remain unaltered, or it may undergo minor alteration; however, what 
is important is that the meaning of the borrowed expression should 
be made clear by the TT context (1992:31). As examples of cultural 
borrowing Hervey & Higgins cite items such as joie de vivre, sauerkraut 
and taboo (1992:31). Cultural borrowing differs from calque in that it 
takes the whole SL expression over into TL, whereas calque borrows 
only the model of the SL grammatical structure (1992:33). See also 
communicative translation 3, cultural transplantation and exoticism. 
Further reading: Hervey & Higgins 1992.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
35
Cultural Substitution A term used by Beekman & Callow (1974) 
in the context of Bible translation to describe a possible strategy 
for dealing with objects or events which are unknown in the target 
culture. Beekman & Callow define cultural substitution as “the use 
of a real-world referent from the receptor culture for an unknown 
referent of the original, both of the referents having the same func-
tion” (1974:201, emphasis original); they present the strategy as an 
alternative to using a more general term or loan-word to translate 
such an SL item. However, they also point out that the strategy should 
be used with great caution, since a) it is clearly inappropriate with 
words which are making a historical reference rather than a didactic 
point (1974:203), b) it is important to choose the most relevant rather 
than simply the most obvious function (1974:204), and c) there is a 
risk of causing a clash between the functions of the source and target 
items (1974:205). Finally, Beekman & Callow do not recommend 
translators to use a cultural substitute if the distortion in dynamic 
fidelity caused by not using it would only be slight (1974:207). 
See also didactic fidelity and historical fidelity. Further reading: 
Beekman & Callow 1974.
Cultural Translation 1 (or Cultural Approach) A term used in-
formally to refer to types of translation which function as a tool for 
cross-cultural or anthropological research, or indeed to any translation 
which is sensitive to cultural as well as linguistic factors. Such 
sensitivity might take the form either of presenting TL recipients with 
a transparent text which informs them about elements of the source 
culture, or of finding target items which may in some way be considered 
to be culturally “equivalent” to the ST items they are translating. Thus a 
translator who uses a cultural approach is simply recognizing that each 
language contains elements which are derived from its culture (such as 
greetings, fixed expressions and realia), that every text is anchored in 
a specific culture, and that conventions of text production and reception 
vary from culture to culture (Koller 1979/1992:59-60). An awareness of 
such issues can at times make it more appropriate to think of translation 
as a process which occurs between cultures rather than simply between 
languages. skopos theory, thick translation and translatorial action 
are all examples of this type of approach. Further reading: Snell-Hornby 
1988/1995; Toury 1987.
2 Defined by Nida & Taber in the context of Bible translation as a 
“translation in which the content of the message is changed to conform 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
36
to the receptor culture in some way, and/or in which information 
is introduced which is not linguistically implicit in the original” 
(1969/1982:199). In other words, a cultural translation is one in which 
additions are made which cannot be directly derived from the original 
ST wording; these might take the form of ideas culturally foreign to 
ST, or even elements which are simply included to provide neces-
sary background information. An example of a cultural translation 
of the Bible might thus be one which transposed the narrative to a 
contemporary setting, or one which expanded the text in an attempt 
to explain the meaning. According to Nida & Taber, translation of 
this type cannot be considered faithful, an epithet which they reserve 
for its opposite, linguistic translation 3 (1969/1982:134). Thus for 
them cultural translation is in some ways synonymous with what 
other writers term adaptation 1 (1969/1982:134). See also dynamic 
equivalence. Further reading: Gutt 1991; Nida & Taber 1969/1982.
Cultural Transplantation A term used by Hervey & Higgins (1992) 
to denote the highest degree of cultural transposition, in which 
details of the source culture contained in ST are replaced by target 
culture elements with the result that the text is partially rewritten in 
a target culture setting. The technique can be successful, but Hervey 
& Higgins suggest that it is not to be considered normal translation 
practice, as in some cases it approximates more to adaptation 2 than 
to translation (1992:30). See also calque, communicative transla-
tion 3, cultural borrowing and exoticism. Further reading: Hervey 
& Higgins 1992.
Cultural Transposition A general term used by Hervey & Higgins 
to describe “the various degrees of departure from literal translation 
that one may resort to in the process of transferring the contents of 
a ST into the context of a target culture” (1992:28). Hervey & Hig-
gins point out that all types of cultural transposition are alternatives 
to a literal translation 1, and any degree of cultural transposition 
selects TL and target culture features rather than those of SL and the 
source culture. The overall effect is a TT which contains a limited 
number of SL features and thus appears less foreign, and closer to the 
TL culture. See also calque, communicative translation 3, cultural 
borrowing, cultural transplantation, exoticism and realia. Further 
reading: Hervey & Higgins 1992.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
37
Decision-making, Translation as A term used to characterize part 
of the process which the translator goes through in the course of 
formulating a TT. Levý (1967) describes the act of translation as 
one of decision-making because he sees it as “a series of a certain 
number of consecutive situations − moves, as in a game − situa-
tions imposing on the translator the necessity of choosing among a 
certain (and very often exactly definable) number of alternatives” 
(1967:1171). Thus by the term decision Levý means a choice which 
needs to be taken between a number of possible solutions to a given 
problem encountered while translating a text, and which will influ-
ence subsequent choices by opening up or closing off other options 
dependent on the initial selection made. Such decisions, whether 
necessary or unnecessary, motivated or unmotivated, are hierarchical 
rather than merely sequential in nature, although little work has so far 
been done on investigating the hierarchical structures to which they 
belong. Levý argues that subjective factors (such as the translator’s 
aesthetic standards) play a part in the making of decisions. This no-
tion is built on by Wilss, who suggests four main factors involved in 
the process: the translator’s cognitive system, his or her knowledge 
bases, the task specification agreed with the client or SL author, and 
problems specific to the particular text-type (1994:148). Wilss argues 
that, as well as generating some insights of its own through such 
approaches as think-aloud protocols, the discipline of transla-
tion studies could benefit greatly from some of the work which has 
been done on decision theory in other fields; issues which could be 
profitably addressed include such questions as why certain decisions 
are sometimes postponed or avoided, or how our knowledge of the 
decision-making process should influence the way translations should 
be assessed. The answers to questions of this type might improve the 
quality of translation performance, and in particular help in the task of 
translator training. See also games (translation and the theory of), 
mapping, minimax principle, operational norms and shifts. Further 
reading: Gorlée 1994; Levý 1967; Wilss 1988, 1994.
Definitions of Translation See translation.
Degree of Differentiation (or Degree of Precision) (German Dif-
ferenzierungsgrad) A term used by Hönig & Kussmaul (1982) to refer 
to a strategy for translating words denoting items of the source culture 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
38
(see realia). It is well known that such items represent particularly 
severe problems for the translator, since their cultural significance 
in SL can never be fully reproduced in TT. As a classical example of 
this Hönig & Kussmaul cite the English expression public school, 
which has a cultural background so rich and complex that not even 
a “note of several pages” (1982:53, translated) would suffice to pro-
vide an exhaustive description of the sociological significance of the 
institutions it refers to. However, Hönig & Kussmaul contend that 
such a procedure should never be necessary, since the function of a 
text will determine the most appropriate translation in terms of how 
much of the socio-cultural background implicit in the item needs to 
be verbalized in TT on any particular occasion (1982:58). Thus in one 
place the term public school might be glossed as elite English school 
but in another as expensive private school (1982:53). However, the 
inclusion of too much or too little detail on any one occasion will 
respectively lead to overtranslation 2 or undertranslation. Because 
this translation strategy is sensitive to contextual requirements, it is 
also sometimes referred to as the necessary degree of differentiation 
(1982:63). Using this technique Hönig & Kussmaul present a way 
of looking at translation which is dependent not on the notion of 
equivalence − or in other words on the extent to which TT matches 
the “visible” verbalized part of ST (1982:62) − but rather on the im-
portance of supplying the amount of detail called for by the context 
and function of the translation. However, like any other, such an ap-
proach has its limitations. As argued by Frank (1991), for example, 
it is most effective when applied to journalistic and other text-types 
which can be said to possess a single, unifying function. In the case 
of poetic or other literary texts, on the other hand, the text func-
tion is not usually so clear-cut, and words may be chosen precisely 
because of the socio-cultural resonances which they set in motion; 
consequently, in such cases it is possible to argue that it is always 
necessary to include in TT every shade of meaning which is present 
in the original (1991:117-18). Further reading: Hönig & Kussmaul 
1982; Lehmuskallio et al. 1991; Snell-Hornby 1988/1995.
Descriptive Translation Studies (DTS) Defined by Holmes (1988e) 
as one of the two subdivisions of pure translation studies (the other 
being theoretical translation studies). According to Holmes, the 
aim of this area of the discipline of translation studies is “to describe 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
39
the phenomena of translating and translation(s) as they manifest them-
selves in the world of our experience” (1988e:71). Holmes’ article has 
proved to be highly influential in certain circles, and the new approach 
it has engendered has led to “a considerable widening of the horizon, 
since any and all phenomena relating to translation, in the broadest 
sense, become objects of study” (Hermans 1985a:14). Thus for the 
purposes of Descriptive Translation Studies, a translation is taken to 
be “any target-language utterance which is presented or regarded as 
such within the target culture, on whatever grounds” (Toury 1985:20). 
It is Toury who has developed the notion of Descriptive Translation 
Studies to the greatest extent, arguing that “no empirical science can 
make a claim for completeness and (relative) autonomy unless it 
has a proper descriptive branch” (Toury 1995:1, emphasis original). 
Toury argues that translations are “facts of one system only: the target 
system” (Toury 1985:19, emphasis original). Thus Descriptive Trans-
lation Studies is for him a target text-oriented discipline consisting 
of “carefully performed studies into well-defined corpuses, or sets of 
problems” (Toury 1995:1). Studies of this type are able to examine 
such areas as decision-making in translation, translation norms, the 
third code and universals of translation (see for example Toury 
1995). Toury argues that such investigations “constitute the best 
means of testing, refuting, and especially modifying and amend-
ing the very theory, in whose terms research is carried out” (Toury 
1995:1, emphasis original); thus he stresses the interrelatedness of 
the various branches of Translation Studies. Holmes’ original model 
divides Descriptive Translation Studies into three areas: function-
oriented translation studies, process-oriented translation studies 
and product-oriented translation studies. Toury argues that the 
most important of the considerations which these reflect is function, 
and the least important process, as the purpose of a translation will 
determine its characteristics as a concrete TL product, which in turn 
will influence the procedures which the translator follows when pro-
ducing the translation (1995:13-14). Toury also distinguishes between 
Descriptive Translation Studies and isolated descriptive studies of 
translation; he argues that it is only the former that has a coherent 
methodology of its own and is therefore able to make verifiable gen-
eralizations about translation (see 1991:181-82 and 1995:11). See 
also applied translation studies, manipulation school, norms and 
prescriptive translation studies. Further reading: Hermans 1985; 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
40
Holmes 1988e; Koller 1979/1992; van Leuven-Zwart 1991; Toury 
1985, 1991, 1995.
Diagrammatic Translation (French Traduction Diagrammatique) 
According to Gouadec (1990), one of seven types of translation (or 
translation-like processes) which serve to meet the various translation 
needs which occur in a professional environment. In diagrammatic 
translation the content of ST is transferred to TL by means of a dia-
gram rather than by text. Sager comments that this way of providing 
information “exceeds what is [by many] considered translation” 
(1994:184). See also absolute translation, abstract translation, 
keyword translation, reconstructions (translation with), selective 
translation and sight translation. Further reading: Gouadec 1990; 
Sager 1994.
Dialogue Interpreting See community interpreting.
Didactic Fidelity According to Beekman & Callow (1974), one 
of two complementary principles of fidelity which are used in the 
translation of Biblical texts (see also historical fidelity). Didactic 
fidelity is defined as the strategy of adapting the text where necessary 
to fit in with the different culture of the target audience; it is used 
to translate instructive rather than narrative passages. Translation 
according to this principle thus utilizes cultural substitution where 
appropriate. However, the situation is complicated by the fact that 
some Biblical teaching is based on cultural items which also anchor 
the passage in which they occur in a specific historical period, with 
the result that tension between didactic and historical fidelity can arise 
(1974:36). In situations such as this Beekman and Callow suggest 
that a possible solution is to use a more general term to translate the 
problem item (1974:37). See also faithfulness. Further reading: 
Beekman & Callow 1974.
Differentiation, Degree of (German Differenzierungsgrad) See 
degree of differentiation.
Direct Translation 1 A term used by a number of writers (e.g.Toury 
1980, 1995) to refer to the type of translation procedure in which a 
TT is produced directly from the original ST, rather than via another, 
intermediate translation in another language. Direct translation tends 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
41
to be the only permitted type of translation in well-established literary 
systems which do not depend heavily on another system or language 
for literary models. See also indirect translation 1. Further reading: 
Toury 1980, 1995.
2 Defined as the type of translation in which the translator works 
into, rather than away from, his or her native language (or language 
of habitual use); the opposite procedure is termed inverse translation 
or service translation. In large, predominantly monolingual nations 
direct translation is the method which is most commonly used; only 
when a translation is being carried out from a “rare” SL for which 
there is a shortage of translators is the alternative method of inverse 
translation resorted to. However, in spite of the current predominance 
of direct translation in Western culture, before about the eighteenth 
century the direction of translation was not generally held to be of 
any importance. Further reading: Kelly 1979.
3 Defined by Gutt (1991) as one of two possible types of 
translation. Gutt works within the framework of Sperber and 
Wilson’s (1986) relevance theory, and views translation as a special 
instance of the wider concept of communication. The notion of 
direct translation arises from the “desire to distinguish between 
translations where the translator is free to elaborate or summarize 
and those where he has to somehow stick to the explicit contents 
of the original” (1991:122). Treating these two types of translation 
as the poles of a cline, Gutt defines direct translation as the case 
in which the translator seeks to remain faithful to the content and 
form of the original to the maximum possible extent. In the terms 
of relevance theory, a TT is considered to be direct “if and only if 
it purports to interpretively resemble the original completely in the 
context envisaged for the original” (1991:163). The notion of the 
original context −  which is conceived in terms of the explicit and 
implicit information which is available to the original audience 
− is vital, as translation is viewed in terms of the “interaction of 
context, stimulus and interpretation” (1991:188), and the new 
audience bears the responsibility for compensating for changes in 
the contextual information available. Direct translation consequently 
eschews explanatory interpolation in the translated text, but rather 
relies on such devices as introductions, notes or glossaries to 
provide information which the translator considers vital for a full 
understanding of the original context. Direct translation is likely to be 
the favoured strategy when, for example, the receptor audience have 
some knowledge of the original, and expect the translation to conform 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
42
to their preconceptions. See also dynamic equivalence, functional 
equivalence, indirect translation 2 and thick translation. Further 
reading: Gutt 1991.
4 (French Traduction Directe) A term used by Vinay & Darbelnet 
(1958, 1958/1995) to refer to translation procedures which are based 
on the use of parallel grammatical categories or parallel concepts 
(1958:46, 1958/1995:31); as such it contrasts with oblique trans-
lation. The types of direct translation which Vinay & Darbelnet 
identify are borrowing, calque and literal translation; in each of 
these cases, ST is transferred into TL “without upsetting the syntactic 
order, or even the lexis” (1958/1995:31). Further reading: Vinay & 
Darbelnet 1958, 1958/1995.
Direction of Translation (or Directionality) A term which refers 
to whether translation occurs into or out of the translator’s native 
language (or language of habitual use). While in past centuries the 
issue of direction of translation was not held to be of any importance, 
most translation activity is today geared towards translating into the 
translator’s native language (see direct translation 2). The nairobi 
declaration, for example, states that “a translator should, as far as 
possible, translate into his own mother tongue or into a language 
of which he or she has a mastery equal to that of his or her mother 
tongue” (Osers 1983:182). However, such issues as the availability 
of translators, the relative status of the two languages, the text-type 
involved and the translation’s function and intended audience will 
inevitably play a role in determining whether a particular translation is 
performed into or out of the translator’s first language. Furthermore, it 
should be pointed out that in certain countries (mainly in Central and 
Eastern Europe) the preferred direction of translation for interpreting 
is out of the interpreter’s language of habitual use. See also ethno-
linguistic model of translation, inverse translation and service 
translation. Further reading: Beeby Lonsdale 1996; Kelly 1979.
Disambiguation See semantic disambiguation.
Discourse-type Restricted Theories of Translation See text-type 
restricted theories of translation
Documentary Translation According to Nord (1991a), one of two 
types of translation defined according to how TT is intended to function 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
43
in the target culture (see also instrumental translation). A documen-
tary translation is a translation which serves as “a document of [a source 
culture] communication between the author and the ST recipient” 
(1991a:72). Thus in this type of translation the TT recipient becomes a 
mere observer of a “past communicative action” (1991a:72), as ST (or 
possibly only certain aspects of ST) is reproduced without any attempt 
to make adjustments in the light of the target context. word-for-
word and other types of literal translation, as well as “exoticising 
translation”, which tries to preserve the “local colour” of ST, are all 
examples of documentary translation; what all such types of transla-
tion have in common is that they focus on certain aspects or features 
of ST (e.g. its wording or grammatical structures, or the local colour 
which it contains), while ignoring others (1991a:73). While Nord’s 
notions of documentary and instrumental translation are similar to 
House’s (1977) overt and covert translation, she points out that the 
assignment of a TT to one of her types is not simply dictated by the 
text-type which ST belongs to, as is the case with House’s categories 
(1991a:72 n. 36). See also observational receiver. Further reading: 
Nord 1988, 1991a, 1997.
Dolmetschen (Interpreting) (German) The standard German word 
for interpreting. Dolmetschen has traditionally been used to de-
note the oral translation of spoken messages and to distinguish this 
process from that of übersetzen, or written translation. However, the 
existence of certain intermediate procedures along with the advent 
of modern recording techniques has caused the line between the two 
procedures to become blurred and has led to Kade (1968) suggesting 
alternative, more rigorous lines on which to define the term. Accord-
ing to Kade, the most important criterion should not be that the 
communication is spoken, but rather that the presentation of ST occurs 
only once and is immediately followed by the production of the finished 
TT. This means that Dolmetschen should be distinguished from 
Übersetzen in that the output from the former process can be neither 
corrected nor checked by the translator on a subsequent occasion 
(see correctability and verifiability). Consequently the process 
of translating a written document at sight should be considered an 
example of Dolmetschen rather than Übersetzen. Further reading: 
Kade 1968, Reiss & Vermeer 1984.
Domesticating Translation (or Domestication) A term used 
by Venuti (1995) to describe the translation strategy in which a 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
44
transparent, fluent style is adopted in order to minimize the strange-
ness of the foreign text for TL readers. Venuti traces the roots of 
the term back to Schleiermacher’s famous notion of the translation 
which “leaves the reader in peace, as much as possible, and moves the 
author towards him” (Schleiermacher 1838/1963:47, 1838/1977:74; 
Venuti 1995:19-20). However, for Venuti the term domestication 
has negative connotations as it is identified with a policy common 
in dominant cultures which are “aggressively monolingual, unrecep-
tive to the foreign”, and which he describes as being “accustomed 
to fluent translations that invisibly inscribe foreign texts with [target 
language] values and provide readers with the narcissistic experience 
of recognizing their own culture in a cultural other” (1995:15). The 
notion of invisibility is important here, as this is the term used to de-
scribe the translator’s role in preparing a TT likely to be acceptable 
in a culture where domesticating translation is standard; indeed, it is 
the translator’s very invisibility which simultaneously “enacts and 
masks an insidious domestication of foreign texts” (1995:16-17). An 
approach based on domestication will thus involve such steps as the 
careful selection of texts which lend themselves to being translated 
in this manner, the conscious adoption of a fluent, natural-sounding 
TL style, the adaptation of TT to conform to target discourse types, 
the interpolation of explanatory material, the removal of SL realia 
and the general harmonization of TT with TL preconceptions and 
preferences. Venuti argues that domestication is the predominant 
translation strategy in Anglo-American culture, and that this is 
consistent with the asymmetrical literary relations which generally 
exist between this and other cultures. He further argues that, since 
domestication serves broader domestic agendas, it is necessary to 
challenge its domination by consciously adopting other translation 
strategies. See also foreignizing translation and resistancy. Further 
reading: Venuti 1995.
DTS See descriptive translation studies.
Dubbing A term used to refer to one of the two main techniques used 
in the translation of audio-visual material such as films and television 
programmes (see also subtitling). The term dubbing is used in two 
ways. Firstly, it can refer to any technique of “covering the original 
voice in an audio-visual production by another voice” (Dries 1995:9). 
This broad definition has the advantage of including other types of 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
45
revoicing, such as voice-over, narration or free commentary (Luyken 
et al. 1991:71). However, the term usually refers more narrowly 
to lip-sync dubbing, which is defined as the process in which “the 
foreign dialogue is adjusted to the mouth movements of the actor in 
the film” (Dries 1995:9) and which is designed to give the impres-
sion that the actors whom the audience sees are actually speaking 
in TL; this is the definition which will be used here. (It should be 
added that the term can also sometimes refer to occasions on which 
the original dialogue needs to be re-recorded in the same language.) 
Like subtitling, dubbing has until recently been largely ignored by 
the discipline of translation studies. This can be explained partly by 
the fact that dubbing is a process which involves many stages besides 
that of language transfer, so that a large number of additional factors 
(such as the use of up-to-date equipment, the choice of actors, the 
skill of the editor and standard of the sound engineering) also con-
tribute to the quality of the dubbing (Dries 1995:12; see also Luyken 
et al. 1991:73-76, 78-79 for a detailed discussion of the mechanics of 
dubbing). A further, possibly more fundamental reason, suggested by 
Fawcett (1996:69), is the existence of the synchronization constraint, 
which can force dubbers to introduce major changes to the original 
wording simply in order to match sounds to lip movements (and indeed 
physical gestures: see Delabastita 1989:203). However, it would be 
wrong to think that the synchronization constraint is of overriding 
importance in all situations. Dubbing should not be seen as a rigid 
kind of phonological translation, in which ST is translated sound 
by sound. Rather it is more helpful to view it as an exercise in what 
has been termed visual phonetics (Fodor 1976:85), since the syn-
chronization which is required needs to be visual rather than acoustic 
(Goris 1993:182). Furthermore, the level of synchronization needed 
in a particular shot will depend for example on the distance of the 
camera from the speaker (see Delabastita 1989:203). Thus Goris 
observes that even in close-up shots it is only ever necessary to match 
those consonants which require the mouth to be closed (i.e. labials 
and semi-labials), while in shots where the speaker’s mouth is not 
clearly visible no synchronization is needed at all (1993:180-82). 
In a number of European countries, such as France, Germany, Italy 
and Spain, dubbing is the standard method of translating film and 
television (Dries 1995:10). However, there are perceived to be both 
advantages and disadvantages in using dubbing rather than subtitling. 
On the negative side, a dubbed film can be said to be less “authentic” 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
46
than one with subtitles. Furthermore, dubbing is less flexible than subti-
tling in that it is harder to add explanations (Goris 1993:171). Finally, 
dubbing is considerably more expensive than subtitling and also takes 
longer to perform. On the other hand, an obvious advantage is that a 
dubbed film demands less cognitive effort from the viewer than one 
with subtitles (Delabastita 1989:205). Furthermore, dubbing generally 
involves less compression of the message than subtitling (Luyken et 
al. 1991:74). However, it is also sometimes argued that the choice of 
dubbing over subtitles has “cultural, ideological and linguistic” impli-
cations, in that larger countries with basically monolingual cultures 
tend to prefer dubbing (Ballester 1995:159; see also Danan 1991). 
Furthermore, in certain societies dubbing is favoured for nationalistic 
reasons as a way of “naturalizing” an imported film and at the same 
time somehow minimizing its foreign, possibly subversive influence 
by completely concealing the original dialogue; as an example of 
this Ballester describes how in Franco’s Spain a policy was for many 
years in operation which promoted dubbing for those films which were 
screened as part of the permitted quota of foreign imports (1995:166-
70; 175-77). Further reading: Danan 1991; Delabastita 1989, 1990; 
Dries 1995; Fawcett 1996; Gambier 1996; Goris 1993; Herbst 1994; 
Luyken et al. 1991; Whitman-Linsen 1992.
Dubrovnik Charter A Translators’ Charter adopted by the f.i.t. in 
1963 at the Fourth International Translators’ Conference in Dub-
rovnik. The general purpose of the Dubrovnik Charter was to delineate 
the responsibilities and rights of translators, and it included a number 
of important recommendations. It stressed the moral involvement 
of the translator in the translation and urged translators not to give 
a text an interpretation with which he or she did not agree; it also 
emphasized the need for faithfulness in translation, although 
distinguished between this and literalism. Working conditions 
were also covered, and translators were adjured not to enter into 
unfair competition with each other. On the other hand, it affirmed 
that the translator should be the copyright holder of his or her work, 
and required that publishers should clearly mention the translator’s 
name in the appropriate places, and should not make alterations to 
his or her work without permission (Haeseryn 1994:212-13). See 
also a.i.i.c. and nairobi declaration. Further reading: Haeseryn 1994; 
Osers 1983.
Dynamics See dynamic fidelity.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
47
Dynamic Equivalence A term introduced by Nida (1964) in the 
context of Bible translation to describe one of two basic orientations 
found in the process of translation (see also formal equivalence). 
Dynamic equivalence is the quality which characterizes a translation 
in which “the message of the original text has been so transported into 
the receptor language that the response of the receptor is essentially 
like that of the original receptors” (Nida & Taber 1969/1982:200, 
emphasis removed). In other words, a dynamically equivalent transla-
tion is one which has been produced in accordance with the threefold 
process of analysis, transfer 2 and restructuring (Nida & Taber 
1969/1982:200); formulating such a translation will entail such pro-
cedures as substituting TL items which are more culturally appropriate 
for obscure ST items, making linguistically implicit ST information 
explicit, and building in a certain amount of redundancy (1964:131) 
to aid comprehension. In a translation of this kind one is therefore not 
so concerned with “matching the receptor-language message with the 
source-language message”; the aim is more to “relate the receptor to 
modes of behavior relevant within the context of his own culture” 
(Nida 1964:159). Possibly the best known example of a dynamically 
equivalent solution to a translation problem is seen in the decision to 
translate the Biblical phrase “Lamb of God” into an Eskimo language 
as “Seal of God”: the fact that lambs are unknown in polar regions 
has here led to the substitution of a culturally meaningful item which 
shares at least some of the important features of the SL expression 
(see Snell-Hornby 1988/1995:19). Nida & Taber argue that a “high 
degree” of equivalence of response is needed for the translation to 
achieve its purpose, although they point out that this response can 
never be identical with that elicited by the original (1969/1982:24). 
However, they also issue a warning about the limits within which the 
processes associated with producing dynamic equivalence remain 
valid: for example, a comparison with the broadly similar category 
of linguistic translation 3 reveals that only elements which are 
linguistically implicit in ST − rather than any additional contextual 
information which might be necessary to a new audience − may legiti-
mately be made explicit in TT. The notion of dynamic equivalence is 
of course especially relevant to Bible translation, given the particular 
need of Biblical translations not only to inform readers but also to 
present a relevant message to them and hopefully elicit a response 
(1969/1982:24). However, it can clearly also be applied to other 
genres, and indeed in many areas (such as literary translation) it

Dictionary of Translation Studies
48
has arguably come to hold sway over other approaches (Nida 
1964:160). See also functional equivalence. Further reading: Gutt 
1991; Nida 1964, 1995; Nida & Taber 1969/1982.
Dynamic Fidelity A term used by Beekman & Callow to describe a 
Bible translation which is “both natural in structure and meaningful 
in content” (1974:40). In other words, according to Beekman & Callow 
a dynamically faithful translation must firstly be characterized by 
the naturalness of the TL forms and structures which it uses, and 
secondly must be easily understood by those who receive it. If these 
two criteria are met, then a translation is said to be preserving the 
dynamics of the original. Beekman & Callow also point out that 
such a translation will explicate information which is implicit in ST 
as and when the “stylistic and discourse structures” of TL require 
it (1974:60), and indeed, will also in appropriate circumstances do 
the reverse (1974:66). See also cultural substitution, exegetical 
fidelity, faithfulness and idiomatic translation. Further reading: 
Beekman & Callow 1974.
Effort Models A term coined by Gile to refer to a set of models of 
the interpreting process, which he developed in the late 1970s and 
early 1980s. The effort models represent an attempt to explain the 
considerable difficulties inherent in interpreting in a way that “should 
facilitate the selection and development of strategies and tactics 
toward better interpreting performance” (Gile 1995a:159); they are 
designed to account for the observed fact that interpreting errors are 
found not only in the output of beginners, but also that of experienced 
professionals. According to Gile, the act of interpreting consists 
of a number of non-automatic operations, each of which (unlike 
automatic operations) takes up a certain amount of the brain’s limited 
processing capacity (1995a:161). Gile introduces the term efforts to 
refer to these individual components of the interpreting process, each 
of which makes its demands on the available processing capacity 
and thus occupies a share of the interpreter’s attention. The first and 
most developed of the models concerns the process of simultaneous 
interpreting. According to Gile, this type of interpreting comprises 
a listening and analysis effort (or comprehension effort), which 
accounts for all mental operations aimed at deriving the meaning of 
ST, a speech production effort, which covers the various stages of 
TL output formulation, a short-term memory effort, which involves 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
49
the operations which occur because of the time-lag between hearing 
and speaking, which may vary according to the difficulty of the speech 
being interpreted, and finally, a co-ordination effort, which regulates 
the way the interpreter’s processing capacity is apportioned among 
the other three at any given moment (1995a:162-70). If at any point 
the total processing requirements of the various efforts exceed the 
available capacity then interpreting performance begins to deteriorate 
(1995a:161). Such a situation can be caused by a variety of “triggers”, 
such as rapid or high-density speech, idiosyncratic linguistic usage, 
the occurrence of numbers or unfamiliar or short names, or simply a 
high level of incompatibility between SL and TL (1995a:172-74). Gile 
has also proposed effort models for other types of interpreting (and 
also for written translation). In the case of consecutive interpreting, 
for example, he distinguishes two phases, the listening and note-
taking phase and the speech production phase (1995a:178); the first 
of these consists of listening and analysis, note-taking, short-term 
memory and co-ordination efforts, and the second of remembering, 
note-reading and production efforts (1995a:178-83). Further reading: 
Gile 1985, 1988, 1995a, 1995b.
Emprunt See borrowing.
Equivalence (or Translation Equivalence) 1 A term used by many 
writers to describe the nature and the extent of the relationships 
which exist between SL and TL texts or smaller linguistic units. As 
such, equivalence is in some senses the interlingual counterpart of 
synonymy within a single language, although Jakobson’s famous 
slogan “equivalence in difference” (1959/1966:233) highlights the 
added complications which are associated with it. The issues lurking 
behind the term are indeed complex and the concept of equivalence 
has consequently been a matter of some controversy; Hermans, for 
example, has described it as a “troubled notion” (1995:217). Part of the 
problem stems from the fact that the term is also a standard polysemous 
English word, with the result that the precise sense in which transla-
tion equivalence is understood varies from writer to writer. For 
example, some commentators have by analogy with the mathematical 
notion of equivalence implied that translational equivalence − and 
consequently translation itself − is both symmetrical and reversible. 
Furthermore, it is in practice impossible to use the term with the 
level of precision assumed by some writers. Catford, for example, 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
50
defines translation as the “replacement of textual material in one 
language (SL) by equivalent textual material in another language 
(TL)” (1965:20), and argues that one of the central tasks of 
translation theory is “that of defining the nature and conditions of 
translation equivalence” (1965:21). Catford’s view of equivalence 
as something essentially quantifiable − and of translation as simply 
a matter of replacing each SL item with the most suitable TL 
equivalent, chosen from a list of all the potential equivalents − has 
been described as “an allegory of the limitations of linguistics at 
that time” (de Beaugrande 1978:11); similarly, according to Snell-
Hornby such a view “presupposes a degree of symmetry between 
languages” (1988/1995:16) and even “distorts the basic problems 
of translation” (1988/1995:22), in that it reduces the translation 
process to a mere linguistic exercise, ignoring cultural, textual and 
other situational factors, which it is now agreed play an essential 
role in translation. This perception has led a number of scholars to 
subdivide the notion of equivalence in various ways. Thus some have 
distinguished between the equivalence found at the levels of different 
units of translation, while others have formulated a number of 
complete equivalence typologies, such as Nida’s (1964) influential 
dynamic and formal equivalence, Kade’s (1968) total (one-to-one), 
facultative (one-to-many), approximative (one-to-part) and zero 
(one-to-none) equivalence, Koller’s (1979/1992 and 1989) more 
wide-ranging denotative, connotative, text-normative (i.e. text type-
based), pragmatic and formal-aesthetic equivalence, and Popovič’s 
([1976]) linguistic, paradigmatic, stylistic and textual equivalence 
2. Each of these individual categories of equivalence encapsulates 
a particular type of ST-TT relationship, although few can be said to 
be complete in themselves, while some (for example dynamic and 
formal equivalence) are mutually exclusive; consequently, the term, 
which had originally been introduced in order to define translation 
scientifically, has become increasingly complex and fragmented. 
Many writers, seeing the difficulties which have been assailing 
the concept of equivalence, have suggested alternative, weaker 
notions, such as similarity, analogy, correspondence or matching 
(Hermans 1991:157). Toury, on the other hand, insists on viewing 
every translation as “a concrete act of performance” (1980:28; see 
performance) and proposes that each TT should be approached via 
the particular norms under which it was produced, arguing that these 
norms determine “the (type and extent of) equivalence manifested by 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
51
actual translations” (1995:61). Thus he turns the order of priorities on 
its head. Equivalence is no longer a set of criteria which translations 
have to live up to, but is rather the group of features (termed the 
equivalence postulate) which characterizes the particular relationships 
linking each individual TT with its ST: “when considered from TT’s 
point of view, equivalence is not a postulated requirement, but an 
empirical fact, like TT itself” (1980:39). Similarly, in another area 
of translation studies, Reiss & Vermeer (1984) also reinterpret 
equivalence on the basis of each individual text, but, unlike Toury, in 
terms of function and communicative effect. For them, there are no 
particular features of ST which automatically need to be preserved in 
the translation process; however, they reserve the term equivalence 
for those instances in which ST and TT fulfil the same communicative 
function (1984:139-40; see skopos theory). See also adequacy 1, 
degree of differentiation, formal correspondence, functional 
equivalence, indeterminacy, invariance, shifts, textual equivalence 
1, tertium comparationis and translatability. Further reading: van 
den Broeck 1978; Koller 1979/1992, 1989; Pym 1992a; Reiss & 
Vermeer 1984; Sturrock 1991; Toury 1980; Turk 1990; Wilss 1977, 
1982.
2 (French Equivalence) A term used by Vinay & Darbelnet (1958, 
1958/1995) to refer to one of seven translation procedures. Equiva-
lence is a kind of oblique translation, which means that it does not 
rely on the use of parallel categories existing in SL and TL (1958:46-
47, 1958/1995:31). According to Vinay & Darbelnet, equivalence is 
a procedure which “replicates the same situation as in the original, 
whilst using completely different wording” (1958/1995:342). It is 
thus used for instance to translate fixed expressions such as idioms, 
proverbs or clichés where SL and TL units which bear little or no 
external resemblance are used to translate each other; thus for example 
English like a bull in a china shop would probably be translated into 
French as comme un chien dans un jeu de quilles (1958/1995:38). 
See also adaptation, borrowing, calque, literal translation, 
modulation 1 and transposition. Further reading: Vinay & Darbelnet 
1958, 1958/1995.
ESIT (Ecole Supérieure d’Interprètes et de Traducteurs) See 
interpretive theory of translation.
Ethnographic Translation One of four classifications of translation 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
52
proposed by Casagrande (1954). The aim of an ethnographic trans-
lation is to explicate the cultural background and anthropological 
significance of ST and the differences in meaning between 
“apparently equivalent elements of messages in the two languages” 
(1954:336); this may be achieved in the translation itself, or in 
explanatory annotations. Explication would also be needed, for 
example, on occasions when SL and TL contain terms which 
are analogous rather than equivalent (such as the German word 
Schadenfreude and English “pleasure in another’s misfortune”), 
or when dealing with SL words which have no satisfactory TL 
equivalent (1954:336). See also aesthetic-poetic translation, 
linguistic translation 2, pragmatic translation 2 and thick 
translation. Further reading: Casagrande 1954.
Ethnolinguistic Model of Translation A term used by Nida (1964) 
to describe the situation, common in Bible translation, in which the 
translator translates between two languages both of which he or 
she has acquired, namely the Greek or Hebrew of the original, and 
a modern, often non-Indo-European language. According to Nida, 
this situation usually requires the translator to work through his or 
her native language, which is usually English or another Western 
European language. Such a situation is of course less than ideal, 
although is frequently inevitable, since the knowledge which trans-
lators have of SL is rarely perfect, and has generally been acquired 
through grammars and bilingual dictionaries intended for speakers 
of the mediating language (1964:148). Translation in such a con-
text is a particularly complex process, as the problems involved in 
translating between languages and cultures are intensified by the 
presence of a significant intertemporal element; furthermore, the 
mediating language and culture will tend to exert an influence on 
the way in which TT takes shape. However, Nida argues that, while 
such “contamination” is virtually inevitable, the ultimate criterion 
for the success of this type of translation is the extent to which 
the response which it elicits in the target audience matches that of 
the original SL readers to ST (see dynamic equivalence). See also 
direction of translation. Further reading: Nida 1964.
Excluded Receiver A term used by Pym (1992b) to denote a reader 
(or listener) who is unable to participate in the message of a text 
because it is explicitly not addressed to him or her; the most obvious 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
53
instance of this is when a document is written in an unknown language 
and is therefore clearly addressing a different audience. See also 
observational receiver and participative receiver. Further reading: 
Fawcett 1995; Pym 1992b.
Exegetic Translation Defined by Hervey & Higgins as “a style of 
translation in which the TT expresses and explains additional details 
that are not explicitly conveyed in the ST”, or in other words one in 
which “the TT is, at the same time, an expansion and explanation of 
the contents of the ST” (1992:250). As such it contrasts sharply with 
the strategy of gist translation in terms of the amount of informa-
tion that is conveyed. See also rephrasing. Further reading: Hervey 
& Higgins 1992.
Exegetical Fidelity According to Beekman & Callow (1974), a term 
used to describe the principle of basing a translation strictly on a 
correct understanding of the original message. Beekman & Callow 
are Bible translators, and so for them the notion of correct exegesis  
− or determining the “meaning intended by the original author” 
(1974: 60) by means of a careful study of ST and of reference 
works such as lexicons, grammars and commentaries − is of central 
importance. The term is introduced in the context of a discussion of 
when information which is implicit in ST should be made explicit 
in TT. They argue that explication is not to be adopted at the whim 
of the translator, but is permissible only if the grammar, meanings 
or dynamics (see dynamic fidelity) of TL require it “in order that 
the information conveyed will be the same as that conveyed to 
the original readers” (1974:58). Regarding the first of these three 
categories, information necessitated by the grammar of TL has to be 
expressed whether it is explicit in the original or not. As an example 
of this Beekman & Callow cite the fact that some languages have two 
first person plural pronouns, where one indicates that the speaker or 
writer is including those who are being addressed, and the other that 
they are excluded; when translating into such a language the translator 
is constantly required to make decisions about which pronoun to use, 
on the basis of the meaning of the original (1974:58-59). The second 
category − that of correcting wrong implications which may emerge in 
TT − involves problems which can be resolved not only by relying on 
correct exegesis but also by gauging the reaction of the TL audience. 
Finally, in line with the requirements of dynamic fidelity ST elements 
can be made explicit in the interests of resolving ambiguities and 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
54
clarifying points which are obscure, but once again only as long 
as the information introduced is exegetically justifiable. See also 
faithfulness. Further reading: Beekman & Callow 1974.
Exoticism A term defined by Hervey & Higgins (1992) as the lowest 
degree of cultural transposition. Linguistic and cultural features of 
ST are taken over into TT with little or no adaptation, so that TT has 
an obvious “foreign” appearance. This may be deliberate, in order 
to make TT more attractive to the TL audience, but it affects the TL 
audience in a way that ST did not affect the SL audience, for whom the 
text was in no way foreign (1992:30). See also calque, communicative 
translation 3, cultural borrowing and cultural transplantation. 
Further reading: Hervey & Higgins 1992.
Expectancy Norms A term used by Chesterman (1993) to refer to 
one of two types of translational norm (see also professional norms). 
According to Chesterman, expectancy norms are established by TT 
readers’ expectations of what translations should be like and how 
they should compare or contrast with native texts (1993:9). Chester-
man understands the function of norms as being not only to reflect 
translational practice but also to regulate it (1993:4); in this respect 
expectancy norms are the norms which govern the translation product 
rather than the process of production (1993:9). Expectancy norms are 
of a “higher-order” than professional norms (1993:9), and thus govern 
the form which these latter norms assume as professional translators 
will generally attempt to design TTs to conform with the relevant 
expectancy norms (1993:10). However, unlike professional norms, 
they are not validated by a “norm-authority” as such, but rather simply 
reflect the views, assumptions and expectations of the TL community 
(1993:10). Chesterman illustrates the relationship between expect-
ancy and professional norms by positing a professional norm which 
might state that “in certain text types, source-language culture-bound 
terms should be expanded or explained in translation” (1993:14, em-
phasis removed); according to Chesterman, this would be governed by 
the corresponding expectancy norm which stated that “readers do not 
expect unknown concepts in a text of this type” (1993:14). Chester-
man comments that the notion of expectancy norms is in many ways 
parallel with Nord’s (1991b) concept of constitutive translational 
conventions. Further reading: Chesterman 1993.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
55
Explicitation A term introduced by Vinay & Darbelnet (1958, 
1958/1995). Explicitation can be characterized in general terms as 
the phenomenon which frequently leads to TT stating ST information 
in a more explicit form than the original. Such a process is brought 
about by the translator filling out ST, for example by including 
additional explanatory phrases, spelling out implicatures or adding 
connectives to “help” the logical flow of the text and to increase 
readability. This process may be avowedly philanthropic, motivated 
by the translator’s conscious desire to explain the meaning to the TT 
reader, or may sometimes simply be an inevitable result of the act 
of mediation. However, whatever the reason, the result is that “the 
translator simply expands the TL text, building into it a semantic 
redundancy absent in the original” (Blum-Kulka 1986:21). Com-
mentators on translation have long been paying attention to the 
phenomenon, as can be seen for example in Güttinger’s (1963) general 
observation that TTs tend to be longer than their originals, or Nida’s 
claim that translated messages are more comprehensible if “drawn 
out” by the addition of a certain amount of redundancy (1964:131). 
However, it is only relatively recently that researchers have started 
taking serious notice of it. For example, Blum-Kulka (1986), in 
a study of cohesion and coherence in translation, finds a greater 
concentration of cohesive devices in translated text, irrespective 
of differences between SL and TL (1986:19); she concludes that “it 
might be the case that explicitation is a universal strategy inherent in 
the process of language mediation, as practiced by language learners, 
non-professional translators and professional translators alike” 
(1986:21). Similarly, Baker, commenting on explicitation of a rather 
different kind, cites the example of how a translator adds several 
lines explaining to Arab readers the significance of an allusion to 
American President Harry Truman (1992:246-8). Furthermore, on 
the stylistic level it has been pointed out by van Leuven-Zwart that 
“a limited degree of explicitness is characteristic of modern prose” 
(1990:81), so that a translator seeking to make a TT seem dated may 
well consider increasing the level of explicitness in the text. Toury 
posits the phenomenon as being one of a number of universals 
of  translation (1980:60); however, serious investigation of this 
phenomenon has not yet progressed very far, although it is hoped 
that new avenues of research will be opened up through the study of 
computerized corpora. See also norms. Further reading: Baker 1992, 
1993; Blum-Kulka 1986; Güttinger 1963; Levý 1965; Newman 1980; 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
56
Toury 1980, 1995; Vinay & Darbelnet 1958, 1958/1995.
Expressive Texts (German Expressive Texte) (formerly Form-
focused Texts; German Formbetonte Texte) A term used by Reiss 
(1977/1989) to refer to one of three main text-types (see also in-
formative texts and operative texts). According to Reiss, each 
text-type is identified by its semantic, lexical, grammatical and 
stylistic features (see Nord 1996:84), which influence the way a text 
is translated and also serve as a basis for translation criticism. In the 
case of each text-type, these features reflect the primary function 
which the text serves, and which, she argues, should be preserved in 
the translation. The major characteristic of texts of the expressive type 
is that they include an aesthetic component, as the author “exploits 
the expressive and associative possibilities of the language in order 
to communicate his thoughts in an artistic, creative way” (Reiss 
1977/1989:109). This means that when translating such texts the main 
concern of the translator should be to try to produce an analogous 
aesthetic effect (Nord 1996:83), as well as reproducing the semantic 
content of the original. The expressive text-type is exemplified to 
different extents by poetry, novels and biographies. However, like the 
other text-types which she describes, it is not a watertight category, 
as many texts also contain a subsidiary function, as in the case for 
example of a didactic poem or a satirical novel (Reiss 1977/1989:111). 
See also multi-medial texts and skopos theory. Further reading: 
Nord 1996; Reiss 1971, 1976, 1977, 1977/1989; Reiss & Vermeer 
1984; Zimmer 1981.
External Transfer See transfer 1.
Extraneous Form A term suggested by Holmes (1988d) to describe 
one of four strategies for rendering verse form in TL. According to 
Holmes, the translator who opts for this approach “casts the metapoem 
[i.e. ST] into a form that is in no way implicit in either the form or 
the content of the original” (1988d:27). Holmes describes this strat-
egy as “deviant” as it does not derive from the original poem in any 
way; he comments that it is often the favoured strategy of translators 
whose work can be described as imitation. See also analogical form, 
content-derivative form, form-derivative forms, mapping, metapoem 
and mimetic form. Further reading: Holmes 1988d.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
57
Faithfulness (or Fidelity) General terms used to describe the extent 
to which a TT can be considered a fair representation of ST according 
to some criterion; while a given writer will tend to consistently use 
either one term or the other, any distinction between the two would 
be artificial. In traditional discussions of translation the concept of 
fidelity has probably been the most basic and widely used yardstick 
for measuring translation quality; however, partly because of a certain 
in-built vagueness and partly because of a perceived emotiveness 
(Sager 1994:121) it has more recently been replaced by notions such 
as equivalence, while these in turn are in many quarters now giving 
way to methodologies which do not rely so heavily on such concepts 
(see Snell-Hornby 1988/1995:13-22). Traditionally a faithful transla-
tion has been understood as one which bears a strong resemblance 
to its ST, usually in terms of either its literal adherence to source 
meaning or its successful communication of the “spirit” of the origi-
nal; not surprisingly therefore, the terms fidelity and faithfulness have 
frequently been used by writers on Bible translation. However, con-
temporary writers have made use of the terms in a number of different 
and often innovative ways. For Nida & Taber, for example, faithful-
ness is a property of a text which displays dynamic equivalence; a 
faithful translation is one which “evokes in a receptor essentially 
the same response as that displayed by the receptors of the original 
message” (1969/1982:201). This is an approach which is refined by 
Gutt, who defines faithfulness in terms of “resemblance in relevant 
respects” (1991:111), whether those be semantic, or purely formal as 
in the case of the verse by the German poet Morgenstern which he 
cites. Popovič appeals to the notion of faithfulness in order to justify 
the translator’s use of shifts, which according to him “do not occur 
because the translator wishes to ‘change’ a work, but because he 
strives to reproduce it as faithfully as possible and to grasp it in its 
totality, as an organic whole” (1970:80). Finally, Frawley advocates 
abandoning notions of fidelity and of good and bad translations, and 
suggests replacing the faithful/free dichotomy with one of moderate 
vs. radical (1984:173). See also abusive translation, accuracy, 
didactic fidelity, dynamic fidelity, exegetical fidelity, historical 
fidelity and resistancy. Further reading: Beekman & Callow 1974; 
Gile 1995a; Gutt 1991.
False Friends (or Faux Amis) A standard term used to describe SL 
and TL items which have the same or very similar form but different 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
58
meanings, and which consequently give rise to difficulties in transla-
tion (and indeed interlingual communication in general). As stated 
by Wandruszka (1978), the phenomenon of false friends is caused by 
historical chance, as cognate words may have developed differently 
in closely related languages. While some false friends have meanings 
which are quite distinct in the two languages (for example English 
to assist and French assister “to be present”, or English sensible as 
opposed to French sensible and German sensibel “sensitive”), the 
greatest danger of interference arises where the difference is more 
subtle (for instance English grin and the more restricted German 
grinsen). It should be added that sometimes false friends differ from 
each other only connotatively, as is the case with English let us and 
the more elevated German “equivalent” lasst uns. Although the ex-
istence of false friends is largely restricted to languages which are 
closely related, examples can also be found in languages which are 
much more distant. According to Wandruszka, if a TL false friend 
is used frequently enough in the SL sense it can eventually become 
a “true friend” by taking on that SL meaning in addition to its own 
(1978:228). Koller (1979/92) notes that the process of translator 
training should include raising students’ awareness of matters of 
interlingual interference, of which false friends are an important 
example. Further reading: Baker 1992; Vinay & Darbelnet 1958, 
1958/1995; Wandruszka 1978.
Faux Amis See false friends.
Fictitious Translation See pseudotranslation 1.
Fidelität See coherence.
Fidelity See faithfulness.
F.I.T. (International Federation of Translators, French Fédéra-
tion Internationale des Traducteurs) An association of translators’ 
organizations founded in Paris in 1953. Translators had begun to form 
their own associations after World War II, and the charter establishing 
F.I.T. was signed by pioneer societies of translators from France, West 
Germany, Italy, Norway, Denmark and Turkey. F.I.T. was authorized 
to operate as an international association by a ministerial order of 
18 March 1954. In 1955, the journal Babel started to appear as the 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
59
official organ of the federation. In 1963, the dubrovnik charter was 
adopted; it contained directives and recommendations on the rights 
and duties of translators, and thus contributed to the recognition of 
translation as a distinct and autonomous profession. See also a.i.i.c.. 
Further reading: Haeseryn 1994; Osers 1983.
Foreignizing Translation (or Minoritizing Translation) A term 
used by Venuti (1995) to designate the type of translation in which 
a TT is produced which deliberately breaks target conventions by 
retaining something of the foreignness of the original. Venuti sees the 
origin of such a concept in Schleiermacher, who discusses the type of 
translation in which “the translator leaves the author in peace, as much 
as possible, and moves the reader towards him” (Schleiermacher 
1838/1963:47, 1838/1977:74; Venuti 1995:19). Commenting that 
Schleiermacher viewed this as the preferred translation strategy, 
Venuti proposes its adoption in “aggressively monolingual” cultures 
(such as the Anglo-American) where the standard approach is that of 
domesticating translation. Adopting the strategy in this way would 
represent “a strategic cultural intervention in the current state of 
world affairs” (Venuti 1995:20), as it would challenge the mentality 
of the dominant culture which sought to suppress the foreignness (or 
“otherness”) of translated texts. Describing foreignizing translation 
as an “ethnodeviant pressure” (1995:20), Venuti thus sees its rôle as 
being to “register the linguistic and cultural difference of the foreign 
text, sending the reader abroad” (1995:20). In concrete terms such a 
strategy would entail not only a freedom from absolute obedience to 
target linguistic and textual constraints, but also where appropriate 
the selection of a non-fluent, opaque style and the deliberate inclusion 
of SL realia or TL archaisms; the cumulative effect of such features 
would be to provide TL readers with an “alien reading experience” 
(1995:20). However, since even the construction of the foreign 
“depends on domestic cultural materials” (1995:29), Venuti concedes 
that foreignizing translations are “equally partial [as domesticating 
translations] in their interpretation of the foreign text”, yet points 
out that they “tend to flaunt their partiality instead of concealing it” 
(1995:34). Examples of a foreignizing strategy in English include 
many of Ezra Pound’s translations, and Nabokov’s (1964/1975) 
famous literal translation of Pushkin’s Eugene Onegin. See also 
abusive translation and resistancy. Further reading: Venuti 1995.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
60
Form-derivative Forms A general term devised by Holmes (1988d) 
to refer to the two strategies of verse form translation which he terms 
analogical form and mimetic form. When using a form-derivative 
approach the translator selects a target verse form which in some 
way reflects that of ST; thus these two strategies are distinguished 
from those denoted by the terms content-derivative form and 
extraneous form. See also blank verse translation,  mapping, 
metapoem, metrical translation and rhymed translation. Further 
reading: Holmes 1988d.
Form-focused Texts (German Formbetonte Texte) See expressive 
texts.
Formal Correspondence According to Catford’s model, a formal 
relationship which exists when a TL category can be found which 
occupies “the ‘same’ place in the ‘economy’ of the TL as the given 
SL category occupies in the SL” (1965:27). In contrast to textual 
equivalence 1, this is a theoretical, systemic category which is estab-
lished on the basis of a formal comparison of SL and TL. Because of 
inevitable incompatibilities between the systems of the two languages, 
formal correspondence is nearly always approximate rather than 
absolute, although it is easier to establish at higher levels of linguis-
tic abstraction. For example, both French and English are languages 
which operate with grammatical units at five ranks (sentence, clause, 
group, word and morpheme); it is consequently reasonable to say 
that there is formal correspondence between these two hierarchies 
of units, even though not every instance of one rank in one language 
will be translated by an item of the same rank in the other. However, 
it is important not to confuse similar grammatical nomenclature with 
formal correspondence; thus for example, the term gerund denotes 
different word-classes in Russian and Latin, while to some extent 
the English category of indefiniteness and Russian sentence-final 
position can be said to be formal correspondents of each other. In 
a development of Catford’s idea, Ivir (1969, 1981), who approaches 
the concept from the discipline of contrastive linguistics, argues that 
formal correspondence between SL and TL items should be seen as a 
one-to-many relationship which can only be posited on the basis of an 
examination of pairs of “translationally equivalent” texts (1981:55). 
It should also be noted that the term formal correspondence is used 
by Nida & Taber (1969/1982) to refer to what they elsewhere term 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
61
formal equivalence. See also correspondence and equivalence. 
Further reading: Catford 1965.
Formal Equivalence (or Formal Correspondence) Defined by Nida 
as one of “two different types of equivalence” (see also dynamic 
equivalence), which “focuses attention on the message itself, in 
both form and content” (1964:159). Formal equivalence is thus the 
“quality of a translation in which the features of the form of the source 
text have been mechanically reproduced in the receptor language” 
(Nida & Taber 1969/1982:201). Nida proposed his categorisation 
in the context of Bible translation, and in many respects it offers a 
more useful distinction than the more traditional notions of free and 
literal translation (Hatim & Mason 1990:7). The aim of a translator 
who is striving for formal equivalence is to allow ST to speak “in its 
own terms” rather than attempting to adjust it to the circumstances 
of the target culture; in practice this means, for example, using 
formal rather than functional equivalents wherever possible, not 
joining or splitting sentences, and preserving formal indicators such as 
punctuation marks and paragraph breaks (Nida 1964:165). The frequent 
result of such strategies is of course that, because of differences in 
structure between SL and TL, a translation of this type “distorts the 
grammatical and stylistic patterns of the receptor language, and hence 
distorts the message” (Nida & Taber 1969/1982:201). For this reason it 
is frequently necessary to include explanatory notes to help the target 
reader (1964:166). Like its converse, dynamic equivalence, formal 
equivalence represents a general orientation rather than an absolute 
technique, so that between the two opposite extremes there are any 
number of intervening grades, all of which represent acceptable 
methods of translation (1964:160). However, a general tendency 
towards formal rather than dynamic equivalence is characterized 
by, for example, a concern for accuracy (1964:159) and a preference 
for retaining the original wording wherever possible. In spite of its 
apparent limitations, however, formal equivalence is sometimes 
the most appropriate strategy to follow: besides frequently being 
chosen for translating Biblical and other sacred texts, it is also useful 
for back-translation and for when the translator or interpreter 
may for some reason be unwilling to accept responsibility for 
changing the wording of TT (see Hatim & Mason 1990:7). It 
should be noted that when Nida & Taber (1969/1982) discuss this 
concept they use the term formal correspondence to refer to it. See 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
62
also gloss translation. Further reading: Nida 1964; Nida & Taber 
1969/1982; Tymoczko 1985.
Formal Equivalent A term used by Nida (1964) to refer to a TL 
item which represents the closest decontextualized counterpart to a 
word or phrase in SL. Clearly, not all items in one language will have 
formal equivalents in another, for example because many apparent 
equivalents in fact refer to objects which are subtly different (as is for 
example the case with words for bread even in different Western 
European languages), and also because many words refer to cul-
tural or geographical phenomena which do not necessarily have any 
equivalent in other languages (1964:167; see also realia and voids 
for examples). Nida argues that, in a translation which is aiming for 
a high degree of formal rather than dynamic equivalence, there will 
be a tendency to use formal equivalents wherever possible, even in 
contexts like those described above. This will of course frequently 
result in a translation which is not easily understood, and which 
will need to be supplemented, for example by means of footnotes. 
An example of this would be if the Western European use of the 
word heart to represent the seat of the emotions were transposed 
into another language where a different part of the body (such as the 
liver or abdomen) normally served that function (adapted from Nida 
1964:172). Nida points out that certain ST elements, such as puns 
and other strictly formal features, will almost inevitably lie beyond 
the reach of formal equivalents (1964:165). See also functional 
equivalent. Further reading: Nida 1964.
Forward-transformation See restructuring.
Free Translation A type of translation in which more attention 
is paid to producing a naturally reading TT than to preserving the 
ST wording intact; also known as sense-for-sense translation, 
it contrasts with literal and word-for-word translation. Lin-
guistically it can be defined as a translation “made on a level higher 
than is necessary to convey the content unchanged while observing 
TL norms” (Barkhudarov 1969:11, translated). In other words, the 
unit of translation in a free translation might be anything up to a 
sentence (or more) even if the content of the ST in question could be 
reproduced satisfactorily by translating on the word or group level. 
Furthermore, according to Catford (1965) it is a prerequisite of free 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
63
translations that they should also be unbounded (1965:25) as regards 
the rank (or level) on which they are performed. Free translations are 
thus generally more “TL-oriented” than literal translations. The free/
literal dichotomy is probably the one most frequently encountered in 
traditional accounts of translation; however, it has been developed in 
various ways. For example, some writers have redefined the contrast 
in different terms without significantly altering the underlying concepts: 
e.g. Nida’s (1964) dynamic and formal equivalence. Others have 
suggested alternative contrasts based on related though different 
notions: e.g. House’s (1977) covert and overt translation, Gutt’s 
(1991) direct translation 3 and indirect translation 2 or Toury’s 
(1980, 1995) acceptability and adequacy 2. A third tendency has 
been to attempt to get away from binary contrasts altogether: e.g. 
Dryden’s (1680/1989) imitation 1, metaphrase and paraphrase. Some 
writers have furthermore chosen to side-step the issue, an approach 
which is probably most strongly associated with target text-oriented 
translation studies. However, it is generally agreed nowadays 
that free and literal translation do not form a binary contrast, and 
that the most appropriate translation strategy will vary according 
to the text-type being translated and the purpose of the translation 
(see for example skopos theory). See also idiomatic translation, 
prescriptive translation studies and sense-for-sense translation. 
Further reading: Catford 1965.
Full Translation According to Catford’s model, a term used to refer 
to the kind of translation in which the entire text is translated, or in 
other words, “every part of the SL text is replaced by TL text material” 
(1965:21). Such a TT will consequently contain no SL elements at all, 
whether extended passages or single lexical items. See also partial 
translation. Further reading: Catford 1965.
Function-oriented Translation Studies (or Function-oriented 
Descriptive Translation Studies) Defined by Holmes (1988e) 
as one of three types of descriptive translation studies. This 
approach is concerned with analysing the function of translations 
in the context of the recipient cultural and social setting, and 
typically addresses such questions as which texts were or were not 
selected for translation by a particular culture, and what influences 
were exerted as a result of such selection. Greater systematizing 
of this area might possibly lead to the establishment of translation 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
64
sociology as a separate field of study (1988e:72). See also process-
oriented translation studies and product-oriented translation 
studies. Further reading: Holmes 1988e.
Functional Equivalence A term used to refer to the type of 
equivalence reflected in a TT which seeks to adapt the function of 
the original to suit the specific context in and for which it was produced. 
According to Gutt, the function that a text is intended to fulfil is now 
probably the “most widely accepted frame of reference for translation 
equivalence” (1991:10). However, while the term is used by a number 
of writers, it is perhaps defined most systematically by House (1977). 
House’s aim is to develop a methodology for assessing translation 
quality, and so her concept of functional equivalence is basically 
evaluative. She presents (1977:42) a detailed, “multi-dimensional” 
analysis of text function in which she distinguishes three dimensions 
of linguistic usage relating to the language user (geographical origin, 
social class and time), and five reflecting language use (medium, 
participation, social role relationship, social attitude and province, 
or general area of discourse). Using this framework it is possible to 
build up a “text profile” for both ST and TT, and House argues that 
a translated text “should not only match its source text in function, but 
employ equivalent situational-dimensional means to achieve that 
function” (1977:49). This means that there should be a high level of 
matching between ST and TT in the dimensions which are particularly 
relevant to the text in question if TT is to be considered functionally 
equivalent to ST (1977:49). Within House’s wider model, functional 
equivalence is only attainable in cases of covert translation (1977: 
204), although even here it is difficult to achieve “because differences 
of the socio-cultural norms have to be taken into account” (1977:205). 
However, according to Gutt, problems remain in the case of texts 
which possess more than one function (1991:10); indeed, it would be 
extremely difficult to construct a model which could accommodate 
such texts. It should be noted that the term functional equivalence is 
also used by de Waard & Nida (1986) to replace what Nida elsewhere 
refers to as dynamic equivalence; according to de Waard & Nida, 
the new term is less open to misinterpretation, and its use serves to 
“highlight the communicative functions of translating” (1986:viii). 
Further reading: Gutt 1991; House 1977; de Waard & Nida 1986.
Functional Equivalent According to Nida (1964), a TL item chosen to 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
65
translate an ST word or phrase not for its formal similarity to this ST 
item but because it offers target readers a clearer understanding of the 
contextual meaning of the original. Such a translation might be settled 
upon either in preference to a more literal translation, or because no 
such phenomenon − and hence no formal equivalent − exists in TL. 
Nida cites the example of how people to whom the concept of snow 
was unknown might have a phrase such as white as kapok down, 
which could be used as a functional equivalent of the English white 
as snow (1964:171). Use of functional rather than formal equivalents 
(with or without the formal equivalent being supplied in a footnote) 
tends to be a feature of translations which aim for a high degree of 
dynamic equivalence (1964:172). Further reading: Nida 1964.
Games, Translation and the Theory of A concept based on a paral-
lel between the translation process and the activity of game-playing 
originally suggested by Wittgenstein, who includes “translating 
from one language into another” (1953: I: 23) in a list of examples 
of language games. However, the idea was first exploited in a dis-
cussion specifically devoted to translation by Levý (1967). In the 
course of his analysis of translation as decision-making, Levý draws 
on the concepts of game theory invented by Luce & Raiffa (1957), 
and applies them to the process of translation in order to highlight 
the nature of the decisions which a translator typically has to make 
when translating a literary text. On the basis of the earlier work Levý 
distinguishes two basic types of game, respectively typified by chess 
and card-games, and argues that translation resembles the former, 
since “every succeeding move is influenced by the knowledge of 
previous decisions and by the situation which resulted from them” 
(1967:1172). In this way, each time a decision is made the translator 
creates the context for a number of subsequent decisions. One further 
important parallel between the translation process and this type of 
game (termed games with complete information) is that, while the 
decisions are non-random, they may still be inspired by subjective 
preferences (Gorlée 1986:99). Levý argues that an analysis of the 
hierarchy of the translational decisions contained in a given TT will 
cast light on the “degree of importance of various elements in the 
literary work” (1967:1172). Gorlée describes the translation process 
as “a kaleidoscopic, never-ending game of creative mental skill” 
(1986:103); however, in contrast to Levý she argues that translation 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
66
is more akin to assembling a jigsaw than to a game of chess (although 
with the one significant difference that in translation there is no one 
pre-existing solution which needs to be discovered). See also mapping. 
Further reading: Gorlée 1986, 1994; Levý 1967.
Gaps See voids.
Gemeinte, Das (Intended Meaning) See tertium comparationis.
General Theories of Translation A term used by Holmes (1988e) to 
refer to one of two branches of theoretical translation studies (see 
also partial theories of translation). A general theory of transla-
tion is defined as “a full, inclusive theory accommodating so many 
elements that it can serve to explain and predict all phenomena fall-
ing within the terrain of translating and translation, to the exclusion 
of all phenomena falling outside it” (1988e:73). Given the diverse, 
multifaceted nature of the discipline of translation studies, it is 
understandable that such a theory “will necessarily be highly for-
malized and ... also highly complex” (1988e:73). Such a theory (if 
it is attainable at all) has yet to be arrived at; as Holmes points out, 
although a number of possible candidates have from time to time been 
proposed, they are all strictly speaking either a) merely a discussion 
of some of the initial considerations which such a theory will need 
to take account of, or b) a list of axioms or hypotheses which either 
fail to explain all the phenomena associated with translation or take 
in other phenomena besides, or c) simply too partial or specific to be 
considered as general theories (1988e:73). See also pure translation 
studies and translation theory. Further reading: Holmes 1988e.
Generalization 1 (or Modulation/Generalization) A term used in 
van Leuven-Zwart’s (1989, 1990) model for comparing a literary text 
with its translation, generalization is defined as the type of modula-
tion 2 in which the dissimilarity between ST and TT transemes is 
characterized by a shift towards greater generality in TT; as such it 
contrasts with the opposite phenomenon of specification. See also 
architranseme, integral translation, modification and mutation. 
Further reading: van Leuven-Zwart 1989, 1990.
2 See generalizing translation.
Generalizing Translation (or Generalization) A term used by 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
67
Hervey & Higgins (1992) to describe a situation where TL uses an 
expression which is wider and less specific than the SL expression 
it translates, as is for example the case when translating English 
daughters by French filles: filles is less specific than daughters, since 
it could also mean girls. According to Hervey & Higgins, general-
izing translation is acceptable if TL has no suitable alternative, or if 
the omitted detail may be gleaned from the TT context or is just not 
important (1992:95). However, they consider this strategy unacceptable 
in circumstances contrary to the above, or if the omitted detail cannot 
be compensated for elsewhere in TT (1992:95-96). See also overlap-
ping translation, particularizing translation and undertranslation. 
Further reading: Hervey & Higgins 1992.
Gist Translation A term common in discussions of translation, and 
used by Hervey & Higgins to refer to “a style of translation in which 
the TT expresses a condensed version of the contents of the ST” 
(1992:250); in other words, a gist translation is one which provides 
“a synopsis of the ST” (1992:250). Within Hervey & Higgins’ frame-
work gist translation contrasts with exegetic translation in terms of 
the amount of detail which it provides. See also rephrasing. Further 
reading: Hervey & Higgins 1992.
Gloss Translation According to Nida, the kind of translation in 
which the translator tries “to reproduce as literally and meaningfully 
as possible the form and content of the original” (1964:159). As 
such, gloss translation typifies the approach usually associated with 
formal equivalence. Nida points out that the production of such a 
word-for-word translation will probably necessitate the inclusion of 
numerous footnotes in order to make the text comprehensible to the 
TL reader. A gloss translation might be of use as a study aid, and has 
the advantage of giving the TL reader deeper insight into elements 
of source language and culture (1964:159). See also interlinear 
translation. Further reading: Nida 1964.
Glücken See success.
Goal Language See target language.
Grammatical Analysis See analysis.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
68
Grammatical Translation Defined by Catford as a type of re-
stricted translation in which “the SL grammar of a text is replaced 
by equivalent TL grammar, but with no replacement of lexis” 
(1965:71). For example, the English sentence This is the man I saw 
might be grammatically translated into French as Voici le man que 
j’ai see-é; here everything except the two lexical items (man and see) 
is replaced by French equivalents (1965:71). It should be noted that 
grammatical and lexical translation are the converse of each other, 
since grammatical translation from language A into language B arrives 
at the same result as lexical translation in the other direction. See also 
graphological translation and phonological translation. Further 
reading: Catford 1965.
Grammatical Transposition A term used by Hervey & Higgins to 
refer to “the replacement or reinforcement of given parts of speech in 
the ST by other parts of speech in the TT, whenever this is made neces-
sary by significant differences of syntactic configuration between the 
SL and the TL” (1992:200). For example, in translating Je persiste 
à croire qu’ils ont raison as I still think they’re right, the adverb still 
is used in TT to convey what is expressed in ST by the verb persiste. 
Hervey & Higgins point out that while they use the term grammatical 
transposition in order to distinguish the phenomenon from cultural 
transposition, some other writers refer to it simply as transposition. 
Further reading: Hervey & Higgins 1992. 
Graphological Translation According to Catford (1965), a type 
of restricted translation. According to Catford, it is possible to 
reduce letters (or other graphological units such as ideograms) to a 
description in terms of a number of distinctive features. Thus for 
example, all the letters of the Roman and Cyrillic alphabets can be 
seen as consisting of a number of vertical, horizontal, oblique and 
semicircular components. On the basis of such a description, it is 
possible to set up equivalence relations between letters from these 
two alphabets. For instance, the Russian word СПУТІІИΚ can be 
graphologically translated into the Roman form CHYTHNK by 
substituting Cyrillic letters not with their nearest Roman sound 
equivalents, but with those Roman letters which most closely resemble 
them in appearance. An approximation to graphological translation 
is sometimes practised by typographers in order to give a text an 
“exotic” flavour; instances of this are particularly common in 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
69
advertising. See also grammatical translation, lexical translation, 
phonological translation and transliteration. Further reading: 
Catford 1965.
Hermeneutic Motion A model introduced by Steiner (1975/1992) 
to describe the process of literary translation. Considering the act 
of translation in the context of human communication across barriers 
of language, culture, time and personality, Steiner subdivides the 
“hermeneutic motion” represented by the translation process into four 
stages (or moves); throughout his argument he famously eschews a fixed 
terminology, preferring a multiple designation of each stage. The first 
move is termed trust or faith, and consists of the translator’s assumption 
that ST contains “a sense to be extracted and retrieved ... into and via 
his own speech” (1975/1992:372); although this is generally an 
instantaneous, unconscious action, Steiner argues that it represents a 
vital assumption which underlies every act of translation. Next comes 
aggression, penetration or decipherment, in which the translator 
“invades, extracts and brings home” (1975/1992:314) the meaning 
of the original. Steiner here refers to St. Jerome’s image of the ST 
meaning being led home captive by the translator; the imagery 
of aggression is appropriate, he argues, because “decipherment is 
dissective, leaving the shell smashed and the vital layers stripped” 
(1975/1992:314). The third move is termed incorporation, embodi-
ment or appropriative use. “Acts of translation add to our means” 
(1975/1992:315) by introducing new elements into the target linguistic 
and cultural system. Furthermore, such importation frequently brings 
change: “no language, no traditional symbolic set or cultural ensemble 
imports without risk of being transformed” (1975/1992:315). Steiner 
elucidates the stage of incorporation by means of two images: such 
an intake of new elements into the system can be viewed in terms of 
either receiving the sacrament or becoming infected. Such an action, 
however, causes a disequilibrium within the system, which can only be 
rectified by the fourth and final stage, which is termed compensation, 
restitution or fidelity. Here, since an act of plunder has taken place, 
Steiner argues that both the translator and the translation need to 
make recompense: “translation fails where it does not compensate” 
(1975/1992:417). Translations commonly misrepresent their STs 
by either failing to do justice to all the aspects of the original, or by 
augmenting the original’s effect; the translator needs to be aware of 
this and attempt to rectify TT’s imbalances. On one level this process is 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
70
of course linguistic: “translators must now work to restore in their own 
language what they failed to recover from the original text” (Leighton 
1991:23). However, Steiner presents the translator’s task almost as 
one of moral obligation to the original: “The translator ... is faithful 
to his text, makes his response responsible, only when he endeavours 
to restore the balance of forces, of integral presence, which his 
appropriative comprehension has disrupted” (1975/1992:318, emphasis 
original). In this way Steiner suggests an alternative to the traditional 
linking of the notion of faithfulness to the free/literal dichotomy. 
The translation, on the other hand, may be said to compensate the 
original by bringing it to life in a new cultural context: “Translation 
recompenses in that it can provide the original with a persistence and 
geographical-cultural range of survival which it would otherwise 
lack” (1975/1992:416). It is in this final stage that Steiner’s ultimately 
philosophical aims are most clear: while his scheme does relate to 
individual acts of translation, his main concern is with the elucidation 
of the nature of translation in the light of broader philosophical, 
cultural and even metaphysical considerations. Further reading: Kelly 
1979; Leighton 1991; Steiner 1975/1992.
Hierarchy of Correspondences Defined by Holmes (1988b) as 
the order of priorities set up by the translator, who has to decide 
which ST features to “preserve” in TT, possibly at the expense of 
other features. Holmes argues that what is achieved in a translation 
− and particularly in the case of literary translation − is “not 
textual equivalence in any strict sense of the term, but a network 
of correspondences, or matchings, with a varying closeness of 
fit” (1988g:101). He lists various kinds of correspondence, such 
as formal, semantic or functional (1988g:101), which can form 
the basis of a translation solution. However, as he points out, the 
translator finds that “the choice of a specific kind of correspondence 
in connection with one feature of the source-text map determines the 
kind of correspondence available for another” (1988b:86). For this 
reason the translator establishes a hierarchy of correspondences, by 
giving priority, for example, to a strict formal correspondence and 
as a result having to reduce correspondence requirements in regard 
to the semantic content. According to Holmes, while semantic 
correspondence receives priority in many less complex texts, the 
establishment of a hierarchy of correspondence for literary texts is 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
71
much more difficult (1988b:86). See also mapping. Further reading: 
Holmes 1988b.
Historical Fidelity A term used by Beekman & Callow (1974) to 
refer to one of two complementary principles of fidelity which should 
guide the translation of Biblical texts (see also didactic fidelity). 
Historical fidelity is defined as the strategy of not transplanting his-
torical narratives into a target setting, and is based on the conviction 
that the Christian faith is rooted in history. Beekman & Callow thus 
argue that “objects, places, persons, animals, customs, beliefs, or 
activities which are part of a historical statement must be translated 
in such a way that the same information is communicated by the 
translation as by the original statements” (1974:35). The principle of 
historical fidelity can be violated by the inappropriate use of cultural 
substitution (1974:203). As pointed out by Gutt, it should be noted 
that the principle of historical fidelity does not follow so much from 
translation theory as from the “high importance attached to matters 
of history in the Christian faith” (1991:114-15). See also faithfulness. 
Further reading: Beekman & Callow 1974.
Homophonic Translation See phonemic translation.
Horizontal Translation A term coined by Folena (1973/1991) to 
refer to one of two types of translation used in the Middle Ages (see 
also vertical translation). Folena defines horizontal translation as 
translation “between languages with a similar structure and a strong 
cultural affinity” (1973/1991:13, translated). In other words, in hori-
zontal translation both SL and TL have a similar value as languages in 
that neither has any special prestige. Thus translation from Provençal 
into Italian, or Norman French into English, would both be examples 
of this particular strategy since all of these languages are vernaculars 
(see Bassnett 1980/1991:52). Horizontal translation, however, is 
also characterized by a blurring of the distinction between transla-
tion, imitation, unacknowledged borrowing and original creation; 
this is because, as Bassnett points out, “originality of material was 
not greatly prized and an author’s skill consisted in the reworking 
of established themes and ideas” (1980/1991:53). Further reading: 
Bassnett 1980/1991; Folena 1973/1991.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
72
Hyperinformation (German Hyperinformation) Defined by Reiss & 
Vermeer (1984) as information which is interpolated by the interpreter 
in order to compensate for the hearer’s possible lack of any cultural 
background knowledge which is necessary for a proper understanding 
of the message. Further reading: Reiss & Vermeer 1984.
IA See information offer.
Identity One of a series of terms used to refer to the way ST and TT 
meaning (and other features) relate to each other. However, identity 
contrasts with such notions as adequacy, correspondence, equi-
valence and invariance in that it implies a much closer relationship 
than these other terms. For this reason most writers have shied away 
from using the term. Nida & Taber, for example, distinguish between 
identity and equivalence, and argue that the translator should strive 
for the latter rather than the former, as for them identity implies 
“conservation of the form of the utterance”, rather than “reproduction 
of the message” of the original (1969/1982:12). Wilss also objects 
to the term, since its use can lead to the mistaken impression that 
linguistic communication is “computable in a rigorous mathematical 
sense” (1982:152). Frawley, who understands identity as “exactness 
in recoding” (1984:163), argues that it can only exist in trivial cases 
(1984:163). Interlingual identity cannot be equated with absolute 
synonymy, as the meaning of items belonging to a given linguistic 
system depends just as much on their relationships with other items 
in the system as it does on those with the reality which is being rep-
resented (1984:163). Frawley also discusses the possible relevance to 
interlingual identity of linguistic universals − or features of language 
which are thought to be present in all human languages − and con-
cludes that their existence can only establish “point-to-point identity” 
(1984:166), while their use in translation “has the effect of changing 
translation into copying across codes” (1984:166). Thus Frawley 
concludes that “identity may be granted across linguistic codes, but 
this identity is actually useless in translation” (1984:167). See also 
formal correspondence. Further reading: Frawley 1984.
Idiomatic Translation (or Idiomatic Approach) A term used by 
Beekman & Callow (1974) in the field of Bible translation, and by 
Larson (1984) more generally, to refer to a translation strategy which 
aims for a TT which reads as naturally as possible. The approach is 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
73
similar to that of dynamic equivalence, in that it stresses the impor-
tance of reproducing the original’s impact on the target audience. 
An idiomatic translation is thus defined as one “which has the same 
meaning as the source language but is expressed in the natural form 
of the receptor language”, and one in which “the meaning, not the 
form, is retained.” (Larson 1984:10, emphasis removed). The aim 
of such a meaning-based method is to reproduce the same message 
for a new audience in the form of a translation which reads like a 
text originally composed in TL. This is achieved not only by careful 
linguistic reformulation and paraphrase, but also by paying close 
attention to the need to make explicit for target readers information 
which, for example, was generally available to the source audience 
and thus only implicitly contained in ST. This is, however, a high 
aim, and Gutt (1991) argues that it will only meet with limited suc-
cess, since it fails to take full account of the “inferential nature of 
communication and its strong dependence on context” (1991:99). See 
also free translation and naturalness. Further reading: Beekman & 
Callow 1974; Larson 1984.
Idiomaticity See idiomatic translation.
Imitation 1 According to the seventeenth century writer Dryden, one 
of three possible methods of translating. Dryden uses the term imitation 
to refer to what is otherwise known as free translation; he does not 
invent the term himself, but rather borrows it from Cowley, whose 
(1656/1905) translations of the Roman poet Pindar’s Odes are cited 
as an example of the procedure. Dryden characterizes the approach 
as a process in which the translator “assumes the liberty, not only to 
vary from the words and sense, but to forsake them both as he sees 
occasion” (1680/1989:8). Indeed, for Dryden this process represents 
such extreme deviation from the original that he questions whether it 
can with any legitimacy be thought of as translation at all; instead, he 
likens it to creating a variation on a theme or giving a present when 
what is expected is the repayment of a debt. Yet Dryden’s view of imi-
tation is clearly somewhat ambivalent, as he concedes that Cowley’s 
translations of Pindar are not as extreme in practice as his theoreti-
cal depiction may suggest, and even states that in the case of such a 
difficult and idiosyncratic writer as Pindar imitation was the only pos-
sible technique to adopt. However, while Dryden acknowledges that 
the practice of imitation can allow the “translator” to show himself 
advantageously by creating something new, he in general views it as 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
74
“the greatest wrong which can be done to the memory and reputation 
of the dead” (1680/1989:10). See also metaphrase and paraphrase. 
Further reading: Dryden (1680/1989); Frost 1955.
2 According to Lefevere (1975), one of two sub-types of the 
translation strategy which he terms interpretation. In all, Lefevere 
describes seven different strategies for translating poetry on the basis of 
his analysis of different English translations of a single poem by the 
Roman writer Catullus. Strictly speaking, however, Lefevere does not 
consider imitation − or version 2, the other sub-type of interpretation − 
to be translation at all. He accordingly defines imitation as the creation 
of a “new” poem, which “has only title and point of departure, if those, 
in common with the source text” (1975:76). Thus ST will simply serve 
as a source of inspiration for the imitation-writer, who produces a 
text which must be considered a “different work” (1975:103). The text 
thus produced represents a radically new interpretation of the original, 
which, in contrast to a version, is governed purely by the imitator’s 
personal aesthetic inclinations. See also blank verse translation, 
literal translation 2, metapoem, metrical translation, phonemic 
translation, poetry into prose and rhymed translation. Further 
reading: Lefevere 1975.
Indeterminacy A concept used in philosophical discussions of 
meaning and translation. Broadly speaking, the term indeterminacy 
refers to the unavoidable ambiguity which arises in both interlingual 
and intralingual communication; however, it has been used by different 
writers in different ways. The concept was originally formulated by 
Quine (1959/1966, 1960), and was illustrated through his notion of 
radical translation. Quine argues that “translation manuals” (i.e. 
systems of interlingual equivalences) present only one of a potentially 
unlimited number of mutually incompatible, yet internally consistent 
mappings between the totality of SL and TL items, and consequently 
suggests that it would be at least theoretically possible to formulate 
a new set of correspondences which would challenge the one which 
had been traditionally accepted (1960:72). Indeterminacy of this 
type originates in the fact that sentences which are sufficiently 
free of situational or cultural implicatures to be translated with 
confidence are too sparse to provide a fixed, reliable basis from 
which one single, unchallengeable set of translational equivalences 
for the entire language could be developed. However, for Quine the 
type of indeterminacy which is revealed by the case of translation is 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
75
simply a graphic demonstration of the more general phenomenon 
of intralingual indeterminacy. This can be described through the 
observation that the sentences of a language could be mapped onto 
each other in different permutations in such a way that, although the 
“overall pattern of associations of sentences with one another and 
with non-verbal stimulation” (Quine 1960:27) was maintained, there 
would be many sentences whose meaning drastically diverged from 
that of their respective correlates. In other words, according to Quine, 
not even synonymy − the intralingual counterpart of interlingual 
equivalence − can avoid containing a certain element of arbitrariness. 
Furthermore, as can be seen from the above, Quine is not interested 
in the translation of individual words or sentences; for him, the 
basic unit of meaning (and therefore of translation) is the entire 
language (Harrison 1979:114). Consequently, it is meaningless to 
ask what the real TL equivalent of an SL sentence would be, unless 
one is working within “some total scheme of translation which 
matches up all the sentences of [SL] with all the sentences of 
[TL]” (Harrison 1979:108, emphasis original). However, a number 
of writers have commented on the pessimistic nature of Quine’s 
notion of indeterminacy. Pym, for example, observes that it is “widely 
thought to be a theory not of translation but of untranslatability” 
(1992a:181). Davidson’s (1984) version of indeterminacy, on the 
other hand, represents a less extreme notion than Quine’s. One of 
the main reasons for this is Davidson’s advocacy of a “principle of 
charity”, which dictates that, faced with a problem of interpretation, 
one is generally best advised to “prefer theories of interpretation that 
minimize disagreement” (1984:xvii) and by so doing to maximize 
one’s chances of understanding what the SL speaker is trying to 
communicate. Davidson reduces the notion of indeterminacy to the 
idea that it is ultimately impossible to decide whether an SL speaker 
has “used words as we do but has more or less weird beliefs, [or 
whether] we have translated him wrong” (Davidson 1984:101). He 
observes that the concept of indeterminacy includes the recognition 
that certain apparent distinctions are not important, and concludes 
by saying that “If there is indeterminacy, it is because when all the 
evidence is in, alternative ways of stating the facts remain open” 
(Davidson 1984:154). Such ambiguities do not, however, inhibit 
the ability of the TL hearer or reader to make sense of the message. 
Mutual comprehension is never out of reach; indeed, according 
to Andrew Benjamin, in Davidson’s way of looking at things it is 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
76
“almost inescapable” (Benjamin 1989:61). See also translatability. 
Further reading: Davidson 1984; Harrison 1979; Malmkjær 1993; 
Quine 1959/1966, 1960.
Indirect Translation 1 (or Intermediate Translation, or Mediated 
Translation, or Retranslation, or Second-Hand Translation) A term 
used to denote the procedure whereby a text is not translated directly 
from an original ST, but via an intermediate translation in another 
language. According to Toury (1980, 1995), such a procedure is of 
course norm-governed, and different literary systems will tolerate 
it to varying extents. For example, it is frequently encountered in 
weak polysystems which depend on other, stronger systems for 
literary models and precedents, particularly where the language of 
the dominant system is widely spoken; in stronger polysystems it can 
be seen in the practice of established TL poets “translating” an ST (in 
an SL of which they have no knowledge) with the aid of a TL crib. 
Another situation in which indirect translation is turned to is where 
there is no suitable bilingual dictionary in existence. TTs produced 
in this manner have a greater tendency towards acceptability, as the 
original ST is frequently not even available to be consulted, and the 
parameters of an ST which is a translation in its own right are less 
likely to be held to be inviolable. In spite of the fact that indirect 
translation is relatively widespread in some parts of the world, it is not 
a procedure which is generally approved of; the nairobi declaration, 
for example, states that recourse should be had to it “only where 
absolutely necessary” (Osers 1983:182). See also direct translation 
1, pivot language, preliminary norms and relay interpreting. Further 
reading: Toury 1980, 1995.
2 According to Gutt (1991), one of two possible types of transla-
tion (see also direct translation 3). Gutt introduces the notion in 
the framework of Sperber and Wilson’s (1986) relevance theory, 
and uses it to investigate the theoretical implications of the concepts 
of dynamic and functional equivalence which originate within 
the Bible-translating tradition. Indirect translation is defined as the 
strategy used by the translator when the dilemma between “the need 
to give the receptor language audience access to the authentic mean-
ing of the original, unaffected by the translator’s own interpretation 
effort” (1991:177) and “the urge to communicate as clearly as pos-
sible” (1991:177) is resolved in favour of the latter. An indirect 
translation will typically expand upon and elucidate ST so that 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
77
implicit information which it contains and which is easily retrievable 
by the SL audience in the original context envisaged by the ST 
writer will be equally available to the TL audience. Consequently 
an indirect translation created for a communicative context which 
differs significantly from the original context is likely to include large 
amounts of additional interpolated explanatory information; such a 
translation is, however, considered faithful inasmuch as it resembles 
the original in “relevant respects” (1991:111). A strategy of indirect 
translation is frequently employed when translating the Bible into 
languages which are rooted in cultures and world-views radically 
different from those presupposed by the original, or from the trans-
lator’s own. Gutt argues that the distinction between this approach 
and direct translation throws new theoretical light on the free versus 
literal translation debate. Further reading: Gutt 1991.
Industrial Process, Translation as A term used by Sager (1994) to 
refer to the use of automatic and semi-automatic routines to facilitate, 
accelerate or lower the cost of the translation process, as for example 
in machine and machine-aided translation. The expression “indus-
trial process” is used even though the “substance” being processed 
− language − is “man-made and symbolic”, unlike other industrial 
materials (1994:19). However, Sager points out that, while there are 
models in theoretical and applied linguistics which are designed to 
account for the characteristics of language, the specification of the 
automated translation process presents difficulties, because work 
which has been done on translation theory is based on human 
rather than machine translation (1994:19-20); Sager thus argues that 
the design specifications for machine translation systems need to be 
based on theoretical models specifically created to account for this 
type of translation (1994:20). See also reader-oriented and writer-
oriented machine translation. Further reading: Sager 1994.
Information Load See communication load.
Information Offer (or Offer of Information) (German Informa-
tionsangebot or IA) A term suggested by Vermeer (1982) as an 
alternative to Stein’s (1979, 1980) description of a text as a collec-
tion of instructions to the recipient. Vermeer argues that the term 
instruction is not a helpful way of designating an act of communi-
cation, preferring to view all communication in “more democratic” 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
78
(1982:99, translated), “more evaluatively neutral” (Reiss & Vermeer 
1984:73, translated) terms as an offer (1982:99), whereby it is the 
responsibility of the reader or listener to interpret the multivalent, 
potentially ambiguous message in the way that makes greatest sense 
in the given context and with the given purpose of the communica-
tion. However, with such multivalence in the original message, it is 
inevitable that every reception of a message will only realize some 
of the possible meanings which it contains, while producing fur-
ther possible meanings not present in the original (Reiss & Vermeer 
1984:62); consequently, each interpretation of a message may be seen 
as a new information offer in its own right, or “information offer about 
an information offer” (“Informationsangebot über ein Information-
sangebot”, 1984:67). Vermeer argues that there are at least two types 
of such “secondary” information offers: commentary and translation 
(1982:99). In this way translation is characterized as a special type 
(“Sondersorte”) of information offer (Reiss & Vermeer 1984:103) 
which simulates the original text or message by interpreting it in a 
different linguistic and cultural context. Vermeer thus rejects notions 
of translation as a two stage process in which the translator acts as 
a kind of “relay station” (Reiss & Vermeer 1984:77, translated), 
receiving a message, recoding it and transmitting it to the target audi-
ence; instead he aligns himself with scholars such as Neubert (1970), 
House (1977; see covert translation and overt translation) and 
Diller & Kornelius (1978; see primary translation and secondary 
translation), who argue that the process of translation is one which 
involves providing the target audience with “information” about ST, 
and therefore one which allows the translator to make responsible, 
creative decisions (Reiss & Vermeer 1984:75). Central to Vermeer’s 
argument is the claim that the translator’s decisions are made not on 
the basis of the text-type (see expressive texts, informative texts, 
multi-medial texts and operative texts) of the original, but rather 
in line with the particular purpose (or skopos) which the translation 
is designed to serve. In the light of such considerations translation 
is seen as achieving not something less than the original text, but 
something new and different. Further reading: Reiss & Vermeer 
1984; Vermeer 1982.
Informationsangebot See information offer.
Informative Texts (German Informative Texte) (formerly Content-
focused Texts; German Inhaltsbetonte Texte) According to Reiss 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
79
(1977/1989), one of three main text-types (see also expressive texts 
and operative texts). Reiss’ typology is intended as a set of guidelines 
for translators and translation critics, and the three types which she 
proposes are distinguished from each other in terms of their major 
function, which is reflected in the language they contain, and which 
needs to be preserved in TT. In the case of informative texts the 
primary aim is one of conveying information to the receiver. This 
means that a translator should concentrate on establishing semantic 
equivalence, and only then turn to other kinds, such as connotative 
or aesthetic (see Reiss & Vermeer 1984:157). Similarly, a translation 
which is deemed to fulfil this function of reproducing in TL the 
informative content of SL should be judged to be successful. Reiss 
makes the point that her text-types represent tendencies rather than 
clearly delineated categories, and that it is possible for texts to have 
secondary, more subsidiary functions; however, reference works, 
business letters, official documents and academic articles all represent 
this text-type to varying degrees. See also multi-medial texts and 
skopos theory. Further reading: Nord 1996; Reiss 1971, 1976, 1977, 
1977/1989; Reiss & Vermeer 1984.
Initial Norm Defined by Toury (1980, 1995) as one of a number 
of basic types of norm which guide the production of a TT. In spite 
of the name, this type of norm does not precede other norms, but 
has logical priority over them, in that the functioning of other types 
depends on how this norm operates. In other words, the initial norm 
refers to “the translator’s (conscious or unconscious) choice as to 
the main objective of his translation, the objective which governs 
all decisions made during the translation process” (van Leuven-
Zwart 1989:154). Interpreting the statement that “translation, 
especially literary translation, always involves an encounter, 
if not a confrontation, between two sets of norms” (1980:55), 
Toury defines the initial norm as reflecting whether the translator 
attempts to remain as  faithful as possible to the parameters of the 
original text, or seeks to adapt the emerging TT to the linguistic 
and literary norms active in TL to as great an extent as possible 
(a choice between adequacy 2 and acceptability). However, it is 
clear that these alternatives represent extremes, and that in most 
TTs the translator will compromise between the two tendencies. As 
is the case with most other norms, the initial norm is not directly 
observable, but may be inferred by identifying the shifts contained 
in TT (van Leuven-Zwart 1989:154). See also matricial norms, 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
80
operational norms, preliminary norms and textual norms. Further 
reading: Toury 1980, 1995.
Instrumental Translation A term used by Nord (1991a) to refer 
to one of two types of translation defined according to how TT is 
intended to function in the target culture (see also documentary 
translation). According to Nord, an instrumental translation is 
intended to fulfil a new communicative purpose in the target culture 
“without the recipient being conscious of reading or hearing a text 
which, in a different form, was used before in a different communica-
tive action” (1991a:73). As such it is “a communicative instrument 
in its own right” (1991a:72) rather than merely a documentary 
record of the ST author’s act of communication with the source 
culture recipients (1991a:72). An instrumental translation can have 
“the same or a similar or analogous function as the ST” (1991a:72); 
depending on the precise relationship between source and target 
functions, it can be classified as belonging to one of three types. If it 
serves the same function(s) as ST it is termed a function-preserving 
translation, as for example in the case of operating instructions or 
business correspondence. If on the other hand the original function 
cannot be meaningfully realized in the new context, it will have to be 
adapted by the translator in a way that is at least compatible with the 
author’s intentions; an example of such a text would be a translation 
of Gulliver’s Travels simultaneously adapted for children. Finally, a 
corresponding translation is a literary translation intended to fulfil 
in the target literary context a “homologous” function to that which 
it achieved in the source culture; much translated poetry can be said 
to belong to this type (1991a:73). According to Nord, instrumental 
translation differs from House’s (1977) comparable concept of 
covert translation in that it only requires the TT function to be 
compatible, rather than identical or equivalent, with that of ST 
(1991a:72 n. 36). See also participative receiver. Further reading: 
Nord 1988, 1991a, 1997.
Integral Translation A term used by van Leuven-Zwart (1989, 1990) 
to refer to a translation which “contains no additions or deletions 
transcending the sentence level” (1989:154). The term is used in 
the context of an investigation into the similarities and differences 
between fictional narrative texts and their translations. Van Leuven-
Zwart argues that in integral translations translational shifts occur on 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
81
two levels, the microstructural (i.e. involving sentences, clauses and 
phrases) and the macrostructural (including for example changes in 
characterization, style or narrative viewpoint), and presents a complex 
model for analysing how consistent patterns of shifts observed on the 
former level influence the broader categories associated with the latter, 
and hence the overall “feel” of TT as compared to ST. In view of its 
basic reliance on a close comparison of the microstructural features 
of ST and TT, such a method is clearly only applicable to integral 
translations and their STs. See also architranseme, generalization, 
modification, modulation 2, mutation, specification and transeme. 
Further reading: van Leuven-Zwart 1989, 1990.
Intercultural Cooperation See translatorial action.
Interlanguage See translationese.
Interlineal Translation A term coined by Hervey & Higgins (1992) 
to refer to the type of translation which is at the extreme of SL bias 
(as opposed to free translation, which is at the extreme of TL 
bias). Hervey & Higgins suggest that an interlineal translation “does 
not necessarily respect TL grammar, but has grammatical units cor-
responding to every grammatical unit of the ST” (1992:20). It thus 
differs from the less extreme strategy of literal translation 1, which 
usually respects the TL grammar, although also commonly uses the 
decontextualized meaning of words. According to Hervey & Higgins, 
interlineal translation is rare, and is normally only used in language 
teaching or in descriptive linguistics (1992:20). It should be pointed 
out that interlineal translation is basically the same as interlinear 
translation except that it does not require the TL units to appear di-
rectly above or below the ST units to which they correspond. Further 
reading: Hervey & Higgins 1992.
Interlinear Translation A type of extremely literal translation 
in which TL words are arranged line by line below (or above) the 
ST items to which they correspond. As with a gloss translation, 
the purpose of an interlinear translation is to provide access to a 
text − frequently but not invariably sacred − for people who would 
linguistically speaking otherwise be inadequately equipped to tackle it. 
According to Steiner, an interlinear translation thus “sets a dictionary 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
82
equivalent from the target-language above each word in the source-
language” and is therefore strictly speaking “nothing else but a total 
glossary, set out horizontally in discrete units” (1975/1992:324). In 
other words, in contrast to most other types of translation, an interlinear 
version is meant to be read in conjunction with the original, and so 
is explicitly intended to function as a crib. Nida argues that such a 
rendering “can scarcely be called a translation in the usual sense of the 
term” (1964:23), and indeed in some respects it resembles a kind of 
semantic transcription, as the closest TL equivalent is automatically 
chosen for each ST item. However, it is not only the words themselves 
which are copied; as Gutt points out, interlinear translations are also 
intended to preserve syntactic categories such as word order “with 
as little change as possible” (1991:137). As a result of using this 
type of translation, what frequently happens is that the linguistic 
norms of TL are violated. Because of this consideration, Gutt argues 
that “the feasibility of this approach will be strongly determined 
by the degree of structural similarity between the two languages in 
question”, since “the more they differ in structure, the less it will be 
possible to combine the demand for resemblance in structure with 
that for intelligibility” (1991:169). Much has also been said about 
interlinear translations on a more metaphysical level, following Walter 
Benjamin’s assertion − in his famous discussion of pure language − 
that “the interlinear version of the Scriptures is the prototype or ideal 
of all translation” (1923/1963:195, 1923/1970: 82). However, while 
many writers have speculated about what he meant by this enigmatic 
statement, it is clear that he was referring to an “ideal” interlinear 
translation in which the ST meaning is not obscured but enhanced 
by its extreme literalism. See also back-translation, bi-text and 
interlineal translation. Further reading: W. Benjamin 1923/1963, 
1923/1970; Gutt 1991; Steiner 1975/1992.
Interlingua See tertium comparationis.
Interlingual Translation According to Jakobson (1959/1966), one 
of three types of translation (see also intersemiotic translation 
and intralingual translation). For the purposes of this classifica-
tion, Jakobson uses a broad definition of translation, as of the three 
types, interlingual translation − or translation proper − is the only 
one which corresponds to what is normally understood by the word 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
83
translation. Working within a semiotic framework, Jakobson defines 
interlingual translation as “an interpretation of verbal signs by means 
of some other language” (1959/1966:233). Because of the lack of full 
equivalence between words of different languages, however, trans-
lation from one language into another usually substitutes one entire 
message for another; hence Jakobson views the process of interlin-
gual translation as a kind of reported speech in which the translator 
“recodes and transmits a message received from another source” 
(1959/1966:233). The problems involved in this kind of recodification 
are of course considerable. As stated by Gorlée, interlingual transla-
tion is “primarily concerned with breaking up and dislocating familiar 
sign-structures and relationships between signs, and with rearranging 
them meaningfully in the light of the new system” (1994:161); it thus 
becomes “a semiotic encounter between two Weltanschauungen” 
(1994:161). The outcome of this is that the two linguistic codes “meet, 
interact, and (eventually and ideally) interconnect, creating a new 
contextual structure”, and the different languages “demonstrate their 
similarities and ... aim to overcome their differences” (1994:160). It 
should be pointed out that Jakobson’s categories are not watertight; 
the case of interdialectal translation, for example, is suggested by 
Toury (1986:1113) as lying on the border between interlingual and 
intralingual translation. See also transfer 1 and translation. Further 
reading: Gorlée 1994; Jakobson 1959/1966.
Intermediate Translation See indirect translation 1.
Internal Transfer See transfer 1.
Interpretation According to Lefevere (1975), one of seven possible 
strategies for translating poetry. Lefevere distinguishes two types 
of interpretation, imitation 2 and version 2. He considers both pro-
cedures to be distinct from translation proper, arguing that “the 
difference between translation, version, and imitation lies in the degree 
of interpretation” (1975:76). See also blank verse translation, 
literal translation 2, metapoem, metrical translation, phonemic 
translation, poetry into prose and rhymed translation. Further 
reading: Lefevere 1975.
Interpreting A term used to refer to the oral translation of a 
spoken message or text. The history of interpreting is not well 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
84
documented, although it is generally agreed that as an activity it is 
older than written translation. It differs from this latter in a number 
of important respects. Firstly, the communication skills which it 
requires are clearly different, as interpreters need to be expert oral 
communicators. Secondly, while translators often have relatively 
unlimited opportunity to make alterations and improvements before 
submitting a final version, interpreters are required to create a 
finished product in “real time” without the possibility of going back 
and making revisions; in other words, interpreting, unlike written 
translation, is both non-correctable and non-verifiable. Thirdly, 
interpreters must ensure that any background knowledge which they 
are likely to need has been acquired in advance; seeking colleagues’ 
advice or consulting reference works is not generally possible 
during the actual process of interpreting. Fourthly, interpreters are 
“performers” who are constantly making split-second decisions and 
taking communicative risks; consequently they typically experience 
higher stress levels while “on the job” than most translators (see Gile 
1995a:111-14). Various types of interpreting can be distinguished, 
either by the context in which it occurs (e.g. community interpreting, 
conference interpreting and court interpreting) or the way in which 
it is carried out (e.g. consecutive interpreting, liaison interpreting, 
simultaneous interpreting and whispered interpreting), although 
clearly there is a considerable amount of overlap between some of 
these categories; however, one further type which is significantly 
different from the others is signed language interpreting, since this 
involves both oral and visual-gestural modalities. It should be pointed 
out that while the term interpretation is often used interchangeably 
with interpreting, some writers insist that the former term should be 
avoided in this context. The retention of a distinction between these 
two notions is particularly necessary in the case of court interpreting, 
where interpretation in the sense of “conveying one’s understanding 
of meanings and intentions” (Morris 1995:25) is an activity which 
interpreters are supposed to avoid. See also dolmetschen, effort 
models, interpretive theory of translation, pivot language and 
relay interpreting. Further reading: Gerver & Sinaiko 1977; Gile 
1995a; Target 7:1; Seleskovitch 1976; Seleskovitch & Lederer 1989; 
Tommola 1995.
Interpretive Theory of Translation (or Interpretative Theory of 
Translation or Theory of Sense) A term used to designate a model 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
85
originally designed to reflect the processes which are involved in 
conference interpreting. The interpretive theory of translation is 
associated with a group of scholars based at ESIT (École Superieure 
d’Interprètes et de Traducteurs), who are sometimes known as the 
Paris School. First presented by Seleskovitch and Lederer in the late 
1960s, the interpretive theory of translation is a reaction against some 
of the restricted views of language proposed by the linguistics of the 
time. The proponents of the theory argue that interpreters do not work 
merely with linguistic meaning, but also need to take into account 
such factors as the cognitive context of what has already been said, the 
setting in which the interpreting is taking place and the interpreter’s 
own world knowledge (Lavault 1996:97). As a consequence of this, 
one of the theory’s principle tenets has been that interpreting should 
be based on a deverbalized, intended meaning (the sense or sens) 
derived from the overall context, rather than on the words of ST as 
such (Seleskovitch 1976:92). Thus according to the model interpret-
ing ignores the need to identify direct translation equivalents for ST 
items and instead “concentrates on finding the appropriate wording 
to convey a given meaning at a given point in time and in a given 
context, whatever that wording ... or the original wording may 
mean under different circumstances” (1976:93). The approach also 
focuses on the mental and cognitive processes involved in interpret-
ing, which is seen as comprising the three stages of interpretation, 
de-verbalization and reformulation (Seleskovitch 1977). While 
concepts such as deverbalization are easier to apply to conference 
or simultaneous interpreting, the theory has latterly been extended to 
include (non-literary) written translation as well (see for example 
Lederer 1994). Another important extension has been suggested by 
Delisle (1980, 1993), who introduces insights from text linguistics 
and discourse analysis. Further reading: Delisle 1980, 1988, 1993; 
Lavault 1996; Lederer 1994; Seleskovitch 1976, 1977; Seleskovitch 
& Lederer 1984, 1989.
Intersemiotic Translation (or Transmutation) A term coined by 
Jakobson (1959/1966) to refer to one of three types of translation 
(see also interlingual translation and intralingual translation). In 
Jakobson’s framework, in which translation is understood as the con-
version of a sign into “some further, alternative sign” (1959/1966:232), 
intersemiotic translation is defined as “an interpretation of verbal 
signs by means of signs of nonverbal sign systems” (1959/1966:233). 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
86
Jakobson cites the reinterpretation of verbal art by “music, dance, 
cinema or painting” (1959/1966:238) as examples of this process. 
What is thus meant by the term is not translation in the standard 
sense, but transmutation of a verbal message into another medium 
of expression, or in other words translation in a figurative sense, 
since the target code is a language “only in a metaphorical manner 
of speaking” (Gorlée 1994:162). Indeed, it is clear that intersemiotic 
translation is in many ways set apart from Jakobson’s other two 
types. For example, as pointed out by Gorlée, information loss is at 
its highest here (1994:168). Furthermore, intersemiotic translation is 
a one-way process, while the other two types are at least potentially 
reversible (Sturrock 1991:310). However, some commentators have 
strong misgivings about the appropriateness of the term, simply 
because of its counter-intuitive nature; Sturrock, for example, 
comments that it is “a semiotic change so radical as to depart 
from what we normally understand by translation” (1991:310). 
Yet Jakobson’s categorization does have the advantage of placing 
translation within a wider context by comparing it with similar 
processes and thus enabling one to generalize about how signs can 
be changed into other signs. Thus he observes that in intersemiotic 
translation “certain structural features ... are preserved despite the 
disappearance of their verbal shape”, and concludes that “many 
poetic features belong not only to the science of language but to 
the whole theory of signs, that is, to general semiotics” (Jakobson 
1960:350-51). See also transfer 1. Further reading: Gorlée 1994; 
Jakobson 1959/1966; Sturrock 1991.
Intertemporal Translation (or Cross-temporal Translation) A 
term used to refer to the translation of a text by an author writing 
in (or about) an earlier time (see Vladova 1993:15-16). Presumably 
formulated on the basis of Jakobson’s (1959/1966) interlingual, 
intersemiotic and intralingual translation, the term can be under-
stood as including the simple modernizing of a text dating from an 
earlier stage of a language; however, it is usually taken to refer to a 
process which also contains an interlingual element. Intertemporal 
translation is in fact a very widespread phenomenon; indeed, Steiner 
points out that all translation, except simultaneous interpreting, 
contains an intertemporal element (1975/1992:351), although in 
many cases this can basically be ignored since it is so small. How-
ever, when ST is the Bible or a text of classical literature it is clear 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
87
that it will sometimes be necessary to confront vast differences in 
language, culture and mentality caused by the amount of time which 
has elapsed since ST was composed. Furthermore, in the case of in-
tertemporal translation across major spans of time there is frequently 
the problem of the work losing its original contextual significance, or 
indeed of the genre in which it was written becoming defunct (Bass-
nett 1980/1991:83). Such loss of defining context has meant that, in 
the absence of a translation which has become a classic in its own 
right, successive generations have generally felt the need to retranslate 
works, since translations more than original texts have a tendency to 
“shift in value and significance as [the] world itself changes and de-
velops” (Snell-Hornby 1987:102). The practical approaches to this 
type of translation which translators have adopted have varied. Some 
writers (e.g. Popovič [1976]:18) have identified the two basic strate-
gies of historization and modernization. However, Holmes (1988h) 
argues that this simple choice is not sufficient to reflect the range of 
approaches adopted, at least by translators of verse. According to 
Holmes, intertemporal translation of poetry involves shifting between 
linguistic, socio-cultural and literary systems (1988h:36), while in 
each of these three areas, independently of each other, the translator 
may choose between equivalents which are a) roughly contemporary 
with ST, b) representative of a kind of “standard archaic usage” (see 
Leech 1969:13), or c) broadly modern in nature (1988h:38-39). While 
his study is fairly small-scale, Holmes observes that there seems to be 
a general unwillingness to produce a TT “that is completely modern 
on all levels, with nothing in it to indicate its ties with an earlier time” 
(1988h:41-42). See also archaism and vertical translation. Further 
reading: Holmes 1988h; Steiner 1975/1992; Vladova 1993.
Intralingual Translation (or Rewording) A term used by Jakobson 
(1959/1966) to refer to one of three types of translation (see also 
interlingual translation and intersemiotic translation). Within 
a semiotic framework Jakobson defines the process of intralingual 
translation as “an interpretation of verbal signs by means of other signs 
of the same language” (1959/1966:233). In other words, intralingual 
translation is not translation in the strict sense, but rather relies 
either on the use of synonyms (although these will of course always 
be approximate, at least to some degree) or circumlocution in order 
to reword a message in the language of the original. For example, 
simplifying a technical text for a non-specialist readership, adapting 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
88
a classic for a children’s audience or producing a version of Chaucer 
in modern English are all processes which can be classified as 
intralingual translation. Of course, it can be difficult to determine 
whether reformulations which span great distances of time or dialect 
should be considered intralingual or interlingual, for as Pym points 
out there is “no strict cut-off point at which wholly intralingual 
rewriting can be said to have become wholly interlingual” (1992a:25). 
However, Jakobson’s widening of the definition of translation to 
include intralingual “rewording” is less controversial than is the 
case with intersemiotic translation, and is mirrored by Steiner’s 
slogan that “inside or between languages, human communication 
equals translation” (1975/1992:49, emphasis removed). Indeed, by 
producing his categorization he is simply suggesting that translation 
belongs to a group of interlinked phenomena between which one can 
find “family resemblances”. Thus there is arguably more that these 
two types of translation have in common than there is that separates 
them; for example, one of the problems central to translation − 
that of determining synonymy − according to Sturrock “remains 
the same whether the translation be effected between two natural 
languages or within one language” (1991:309). Furthermore, there 
is much which intralingual translation can teach us about the more 
“standard” interlingual variety, and indeed about the “conventional 
but never static, nature of verbal language”, which “highlights the 
ability of one linguistic sign system to stand in more than one fashion 
for something else” (Gorlée 1994:159). On the other hand, there 
are of course specific features − besides the obvious ones − that set 
intralingual translation apart from Jakobson’s other two categories; 
an example of this is the fact that the amount of information which 
is lost during the recodification process is lower here than with the 
other types (Gorlée 1994:168). See also transfer 1. Further reading: 
Gorlée 1994; Jakobson 1959/1966.
Intra-system Shift According to Catford, a type of category shift 
which occurs when “SL and TL possess systems which approxi-
mately correspond formally as to their constitution, but when 
translation involves selection of a non-corresponding term in the 
TL system” (1965:80). For example, although English and French 
largely correspond on a formal level in their use of the singular-plural 
distinction, there are many occasions when this formal corres-
pondence is departed from, so that the translation equivalent of a 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
89
singular item in one language is a plural item in the other, as is the 
case in such correspondences as advice = des conseils, the contents 
= le contenu and so forth (1965:80). Like other types of category 
shift, intra-system shifts are generally forced on the translator by the 
conflicting demands of SL and TL structure. See also class shift, 
level shift, structure shift, shift and unit shift. Further reading: 
Catford 1965.
Invariance A term used to denote the concept of the immutability of 
(elements of) ST in the translation process; the related term invariant 
is defined along similar lines as the features or elements common to 
ST and TT. The notion behind these terms is closely connected with 
that of equivalence, and many of the issues raised in the discussion 
of that concept are of relevance here too. Many early statements 
on invariance were formulated with a view to developing effec-
tive procedures for machine translation, and tended to overlook 
aspects of the translation process which could not be described as 
simple replacement of linguistic units. Thus Oettinger, for example, 
writes that “keeping significance invariant is the central problem in 
translating between natural languages” (1960:104, quoted in Koller 
1979/1992:90). This view persisted past the period of optimism 
about the possibilities of machine translation, so that Popovič, for 
example, writes that the invariant core of a text is “represented by 
stable, basic and constant semantic elements” ([1976]:11) which, he 
argues, can be arrived at through semantic condensation, a process 
akin to that of back-transformation (see analysis). However, many 
writers have argued that denotative meaning is not the only textual 
element in terms of which it is possible to talk of invariance. Thus 
Bassnett, for example, uses the term invariant to refer in general 
terms to “that which exists in common between all existing transla-
tions of a single work” (1980/1991:27). Kade, on the other hand, 
understands invariance more specifically in terms of the potentially 
equal communicative value of ST and TT which is realized in 
an “approximately equal effect on ST and TT recipients” (Kade 
1968:63, translated). Similarly, Neubert answers the question of 
what makes one text a translation of another by saying that “trans-
lation always alters ST in such a way as to make it impossible to 
speak of an invariance between SL and TL which takes no account of 
pragmatics” (1973:15, translated). He thus argues that truly adequate 
translation should be characterized by invariance not only on the 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
90
semantic level, but also within the parameters dictated by pragmatic 
considerations such as the need to conform to the conventions of a 
given text-type within both SL and TL (Neubert 1973:18-19). Toury, 
who takes a more relative view of translation, understands invari-
ance as something which can only be defined in relation to a specific 
act of translation, in the light of the particular norms and strategies 
which have been followed by the translator; he thus talks of “invari-
ance conditions”, which arise from the relationships found to exist 
between a particular TT and ST (see for example 1980:28). See also 
correspondence, identity and tertium comparationis. Further reading: 
Kade 1968; Neubert 1973.
Invariant See invariance.
Inverse Translation A term used to describe a translation, either 
written or spoken, which is done from the translator’s native language 
(or language of habitual use). Inverse translation has clear pedagogi-
cal applications (such as the traditional prose translation, in which 
an English-speaking student would translate a passage from Eng-
lish, usually into Latin or Greek). In previous ages the direction of 
translation was not considered important. Today, however, apart from 
in the context of language learning, the use of inverse translation in 
English-speaking countries is limited, as here the relatively small 
volume of translation from English can easily be handled by native 
speakers of the relevant TL. However, in other parts of the world 
translators turn to inverse translation with rather greater frequency, for 
example to cope with the huge amount of translation into English 
which needs to be performed. This is particularly true for certain 
text-types (such as material for tourists) where the need for perfect 
style is not so pressing, although even when other, more sensitive text-
types are involved many of the shortcomings of this technique can be 
overcome by team translating or by having TTs edited by a TL native 
speaker. Furthermore, in some countries (such as Russia) inverse 
translation is the preferred direction of translation for interpreters 
(see interpreting). A similar, though more complicated, procedure 
is described by Nida (1964) in his discussion of the ethnolinguistic 
model of translation. An alternative term for inverse translation is 
service translation. See also direct translation 2. Further reading: 
Beeby Lonsdale 1996; Kelly 1979; Snell & Crampton 1983.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
91
Invisibility See domesticating translation.
Kernel (or Kernel Sentence) See analysis.
Keyword Translation (French Traduction Signalétique) Accord-
ing to Gouadec (1989, 1990), one of seven types of translation (or 
translation-like processes) which serve to meet the various transla-
tion needs which arise in a professional environment. This particular 
type involves keywords in ST being translated into TL to determine 
whether or not the information contained in ST requires fuller trans-
lation and, if so, how it should be translated. The keywords indicate 
the basic concepts of ST, and by placing them in decreasing order of 
frequency in ST the translator can indicate which concepts are the 
most important. The result is a TL index of the SL document which 
enables the TL reader to identify the sections of the text which will be 
of most use to him or her (1989:23). See also absolute translation, 
abstract translation, diagrammatic translation, reconstructions 
(translation with), selective translation and sight translation. 
Further reading: Gouadec 1989, 1990; Sager 1994.
Kohärenz See coherence.
Kontrollierbarkeit See verifiability.
Korrigierbarkeit See correctability.
Lacunes See voids.
Leipzig School An influential group of translation scholars based 
in the Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics at the 
University (formerly the Karl Marx University) of Leipzig. The Leipzig 
School have been active since the 1960s, and have made a major 
contribution to one of the two main schools of translation theory 
which now “dominate the scene in Europe” (see Snell-Hornby 
1988/1995:14). The Leipzig School is characterized by a linguistic, 
scientific approach to the study of translation, and most of their work 
has centred around the problems of scientific and technical translation 
(Koller 1979/1992:130). The best-known scholars within the Leipzig 
school are probably Otto Kade and Albrecht Neubert, whose main

Dictionary of Translation Studies
92
publications include Kade (1968), an important work coining 
the terms translat and translation and containing a much-quoted 
discussion of types of equivalence, and Neubert (1985), which 
broadens the linguistic approach to include factors of a text-linguistic 
nature. See also science of translation. Further reading: Snell-
Hornby 1988/1995.
Level Shift A term used by Catford (1965) to denote one of two 
major types of shift, or departure from formal correspondence “in 
the process of going from the SL to the TL” (1965:73). An SL item 
which undergoes a level shift in the process of translation will have a 
TL translation equivalent at a different linguistic level from its own. 
Following Halliday (1961), Catford identifies a total of four possible 
levels on which linguistic phenomena may occur: the grammatical, the 
lexical, the graphological and the phonological. In practice, however, 
level shifts only occur between the levels of grammar and lexis, and 
so entail the use of lexical means in TT to express a meaning which in 
ST is grammatically encoded, and vice versa. For example, the notion 
of completion is expressed in Russian by the grammatical category 
of perfectivity. However, in certain contexts it is more expedient to 
render this concept lexically in English by using an alternative verb, 
so that for instance Russian on sdelal “he has done” might become 
“he has achieved” if this conveyed the particular emphasis required 
by the context. It should be noted that the notion of the level shift 
includes not only instances of incompatibility between the SL and TL 
linguistic systems, but also occasions where the translator has simply 
decided to translate an SL item in a certain way. See also category 
shift. Further reading: Catford 1965.
Lexical Translation A term used by Catford to refer to a type of re-
stricted translation in which “the SL lexis of a text is replaced 
by equivalent TL lexis, but with no replacement of grammar” 
(1965:71-72). For example, the English sentence This is the man I 
saw might be lexically translated into French as This is the homme 
I voi-ed; here the English grammar is preserved, while the lexical 
items man and see are replaced by their French equivalents. A more 
famous example of (partial) lexical translation is Burgess’ A Clock-
work Orange, which is written throughout in a kind of futuristic 
slang which contains a large number of Russian lexical items; an 
example of this, taken from the opening of the novel, is the sentence 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
93
“There was me ... and my three droogs ..., and we sat in the Korova 
Milkbar making up our rassoodocks what to do ....” (1962/1972:5). It 
should also be pointed out that lexical and grammatical translation are 
the converse of each other, since lexical translation from language A 
into language B produces the same type of text as grammatical transla-
tion in the other direction. See also graphological translation and 
phonological translation. Further reading: Catford 1965.
Liaison Interpreting (or Bilateral Interpreting) Defined by Keith 
as a type of interpreting in which “an individual who speaks two 
languages mediates in a conversation between two or more indi-
viduals who do not speak each other’s tongue” (1985:1).While most 
closely associated with community interpreting, liaison interpreting is 
used in any small-scale context, such as for example business meetings, 
official visits or informal conversations. Liaison interpreting is 
bi-directional, and is usually performed sentence by sentence in 
a consecutive manner; however, it is not generally classified as 
consecutive interpreting proper, as this term is generally reserved 
for a procedure which is more closely defined and which involves 
notetaking. The practice of liaison interpreting is probably found in all 
multilingual societies; however, according to Ozolins, as a profession 
it is still “embryonic”, and is frequently performed by anyone who 
happens to know the two languages in question, including in some 
cases a family member of one of the parties involved (1995:154). 
Further reading: Gentile et al. 1996; Ozolins 1995.
Lingua Universalis See tertium comparationis.
Linguistic Approach See linguistic translation 1.
Linguistic Equivalence According to Popovič ([1976]), one of four 
types of equivalence. Popovič defines linguistic equivalence as 
“homogeneity of elements upon the linguistic (phonetic, morpho-
logical, and syntactic) levels of the original and the translation” 
([1976]:6). The linguistic levels of a text are considered to be the 
lowest ([1976]:11), and are concerned with “stylistic purity and 
linguistic correctness” ([1976]:14); “homogeneity” between ST and 
TT upon this level is established by the “search for and evaluation of 
correspondence between the elements of the original language and 
those of the recipient language” ([1976]:14), and helps to determine 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
94
equivalence on the higher, expressive level of the text ([1976]:6). See 
also paradigmatic equivalence, stylistic equivalence and textual 
equivalence 2. Further reading: Popovič [1976].
Linguistic Translation 1 (or Linguistic Approach) A term used 
to refer to any approach which views translation as simply a ques-
tion of replacing the linguistic units of ST with “equivalent” TL 
units without reference to factors such as context or connotation. It 
should be pointed out that the term is strictly speaking misleading, 
as modern linguistics seeks to account for these areas too. The term 
is akin to close translation, as it can be used as a kind of super-
ordinate covering strategies like interlinear translation, literal 
translation 1 and word-for-word translation. While such strate-
gies are of limited applicability, it is commonly agreed that they are 
appropriate for certain purposes, such as illustrating SL structure 
(for example in the context of language teaching); however, they are 
also frequently used for translating sacred texts, where the original 
wording is often considered to be in some way inviolable. See also 
equivalence, rank-restricted theories of translation and unit of 
translation.
2 One of four classifications of translation proposed by 
Casagrande (1954). The term is used to describe a word-for-word 
or even morpheme-for-morpheme translation in which ST segments 
are translated sequentially into the most closely corresponding 
TL units. According to Casagrande, the aim of such a translation 
is “to identify and assign equivalent meanings to the constituent 
morphemes of the source language” (1954:337); thus structural 
or grammatical form is the central concern. When an ST has 
been translated in this way, the result will be a literal or even an 
interlinear translation. Morphemes and words are translated into 
their nearest equivalents, possibly without changing the original 
word order, and thus remaining as close to ST as possible. Although 
linguistic translation has its uses, in Casagrande’s opinion it may 
lead to a kind of false translation which “can be as misleading as 
an overly  free translation” (1954:337). See also aesthetic-poetic 
translation, ethnographic translation and pragmatic translation 
2. Further reading: Casagrande 1954.
3 A term used by Nida & Taber in the context of Bible translation 
to refer to a translation “in which only information which is linguisti-
cally implicit in the original is made explicit and in which all changes 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
95
of form follow the rules of back transformation and transformation 
and of componential analysis” (1969/1982:203; see also analysis and 
restructuring). In other words, a linguistic translation is one which 
only contains elements which can be directly derived from the ST 
wording, avoiding any kind of explanatory interpolation or cultural 
adjustment which cannot be justified on this basis; in this way lin-
guistic translation contrasts with cultural translation 2. According 
to Nida & Taber, linguistic translation is the only legitimate strategy 
for Bible translation (1969/1982:134), and only a linguistic translation 
can be considered faithful (1969:203). See also dynamic equivalence. 
Further reading: Gutt 1991; Nida & Taber 1969/1982.
Linguistically Creative Translation (German Sprachschöpferische 
Übersetzung) A term used by Reiss & Vermeer (1984) to denote the 
translation of an ST which contains cultural terms, concepts or other 
items which are not native to TL and for which new TL labels conse-
quently need to be designed. Religious, philosophical and technical 
writing are all examples of genres in which such a procedure tends to 
be common. However, it should be pointed out that TTs which contain 
a high level of such new lexical items cannot be considered to be 
adequate (1984:136). Further reading: Reiss & Vermeer 1984.
Literal Translation 1 A notion which has for many centuries 
been at the heart of most translation controversies, where it has 
been either staunchly defended against or vigorously attacked in 
favour of its rival, free translation (see prescriptive translation 
studies). However, there is a certain amount of variation in 
the way this term is applied, as literal translation is sometimes 
understood as including the related notion of word-for-word 
translation. A literal translation can be defined in linguistic terms 
as a translation “made on a level lower than is sufficient to convey 
the content unchanged while observing TL norms” (Barkhudarov 
1969:10, translated). In a similar vein Catford (1965) also offers 
a definition based on the notion of the unit of translation: he 
argues that literal translation takes word-for-word translation as 
its starting point, although because of the necessity of conforming 
to TL grammar, the final TT may also display group-group or 
clause-clause equivalence (1965:25). Thus the term is a relative 
one, as for any ST “there are as many degrees of literalness and 
freedom of translation as there are levels of hierarchical structure” 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
96
(Hockett 1954:313). As a translation strategy, literal translation 
clearly has its uses; a fairly literal approach is, for example, generally 
appropriate for translating many types of technical text, while in a 
different context the technique can also provide language learners 
with useful insights into TL structures. In literary translation, too, 
the approach has its champions. Nabokov, for example, describes it 
as “rendering, as closely as the associative and syntactical capacities 
of another language allow, the exact contextual meaning of the 
original”, and claims that only this strategy can be considered true 
translation (Nabokov 1964/1975:viii). On a more philosophical 
level, Walter Benjamin reasons that the kinship of languages is more 
clearly highlighted in a literalist approach to translation (1923/1963, 
1923/1970; see pure language). However, amongst modern literary 
translators there are few who would consider literal translation to be 
a suitable vehicle for their work. One of the main reasons for this 
is stated by Nida as follows: “Since no two languages are identical, 
either in the meanings given to corresponding symbols or in the 
ways in which such symbols are arranged in phrases and sentences, 
it stands to reason that there can be no absolute correspondence 
between languages. Hence there can be no fully exact translations” 
(1964:156). Furthermore, to this could be added the near-impossibility 
of reproducing in TT meanings which are only implicitly present 
in ST (see Gutt 1991). Literal translation frequently fails to make 
sufficient allowance for such factors, or is sometimes resorted to 
because SL or ST is considered in some way superior or sacred (Shen 
1995:571); its adoption frequently leads to a “complete distortion of 
the meaning of the original” (Chukovsky 1966:242, 1984:6). The 
notion of literal translation has been formalized by Nida as formal 
equivalence (1964), while Vinay & Darbelnet (1958, 1958/1995) 
categorize it as a type of direct translation 4, listing it as one of seven 
translation procedures (1958:48, 1958/1995:33; see also adaptation 
2, borrowing, calque, equivalence, modulation 1 and transposition). 
See also back-translation, interlinear translation, literalism, 
metaphrase and rank-bound translation. Further reading: Gutt 1991; 
Nabokov 1964/1975; Shen 1989, 1995.
2 Defined by Lefevere (1975) in the course of an analysis of 
English translations of a poem by Catullus as one of seven possible 
strategies for translating poetry. Clearly when it is poetry that is being 
translated, use of a literal approach is particularly problematic, as the 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
97
translator is “working with pre-selected and pre-arranged material” 
(Lefevere 1975:61). Lefevere consequently considers that the method 
has severe limitations. However, he also concludes that because of the 
impossibility of finding direct TL equivalents for SL items a literal 
approach to translating poetry is in practice unworkable, at least on 
an artistic level; in this connection he argues that the work of the lit-
eral translator is “the record of a long series of more or less strategic 
retreats from the principle that he ... pay[s] lip service to” (1975:28). 
See also blank verse translation, imitation 2, interpretation, metri-
cal translation, phonemic translation, poetry into prose, rhymed 
translation and version 2. Further reading: Lefevere 1975.
Literalism A term used in the same way as literal translation 1 
(or to refer to a single occasion in which this type of approach is 
applied). While literalism is appropriate to the translation of certain 
types of text (such as legal documents), most modern commentators 
condemn the literal translation of literature. For example, Steiner 
comments that “far from being the most obvious, rudimentary mode 
of translation, ‘literalism’ or as Dryden called it, metaphrase, is in 
fact the least attainable” (1975/1992:324; see metaphrase), while 
Barnstone in a similar vein describes the strategy as operating like 
“an interlingual photocopier of meaning, giving automatic, predict-
able, and repeatable versions” (1993:31). Further reading: Barnstone 
1993; Shen 1989, 1995.
Loan Translation See calque.
Logeme A term used by Radó to refer to a unit which “corresponds to 
the character and tasks of translation” (1979:189). A logeme is defined 
as the “element of the ST [the translator] has to distinguish and then to 
reproduce while composing the TT” (1979:189). The term is more or 
less synonymous with unit of translation, although Radó’s concept 
is perhaps slightly broader. Thus, not only items such as morphemes, 
words or phrases may be considered logemes, but also − in a cultural 
setting where translation conventions require their reproduction − 
textual features such as verse metre (1979:191). According to Radó, 
the concept of the logeme is useful not only to translators and inter-
preters, but also in translator training and translation criticism, and 
as a “tool of analysis” (1979:189) in translatology. Further reading: 
Radó 1979.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
98
Logos See pure language.
Low Countries Group See manipulation school.
Loyalty (German Loyalität) A term introduced by Nord (1991a) 
to describe the attitude which should ideally characterize the 
translator’s relationship to the ST author and sender, and the TT 
reader. Nord describes loyalty as “a moral principle indispensable 
in the relationships between human beings, who are partners in a 
communication process” (1991a:29). Such a concept is necessary 
because “in normal intercultural communication, neither the initiator 
nor the recipient of the translated text is able to check on whether or not 
the TT really conforms to their expectations” (1991b:94); whenever 
this is the case, they have to trust the translator to do a good job. Nord 
suggests the term to supplement the framework provided by skopos 
theory, consequently terming her new revised model “functionality 
plus loyalty”. In accordance with this model, a translator is free to 
focus on particular ST aspects to the detriment of others, if this is in 
line with the skopos; however, the principle of loyalty then requires 
him or her to explain to the ST sender how ST has been changed, if 
such changes conflict with the prevailing translational conventions 
and consequently also with the sender’s expectations. Failure to do 
this amounts to misleading the ST sender as to the nature of the TT 
produced. The notion of loyalty is totally distinct from that of fidelity 
(see faithfulness), which is “a rather technical relationship between 
two texts” (Nord 1991a:29). See also translatorial action. Further 
reading: Nord 1988, 1991a, 1991b, 1997.
Machine-aided Translation (MAT) (or Computer-aided Translation, 
or Computer-assisted Translation, or Machine Aided Human 
Translation, or Machine-assisted Human Translation, or Machine-
assisted Translation) Defined by Sager as “a translation strategy 
whereby translators use computer programs to perform part of the 
process of translation” (1994:326). As such it contrasts with machine 
translation in that the computer is simply used as an aid for the human 
translator rather than actually performing the translation itself. However, 
it is in reality difficult to draw a clear distinction between these two 
modes of operation as there is a considerable area of overlap in which 
automated or semi-automated processes are combined with varying 
amounts of human intervention (Arnold et al. 1994:35). There are many 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
99
types of computer application which are nowadays commonly used 
by professional translators, and with the IT explosion the potential for 
their exploitation has grown rapidly. Of course many non-specialist 
applications frequently find a place in a translator’s “workstation”, 
such as for example word processing (including the  multilingual 
variety), CD-ROM databases, optical character recognition (OCR), 
concordancing and e-mail; however, many would question whether 
the use of such facilities alone would justify employing the term 
machine-aided translation. Contrasting with these are an increasing 
number of dedicated “translation tools” − frequently combined as a 
single “package” − such as corpora of pre-existing or pre-translated 
text segments, on-line dictionaries (with or without an automatic 
look-up facility) and a variety of more specialized computerized 
aids designed to help develop and store term banks and to perform 
a number of other tasks connected with terminology management. 
However, the main purpose of all such systems is to accelerate the 
process of human translation (Sager 1994:276); they are thus all 
highly interactive in nature and require a large amount of human 
intervention. Furthermore, it should be pointed out that applications 
of this type work more satisfactorily if the translation can be limited 
to a specialist area with its own range of vocabulary (1994:276). See 
also bi-text. Further reading: Arnold et al. 1994; Clark 1994; Melby 
1992; Neubert 1991b; Sager 1994.
Machine Translation (or Automatic Translation) (MT) A term 
used to refer to translation which is performed wholly or partly 
by computer. As implied by this definition, such translation may be 
carried out with or without human intervention; however, if there is 
a considerable level of intervention, or if computer applications are 
simply used as “translation tools”, then it is more common to talk of 
machine-aided translation, although the boundary between these 
two approaches is not always completely clear-cut. It must be said 
that there has been much cynicism about machine translation in some 
quarters, and wags have been quick to recite some of the direr howlers 
which machine translation systems have produced. Furthermore, on a 
more scholarly level, Snell-Hornby expresses a common perception 
when she states that “now there is no longer any doubt that the 
product of technology, however sophisticated, cannot compete with 
the creative power of the human mind” (1988/1995:66). However, 
the fact is that modern approaches to machine translation tend to 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
100
be more realistic and level-headed than those which arose from the 
initial euphoria of the 1950s, and the previously-held assumption that 
machine translation should eventually replace human translation has 
given way to a more sober appraisal of its potential. It is indeed clear 
that humans are considerably more adept at analysing and interpreting 
natural language than even the most sophisticated machines, and that 
genres such as literary texts, advertising and promotional material 
are not generally suited to translation by machine (Newton 1992a:7). 
Fully automatic, high quality machine translation (FAHQMT) may 
indeed be impossible (Arnold et al. 1994:13-14), but on the other 
hand, there are areas where the machine wins out, such as for example 
in spelling and terminological consistency (Newton 1992a:5). The 
approach can usefully be employed for translating more restricted 
text-types (such as financial reports or weather forecasts), and is 
particularly efficient within an organization which has “a large, 
constant flow” of texts of a certain type which need to be translated 
(Melby 1992:149; see also sublanguages). Its performance can be 
improved by ensuring that the input is in a form which the system 
will find easy to analyse (see controlled language and pre-editing). 
Furthermore, the raw output from machine translation does not 
need to be perfect in order to serve a useful purpose (Newton 
1992a:4), as it can be post-edited to the extent that is appropriate 
to the purpose it is to serve; however, one of the main criteria for 
determining the usefulness of the approach in a given context is that 
it should be quicker or cheaper than performing the task by hand. 
Another common misconception is that machine translation systems 
exist as a “single, stand-alone, black box” (Sager 1994:16). In reality, 
while the system itself is actually made up of two main components, 
the translation engine and the dictionary, it usually forms part of 
a suite of document processing software. As regards the design 
(or “architecture”) of the translation engine, older systems have 
generally used a direct system, in which SL sentences are converted 
directly into TL sentences, while more modern designs tend to favour 
an indirect architecture, in which SL material is converted into TL 
via an underlying representation, which in some cases is termed an 
interlingua (see Arnold et al. 1994). Much research is still being 
carried out into machine translation, and significant advances are 
being made. However, it needs to be recognized that the approach 
continues to suffer from unfair comparison with human translation, 
partly because, as Sager argues, the discipline as a whole does not 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
101
offer an adequate model for it (1994:20); after all, it may be that rather 
than translating, the computer “does something else, which may 
be similar in some respects, and the outcome of which is a derived 
document for which we have yet to find another name” (1994:119-
20). See also industrial process (translation as), reader-oriented 
machine translation and writer-oriented machine translation. 
Further reading: Arnold et al. 1994; Hutchins & Somers 1992; Newton 
1992; Sager 1994; Wilss 1977, 1982.
Manipulation See manipulation school and rewriting.
Manipulation School (or Low Countries Group) A term used by 
some to refer to the group of scholars associated with a particular ap-
proach to the study of translated literature. First coined as a word-play 
(Lambert 1991:33), it is now used almost as a nickname; however, 
the school’s own preferred terms are either translation studies or the 
Low Countries group, although this latter term is misleading to the 
extent that the group includes scholars from countries other than Bel-
gium and the Netherlands, most notably former Czechoslovakia and 
Israel. The group has also been known as the descriptive, empirical 
or systemic school (Hermans 1995:217); however, the name manipu-
lation school arose because of the group’s conviction that from the 
target perspective, “all translation implies a degree of manipulation 
of the source text for a certain purpose” (Hermans 1985a: 11), so that 
the process of translating will “bring the Target Text into line with a 
particular model and hence a particular correctness notion, and in so 
doing secure social acceptance, even acclaim” (Hermans 1991:166). 
According to one of their best known programmatic statements, the 
members of the school have in common 
a view of literature as a complex and dynamic system; 
a conviction that there should be a continual interplay 
between theoretical models and practical case studies; 
an approach to literary translation which is descriptive, 
target-oriented, functional and systemic; and an interest in 
the norms and constraints that govern the production and 
reception of translations, in the relation between translation 
and other types of text processing, and in the place and 
role of translations both within a given literature and in the 
interaction between literatures. 
 
 
 
 
(Hermans 1985a:10-11)

Dictionary of Translation Studies
102
Their basic approach thus contrasts with that of the science of 
translation, firstly since their starting-point is “not intended equi-
valence but admitted manipulation” (Snell-Hornby 1988/1995:22), 
and secondly because of their concentration on literary rather than 
technical translation. The group’s most important texts include 
Even-Zohar (1990), Hermans (1985), Holmes et al. (1978), Holmes 
(1988), van Leuven-Zwart & Naaijkens (1991) and Toury (1980 & 
1995), while their most important contributions to the discipline are 
probably the use of a target text-oriented approach, and the notions 
of norms, rewriting and the literary polysystem. See also descriptive 
translation studies and nitra school. Further reading: Hermans 
1985a; Lambert 1991; Snell-Hornby 1988/1995.
Mapping A concept used by Holmes (1988a) for two separate 
purposes. Firstly, as a commentary on how different translations 
of a single poem will each provide the TL reader with an accurate 
reflection only of certain features of ST, Holmes observes that “all 
translations are maps, the territories are the originals” (1988a:58); in 
the same way as no map is definitive, but will serve only the specific 
purpose for which it was made, it is necessary to have a variety of 
translations of a poem in order to achieve a fuller understanding 
of the original. Secondly, Holmes (1988b) argues that translation 
(particularly the translation of poetry) is a text-rank operation which 
simultaneously proceeds both serially and structurally, or in other 
words both sentence by sentence and also as the translator derives and 
then constantly refers to an overall mental conception (or map) of the 
text as a whole. However, according to Holmes, not one, but two maps 
are used during the translation process; the first of these reflects the 
features which the translator abstracts from ST, while the second is 
created on the basis of the choices (linguistic, stylistic, rhythmic, and 
so forth) which he or she makes from the available options and reflects 
the shape that TT will ultimately take. Furthermore, the second map 
is influenced by a hierarchy of correspondences (1988b:86) which 
inevitably emerges as certain choices are ruled out simply because 
other, more important ones have already been made. The concept of 
the map could have a practical application for scholars investigating 
the relationship between an ST and its translation. See also analogical 
form, content-derivative form, decision-making (translation as), 
extraneous form, games (translation and the theory of), metapoem and 
mimetic form. Further reading: Holmes 1988a, 1988b.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
103
MAT See machine-aided translation.
Matricial Norms Defined by Toury (1980, 1995) as one of two kinds 
of operational norm (see also textual norms). Matricial norms regu-
late the decisions which the translator will make during the actual 
process of translation regarding the organization of the text on a level 
above that of the sentence. For example, the operation of such norms 
will determine to what extent the omission of ST material is permit-
ted (existence), whether sections of text may be moved (location), 
and the way in which the text is subdivided (textual segmentation). 
(These categories are of course not clear-cut, as for example the mov-
ing of a section of text from one location to another is tantamount 
to an omission in one place and an addition in another.) Matricial 
norms also determine whether such changes are acknowledged by 
the inclusion of a statement to the effect that TT has been abridged 
or adapted. See also initial norm and preliminary norms. Further 
reading: Toury 1980, 1995.
Mediated Translation See indirect translation 1.
Mediating Language See tertium comparationis.
Medium-restricted Theories of Translation According to Holmes 
(1988e), one of six varieties of partial theory of translation. A 
medium-restricted theory of translation may for example be con-
cerned only with human, machine or machine-aided translation, or 
might more specifically encompass one particular medium of human 
translation, such as simultaneous interpreting or written translation. 
See also area-restricted, problem-restricted, rank-restricted, 
text-type restricted and time-restricted theories of translation. 
Further reading: Holmes 1988e.
Metaphrase (or Verbal Translation) A term used by the seventeenth 
century poet and translator Dryden (1680/1989) to refer to one of three 
methods of translating. Dryden defines metaphrase as the process of 
“turning an author word by word, and line by line, from one language 
into another” (1680/1989:7). In other words, the process which this 
term denotes is that of literal translation. Dryden condemns such 
a practice in no uncertain terms by arguing that “’tis almost impos-
sible to translate verbally, and well, at the same time” (1680/1989:8). 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
104
Indeed, his description of metaphrase is written in highly evaluative 
language throughout: the translation which results from such a method 
is characterized as pedantic (1680/1989:8) and servile (1680/1989:9), 
while the translator is dubbed a verbal copier (1680/1989:9). How-
ever, it is only in the following famous image that Dryden pours his 
fullest scorn on this type of translation: “’Tis much like dancing on 
ropes with fettered legs: a man may shun a fall by using caution; but 
the gracefulness of motion is not to be expected: and when we have 
said the best of it, ’tis but a foolish task; for no sober man would put 
himself into a danger for the applause of escaping without breaking 
his neck” (1680/1989:9). See also imitation 1 and paraphrase. Further 
reading: Dryden (1680/1989); Frost 1955.
Metapoem A term coined by Holmes (1988c, 1988d) on the basis 
of Barthes’ (1964) meta-language. Distinguishing works of literature 
from literary criticism, Barthes argues that while the former are in-
tended as statements about “reality”, criticism is in effect a statement 
about these original works. In other words, the relationship between 
literary text and reality is mirrored by that between criticism and text. 
Changing the term to meta-literature, Holmes takes up this idea and 
argues that criticism is not the only type of writing of which this may 
be said. Indeed, he suggests seven kinds of text which can function as 
comment on a poem: a critical essay in the language of the poem, a 
critical essay in another language, a prose translation, a verse transla-
tion, an imitation, a poem “about” the poem and a poem inspired by 
the poem (1988d:24). Holmes uses the term metapoem to designate 
the fourth text-type, the verse translation. To illustrate how these 
text-types relate to the original poem and to each other he arranges 
them in the shape of a fan around the word poem. One implication of 
such a model is that a metapoem is “a fundamentally different kind of 
object from the poem from which it derives” (Holmes 1988c:10), in 
that it does not relate directly to the reality which is ultimately being 
portrayed, but only via its ST. Another implication is that all kinds of 
translation are a critical interpretation of their ST, a metapoem specifi-
cally “enacting” (Frost 1955 cited in Holmes 1988c:11) the original 
by remaining as faithful as possible to the parameters of ST and at 
the same time having poetic integrity in TL. A metapoet must thus 
combine the perception of the critic, the sensibility of the poet and 
the special skill of resolving the confrontation of source and target 
norms. See also metatext. Further reading: Holmes 1988c, 1988d.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
105
Metatext A term used by Popovič (1976, [1976]) to describe a text 
which has been produced using another text (or prototext) as its 
starting-point or model. The term is used within the framework of an 
attempt to study literary interrelations − or “inter-textual continuity” 
(1976:225) − in a systematic way. According to Popovič, metatexts 
belong to the wider category of metacommunication, which refers to 
“all types of processing (manipulation) of the original literary text” 
(1976:226). A metatext is thus understood as being a text which results 
from the development or modification of “the semiotic, meaning-
bearing, side of the original text” (1976:226). In this way the notion 
of the metatext includes text-types such as translations, paraphrases 
or parodies ([1976]:31), but excludes for example transcriptions or 
new editions of existing works (1976:226). A translation is a type of 
metatext which serves as a substitute for another text (1976:230), and 
is the result of “imitative continuity” with the prototext (1976:231-
32). However, it is important to point out that a translation does not 
merely reflect the original, but is rather “determined by the relation 
of the translator as creator to reality” (1976:233). In other words, 
the translator not only “conveys information about invariants of the 
original”; he or she also “discovers in the original further virtual or 
concealed meanings” in the light of his or her own experience of 
reality (1976:233). In this respect the notion of the metatext is distinct 
from Holmes’ related concept of the metapoem. Further reading: 
Popovič  1976, [1976].
Metrical Translation Described by Lefevere (1975) as one of seven 
strategies for translating verse. Within an analysis of English trans-
lations made of a poem by Catullus over a hundred-year period 
Lefevere uses the term metrical translation to refer to the type of 
translation in which the metre of ST is preserved in TT. Metrical 
translation is thus the strategy in which a kind of equivalence is pur-
sued first and foremost on the metrical level. However, Lefevere is 
in agreement with Holmes that it is a “convenient fiction” (Holmes 
1988d:25) that a verse form in any one language “can be entirely 
identical with a verse form in any other” (1988d:26), regardless 
of similarity between terminology or language structure. Metrical 
translation is thus seen as a “very rigorous straitjacket imposed on 
the target text” (Lefevere 1975:37), in that the translator is obliged 
to impose on TT a new metrical order which conflicts with and cuts 
across the “pre-selected and pre-arranged material” (1975:61) of ST. 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
106
In this way, argues Lefevere, metrical translation concentrates on 
one aspect of ST, while neglecting other more important features 
(such as the semantic content); in so doing, it “fails completely to 
make the source text available as a literary work of art in the target 
language” (1975:42). See also blank verse translation, imitation 
2, interpretation, literal translation 2, mimetic form, phonemic 
translation, poetry into prose, rhymed translation and version 2. 
Further reading: Lefevere 1975.
Mimetic Form According to Holmes (1988d), one of four strategies 
for the translation of verse form, in which the form of the original 
is retained in TT. However, Holmes points out that verse forms in 
different languages cannot be identical, even if they share the same 
name. Use of mimetic form has the effect of “re-emphasizing, by its 
strangeness, the strangeness which for the target-language reader is 
inherent in the semantic message of the original poem” (1988d:27); 
this is because an imported form frequently goes beyond the bounds 
of what is acceptable in the target literary tradition in terms of which 
verse form is appropriate to which genre. However, the selection of 
such a form may introduce new features into the literary system, 
some of which may take on permanent status. Consequently the use 
of mimetic form is common in cultures or periods in which concepts 
of genre are less rigid. Along with analogical form, Holmes cat-
egorizes mimetic form as one of two types of form-derivative form. 
See also content-derivative form, extraneous form, mapping and 
metapoem. Further reading: Holmes 1988d.
Minimax Principle A term used by Levý (1967) during a discussion 
of the “pragmatic dimension” of translation. However, what Levý 
means by the term pragmatic is not the problem of translating the 
contextual aspects of a given text, but rather non-textual concerns 
which the translator is likely to face, such as the question of the 
extent to which he or she should accommodate the target audience’s 
probable preferences and expectations. According to the minimax 
principle, during the decision-making process which is involved in 
any translation, the translator “resolves for that one of the possible 
solutions which promises a maximum of effect with a minimum of 
effort” (1967:1179). For example, the extra effect brought about by 
reproducing the rhyme-scheme of an original poem is not usually felt 
by translators in many traditions to justify the considerable effort 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
107
which this involves. Levý argues that translators typically adopt a 
“pessimistic strategy” (1967:1180), by rejecting all those solutions 
which are not likely to meet their audience’s aesthetic or linguistic 
expectations. Translators, Levý suggests, will subconsciously predict 
how readers will evaluate their work; this will in turn influence 
decisions taken during the translation process, so that for example 
linguistic elements perceived as being non-native to the TL system 
may be deliberately avoided. The application of minimax procedures 
on a statistical basis may cast light on such problems as the relative 
importance of different stylistic devices in SL and TL, or the extent 
to which the linguistic purity of a particular TL is considered to be a 
matter of importance. Further reading: Levý 1967.
Minoritizing Translation See foreignizing translation.
Modification In van Leuven-Zwart’s (1989, 1990) model for 
comparing a literary work with its translation, one of three types of 
shift which may occur between ST and TT transemes during the 
translation process. A shift is said to be an example of modification 
when each of the two transemes is hyponymically related to its 
corresponding architranseme, so that the overall relationship which 
obtains between them is one of contrast. For example, choosing a 
word with a slightly different meaning, using another part of speech 
or substituting a word with other stylistic overtones all qualify as 
instances of modification. It should be pointed out that, while many 
examples of modification result from a conscious decision on the part 
of the translator, the phenomenon is frequently caused by constraints 
of a language-bound or culture-bound nature. When the modification 
consists of supplying extra syntactic links or making vague logical 
connections more explicit it is termed explanation. Parallels exist 
between the notion of modification and some of Catford’s categories 
of shift; for example, a change in part of speech, which van Leuven-
Zwart would term syntactic or syntactic-semantic modification, 
would be classified in Catford’s model as class shift. See also 
generalization, integral translation, modulation 2, mutation and 
specification. Further reading: van Leuven-Zwart 1989, 1990.
Modulation 1 (French Modulation) A term used by Vinay & Darbel-
net (1958, 1958/1995) to refer to one of seven translation methods. 
Modulation is a kind of oblique translation, which means that it does 
not involve the use of parallel SL and TL categories (1958:46-7, 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
108
1958/1995:31). Vinay & Darbelnet define modulation in general 
terms as “a variation of the form of the message, obtained by a change 
in the point of view” (1958/1995:36). In other words, modulation 
involves a manipulation of mental rather than grammatical catego-
ries (as opposed to transposition: 1958:88, 1958/1995:88), and 
reflects the subtly different angles from which speakers of differ-
ent languages view real-life objects and phenomena. As such it is 
justifiable when a literal translation or a transposition would result 
in an expression which is grammatically correct, but which does 
not sound natural in TL (1958:51, 1958/1995:36). According to 
Vinay & Darbelnet, some modulations are fixed, or in other words 
“referred to in dictionaries and grammars and ... regularly taught” 
(1958/1995:37); others on the other hand are free, or not “sanctioned 
by usage” in the same way (1958/1995:37). Vinay & Darbelnet 
(1958:89-90, 235-40, 1958/1995:89-91, 249-54) also distinguish 
various types of modulation, such as “abstract for concrete” (e.g. 
le dernier étage for the top floor), part for whole (e.g. to wash one’s 
hair for se laver la tête) or − most commonly − negation of the op-
posite (e.g. forget it! for n’y pensez plus!). See also adaptation 2, 
borrowing, calque and equivalence 2. Further reading: Vinay & 
Darbelnet 1958, 1958/1995. 
2 According to van Leuven-Zwart (1989, 1990), one of three 
possible microstructural shifts which may be observed between 
ST and TT transemes in the process of comparison via their 
corresponding architranseme. The relationship between the two 
transemes is considered to be one of modulation “if one has a 
synonymic relationship with the [architranseme] and the other a 
hyponymic relationship” (1989:159), or in other words, if a shift 
occurs between ST and TT transemes which either increases or 
decreases the degree of generality. Depending on whether the 
shift is towards or away from greater generality, it will be termed 
either generalization or specification; such a shift will be either 
semantic or stylistic in nature. Such microstructural shifts can 
influence features on the macrostructural level. For example, 
the translation of a general, stylistically neutral word by a more 
specific, value-laden one may contribute to a change in the narra-
tive standpoint by bringing the textual world closer to the reader, 
while a consistent change in the register of a character’s speech 
may alter the reader’s perceptions of that character (1990:72-74). 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
109
See also integral translation, modification and mutation. Further 
reading: van Leuven-Zwart 1989, 1990.
Modulation/Generalization See generalization.
Modulation/Specification See specification.
Monosemierung See semantic disambiguation.
MT See machine translation.
Multilingual Corpora Defined by Baker (1995) as “sets of two or 
more monolingual corpora in different languages, built up ... on the 
basis of similar design criteria” (1995:232); the term is understood 
as referring to corpora of native rather than translated texts in the 
languages represented. Multilingual corpora have been profitably 
used in translator training, materials writing and the development of 
machine translation software, as they can be exploited to provide 
useful insights into the typical means employed by two or more 
languages to express similar meanings. Furthermore, a reliance 
on multilingual corpora is a typical feature of the methodology of 
contrastive linguistics, where the aim is generally to compare the 
natural patterns of two or more languages through an examination 
of texts produced in those languages. However, since multilingual 
corpora can only provide information about how language is used in 
its “home” context, rather than in translated texts, they have only a 
limited theoretical application when the object of discussion is the 
phenomenon of translation itself; for such study other types of cor-
pora are more appropriate. Furthermore, since the use of corpora in 
Translation Studies is relatively new, it should be pointed out that a 
certain degree of terminological confusion exists; Aijmer et al. (1996), 
for example, use the term parallel corpora to refer to corpora of this 
type. See also bilingual corpora 2 and comparable corpora. Further 
reading: Aijmer et al. 1996; Baker 1995.
Multi-medial Texts (German Multimediale Texte) (formerly 
Audio-medial Texts; German Audio-mediale Texte) A term used by 
Reiss (see for example Reiss & Vermeer 1984) to refer to a subsidiary 
text-type which supplements Reiss’ basic text typology (see expres-
sive texts, informative texts and operative texts). The multi-medial 
category consists of texts in which the verbal content is supplemented 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
110
by elements in other media; however, all such texts will also simul-
taneously belong to one of the other, main text-types. Reiss argues 
that this text-type forms a “superstructure” over the other three, as 
the “special requirements of this type take precedence over whatever 
basic text type a given text otherwise belongs to” (1977/1989:111). 
Songs, comic strips, plays, and writing for radio or television are all 
examples of this type (Reiss 1977/1989:111), and the translator of 
such texts will need to ensure that the translation is equally suited as 
the original for use in the relevant medium. See also skopos theory. 
Further reading: Nord 1996; Reiss 1971, 1976, 1977, 1977/1989, 
1990; Reiss & Vermeer 1984.
Multiple-Stage Translation Suggested by Voegelin “as a set of 
procedures for showing explicitly the stages of work followed when 
an utterance in one language is re-uttered in another” (1954:271). 
Although originally developed as a procedure to be followed in 
machine translation, multiple-stage translation was adapted for 
the purpose of demonstrating the processes involved in translating 
from American Indian languages. Presented as a development of the 
type of two-stage translation which was common in anthropological 
research (i.e. ST − literal TT − free TT), multiple-stage translation 
can be characterized as the progressive rearrangement of SL linguis-
tic units to produce a TT which still reflects much of the structure 
of SL. Voegelin identifies eight stages in the translation process, the 
first of which is the identification of SL words with the help of an 
informant, and the last the addition of TL punctuation; with each of 
these “translational interim stages” (Wilss 1982:106), the developing 
TT is brought closer and closer to its final form. However, the pre-
cision of the instructions for multiple-stage translation, some of which 
call for highly complex bracketing procedures and the adoption of 
certain typographical conventions, is redolent of the procedure’s 
machine translation origins, implying as it does the possibility of 
reducing translation problems to a “sequence of standardly operative 
moves guaranteeing translational success” (Wilss 1994:136). For 
reasons such as this many commentators conclude that multiple-stage 
translation is impractical for most purposes. Further reading: Voegelin 
1954; Wilss 1994.
Mutation A term used by van Leuven-Zwart (1989, 1990) to denote 
the third category of shift which may occur between ST and TT 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
111
transemes. Mutation is said to have occurred if no relationship can 
be established between the two transemes; in this case it is not possible 
to establish an architranseme. According to van Leuven-Zwart there 
are three types of mutation: “addition of clauses or phrases, deletion 
of clauses or phrases, and radical change of meaning” (1989:169, 
emphasis original). See also generalization, integral translation, 
modification, modulation 2, and specification. Further reading: van 
Leuven-Zwart 1989, 1990.
Nairobi Declaration (or Nairobi Recommendation) A declaration 
adopted by UNESCO on 22 November 1976, the full title of which 
is the “Recommendation on the Legal Protection of Translators 
and Translations and the Practical Means to Improve the Status of 
Translators”. The intention of the recommendation is to ensure that 
translators − whether salaried or unsalaried, full or part time, literary, 
scientific or technical − are accorded recognition commensurate with 
the skill required to carry out their task, and to improve the often 
unfavourable conditions in which they are obliged to work. One 
of the document’s main concerns is that translators should receive 
rights similar to those enjoyed by authors in terms of, for example, 
social benefits, protection under international copyright laws, and the 
prominence given to their name in published translations. However, 
the declaration is broad in scope, covering such diverse topics as 
remuneration, contracts, professional organizations, training and 
working conditions. See also a.i.i.c., dubrovnik charter and f.i.t. 
Further reading: Haeseryn 1994; Osers 1983.
Naturalness A term used to refer to the extent to which a translation 
is expressed in clear, unforced terms in TL. Naturalness is described 
by the Bible translators Beekman & Callow as “a prerequisite to ease of 
understanding” (1974:39). The notion of naturalness also features in 
a famous definition of translation formulated by Nida & Taber, who 
− also within the context of Bible translation − state that translating 
“consists in reproducing in the receptor language the closest natural 
equivalent of the source-language message, first in terms of meaning 
and secondly in terms of style” (1969/1982:12, emphasis added); 
they describe naturalness as being characterized by “the use of 
grammatical constructions and combinations of words which do 
not violate the ordinary patterns of a language” (1969/1982:203). 
Similarly, Beekman & Callow consider that the naturalness of TT

Dictionary of Translation Studies
112
should be comparable to the naturalness of the original in terms of the 
use that is made of the “inventory of linguistic forms which serve as 
a vehicle for any message conveyed” in a given language (1974:40). 
Along similar lines, Vázquez-Ayora − writing in a different tradition − 
states that every language has its own particular preference as regards 
style and manner of expression: Spanish, for example, does not have 
the fondness of English for explaining and describing in the most 
minute detail, and this must be taken into account when translating 
between these two languages (1977:361). See also accuracy, dynamic 
fidelity, idiomatic translation and translationese. Further reading: 
Beekman & Callow 1974; Vázquez-Ayora 1977.
Necessary Degree of Differentiation (or Necessary Degree of 
Precision) See degree of differentiation.
Negative Shift Defined by Popovič as an incorrect translational so-
lution (or mistranslation) caused by a misunderstanding on the part 
of the translator ([1976]:16). Popovič states that this may be due to 
the fact that the translator is unfamiliar with the language, or has 
interpreted an ST structure superficially. See also shifts. Further 
reading: Popovič [1976].
Nitra School A group of Slovak scholars originally based at the Ni-
tra Pedagogical Faculty in former Czechoslovakia. The group, which 
included Jiří Levý, František Miko and Anton Popovič among its 
members, took some of the work of the Russian Formalists and the 
Prague linguistic circle as its starting-point in an investigation of 
some aspects of literary translation. Together these scholars were 
responsible for a number of important insights which have been 
taken up by later writers, in particular those associated with the ma-
nipulation school. Among these were for example an emphasis on 
retaining the artistic quality of a work in translation (Levý 1969), the 
investigation of the possibility of cataloguing the expressive features 
contained in a text (Miko 1970), the importance of shifts as a general 
translational phenomenon (Popovič 1970), and the consideration of 
translation in the context of the wider notion of metatext (Popovič 
1976, [1976]). As pointed out by Hermans, the group fell silent after 
1980 (1995:217). Further reading: Gentzler 1993.
“No Leftover” Principle According to Toury (1995), a technique 
used in descriptive translation analysis. The purpose of the principle 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
113
is to act as a guideline for establishing the precise relationships 
between individual ST and TT segments. A basic problem in 
“coupling off” pairs of replaced and replacing segments in this 
way is how to determine their respective boundaries, as there is no 
guarantee they will be identical “in rank or in scope” (1995:79), 
for example because of omission, addition or the results of com-
pensation. The “no leftover” principle thus guides the researcher 
to identify as a replacing segment only a TT segment beyond the 
boundaries of which “there are no leftovers of the solution to a 
translation problem which is represented by one of the source 
text’s segments, whether similar or different in rank and scope” 
(1995:79). Further reading: Toury 1995.
Norms A term frequently encountered in discussions of translational 
phenomena. A certain degree of confusion exists surrounding the 
use of the term (van Leuven-Zwart 1991). Traditional writing on 
translation and some branches of modern translation theory have 
taken a basically normative or prescriptive approach, in which 
norms are perceived and presented as guidelines, or even rules, 
which a translator needs to follow in order to produce an acceptable 
translation. Today, for example, this approach is often associated 
with various areas of applied translation studies (such as translator 
training and the writing of translation textbooks). Within other 
approaches, such as descriptive and pure translation studies, 
norms are understood in more neutral terms as reflections of the 
translation practice which typifies the translations produced by a 
certain translator, school of translators or entire culture. However, 
the same broad definition will serve whichever approach is adopted, 
so that it is possible to state in general terms that: “Norms ... perform 
a channelling, funnelling role in that they refer problem tokens, i.e. 
individual utterances and occurrences, to problem types, to which a 
given norm can be applied” (Hermans 1991:165). Broadly speaking, 
the conception of norms which different writers have adopted has 
depended on whether they understand the role of translation theory 
as being essentially regulatory, descriptive or predictive. However, 
it was the contradictory nature of many of the norms laid down 
by normative models (see for example Savory (1957:49) for a 
famous list of such contradictory requirements) that led Toury (1980) 
to suggest his tripartite model describing translational behaviour, in 
which the norm was posited to occupy the middle ground between 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
114
competence and performance (or, in another dimension, between 
rules and idiosyncrasies: Toury 1995:54). In this model, norms are 
defined as “strategies of translation which are repeatedly opted for, in 
preference to other available strategies, in a given culture or textual 
system” (Baker 1993:240). Understood in this way, norms influence 
decisions in such wide-ranging areas as a TT’s position between the 
poles of acceptability and adequacy 2 (initial norm), whether it is 
acceptable in a given culture to translate a work via its translation in 
another language (preliminary norms; see also indirect translation 
1), and more generally translational choices which need to be made 
during the course of the translation process (matricial, operational 
and textual norms). Since such norms are not directly observable, 
they are typically reconstructed from actual texts or from extratextual 
sources such as corpora of TTs or various kinds of explicit statements 
of translation practice (Toury 95:65), although the latter frequently 
reflect current prescriptive thinking on translation. The study of such 
norms is strongly associated with a target text-oriented approach, 
and can provide useful insights in a number of areas. These include 
the preconceptions, conventions and preferences of individual 
translators or whole cultures, and − leading on from these − the 
way in which equivalence is understood in different traditions; the 
identification of true universals of translation; and the position of 
translated literature in the literary polysystem. It is because of such 
wide-ranging considerations that the notion of the norm has been 
deemed “an absolutely essential concept” (Hermans 1991:165). See 
also conventions, expectancy norms and professional norms. Further 
reading: Chesterman 1993; Hermans 1991; Komissarov 1993; Toury 
1980, 1995.
Obligatory Equivalents A term used by Nida (1964) to describe the 
features of TL which the translator must of necessity employ when 
translating from another language. According to Nida, it is the first 
requirement of any translation “that it conform to the obligatory formal 
features of the receptor language” (1964:173). These innate features 
− which can include any type of grammatical category or other formal 
element − are what distinguish one language from another; as Nida 
says, citing Jakobson (1959/1966:236), “languages differ most in 
what they must convey, not in what they may convey” (1964:173). 
Translation problems thus frequently arise as a result, for example, of 
the presence in TL of a category which is not found, or which is only 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
115
poorly defined, in SL. The existence of such features also imposes 
severe restrictions upon the extent to which TL expressions may be 
considered equivalent to the corresponding SL expressions, as the 
translator has no alternative but to employ obligatory equivalents in 
any translation, whether it is formally or dynamically equivalent. 
Nida also points out that, because obligatory TL features must be 
introduced into the translation, there is a tendency towards gain 
in linguistic forms when translating from one language to another. 
However, this gain may be justified by the fact that there is an almost 
inevitable loss in total meaning between SL and TL because the two 
languages do not share the same cultural context (1964:174-75). 
See also equivalence and optional equivalents. Further reading: 
Nida 1964.
Oblique Translation (French Traduction Oblique) According to 
Vinay & Darbelnet, a term used to refer to various types of translation 
procedure designed to cope with situations where, because of structural 
or conceptual differences between ST and TT, some stylistic effects 
cannot be rendered satisfactorily without disturbing the syntactic or 
lexical order of the text (1958:46, 1958/1995:31); as such it contrasts 
with direct translation 4. In such cases, the straight replacement 
of ST elements by parallel TL elements is not possible, as it would 
simply produce a translation which was unacceptable in terms 
of meaning, structure or style (1958:49, 1958/1995:34-35). The 
four types of oblique translation − adaptation 2, equivalence 2, 
modulation 1 and transposition − are thus stylistic devices which 
enable translators to produce TTs which read naturally and do not 
give the impression of having been translated. Further reading: Vinay 
& Darbelnet 1958, 1958/1995.
Observational Receiver A term used by Pym (1992b) to describe a 
reader (or listener) who is able to understand the message of a text, 
even though he or she is not specifically addressed in it; such a reader 
contrasts with an excluded receiver and a participative receiver. 
Pym cites the example of an English-language job advertisement 
appearing in a French newspaper with a literal French translation 
appended; even in such circumstances the non-English-speaking 
reader “although lingually non-excluded, by no means shares the 
same discursive status as the implied receiver of the English text”, 
as he or she is still not one of those being invited to apply for the job 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
116
(1992b:176). Pym is not convinced that his categorization represents 
a radically new distinction, and indeed, strong parallels do exist, for 
example, between translation intended for an observational receiver 
and House’s (1977) overt translation. However, Fawcett argues 
that while other similar distinctions categorize texts on the basis of 
function, Pym’s idea of distinguishing types of receiver according to 
their degree of involvement “allows the breaking of a logjam in the 
question of translating texts which are culture-specific either in whole 
or part” (1995:179). See also documentary translation. Further 
reading: Fawcett 1995; Pym 1992b.
Offer of Information See information offer.
Operational Model A model of the translation process suggested by 
Bathgate (1980, 1981). The operational model is designed to describe 
“all phases of the work done by the translator to get from a source-
language text to the corresponding target-language text” (1980:113). 
Bathgate’s model is not proposed as an alternative to the many other 
models of the translation process which exist, but is rather an attempt 
to reconcile all previous models by placing them within one overall 
framework. The operational model divides the process of translation 
into seven phases: tuning (“getting the feel of the text”: Bathgate 
1980:113), analysis, understanding, terminology (i.e. transfer 2), 
restructuring, checking and discussion (for example with a subject 
expert). These phases are not necessarily either distinct or sequential; 
for instance, the discussion phase may occur concurrently with 
any − or all − of the others. As can be seen from the nomenclature, 
Bathgate’s model is to a large extent based on that proposed by Nida 
& Taber (1969/1982). However, according to Bathgate, other models 
which are also accommodated include those represented by hermen-
eutic motion, modulation 1, decision-making and mapping; each of 
these models can be allocated a place according to the phase for which 
it provides the greatest insights. Bathgate argues that the overview of 
translator activity which the operational model provides is useful in 
training translators. Further reading: Bathgate 1980, 1981.
Operational Norms A term used by Toury (1980, 1995) to refer to 
those translational norms which “direct actual decisions made during 
the translating process itself” (Toury 1980:54). There are two types 
of operational norm: those which affect the matrix of the text, or in 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
117
other words the ways in which the linguistic material − especially 
the larger units − is distributed within the text (matricial norms), and 
those which involve the textual make-up and verbal formulation of the 
text (textual norms). As the process of decision-making progresses 
the precise operational norms which are being used will determine 
which options are available to the translator and which are closed 
off. See also initial norm and preliminary norms. Further reading: 
Toury 1980, 1995.
Operative Texts (German Operative Texte) (formerly Appeal-
focused Texts; German Appellbetonte Texte) A term used by Reiss 
(1977/1989) to refer to one of three basic text-types intended both 
as a guide for translators and to help in the process of translation 
criticism (see also expressive texts and informative texts). As with 
the other categories, operative texts are distinguished by the function 
which they serve, and also by the language in which they are written, 
which reflects this function. Operative texts contain messages which 
are intended to persuade the receiver to undertake a certain course 
of action, such as buying a specific product or voting for a particular 
political party. In other words, in such a text “both content and form 
are subordinated to the extralinguistic effect which the text is designed 
to achieve” (Nord 1996:83). This means that a translator’s main 
aim should be to produce a TT which has an equivalent persuasive 
force to that of the original. However, besides transmitting similar 
“impulses to action” (Reiss 1977/1989:111), the translation process 
will also entail preserving the basic semantic content, as well perhaps 
as reproducing elements of an aesthetic nature. Political manifestos, 
advertisements and sermons are all examples of this type of text; 
however, Reiss makes the point that, like the others, this category is 
not rigidly defined, as many texts also have further, more subsidiary 
aims. See also multi-medial texts and skopos theory. Further reading: 
Nord 1996; Reiss 1971, 1976, 1977, 1977/1989; Reiss & Vermeer 
1984.
Optional Equivalents According to Nida (1964), the features of a 
language which a translator may choose to use when rendering an ST 
in TL. Whereas in the case of obligatory equivalents the translator 
is bound by the rules which govern the formal features of TL, there is 
no such restriction on the use of optional equivalents, and so he or she 
may choose between various possible renderings, all of which reflect 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
118
proximity to ST. According to Nida, the use of optional equivalents 
is important in maintaining the “flow” of the message, so the criteria 
which determine how to select them involve the principle of com-
munication load; Nida in addition points out that the translator must 
be sensitive to the style and intent of the author, and must also be 
empathetic to the TT receptors (1964:173-74). See also equivalence. 
Further reading: Nida 1964.
Organic Form See content-derivative form.
Overlapping Translation (or Partially-overlapping Translation) 
A term used by Hervey & Higgins (1992) to describe the type of se-
mantic near-equivalence which combines elements of generalizing 
translation and particularizing translation in a single word or 
phrase by adding a detail not found in ST but at the same time omitting 
another detail which is given there. Hervey & Higgins suggest that 
overlapping translation may be visualized as two partially overlap-
ping circles, as the SL and TL expressions both contain elements of 
shared meaning as well as features not found in the other. According 
to Hervey & Higgins, it is acceptable on two conditions: “first, if 
the TL offers no suitable alternatives; second, if the omitted detail is 
either unimportant or can be recovered from the overall TT context, 
and if the added detail is implicit in, or at least not contradictory to, 
the overall ST context” (1992:97). As an example of this phenomenon 
Hervey & Higgins discuss the English phrase my mother-in-law’s 
soup and a possible French translation, la soupe de ma belle-mère; 
although the French is one of the closest possible renderings of the 
English, it can be termed an overlapping translation because of the fact 
that, on the one hand, French soupe is a narrower term than English 
soup, and, on the other, French belle-mère can refer not only to a 
mother-in-law, but also to a step-mother (1992:96). Further reading: 
Hervey & Higgins 1992.
Overt Translation A term introduced by House (1977) to refer 
to one of two contrasting modes of translation (see also covert 
translation). According to her model, some STs have independent 
status in the source culture. This means that they are in some way 
inextricably linked to the community and culture, being specifically 
directed at SL addressees. In order to translate such STs appropriately, 
it is necessary to produce an overt translation, or one in which “the 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
119
target addressees are quite ‘overtly’ not being directly addressed” 
(1986:188). Consequently, in the production of such a TT no attempt 
is made to produce a “second original”: an overt translation “must 
overtly be a translation” (1986:188). Furthermore, because of the 
firm anchoring of ST in the source culture, it is not possible to preserve 
its original function (in terms of context, audience, etc.) in TT. 
Production of an overt translation is generally a matter of relatively 
straightforward linguistic recoding, usually with no necessity to carry 
out any subtle cultural realignment. Sermons, political speeches and 
much artistic literature are all examples of text-types for which such 
an approach would be appropriate. In this framework translations 
for special addressees (for example children’s versions of classical 
works) or purposes (for example interlinear translations) are 
defined as overt versions of an ST. See also documentary translation, 
observational receiver and semantic translation. Further reading: 
House 1977, 1986.
Overtranslation 1 (or Over-translation) (French Surtraduction) 
A term used by Vinay & Darbelnet (1958, 1958/1995) to describe 
what occurs when two units of translation are perceived where 
there is in fact only one. Vinay & Darbelnet cite as an example the 
translation of aller chercher as to go and look for, rather than to fetch; 
here the translator has treated the SL expression as if it were a chance 
combination of two words, rather than a fixed expression which has 
an obligatory one-word equivalent in TL (1958:31, 1958/1995:16). 
Further reading: Vinay & Darbelnet 1958, 1958/1995.
2 A term used by Newmark (1981/1988) to refer to one of two 
phenomena frequently found in translated texts. As is argued by 
Newmark, every act of translation involves some loss of ST meaning 
(for example because of the difficulty of finding a precise equivalent 
for a given word, or more generally because the writer of ST and 
the translator favour different modes of expression). According to 
Newmark, if this loss of meaning entails an increase in detail (rather 
than an increase in generalization) it is termed overtranslation. For 
example, the axiomatic simplicity of the English sentence the cat sat 
on the mat disappears when it is translated into French (le chat était 
accroupi sur le paillasson), partly because French lacks a generic 
term corresponding to English mat, with the result that any word 
chosen as an equivalent is likely to have a more specific meaning than 
the English word. As observed by Duff (1981), a common symptom 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
120
of overtranslation is more words being used to express an idea 
in TT than were used in ST. Overtranslation is typical of semantic 
translation. See also degree of differentiation, particularizing 
translation and undertranslation. Further reading: Duff 1981; 
Newmark 1981/1988, 1988.
Paradigmatic Equivalence Defined by Popovič as “equivalence 
of the elements of a paradigmatic expressive axis upon the stylistic 
level as a system of expressive elements” ([1976]:6). The term para-
digmatic is used to refer to the complete “expressive system”, or in 
other words, the entire range of expressive possibilities from which 
the actual items found in a given text are drawn. This type of equiva-
lence is not identical with “lexical synonymical equivalence” (one 
of several kinds of linguistic equivalence), as it involves a “hierar-
chically higher stylistic category” ([1976]:6). See also equivalence, 
stylistic equivalence and textual equivalence 2. Further reading: 
Popovič [1976].
Parallel Corpora (or Bilingual Corpora) According to Baker, a 
parallel corpus “consists of original, source language-texts in lan-
guage A and their translated versions in language B” (1995:230). 
Like multilingual corpora, parallel corpora can be used in materials 
writing, translator training and the development of machine transla-
tion systems. However, their advantage over multilingual corpora is 
that they provide information not on the native patterns of a target 
language, but on those of specific target texts, and so give insight into 
the particular translation practices and procedures which have been 
used by the translator. Full exploitation of the potential of parallel 
corpora is possible only with the use of special software to enable 
the investigator to align ST sentences with their TT equivalents or 
to conduct bilingual concordancing operations. As is the case with 
terms denoting other types of corpora, there is still a certain lack of 
standardization in the way in which this term is used; Johansson & 
Hofland (1994), for example, extend its meaning to include the type 
of corpora which Baker (1995) refers to as multilingual corpora. See 
also bi-text and comparable corpora. Further reading: Baker 1995; 
Granger 1996; Hartmann 1980; Johansson & Hofland 1994.
Parallel Translation A procedure described by Casagrande (1954). 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
121
Parallel translation is in effect a type of back-translation in which 
an ST is translated simultaneously into several different TLs. Ac-
cording to Casagrande, such a procedure provides a researcher 
with useful insights: “Comparison of the translations in the several 
target languages may reveal significant and systematic differences 
in the way [SL] is handled at both the grammatical and semantic 
levels” (1954:340). See also serial translation. Further reading: 
Casagrande 1954.
Paraphrase One of three methods of translating described in the 
seventeenth century by Dryden (1680/1989). While imitation 1 and 
metaphrase are the procedures which represent the two extremes 
of free and literal translation, paraphrase is conceived as a mid-
dle way between them. Dryden defines paraphrase as “translation 
with latitude, where the author is kept in view by the translator, so 
as never to be lost, but his words are not so strictly followed as his 
sense” (1680/1989:8). Dryden recommends paraphrase as the pre-
ferred means of translating, and although he ascribes primacy to the 
author’s sense, advocates exercising care in the translation of both the 
original’s meaning and its words: when translating thoughts, it is per-
missible “to vary but the dress, not to alter or destroy the substance” 
(1680/1989:11), while if the words − “the more outward ornaments” 
(1680/1989:11) − can be rendered gracefully, “it were an injury to the 
author that they should be changed” (1680/1989:11). Dryden argues 
that by adopting this method of translation “the spirit of an author 
may be transfused, and yet not lost” (1680/1989:11); furthermore, 
he underlines the necessity of making a translation resemble the 
original by using a simile comparing the translation process with 
that of a painter copying from life (1680/1989:11). Finally, it should 
be pointed out that while Dryden’s use of this term differs from the 
standard modern English meaning of paraphrase, many other writers 
on translation do use the term in this more common sense. Further 
reading: Dryden 1680/1989; Frost 1955.
Paris School See interpretive theory of translation.
Partial Theories of Translation According to Holmes (1988e), one 
of the two branches of theoretical translation studies. In contrast to 
general theories of translation, partial theories of translation are 
concerned with only a limited number of the phenomena covered by 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
122
the discipline of translation studies. Significant advances have been 
made in the area of numerous specific partial theories of translation, 
and considerable further development is likely to be a prerequisite 
of the eventual formulation of a general theory of translation. The 
category of partial theories of translation is further divided into six 
sub-types: area-restricted, medium-restricted, problem-restricted, 
rank-restricted, text-type restricted and time-restricted theories 
of translation. See also pure translation studies and translation 
theory. Further reading: Holmes 1988e.
Partial Translation A term used by Catford (1965) to refer to a kind 
of translation in which parts of the text (usually lexical items) are 
left “untranslated”. This occurs with reasonable frequency in liter-
ary translation, either as a strategy for dealing with “untranslatable” 
elements, or in order to introduce an SL flavour into TT. However, 
to say that such elements remain “untranslated” is something of an 
approximation, as items will inevitably acquire new contextual mean-
ings in TL; as illustration of this, Catford cites the examples of Finnish 
sauna and Russian sputnik, both of which, as foreign “borrowings”, 
are understood in English differently from the way they are used in 
the languages from which they are taken. See also full translation. 
Further reading: Catford 1965.
Partially-overlapping Translation See overlapping translation.
Participative Receiver According to Pym (1992b), one of three 
types of text receiver (see also excluded receiver and observational 
receiver). As such, a participative receiver is a reader (or listener) 
to whom the text is explicitly addressed. Pym cites the example of 
a job advertisement written in English which appears in a French 
newspaper; even though there may be an explanation in French of 
the content of the advertisement, it is only those in a position to 
understand the English − the “participative receivers” − who are 
actually being invited to apply (1992b:176). Fawcett argues that 
such a categorization of reader involvement represents an important 
advance on classifications of translation function (such as House’s 
(1977) covert and overt translation), as it casts important light 
on the question of translating cultural-specific texts (1995:179). 
See also instrumental translation. Further reading: Fawcett 1995; 
Pym 1992b.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
123
Particularizing Translation (or Particularization) Defined by 
Hervey & Higgins (1992) as a translation which renders an ST expres-
sion by a TL hyponym (or word with a less exclusive meaning). This 
means that the literal meaning of the TT expression is narrower and 
more specific than that of the corresponding ST expression. In this 
way a particularizing translation adds details to TT that are not explic-
itly expressed in ST. According to Hervey & Higgins, particularizing 
translation is acceptable on two conditions: “first, that the TL offers no 
suitable alternative; second, that the added detail is implicit in the ST 
and fits in with the overall context of the ST” (1992:95). However, it 
may not be used if there are alternatives in TL, or if the added detail 
creates discrepancies in TT or represents a misinterpretation of the 
overall context of ST (1992:95). See also generalizing translation, 
overlapping translation and overtranslation 2. Further reading: 
Hervey & Higgins 1992.
Patronage A term used by Lefevere (1985, 1992) in the context of a 
discussion of the factors which can be brought to bear on a literary 
system and the individual texts of which it is composed. According 
to Lefevere, two types of control are exercised on a literary system. 
The first of these is that of professionals such as translators, critics, 
reviewers and teachers, whose intervention can determine the 
shape of a text or ensure that the way in which it is perceived fits 
in with the “reigning orthodoxy” (1992:15) of a culture; the second 
is that of what Lefevere terms patronage. Patronage is defined as 
“something like the powers (persons, institutions) that can further or 
hinder the reading, writing, and rewriting of literature” (1992:15). 
Such “powers” can take the form of individuals (such as the head 
of state), political or religious institutions, social classes, publishers 
or the media (1992:15); in each instance the influence which they 
exert has the purpose of ensuring that “the literary system does not 
fall too far out of step with the other subsystems society consists 
of” (1992:14). The control which the “patron” exercises consists of 
three elements: ideological constraints on form and subject matter, 
economic provision for writers, translators and other rewriters, 
and the bestowing of status on these individuals (1992:16). Patronage 
is termed undifferentiated if all three elements depend on the same 
persons or institutions, and it is generally the case that such patrons 
are concerned with maintaining the stability of society as a whole 
(1992:17); in systems where this is not the case the patronage is said 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
124
to be differentiated. The influence of patronage is of course immense, 
as it can determine the ways in which a literary system develops, 
as well as shaping the canon of texts chosen for study in schools 
and universities (1992:20-24). See also polysystem theory. Further 
reading: Lefevere 1985, 1992.
Performance A term used by Toury (1980). Following Chomsky’s 
(1965) famous dichotomy, Toury uses the term performance to de-
scribe instances of actual translation (i.e. existing TTs) as opposed to the 
system of translational possibilities which exist between any potential 
SL and TL (known as translation competence). Strictly speaking, the 
term thus applies to instances of interlingual communication, and 
more specifically, the type of interlingual communication which is 
known as translation. Instances of such translational performance 
(i.e. individual TTs) can be studied for the information which they 
may reveal about translated text in general; in this connection, 
both the TT-ST and the TT-TL relationships which a particular 
TT displays are of interest. Toury suggests that the performance-
competence distinction is too cut-and-dried to account for all types of 
translational phenomenon (whether standardly used by translators, 
only occasionally encountered or merely potential but basically 
unrealized), and consequently proposes the norm as the third member 
of a tripartite model. Further reading: Toury 1980.
Phonemic Translation (or Homophonic Translation) One of seven 
strategies for translating poetic texts, which Lefevere (1975) discusses 
with reference to English translations of Catullus’ poem sixty-four. 
In a phonemic translation the translator places fidelity to the sound 
of ST above all other considerations, to produce a TT which attempts 
to mimic the “phonetic image” (Kelly 1979:125) of ST while being 
encoded in as close an approximation to TL as possible. Thus for 
example Zukofsky & Zukofsky’s (1969) experimental translation 
of the Catullus poem aims to “breathe the ‘literal’ meaning” with 
the ST author by following the sound, rhythm and syntax of ST 
as closely as possible (Zukofsky & Zukofsky 1969, Translators’ 
Preface). Lefevere points out that throughout the entire TT “... an 
undercurrent of paraphrased sense lies hidden behind the attempted 
similarity of sound” (1975:21), a sense which is made up of “elaborate 
syntactic jigsaw puzzles” (1975:95). However, such a radically distinc-
tive TT inevitably polarizes opinion. Lefevere is generally critical, 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
125
arguing that the TT produced is awkward and frequently lacking 
in any kind of TL meaning; he speaks disparagingly of the way in 
which the translators implicitly claim to be “fusing” SL and TL 
in their translation (1975:96). Kelly, on the other hand, sees it as 
an extreme outworking of Walter Benjamin’s (1923/1970) notion 
of a translation being an attempt to approximate pure language 
(Kelly 1979:55). Toury cites this TT, among others, as a test-case 
for the claim of target text-oriented translation studies that 
a wide range of different texts can be accepted as translations 
(1980:43-45). Venuti, who refers to this type of modernist 
translation as homophonic translation, notes the “proliferation of 
ambiguities” and the “dazzling range of Englishes” (1995:216) 
suggested by the text; he treats such eccentric TTs as examples 
of foreignizing translation, a strategy which he advocates as a 
challenge to accepted translation practices. It should be pointed out 
that the category of phonemic translation is broadly analogous to 
Catford’s (1965) phonological translation. See also blank verse 
translation, imitation 2, interpretation, literal translation 2, 
metrical translation, poetry into prose, rhymed translation and 
version 2. Further reading: Lefevere 1975; Venuti 1995.
Phonological Translation A term used by Catford to refer to a type 
of restricted translation in which “the SL phonology of a text is 
replaced by equivalent TL phonology” (1965:56), the grammar and 
lexis remaining unchanged. While formal correspondence may not 
exist between given phonological features of two different languages, 
it is usually possible to set up translation equivalences. The basis for 
such equivalences is the “relationship of SL and TL phonological 
units to ‘the same’ phonic substance [or sequence of sounds]” 
(1965:56). This means that sounds or groups of sounds which do 
not exist in the TL phonological system will not be realized when 
translated from the SL phonological system, or else will be realized 
in a way more germane to the TL phonological system. Therefore 
the English sequence /kats/, for example, might be rendered into 
a language which had no final consonant clusters as /kat/, while 
English /had/ would correspond to Greek /xent/, since this represents 
the closest Greek equivalent to the original sequence of sounds. This 
procedure is occasionally exploited for its potential humorous effect, 
as can be seen in the following phonological translation into French 
of the first two lines of the English nursery-rhyme “Georgie-Porgie”:

Dictionary of Translation Studies
126
Georgie Port-régie, peu digne en paille,
Qui se dégeule sans mais. Dame craille.
 
 
-de Kay (1983: no. 1)
However, besides instances of such ingenious word-play, and with 
the further exceptions of film dubbing and some translations of poetry 
(both of which are partial phonological translatidxon), SL phonol-
ogy is usually replaced, not translated. It should be noted that if one 
speaks a foreign language with the phonology of one’s own language 
− or in other words with a foreign accent − one can be considered to 
be performing a phonological translation from the foreign language 
into one’s own. See also grammatical translation, graphological 
translation, lexical translation and phonemic translation. Further 
reading: Catford 1965.
Pivot Language A term used to refer to a language which serves as 
an intermediate stage between SL and TL when it is for some reason 
not possible to transfer ST directly into TL (see indirect translation 
1 and relay interpreting). This procedure can be resorted to when 
for example no translator or interpreter is available who is able to work 
between SL and TL; it is also used as a cheap method of subtitling, 
where it entails providing subtitles in a certain TL on the basis of a set 
of subtitles which has been produced for another language. Use of a 
pivot language is not generally encouraged since it necessitates two 
separate transfers − firstly from SL into the pivot language and then 
from the pivot language into TL − which are performed by different 
people and which can thus result in a TT which departs some way 
from the original (see Dries 1995). Further reading: Seleskovitch & 
Lederer 1989.
Poetry into Prose One of seven strategies of poetry translation 
catalogued by Lefevere (1975). Poetry into prose differs from 
literal translation 2 in that the translator attempts to render in 
TT some of the poetic qualities of the original. Opinion as to the 
efficacy of this strategy has always been sharply divided. Tytler, for 
example, designates the translation of a lyric poem into prose as 
“the most absurd of all undertakings” (1791/1978:207). Murry, on 
the other hand, considers that “no fetters of rhyme or metre should 
be imposed” to impede the difficult labour of translating poetry 
(1923:129, quoted in Holmes 1988d:31 n. 11). In the course of an 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
127
analysis of English translations of a poem by Catullus, Lefevere 
considers the advantages and disadvantages of this technique. On 
the positive side, he characterizes poetry into prose translations as 
“accurate, closer to the source text than a verse translation could 
ever be”, while also being “happily liberated from the deadening 
restraints of the doggedly word-for-word technique” (1975:42). 
However, he observes that the strategy also results in “an uneasy, 
hybrid structure, forever groping towards a precarious equilibrium 
between verse and prose and never really achieving it” (1975:42). In 
other words, the translator who chooses this translation strategy is still 
obliged to operate within considerable restrictions which ultimately 
deduct from the overall literary impact of the text. See also blank 
verse translation, imitation 2, interpretation, metrical translation, 
phonemic translation, rhymed translation and version 2. Further 
reading: Lefevere 1975.
Polemical Translation Defined by Popovič (1976, [1976]) as a trans-
lation in which the translator’s operations are intentionally “directed 
against another translator’s operations that are representative of a 
different or antagonistic conception [of translation]” ([1976]:21). 
Alternatively, a polemical translation can also be aimed at the ST 
author. In such cases, a translation of this type may be devised as 
a parody of some aspect of the author’s poetics, or may simply be 
intended to bring the original up to date (1976:229). Further reading: 
Popovič 1976, [1976].
Polysystem Theory A theory proposed by Even-Zohar (1978a, 1978b) 
to account for the behaviour and evolution of literary sysztems. The 
term polysystem denotes a stratified conglomerate of interconnected 
elements, which changes and mutates as these elements interact with 
each other. Thus a given national literary polysystem will evolve as 
a result of the continuous tension between various literary models, 
genres and traditions; the frequently conservative, “canonized” forms 
(those which most closely reflect the most accepted, institutionalized 
aesthetic) will attempt to retain their prominent, influential position, 
while other, innovative, “non-canonized” genres will attempt to 
usurp their central position. In order to acquire a complete overview 
of the dynamics which shape a literary polysystem one must take 
account not only of so-called “high” forms (such as the established 
verse forms) but also of a range of “low” forms (such as works for 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
128
children, popular fiction and translated literature). Translated literature 
usually occupies a peripheral position, but can at times assume a 
more influential rôle. The adoption of polysystem theory by certain 
groups of scholars (most notably the so-called manipulation school) 
has led to the development of target text-oriented translation 
studies, a non-prescriptive approach in which the emphasis has 
been on describing actual translation practices (or norms) rather than 
constructing theories which propose one particular translation method 
as being the only correct one. See also system. Further reading: Baker 
1993; Even-Zohar 1978a, 1978b, 1990; Gentzler 1993; Hermans 
1985a; Lefevere 1983.
Post-editing A term used in the context of machine translation 
and defined by Sager as “the adaptation and revision of output of a 
machine translation system either to eliminate errors which impede 
comprehension or to make the output read like a natural language 
text” (1994:327). As Sager observes, such human intervention is 
often necessary because output from machine translation can seem 
“faulty or artificial” (1994:276). The process of post-editing can 
be either interactive or non-interactive; however, for the use of a 
machine-translation system to be economically viable, the expense 
and effort involved in post-editing must be less than that required 
for a full human translation, or there would be no point in using 
the machine translation system. On the other hand a flexible policy 
towards post-editing will recognize that translations are needed 
for different purposes, and that the level of post-editing will vary 
accordingly. Thus for example one text may be translated with no 
post-editing at all (possibly to find out whether it merits “proper” 
translation), a second may require considerable post-editing in order 
to be presented in a highly polished state, while a third may simply 
need to be checked for basic intelligibility and accuracy before being 
submitted in a readable but less than perfect form (see Arnold et al. 
1994:33-34). See also pre-editing. Further reading: Arnold et al. 1994; 
Sager 1994.
Pragmatic Translation 1 (or Pragmatic Approach) A term used to 
refer to translation which pays attention not only to denotative meaning 
but also to “the way utterances are used in communicative situations 
and the way we interpret them in context” (Baker 1992:217). As 
stated by Baker, pragmatics is a branch of linguistics devoted to 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
129
“the study of meaning, not as generated by the linguistic system but 
as conveyed and manipulated by participants in a communicative 
situation” (1992:217); this means that a pragmatic translation will 
for example attempt to convey connotative meaning, allusion, and 
interpersonal aspects of communication such as implicature, tone, 
register and so on. Many insights of pragmatics have been incorpo-
rated into various translation theories, including relevance theory 
(see direct translation 3 and indirect translation 2) and skopos 
theory (Neubert 1994:411). See also communicative translation 1. 
Further reading: Baker 1992; Hatim & Mason 1990.
2 One of Casagrande’s (1954) four classifications of translation, in 
which the chief purpose is to “translate a message as efficiently and 
as accurately as possible”, with the emphasis on “the content of the 
message as such rather than on its aesthetic form, grammatical form or 
the cultural context” (1954:335). Examples of pragmatic translations 
are scientific treatises, government documents and the instructions, 
directions or descriptions written in several languages on packaged 
goods. See also aesthetic-poetic translation, ethnographic transla-
tion and linguistic translation 2. Further reading: Casagrande 1954.
Pre-editing A term used to refer to the process of preparing an 
ST for translation by a machine translation system. Most such 
systems find it almost impossible to analyse language which is even 
slightly convoluted, and so it is frequently necessary to simplify, 
clarify and disambiguate the grammar and vocabulary of the text 
to be translated, in order to ensure that the output is of a reasonable 
quality. Such pre-editing may take the form of rewriting the text in a 
controlled language, or simply shortening sentences, reducing the 
number of subordinate clauses and adding explicating words such as 
conjunctions. However, pre-editing may also be semi-automated as 
some systems have a critiquing facility which indicates the points 
at which the input needs to be rewritten (Arnold et al. 1994:29). See 
also post-editing and writer-oriented machine translation. Further 
reading: Arnold et al. 1994.
Precision, Degree of See degree of differentiation.
Preliminary Norms According to Toury (1980, 1995), one of a 
number of different types of norm which influence the translation 
process. Preliminary norms are defined as operating in two distinct 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
130
but clearly related areas. The first of these is the question of whether 
or not a coherent translation “policy” can be identified in a given 
culture or language at a particular point in time. Such a policy is 
understood in terms of the individual works, authors, genres, schools 
or literatures which are the preferred sources for translation into a 
given language. Of course, different policies may apply to different 
subgroups of the target system, while in some contexts no definite 
policy exists; one may only be said to exist if the choices made in a 
given area are nonrandom (Toury 1995:58). The second area in which 
preliminary norms are said to operate is in the attitude displayed by a 
given culture to translation via another TT in another language (see 
indirect translation 1). For example, some cultures prohibit any 
translation which does not use the original text as its ST, while in 
others such a practice may be permitted, tolerated or even preferred. 
Further issues would include the languages which may serve as an 
intermediary, and whether such a mediated translation is labelled as 
such or camouflaged (Toury 1980:53-54 and 1995:58). See also ini-
tial norm, matricial norms, operational norms and textual norms. 
Further reading: Toury 1980, 1995.
Prescriptive Translation Studies A term used by Toury (1980, 1985) 
to refer to approaches to translation which are normative in outlook, 
or in other words which impose criteria stipulating the way translation 
should be performed in a particular culture. Two of the most significant 
prescriptive orientations have traditionally been the insistence on 
either free or literal translation as being the only “proper” strategy to 
adopt; however, other prescriptions have also been made, such as for 
example the refusal by some cultures to accept the validity of indirect 
translation 1 (see Toury 1995). Toury attributes the traditional 
predominance of such prescriptive approaches to the “overall 
orientation of the discipline towards its practical applications” 
(1985:17), such as translation teaching and criticism (see applied 
translation studies); such applications have represented “the main 
constraint on the very formulation of the theory which underlies them” 
(1985:17) as they have been allowed to dominate the discipline instead 
of serving as its “extensions ... into ‘the real world’” (1985:17). In 
practice this has meant that the discipline of translation studies has 
been influenced by prescriptive pronouncements which have derived 
“either from sheer speculation or from theoretical and descriptive 
work done within the framework of other, more ‘basic’ disciplines” 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
131
such as contrastive linguistics (1985:17, emphasis original). According 
to Toury this situation is remedied by acknowledging that Translation 
Studies consists not only of applied but also of descriptive and 
theoretical branches; within such a framework it is possible to 
develop methodologies for viewing translations as target facts which 
can be studied on an empirical basis, while the applied extensions 
will − rightly − remain prescriptive in nature (Toury 1995; see also 
Holmes 1988e). See also source text-oriented translation studies. 
Further reading: Toury 1980, 1985, 1995.
Primäre Übersetzung See primary translation.
Primary Translation (German Primäre Übersetzung) According 
to Diller & Kornelius (1978), one of two ways of translating (see 
also secondary translation). A TT is considered to be a primary 
translation if the aim is “to produce a communication between an SL 
sender and a TL receiver” (1978:3). In other words, the translator of 
a primary translation will attempt to create a text in which the target 
recipients seem to be addressed directly rather than being presented 
with a message which was originally intended for someone else. Thus 
primary translation is said to occur, for example, when two people 
converse via an interpreter, or when a bilingual secretary translates 
a business letter, since in both these cases the TT recipient is the 
intended recipient of the original communication. See also covert 
translation. Further reading: Diller & Kornelius 1978.
Problem-restricted Theories of Translation A term used by Holmes 
(1988e) to refer to one of six partial theories of translation. 
Problem-restricted theories of translation deal with specific 
translation-related problems, such as for example that concerning 
the nature of translation equivalence, or the translation of metaphors 
or proper names. See also area-restricted, medium-restricted, 
rank-restricted, text-type restricted and time-restricted theories 
of translation. Further reading: Holmes 1988e.
Process-oriented Translation Studies (or Process-oriented 
Descriptive Translation Studies) According to Holmes (1988e), one 
of three varieties of descriptive translation studies. Process-oriented 
Translation Studies is concerned with an examination of the mental 
processes involved in the act of translating. Clearly, such processes 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
132
are highly complex, yet it is hoped that the systematic application of 
sophisticated psychological techniques will lead to advances in this 
area and to the possible setting up of a new area of study which one 
might term translation psychology (1988e:72-73). See also function-
oriented translation studies and product-oriented translation 
studies. Further reading: Holmes 1988e.
Product-oriented Translation Studies (or Product-oriented De-
scriptive Translation Studies) One of three types of descriptive 
translation studies, according to Holmes (1988e). This approach 
generally starts from the description of existing translations, and typi-
cally progresses to a comparative analysis of various translations of 
the same text into one or more TLs. A more generalized survey of a 
larger corpus of translations (relating to a particular period, language 
and/or text or discourse type) may follow on from this; such an analy-
sis may for example focus on medieval English Bible translations. 
One possible eventual goal of Product-Oriented Translation Studies 
might be a comprehensive history of translations, although such an 
ambitious project is not likely to be feasible for some time (1988e:72). 
See also function-oriented translation studies and process-oriented 
translation studies. Further reading: Holmes 1988e.
Professional Norms Defined by Chesterman (1993) as one of two 
types of translational norm (see also expectancy norms). According 
to Chesterman, professional norms govern “the accepted methods 
and strategies of the translation process” (1993:8); as such they are 
intended to reflect the way professional translators in a given culture 
produce translations. Chesterman argues that the purpose of norms 
is not only to describe, but also to evaluate both translations and 
translational practice. In this way they not only reflect “the actual 
practice of competent professional translators” (1993:9) but are also 
“at least in part validated by norm authorities” (1993:9) such as 
editors, critics or teachers of translation. Furthermore, professional 
norms are also governed by the “higher-order” expectancy norms 
(1993:9). Chesterman identifies three main types of professional 
norm: the accountability norm, the communication norm and the rela-
tion norm. The accountability norm is an ethical norm, as it requires 
the translator to meet the demands of loyalty to the writer of ST, 
the commissioner of the translation and the prospective readership 
(1993:8). The communication norm is a social norm which specifies 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
133
the ways in which the translator should act in order to “optimize com-
munication between the original writer and/or commissioner and the 
prospective readership” (1993:8). The relation norm is a linguistic 
norm, and determines the type and level of equivalence established 
between ST and TT; its nature is “determined by the translator, on 
the basis of his or her understanding of the intentions of the original 
writer and/or commissioner, the type and skopos of the text, and the 
nature of the prospective readership” (1993:9; see skopos theory). 
See also regulative translational conventions. Further reading: 
Chesterman 1993.
Prose Translation See inverse translation.
Prospective Science of Translation See prospective translation 
and science of translation.
Prospective Translation A term used by Postgate to describe 
translation “which primarily regards the Reader” (1922:18; see 
also retrospective translation). Prospective translation is thus a 
TL-oriented translation procedure in which the translator’s main 
concern is to express the ST meaning in terms appropriate to the TL 
audience; in this way the translator is seen as an adapter rather than 
a faithful follower of the original wording. Wilss (1982:159) uses 
the term prospective science of translation to denote the subdivision 
of applied translation studies concerned with such matters as the 
methodology of translation teaching and the study of translation 
difficulties, which are associated with translation as a process 
rather than a product. The term prospective translation is broadly 
synonymous with acceptable translation (see acceptability) and 
free translation. See also science of translation. Further reading: 
Postgate 1922; Wilss 1977, 1982.
Protest (German Protest) A term used by Reiss & Vermeer (1984) in 
the context of skopos theory. According to Reiss & Vermeer, in any 
act of communication, the delivery of a message is followed by some 
kind of feedback (Rückkoppelung) or reaction, the purpose of which 
is to provide the message producer with an idea of how the message 
has been received. The communication is considered not to have been 
successful if the recipient’s feedback takes the form of a protest, or in 
other words if the communication is not received as it was intended; 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
134
such a protest can occur because of either the content of the mes-
sage or the intention of the producer. In the context of translation, a 
protest can in addition be directed against the translator’s intention, 
or in other words TT’s skopos. See also coherence and information 
offer. Further reading: Reiss & Vermeer 1984; Vermeer 1983.
Prototext Defined within Popovič’s theory of metacommunica-
tion as a text “which serves as an object of inter-textual continuity” 
(1976:226). In other words, a prototext is any text which provides the 
starting-point for the creation of a further text (or metatext). Thus the 
concept includes STs for translation, and also the originals or inspira-
tions for such other secondary activities as imitation, re-telling, allusion 
and reviewing ([1976]:31). Further reading: Popovič 1976, [1976].
Pseudotranslation 1 A term used to refer to “TL texts which are 
regarded in the target culture as translations though no genuine STs 
exist for them” (Toury 1980:31). The notion of pseudotranslation 
thus refers to the kind of literary forgery in which a writer attempts 
to present an original text as if it were a translation. Toury argues 
that this phenomenon has significance for translation studies for 
two main reasons. Firstly, pseudotranslation has been used on 
occasion “to introduce innovations into a literary system, especially 
when this system is resistant to deviations from canonical models 
and norms” (1984: 83 see norms). Secondly, pseudotranslations 
provide a useful insight into prevailing notions of the features which 
characterize a translated text, as pseudotranslators typically utilize 
both linguistic and textual items common in genuine translations. 
Pseudotranslations have special significance in target text-
oriented approaches to translation as the fact of their existence 
supports the claim that “the identity of a target text as a translation 
is determined first and foremost by considerations pertinent to the 
receptor system, with no necessary connection with the source text” 
(1984:81). Popovič ([1976]) uses two terms − pseudotranslation and 
fictitious translation − to refer to the same phenomenon. A famous 
example of a pseudotranslation is the Works of Ossian, which James 
Macpherson published during the 1760s, claiming to have translated 
them from the original Gaelic, but which it seems he had in fact 
written himself (see Macpherson 1996). See also polysystem theory 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
135
and system. Further reading: Toury 1980, 1984, 1995.
2 A term used by Radó (1979) to refer to a TT which deviates too 
greatly from its ST to be considered a translation. The criterion for 
deciding how to categorize a work is the extent to which the ST and 
TT logemes correspond. adaptations 1, reworkings in a different 
genre (for example stage versions) and “travesties” are all according 
to Radó types of text which should be classified as pseudotransla-
tions. Further reading: Radó 1979.
Public Service Interpreting See community interpreting.
Pure Language (or Logos, or True Language, or Universal 
Language) (German die reine Sprache) A term used by Walter 
Benjamin in his writings on the nature of language and translation. 
Kelly describes Benjamin’s approach as a “mixture of mysticism, 
aesthetics and philosophy” (1979:30), a statement which reflects 
Benjamin’s view of language as something innately mysterious, sacred 
and even magical. In an early essay (1916/1977, 1916/1979) the term 
pure language refers to the language of Paradise which Man used 
in order to name everything in Creation; this act of naming is viewed 
by Benjamin here as “the translation of the nameless into name” 
and “the translation of an imperfect language into a more perfect 
one” (1916/1977:151, 1916/1979:117). However, it is in the sense 
introduced by Benjamin (1923/1963, 1923/1970) that the term 
pure language is more commonly used and understood. This latter 
article is concerned with the translator’s task, which Benjamin sees as 
consisting of various elements. First of all, there is the need to release 
ST from its dependency on a single linguistic code by “prolonging 
its life” in another cultural and linguistic setting. Secondly, a good 
translation will increase and extend the scope and range of TL: 
“The translator enriches his tongue by allowing the source language 
to penetrate and modify it” (Steiner 1975/1992:67). Benjamin 
elaborates on this point in an extended quotation from Pannwitz 
(1917), and argues that in a good translation TL should take on 
some of the characteristics of SL, while a bad translation, on the 
other hand, merely effects a transfer of information from one language 
to another. Thirdly, a translation should express “the central recipro-
cal relationship between languages” (Benjamin 1923/1963:185, 
1923/1970:72). However, Benjamin understands kinship of languages 
not in the usual historical sense, but rather as a similarity of intention: 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
136
the actual words and constructions may differ, but the human 
experience which all languages point to is invariable. Furthermore, 
all languages are “fragments of a greater language” (1923/1963:191, 
1923/1970:78), which is termed the pure language; translation from 
one language into another will lead to the two languages being mu-
tually supplemented, even reconciled, or, as Steiner has it, “somehow 
fused” (1975/1992:67). During this process − possibly to be seen as 
the fitting together of fragments of a broken vessel − the pure language 
is approximated to more closely in a translated than in an original 
text: “[the translator] extends his native idiom towards the hidden 
absolute of meaning” (Steiner 1975/1992:67). In Benjamin’s scheme 
of things the primary unit of translation is the word; consequently 
the essence that is the pure language is borne by the words rather than 
the syntax: “For if the sentence is the wall before the language of the 
original, literalness is the arcade” (1923/1963:192, 1923/1970:79). 
The syntax of a given language is portrayed as a wall because of the 
presence, for example, of implicit information and language-specific, 
ingrained metaphor, which inevitably ties the meaning of the text 
to a single linguistic code. It is in the light of such considerations 
that Benjamin comments that “The interlinear version of the Scrip-
tures is the prototype or ideal of all translation” (1923/1963:195, 
1923/1970:82); interlinear translation, however, should not be 
taken to mean a simple, automatic, word-for-word translation, but 
rather an idealized version of such translation, in which the meaning 
is “liberated” from the syntax and norms of a single language, and 
is allowed to shine through the words in its purest, most unobscured 
form. See also babel (tower of). Further reading: A. Benjamin 1989; 
W. Benjamin 1916/1977, 1916/1979, 1923/1963, 1923/1970; de Man 
1986; Steiner 1975/1992.
Pure Translation Studies According to Holmes (1988e), the non-
applied subdivision of translation studies. As such, Pure Translation 
Studies is itself split into a descriptive and a theoretical wing (see 
descriptive translation studies, theoretical translation studies and 
translation theory 2). See also applied translation studies. Further 
reading: Holmes 1988e.
Radical Translation A term used by Quine (1959/1966, 1960) to 
denote the “translation of the language of a hitherto untouched people” 
(1960:28). For Quine, whose main concern is with the philosophy of 
meaning, the significance of such a situation lies in the fact that the
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
137
translator has neither linguistic similarities nor common culture to 
rely on, and so is forced to decipher an alien language from first 
principles. Quine’s aim is not to recommend a specific translation 
procedure; on the contrary, radical translation is intended as a 
hypothetical demonstration of the indeterminacy of meaning. Quine 
describes the imaginary, but now famous situation of a sighting of a 
rabbit leading to the utterance of the SL sentence “Gavagai”, which 
the translator tentatively translates as “Rabbit”. He then argues that 
such sentences, based on observable phenomena, provide the best 
point for the translator to gain a toe-hold in SL. The deciphering of 
the entire language would follow on from such sentences by means of 
inference, trial and working hypothesis, on the basis of whether the 
translator’s attempts to “use back” sentences in various situations 
elicited assent or dissent from the SL informant; when the possible 
range of application of an SL sentence had been established with 
reasonable certainty, the translator would suggest a TL sentence 
as an equivalent. Such correspondences, or analytical hypotheses, 
Quine argues, are what provide the “parameter of translation” 
(1960:76), as they determine the nature of the “translation manual” 
which is gradually built up by the translator. However, Quine points 
out a number of theoretical problems which arise from the notion 
of radical translation. For example, the sets of circumstances which 
might elicit apparently equivalent SL and TL sentences may in fact 
be different, since the two languages will inevitably diverge in how 
they categorize observable phenomena. Furthermore, speakers of 
any language carry around with them a certain amount of cultural 
knowledge (or collateral information); such knowledge, which 
of course also differs from language to language, will colour the 
perception of even such apparently culturally neutral events as the 
sighting of a rabbit. Most important, however, is Quine’s argument 
that the analytical hypotheses which a translator selects are to a large 
extent arbitrary. He states that
manuals for translating one language into another can be 
set up in divergent ways, all compatible with the totality 
of speech dispositions, yet incompatible with one another. 
In countless places they will diverge in giving, as their 
respective translations of a sentence of the one language, 
sentences of the other language which stand to each other 
in no plausible sort of equivalence however loose.
 
 
 
 
(Quine 1960:27)

Dictionary of Translation Studies
138
The purpose of radical translation is therefore to highlight the notion 
of indeterminacy in translation, as illustrated by these three factors. 
Furthermore, if taken to its logical conclusion it ultimately leads 
to the discovery that meaning is not absolute: “the discontinuity of 
radical translation tries our meanings: really sets them over against 
their verbal embodiments, or, more typically, finds nothing there” 
(Quine 1960:76). See also equivalence. Further reading: Harrison 
1979; Malmkjær 1993; Quine 1959/1966, 1960.
Rank-bound Translation Described by Catford (1965) as a type 
of total translation. In accordance with the grammatical system 
proposed by Halliday (1961) the term rank is used to denote linguis-
tic units of various sizes, ranging from a morpheme to a sentence. 
A rank-bound translation is therefore one in which “the selection of 
TL equivalents is deliberately confined to one rank (or a few ranks, 
low in the rank scale)” (Catford 1965:24; emphasis original); such a 
translation might thus proceed, for example, on a word-for-word or 
clause-for-clause basis. A good example of rank-bound translation is 
provided by the French sentence J’ai laissé mes lunettes sur la table 
and the English sentence I’ve left my glasses on the table (Catford 
1965:76), which exhibit almost total correspondence on all linguistic 
ranks; however, such examples are uncommon, even when SL and 
TL have such relatively similar grammatical categories as French 
and English. In most contexts the TTs produced by this process “are 
not acceptable texts of the goal language at all” (de Beaugrande 
1978:11). However, word-rank-bound translation is used in inter-
linear translation to produce a specialized text designed to fulfil a 
specific purpose. Another practical application for the technique has 
been proposed by Ure, Rodger & Ellis, who recommend providing 
a poet-translator unfamiliar with SL with a “crib” in the form of a 
rank-bound translation; such a procedure, they claim, is superior in 
“algorithmic rigour” (1969:14 n. 14) to such alternatives as a rough 
draft or word-for-word version. See also literal translation 1, 
rank-restricted theories of translation, unbounded translation, 
unit shift and word-for-word translation. Further reading: Catford 
1965; Ure, Rodger & Ellis 1969.
Rank-restricted Theories of Translation One of six types of 
partial theory of translation identified by Holmes (1988e). A 
rank-restricted theory of translation is defined as one which is only 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
139
concerned with the features of translation at linguistic ranks lower 
than entire texts (see rank-bound translation). At the time when 
Holmes first wrote his now famous article (i.e. the early 1970s), most 
linguistically-oriented research fell within this particular category 
as the focus there was usually on the ranks of word, word-group or 
sentence (see linguistic translation 1). However, Holmes predicted 
that the advent of text linguistics would eventually be likely to lead 
to the development of linguistic methods of translation analysis at the 
text rank also (1988e:75); this has to a large extent now been borne 
out by the arrival of approaches of the type outlined in pragmatic 
translation 1. See also area-restricted, medium-restricted, 
problem-restricted, text-type restricted and time-restricted 
theories of translation. Further reading: Holmes 1988e.
Reader-oriented Machine Translation A term used by Sager (1994) 
to refer to the speedy production of a TL version of a text by means 
of machine translation in order simply to inform the TL reader 
of the content of ST. According to Sager, readers are sometimes 
prepared to accept machine-produced texts even if they are difficult 
to read, provided that they are produced quickly and inexpensively 
(1994:281). The result of such a procedure is “raw output”, or in 
other words an artificial product which may require more reading 
effort than a human translation simply because it has not been post-
edited; however, it has the advantage of being available more quickly 
than a more “polished” version, and can now be relied on to contain 
a relatively small number of lexical or terminological mistakes 
(1994:282). Sager points out that people who frequently use such 
translations develop the ability to read the artificial machine-produced 
language which they typically contain with a high degree of fluency 
(1994:282). As an example of reader-oriented machine translation in 
action Sager cites the system SYSTRAN, which is used by the US 
Air Force to help survey scientific and technical literature (1994:283). 
See also industrial process (translation as) and writer-oriented 
machine translation. Further reading: Sager 1994.
Realia (Russian Realii) Defined by Vlakhov & Florin (1970) as 
textual elements which provide local and historical colour. One of 
the most recalcitrantly untranslatable features of an ST, realia are 
generally confined to literary rather than technical translation. 
Vlakhov & Florin define realia as follows: “words (and collocations) 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
140
of a national language which denote objects, concepts and phenomena 
characteristic of the geographical surroundings, culture, everyday 
realities or socio-historical specifics of a people, nation, country 
or tribe, and which thus convey national, local or historical colour; 
such words have no exact equivalents in other languages” (1970:438, 
translated). There are four categories of realia: a) geographical and 
ethnographical (e.g. mistral, Hakka), b) folkloric and mythological 
(e.g. Baba Yaga, leprechaun), c) everyday items (e.g. hurdy-gurdy, 
rupee) and d) socio-historical (e.g. Bezirk, Infanta). Vlakhov & Florin 
suggest six strategies for translating realia: transcription, calque, 
formation of a new word, assimilation, approximate translation 
and descriptive translation (see explicitation). When selecting the 
most appropriate strategy, the translator should seek to retain some 
local colour without encumbering the reader with an excess of new, 
frequently impenetrable lexical items, and should also be mindful of 
the influence, whether enriching or polluting, which the new coinings 
may exert on TL. See also cultural transposition and voids. Further 
reading: Florin 1993; Lehmuskallio et al. 1991; Leighton 1991; 
Vlakhov & Florin 1970.
Receptor Language Defined by Nida & Taber as “the language 
into which a message is translated from the original or source 
language” (1969/1982:205, emphasis removed). In other words, as 
regards referential meaning the term receptor language is basically 
synonymous with the probably more widespread term target 
language. However, its use tends to be associated with certain areas 
of translation studies, perhaps most notably Bible translation. 
Furthermore, some writers encourage its adoption because the 
overtones which it conveys are perceived as being more appropriate 
to a discussion of translation than those of its main rival. Thus Nida, 
for example, argues that its use emphasizes the fact that the message 
is not shot at a target, but must rather be “decoded by those who 
receive it” (1969:484). See also direction of translation and source 
language.
Reconstructions, Translation with (French Traduction avec 
Reconstructions) According to Gouadec (1990), one of seven types 
of translation which serve to meet the various translation needs which 
arise in a professional environment. In translation with reconstructions 
ST is translated in its entirety without regard to its form. The aim of 
such a translation is to communicate the content of ST in the simplest 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
141
way possible; all the information is thus immediately accessible to 
the TL reader (1990:335). See also absolute translation, abstract 
translation, diagrammatic translation, keyword translation, 
selective translation and sight translation. Further reading: 
Gouadec 1990; Sager 1994.
Redundancy Described by Nida (1964) as a feature of all natural 
languages which should be preserved through the translation 
process. According to Nida, the information contained in any 
communication needs to be diluted, and the effects of any possible 
interference (or “noise”) overcome, by the inclusion of a certain amount 
of redundancy, the purpose of which is to “raise the predictability” 
(1964:127) of what is being communicated and in so doing ease the 
receptor’s task of decoding the message. Redundancy is thus defined 
as “the expression more than once of the same units of information” 
(Nida & Taber 1969/1982:205), or in other words the inclusion of 
unnecessary or repeated information within a text. Nida calculates 
that natural languages “normally tend to produce messages of about 
50 percent redundancy” (1964:129); such redundancy can be, for 
example, phonetic, lexical, collocational or grammatical in nature. 
However, in translated texts this figure can fall dramatically. This 
is partly because the translator can increase the unpredictability 
(or information) contained in the text by following SL patterns 
too literally; in such circumstances, the resulting TL awkwardness 
increases the target receptor’s processing effort. However, another 
reason is that TL receptors will not share the cultural background 
of their SL counterparts and so will not be able to make all the 
inferences required for a proper understanding of the text. Because 
of this, texts need to be “drawn out” in the translation process by 
incorporating a degree of linguistic redundancy and by making 
implicit information more explicit. Failure to do this will lead to the 
receptor being “overloaded” with information. According to Nida 
& Taber, such a procedure is essential if dynamic equivalence is to 
be achieved, which leads to the conclusion that “there is a tendency 
for all good translations to be somewhat longer than the originals” 
(1969/1982:163). See also communication load and explicitation. 
Further reading: Nida 1964; Nida & Taber 1969/1982.
Refraction A general term used by Lefevere in the early 1980s to 
refer to the range of literary processes to which translation can be 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
142
said to belong. Lefevere defines refraction as “the adaptation of a 
work of literature to a different audience, with the intention of influ-
encing the way in which that audience reads the work” (1982:4). Of 
the various processes which can be classified as refraction the most 
“obvious” is translation, while other types include criticism, com-
mentary, historiography, teaching, anthologizing and the production 
of plays (1982:4). Lefevere argues that these activities are carried 
out against the background of the prevailing literary climate and 
political ideology, and that these factors act as a “spectrum” through 
which writers and their works are “refracted” before they reach their 
audience (1982:4). Lefevere remarks on the fact that refraction has 
not been properly studied as a phenomenon (1982:5), in spite of the 
fact that the works of refractors have played an “immense” part not 
only in disseminating the writings of individual authors, but also in 
influencing the way in which entire literary systems have developed 
(1982:5). It should be noted that, as Hermans points out, the term 
refraction has more recently been replaced by rewriting (1994:139). 
See also patronage. Further reading: Lefevere 1982.
Regulative Translational Conventions A term used by Nord (1991b) 
to denote one of two types of translational convention. Nord bases the 
concept on Searle’s (1969) notion of regulative rules, or the conventions 
which determine how a person should behave in a given situation (an 
example being the rules of etiquette which provide guidelines on how 
to conduct interpersonal relationships). By analogy, Nord’s concept 
refers to “the generally accepted forms of handling certain translation 
problems below the text rank” (1991b:100). The examples which she 
cites of such problems are “proper names, culture-bound realities or 
realia, quotations, etc.” (1991b:100; see realia); in all of these areas, 
translational practice varies from culture to culture, while the specific 
regulative translational conventions which operate are determined by 
a given culture’s constitutive translational conventions. See also 
professional norms. Further reading: Nord 1991b.
Relay Interpreting A term used to refer to the practice of interpret-
ing between two (usually less widely spoken) languages via a third, 
mediating language (Seleskovitch & Lederer 1989:199). Encountered 
in conference interpreting, such a procedure is sometimes neces-
sitated when no single interpreter is present who is able to work with 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
143
both SL and TL. Thus for example, in a conference at which English, 
French, Greek and Danish delegates are present, it may only be pos-
sible to interpret speeches in Danish for the Greek delegates by first 
interpreting them into English or French (Seleskovitch & Lederer 
1989:199). In such a situation, the second interpreter (or “relayer”) 
does not have direct access to the communicative features of the 
speaker’s original spontaneous delivery, and will probably also not 
be familiar with the source culture; in effect he or she is therefore in 
the same position as most of the conference delegates (Seleskovitch 
& Lederer 1989:200). However, Brennan & Brien (1995) actively 
recommend this procedure in the case of signed language interpret-
ing. In this context it involves a hearing interpreter communicating ST 
in a “sign supported” language to a Deaf interpreter who then relays 
the message to the TL audience in a signed language. The advantage 
of using the procedure here is that it enables the Deaf audience to 
receive the message from an interpreter who is working into his or 
her native language (1995:117-18). See also interpreting and pivot 
language. Further reading: Seleskovitch & Lederer 1989.
Repertoreme Defined by Toury as “any sign, irrespective of rank 
and scope, which forms part of ... an institutionalized repertoire” 
(1995:268). The term repertoire is understood as referring to “the 
aggregate of rules and materials which govern both the making and 
use of any given product” (Even-Zohar 1990a:39); thus for example, 
the literary repertoire may be described as “the aggregate of rules 
and items with which a specific text is produced, and understood” 
(Even-Zohar 1990a:40). When an item belonging to such a repertoire 
is inserted into a particular text, it “enters into a unique network 
of internal relations, peculiar to that act/text” (Toury 1995:268), 
and consequently becomes a texteme. However, in the process 
of translation, according to an observed translation phenomenon 
which Toury formulates as the Law of growing standardization, 
“textual relations obtaining in the original are often modified, 
sometimes to the point of being totally ignored, in favour of [more] 
habitual options offered by a target repertoire” (1995:268, emphasis 
removed); in other words, ST textemes tend to be converted into TL 
repertoremes (1995:268). Thus for example intentional ambiguities 
may be ironed out or original metaphors replaced by more standard 
formulations. However, it should be pointed out that while Toury 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
144
posits this tendency as being almost universal, the reverse can also 
happen when new webs of relationships are created in TT where none 
existed in ST (1995:272). Further reading: Toury 1995.
Rephrasing A term used by Hervey & Higgins to refer to “the exact 
rendering of the message content of a given ST in a TT that is radi-
cally different in form, but neither adds nor omits details explicitly 
conveyed in the ST” (1992:252). In terms of the amount of information 
which is provided in TT this process is a theoretical midway-point 
between the two extremes of exegetic translation and gist transla-
tion: despite the radically changed form in which TT appears, the 
message content is as close as possible to ST. As an example of 
intralingual rephrasing Hervey & Higgins cite the sentences I had 
a little drink about an hour ago and I consumed a small quantity of 
alcohol approximately 60 minutes ago (1992:17). Hervey & Higgins 
observe that rephrasing never allows a precise reproduction of the 
message content of ST, simply because “the two forms of expression 
are different” (1992:18). Further reading: Hervey & Higgins 1992.
Resistancy (or Resistance) A term used by Venuti (1995) to refer to 
the strategy of translating a literary text so that it retains something 
of its foreignness; as such it is broadly synonymous with foreignizing 
translation. According to Venuti, the approach was conceived as 
a way of challenging the assumption prevalent in Anglo-American 
culture that the only valid way of translating is to produce a TT which 
reads fluently in TL and is so “transparent” that it could be mistaken 
for a product of the target culture. Resistancy thus consists of freeing 
“the reader of the translation, as well as the translator, from the 
cultural constraints that ordinarily govern their reading and writing” 
and questioning the “major ... status [of English-language culture] 
by using it as the vehicle for ideas and discursive techniques which 
remain minor in it, which it excludes” (1995:305). Venuti considers 
the experience of being thus confronted by the cultural differences 
which separate TL and ST as potentially liberating for the reader 
(1995:306). In practice resistancy involves including unidiomatic 
usage and other linguistically and culturally alienating features in 
the translated text so as to create the impression of foreignness; in 
this way it requires the translator to become “a nomad in [his or 
her] own language, a runaway from the mother tongue” (1995:291). 
However, as Venuti points out, the adoption of a policy of resistancy 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
145
does not necessarily lead to increased faithfulness in the translation, 
but rather establishes an “abusive fidelity” (1995:291; see abusive trans-
lation) in which some features of ST are lost but others are added 
(1995:300). Venuti thus sees translation as “a process that involves 
looking for similarities between languages and cultures” through the 
act of “constantly confronting dissimilarities” (1995:306). However, 
a translation should never seek to remove these dissimilarities 
completely, as through resistancy its aim should be to remind the 
reader “of the gains and losses in the translation process and the 
unbridgeable gaps between cultures” (1995:306). See also domesti-
cating translation. Further reading: Venuti 1995.
Restricted Translation A term used by Catford (1965) to refer to a 
mode of translation which contrasts with total translation. Restricted 
translation is defined as the “replacement of SL textual material by 
equivalent TL textual material, at only one level” (1965:22). There are 
four linguistic levels, and each has its own type of restricted transla-
tion associated with it (see grammatical translation, graphological 
translation, lexical translation and phonological translation). 
Further reading: Catford 1965.
Restructuring (or Transformation, or Forward-transformation) 
According to Nida & Taber (1969/1982), the third and final stage 
in the translation process (see also analysis and transfer 2). 
Nida & Taber’s model was designed with the problems of Bible 
translating specifically in mind, and is based on Chomsky’s notions 
of deep and surface structure (see for example Chomsky 1965). The 
restructuring stage processes the transferred material, which exists 
only in the form of kernel sentences (“the basic structural elements” 
(Nida & Taber 1969/1982:39) which can be said to underlie the 
syntactically more elaborate “surface structure” of any language); 
its purpose is to transform the results of the transfer process into a 
“stylistic form appropriate to the receptor language and to the intended 
receptors” (1969/1982:206). Restructuring is thus defined as forward-
transformation, or in other words the process which is the reverse of 
back-transformation (see analysis). Nida & Taber (1969/1982:120) 
argue that there are three main problem areas which are connected with 
the restructuring of an ST: “the varieties of language or of styles which 
may be desirable” (e.g. choice of oral or written forms, consideration 
of sociolinguistic and situational factors, selection of appropriate genre 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
146
and type of discourse), “the essential components and characteristics 
of these various styles” (e.g. choice of formal features and lexical 
items, whether or not they are intended to produce a special effect), 
and “the techniques which may be employed in producing the type 
of style desired” (e.g. employing or training a stylist who is sensitive 
to the above factors). Throughout the restructuring process, however, 
it is also important to consider the impact which the emerging 
translation is to have on its intended receptors (Nida 1969:494-95), 
as only if it produces in them a response which is essentially the 
same as that of the original audience can the translation be held to 
be dynamically equivalent to its ST. Further reading: Gentzler 1993; 
Nida 1969; Nida & Taber 1969/1982.
Retranslation See indirect translation 1.
Retrospective Science of Translation See retrospective tran-
slation and science of translation.
Retrospective Translation A term introduced by Postgate to de-
scribe translation “which primarily regards the Author” (1922:18; 
see also prospective translation). According to Postgate, the aim 
of such SL-oriented translation is “to impart a knowledge of an original 
to those to whom it would otherwise be unknown” (1922:22). Thus 
the translator is seen as a receiver whose main concern is for clear 
comprehension of ST rather than idiomatic expression in TL. Wilss 
(1982) uses the term retrospective science of translation to denote 
the study of such phenomena as error analysis and translation criticism, 
which belong to the subdivision of applied translation studies 
associated with translation as a product rather than a process. As a 
discipline, the retrospective science of translation thus “proceeds from 
what it finds in the TL and compares the quality of the [TT] with that 
of the original; by so comparing the two, it can begin to identify the 
formulation processes directing the production of the [TT] and to 
determine how adequately they achieve what was intended” (Wilss 
1982:59). The term retrospective translation is broadly similar 
in meaning to adequate translation (see adequacy 1) and literal 
translation 1. See also science of translation. Further reading: 
Postgate 1922; Wilss 1977, 1982.
Revoicing See dubbing.
Rewording See intralingual translation.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
147
Rewriting A term introduced by Lefevere (1985, 1992) to refer to 
a range of processes, including translation, which can be said to re-
interpret, alter or manipulate an original text in some way. The term 
arose from the conviction that translation studies needs to deal 
with the socio-cultural, ideological and literary constraints which lie 
behind the production of texts. According to Bassnett & Lefevere, 
translators, critics, historians, professors and journalists are all text 
producers whose output can be classified as “rewriting” (1990a:10). 
Rewriting is thus defined as “anything that contributes to construct-
ing the ‘image’ of a writer and/or a work of literature” (1990a:10); 
the term image is understood as the projection of an original work or 
author in a given culture, which frequently exerts more influence than 
that original (Lefevere 1992:110). It is thus one of Lefevere’s main 
theses that “ordinary” readers of literature are exposed to rewritings 
much more frequently than they are to original writings (1992:7); 
in this way rewriting is one of the means by which the survival of a 
literary work is ensured (Bassnett & Lefevere 1990a:10). However, 
rewriting is closely connected with the political and literary power 
structures which operate within a given culture, as the processes of 
adaptation and manipulation which rewriters perform generally lead 
to the production of texts which reflect the dominant ideology and 
poetics (Lefevere 1992:8; see patronage); for this and other reasons, 
rewriting is never “innocent” (Bassnett & Lefevere 1990a:11). Seen 
in such a context, translation − “the most obviously recognizable 
type of rewriting” (Lefevere 1992:9) − is a process which manipu-
lates ST by adjusting it to fit in with two important constraints. The 
first of these is the translator’s (conscious or unconscious) ideology. 
This is reflected in the way he or she treats the original’s universe 
of discourse, or the “objects, concepts, customs belonging to the 
world that was familiar to the writer of the original” (1992:41); 
the translator’s attitude to such items is influenced by “the status 
of the original, the self-image of the culture that text is translated 
into, the types of texts deemed acceptable in that culture, the lev-
els of diction deemed acceptable in it, the intended audience, and 
the ‘cultural scripts’ that audience is used to or willing to accept” 
(1992:87). The translator’s ideology, however, also determines his 
or her attitude to the language in which ST is written, for example 
in terms of the extent to which meaning is privileged over form in 
the translation of poetry. The second constraint which operates on 
translation is the poetics dominant in the target culture, a poetics 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
148
being informally defined as a combination of “literary devices, gen-
res, motifs, prototypical characters and situations, and symbols” and 
the culture’s notion of what the rôle of literature in the social system 
should be (1992:26). See also polysystem theory, refraction and 
system. Further reading: Bassnett & Lefevere 1990; Hermans 1994; 
Lefevere 1985, 1992.
Rhymed Translation One of seven strategies for translating poetry 
described by Lefevere (1975) in the course of an examination of 
English translations of a poem by Catullus. Within this particular 
context rhymed translation is distinguished from metrical translation 
in that its metre is self-imposed rather than being copied from ST, 
which in this case was composed in non-rhyming verse. Lefevere 
argues that when such a strategy is being followed, or in other words 
when rhyme and metre have to be imposed on “pre-selected and pre-
arranged” material, the search for an acceptable solution is “doomed 
to failure from the start” (1975:49) and runs the risk of producing a 
mere caricature of ST (1975:61). The reason for this is that, like most 
other translation strategies, rhymed translation concentrates exclu-
sively on one aspect of ST rather than on the text as an integrated 
whole. Of course, in view of the vast complexity of the task, this is 
all that most translators of verse can realistically hope to achieve. 
See also analogical form, blank verse translation, imitation 2, 
interpretation, literal translation 2, phonemic translation, poetry 
into prose and version 2. Further reading: Lefevere 1975.
Science of Translation One of several overlapping terms used 
to denote the discipline concerned with the systematic study of 
translation phenomena (see also translation theory 1, traductology, 
translation studies and translatology). However, while often 
broadly synonymous with these other designations, the term science 
of translation tends to contain a number of theoretical assumptions 
and methodological overtones which set it apart. An early use of the 
term can be found in Nida (1964), who suggests it as a counterbalance 
to the tendency to view translation exclusively as an art or a skill. 
Nida argues that the processes of translation “are amenable to 
rigorous description” (1964:3), and concludes that “the transference 
of a message from one language to another is ... a valid subject for 
scientific description” (1964:3). However, Nida does not apply the 
term to all types of rigorous investigation of translation, but rather 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
149
reserves it for his three-stage model of the translation process 
(see analysis, transfer 2 and restructuring). Thus his use of the 
term specifically refers to an approach influenced by Chomskyan 
linguistics and centred around the problems of Bible translation, and 
implies a preference for dynamic rather than formal equivalence as 
well as the belief that meaning exists independently of the language, 
text or message in which it is encoded. Besides being employed in 
this way in the discussion of Bible translating, the term is also used, 
principally by German writers, to refer generally to any kind of 
academic investigation of translation. In this context, the science of 
translation (Übersetzungswissenschaft or Translationswissenschaft in 
German) is typically characterized as being highly interdisciplinary in 
nature, as translation scholars draw on the insights and methodologies 
of such widely differing fields as linguistics, communication theory, 
cultural studies and psychology; however, scholars who use the term 
science of translation (rather than Translation Studies, for example) 
generally follow a basically linguistically-based approach and 
concentrate on non-literary translation. As an emerging discipline 
in its own right the science of translation is frequently split into a 
number of areas not related to the other disciplines on which it draws. 
Thus Koller, for example, talks about process and product-oriented 
science of translation (1979/1992:12), while Wilss distinguishes 
“the model-theoretic aspect, the language-pair-oriented descriptive 
aspect, and the language-pair-oriented applied aspect, each of which is 
guided by different considerations” (Wilss 1982:79). See also leipzig 
school, prospective translation and retrospective translation. 
Further reading: Gentzler 1993; Koller 1979/1992; Nida 1964; Wilss 
1977,1982.
Scopos Theory See skopos theory.
Secondary Translation (German Sekundäre Übersetzung) A term 
used by Diller & Kornelius (1978) to refer to one of two modes of 
translation (see also primary translation). A secondary translation 
is defined as a translation which has the purpose of “informing a TL 
receiver about a communication between an SL sender and an SL 
receiver” (1978:3). In other words, the recipients of a secondary 
translation are not the group of people for whom ST was originally 
composed. Instances where this type of translation is favoured include 
the translation of literary and scientific works. See also overt trans-
lation. Further reading: Diller & Kornelius 1978.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
150
Second-hand Translation See indirect translation 1.
Sekundäre Übersetzung See secondary translation.
Selective Translation (French Traduction Sélective or Traduction 
Documentaire) One of seven types of translation proposed by 
Gouadec (1989, 1990) to fulfil the various translation needs which can 
occur in a professional environment. In selective translation only details 
relating to one specific aspect of ST are translated, thus eliminating 
all irrelevant information (1990:334-35). Additional information not 
in the original document may be added in the form of explanatory 
notes, tables, graphs and so on, and the TL reader will thus have rapid 
access to the most important information contained in ST (1989:25). 
See also absolute translation, abstract translation, diagrammatic 
translation, keyword translation, reconstructions (translation 
with) and sight translation. Further reading: Gouadec 1989, 1990; 
Sager 1994.
Self Translation See autotranslation.
Semantic Disambiguation (German Monosemierung) A term used 
to describe a vital stage in the process of translating from a foreign 
language. Because of the polysemy commonly displayed by the words 
of any language and the strong dependence of meaning upon precise 
context, even the simplest text will inevitably include an element 
of lexical ambiguity; indeed, as asserted by Hönig (1976:54), it 
is likely that such ambiguity will be displayed by the majority of 
lexical words in any one text, at least to some extent. While such 
polysemic elements are automatically and effortlessly disambiguated 
by a native speaker on the basis of an intuitive understanding of their 
precise meanings in the given context, for the non-native translator 
they present a frequent source of difficulty: “Polysemy may be 
basically only potential, but for the translator it is often painfully 
real” (Hönig & Kussmaul 1982:91, translated). The text can thus be 
seen as a “chain of monosemically textualized polysemic lexemes” 
(Hönig 1976:53, translated), while it is the task of the translator (or 
reader) to determine the precise meanings of individual words on 
the basis of the contextual clues which are available. The concept 
of semantic disambiguation is particularly important in the field of 
translator training, as one of the jobs of the trainer is to encourage 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
151
students to look at the context in which a word is used rather than 
relying on an automatic association of one particular SL word with 
one particular TL meaning or accepting without question the TL 
equivalents suggested by bilingual dictionaries. Further reading: 
Diller & Kornelius 1978; Hönig 1976; Hönig & Kussmaul 1982; 
Koller 1979/1992.
Semantic Translation According to Newmark, one of two modes 
of translation (see also communicative translation 2), in which “the 
translator attempts, within the bare syntactic and semantic constraints 
of the TL, to reproduce the precise contextual meaning of the author” 
(1981/1988:22). A semantic translation consequently tends to strive 
to reproduce the form of the original as closely as TL norms will al-
low; furthermore, no effort is made to shift ST into a target cultural 
context. Greater attention is paid to rendering the author’s original 
thought-processes in TL, rather than attempting to re-interpret ST 
in a way which the translator considers more appropriate for the 
target setting; a semantic translation will therefore treat the original 
words as sacred, even if this requires reproducing inconsistencies, 
ambiguities and errors. Semantic translation is usually appropriate 
for literary, technical and scientific texts, as well as other contexts 
where the language of ST is as important as the content. It should, 
however, be pointed out that semantic translation is not intended 
to be a completely watertight category; furthermore, along with 
communicative translation it is designed to represent the “‘middle 
ground’ of translation practice” (Hatim & Mason 1990:7) which lies 
between strategies such as adaptation and interlinear translation 
(see Newmark 1988:45). See also overt translation. Further reading: 
Newmark 1981/1988, 1988.
Semantic Voids See voids.
Sense, Theory of (French Sens, Théorie du) See interpretive theory 
of translation.
Sense-for-sense Translation A general term used to describe the 
type of translation which emphasizes transfer of the meaning or “spirit” 
of an ST over accurate reproduction of the original wording. The 
purpose of such a policy is to accommodate the needs of the TL 
reader by producing a text which conforms to the linguistic and 
textual norms of the target language and culture and which does 
not therefore sound “foreign”. Like its opposite, word-for-word 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
152
translation, the term was first used by the Roman writers Cicero 
and Horace in the first century BC. These two early commentators 
in effect set in motion a debate which has been raging ever since, 
with either sense-for-sense or word-for-word approaches gaining the 
upper hand as the favoured strategy in different eras, depending on 
contemporary fashions. For a fuller discussion of some of the issues 
associated with this term, see free translation. Further reading: 
Bassnett 1980/1991.
Serial Translation Defined by Casagrande as a special type of back-
translation in which “a message in code A is translated successively 
into codes B, C, D, etc. and if desired, back into code A” (1954:339). 
This approach has been employed in certain areas of anthropological 
research, where it allows the researcher to compare the translation of 
an aboriginal text into more than one more familiar language. For 
example, according to Voegelin (1954), researchers in Mexico have 
had texts translated first of all into Spanish (the informant’s second 
language) and then into English (the translator’s mother tongue). 
However, such an approach contains obvious hazards, so that extra 
care needs to be taken to check the reliability of translations obtained 
in this way (Casagrande 1954:340). See also indirect translation 1 and 
parallel translation. Further reading: Casagrande 1954.
Service Translation A term used by Newmark (1988) to denote what 
is also known as inverse translation. While service translation, or 
the practice of translating out of one’s native language, is commonly 
considered to be an activity which should be discouraged, Newmark 
points out that such a procedure “is necessary in most countries” 
(1988:52). See also direct translation 2 and direction of transla-
tion. Further reading: Newmark 1988.
Shifts (or Shifts of Expression) Originally defined by Catford 
as “departures from formal correspondence in the process of going 
from the SL to the TL” (1965:73). Catford enumerates a number of 
types of shift, all of which lead to minor TT rewordings brought about 
by structural incompatibilities between SL and TL (see category 
shift, class shift, intra-system shift, level shift, structure shift 
and unit shift). The shifts described by Catford are therefore purely 
linguistic, being grammatical or lexical in nature; they are furthermore 
unavoidable unless the translator wishes to reproduce the ST structure 
extremely closely. However, in any TT there are likely to be many 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
153
minor (or indeed major) deviations from ST which it may not be 
possible to account for within this framework. Translation critics 
have frequently failed to understand the motivation for such 
differences, and have tended to dismiss them as “errors”. However, 
the fact that such apparent “mistakes” form a feature of almost any 
TT is recognized by Popovič (1970), who broadens the concept of 
the shift (or “shift of expression”) to account for the widespread 
nature of their distribution. Popovič defines shifts more generally as 
“all that appears as new with respect to the original, or fails to appear 
where it might have been expected” (1970:79); he also comments 
that shifts represent “the relationship between the wording of the 
original work and that of the translation” (1970:85). In this way 
he includes not only linguistic phenomena, but also replacements 
arising from textual, literary or cultural considerations. Popovič thus 
recognizes not only the existence of uncircumventable linguistic 
differences, but also the fact that the translator is working within 
the constraints of norms which will influence the decisions made 
during the translation process; such differences he attributes not 
to lack of training, sloppiness or ignorance, but to the translator’s 
attempt “to reproduce [the work] as faithfully as possible and to 
grasp it in its totality, as an organic whole” (Popovič 1970:80). 
The range of phenomena covered by the term is therefore wide, and 
includes such changes as a move from an abstract to a concrete 
form of expression, or a tendency, for example, towards archaism, 
explicitation or intensification in TT. Such phenomena variously 
result from the translator’s personal stylistic preferences or from 
the translational policy or norms which are being adhered to; 
their precise nature and distribution have been investigated by 
van Leuven-Zwart (1989, 1990; see generalization, modification, 
modulation 2, mutation and specification). Toury (1980, 1995) 
further develops the notion of shifts, distinguishing two varieties, 
the obligatory (e.g. linguistically motivated) and the non-obligatory 
(e.g. motivated by literary or cultural considerations); the extent 
to which a TT contains non-obligatory shifts will determine 
whether its initial norm is one of acceptability or adequacy 2. 
See also compensation, decision-making (translation as), formal 
correspondence and negative shift. Further reading: Catford 1965; 
van Leuven-Zwart 1989, 1990; Popovič 1970; Toury 1980, 1995.
Sight Translation (French Traduction à vue) A term in general use 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
154
which refers to the unprepared, oral translation of a written text. 
Gouadec (1990) uses it more specifically to denote one of seven types 
of translation which can be employed in a professional environment. 
According to Gouadec, in sight translation a summary of the content 
of ST is provided on demand; as such it contrasts with the other six 
types, where the information needed can be supplied at greater leisure 
(1990:335). See also absolute translation, abstract translation, 
diagrammatic translation, key-word translation, reconstructions 
(translation with) and selective translation. Further reading: 
Gouadec 1990.
Signed Language Interpreting A type of interpreting in which the 
interpreter works between a spoken language and a visual-gestural 
language used by Deaf people. Such languages probably exist in all 
developed countries, and are the standard means of communication 
used by members of the Deaf community in each country; they 
are exemplified by ASL (American Sign Language) and BSL 
(British Sign Language). Languages of this type possess their own 
independent structure and are as fully developed as spoken languages; 
they generally function as the native language for people who have 
been deaf since birth, and in this way contrast with “sign supported” 
languages (Brennan & Brien 1995:117) such as signed English, 
which are used by people who have lost their hearing after they have 
learnt a spoken language. The term interpreting is strictly speaking 
only used in relation to languages of the former type; in the case of 
sign supported languages − which are essentially spoken languages 
conveyed visually − it is more usual to talk about transliteration. In 
many ways signed language interpreting is comparable to interpreting 
between two spoken languages; however, there are a number of 
differences. For example, since signed language interpreting involves 
receiving and transmitting information in different modalities (i.e. 
spoken and signed), the use of simultaneous rather than consecutive 
interpreting becomes less demanding, and is indeed the norm for 
this type of interpreting (Brennan & Brien 1995:115). This means 
that signed language interpreters can work simultaneously not only 
in conferences, but also in other, smaller-scale contexts such as 
doctors’ surgeries, job interviews and indeed any other situation in 
which community interpreting might be appropriate. Furthermore, 
in view of this difference in operation the interpreter frequently takes 
on a more visible and central role in the communication than would 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
155
otherwise be the case (1995:116). Another important consideration 
is that since signed languages have no standard written form the task 
of translating from or into such a language, or indeed of preparing 
a piece of interpreting in advance, is highly problematic (1995:116). 
See also relay interpreting. Further reading: Brennan & Brien 1995; 
Hayes 1992; Isham 1995; Scott-Gibson 1991.
Simultaneous Interpreting A term used to refer to one of two main 
modes of interpreting (see also consecutive interpreting). In 
simultaneous interpreting the interpreter acts as a kind of invisible 
presence; sitting in a special booth and working with headphones and 
a microphone, he or she listens to an SL speech, and reformulates it 
in TL as it is delivered. The technique was first employed during the 
Nuremberg trials after the end of the Second World War, and is now 
typically used in settings such as conferences and televised trials (see 
conference interpreting and court interpreting). Contrary to popular 
belief, interpreters do not generally approach the task completely 
“blind”, as they have normally at least had the chance to peruse some 
documents before interpreting commences. However, in view of the 
intensive nature of the task interpreters tend to work in 20-30 minute 
shifts, and there will usually be two interpreters in the booth at any 
one time; ideally the “off-duty” one will be able to provide assistance 
as and when required (Gile 1995a:193). According to Shlesinger 
(1995a:194), when functioning in this mode an interpreter has to 
work with three major constraints. Firstly, simultaneous interpreting 
occurs at a pace dictated by the speaker. Secondly, at any one time 
the interpreter will only have recourse to a small segment of the text; 
he or she will therefore often “play safe” in order to avoid creating 
potential problems later on. Thirdly, the interpreter may not possess 
the general or specialized knowledge which the speaker expects in 
the audience. However, when difficulties arise, there are a number 
of strategies which can be used (Gile 1995a:192-204). For example, 
in certain conditions interpreters can get help from a colleague or 
consult a document. A passage containing complex syntax can be 
“segmented”, or in other words reformulated so as to simplify the 
structure. Furthermore, when experiencing comprehension difficulties 
interpreters might delay their response a little, in order to gain more 
time to think. Indeed, experienced interpreters are able to control 
their “Ear-Voice-Span” (EVS) in response, on the one hand, to the 
limitations of short-term memory, and, on the other hand, to the need 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
156
to allow themselves time to anticipate (see effort models). See also 
signed language interpreting and whispered interpreting. Further 
reading: Chernov 1978, 1987; Gile 1995a; Lambert & Moser-
Mercer 1994; Moser-Mercer 1984; Pöchhacker 1994; Seleskovitch 
1968, 1968/1978; Seleskovitch & Lederer 1989; Shlesinger 1995a, 
1995b.
Skopos Theory (German Skopostheorie, from Greek skopos 
“purpose, goal”) An approach to translation proposed in the late 
1970s and early 1980s by Reiss & Vermeer. Skopos theory stresses 
the interactional, pragmatic aspects of translation, arguing that the 
shape of TT should above all be determined by the function or “skopos” 
that it is intended to fulfil in the target context. Reiss & Vermeer 
formulate this principle into two skopos rules: “an interaction is 
determined by (or is a function of) its purpose”, and “the skopos can 
be said to vary according to the recipient” (1984:101, translated). 
From these principles it follows that the translator should use the 
translation strategies which are most appropriate to achieving the 
purpose for which TT is intended, irrespective of whether they 
are considered to be the “standard” way to proceed in a particular 
translation context; in short, when producing a TT “the end justifies 
the means” (Reiss & Vermeer 1984:101, translated). An awareness 
of the requirements of the skopos thus “expands the possibilities of 
translation, increases the range of possible translation strategies, 
and releases the translator from the corset of an enforced − and 
hence often meaningless − literalness” (Vermeer 1989:186). Toury 
describes skopos theory as an alternative target text-oriented 
paradigm (1995:25). This is certainly accurate in that a skopos-
based approach represents a “dethroning” of ST (Vermeer 1986:42, 
translated): rather than presenting the translator with a fixed body 
of “facts” which he or she must pass on to the target audience, ST 
is seen as an information offer, which the translator must interpret 
by selecting those features which most closely correspond to the 
requirements of the target situation. In this way a translation is 
thought of as communicating something new and original, rather 
than simply furnishing the TL reader with the same information 
in a recodified form. For example, consideration of the precise 
audience for which a TT was intended would determine whether 
translation, paraphrase or even re-editing was the most appropriate 
strategy to adopt in a given situation (Vermeer 1989:185). In more 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
157
concrete terms, translating according to a TT’s skopos might entail 
rendering a scientific text fairly literally, adapting Don Quixote for a 
children’s edition, removing from the sayings of Buddha the endless 
repetition which would be unacceptable to most modern readers, or 
adding extra politeness formulae to American business letters being 
translated into German (examples taken from Vermeer 1982:100). 
The extent to which the translation had met with success could be 
determined by whether it was interpreted by the target recipient in 
a way which was coherent with his or her situation, and whether or 
not it led to any kind of protest against its meaning or form (Reiss 
& Vermeer 1984:112). Skopos theory was conceived independently 
of the clearly similar notion of translatorial action; however, in 
his more recent writings (for example 1989, 1989/1992) Vermeer 
has suggested merging the two to form a common framework. See 
also commission and loyalty. Further reading: Nord 1997; Reiss & 
Vermeer 1984; Vermeer 1989, 1989/1992.
Source Language (SL) The standard term describing the language 
in which the text being translated (or source text) is written. The 
source language is one of the systems to which ST belongs (along 
with, for example, the source literary, textual and cultural systems); 
since the target language also forms an independent system there 
will inevitably be a certain amount of linguistic incompatibility (and 
interference) between the two languages. However, for the translator 
a knowledge of the source language is in itself insufficient; what 
is also essential is a close familiarity with source culture, literary 
traditions, textual conventions and so forth. While the source language 
is on occasion the translator’s native language, it is more usual for 
translation to take place out of a language which has been acquired. 
It should also be pointed out that the source language involved in a 
particular act of translation is not necessarily the language in which 
the work was originally written, as ST may itself be a translation 
from another source language. See also direction of translation, 
ethnolinguistic model of translation, indirect translation 1, 
semantic disambiguation, receptor language and source text-
oriented translation studies. Further reading: Kelly 1979; Sykes 
1983.
Source Text (or Source-language Text) (ST) The text (written 
or spoken) which provides the point of departure for a translation. 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
158
Except in the case of intersemiotic and intralingual translation, the 
source text will be in a different language (source language) from 
the translation (or target text) which the translator produces from 
it. The source text will typically be an original text written in SL; 
however, in the case of indirect translation 1, it may itself be a 
translation of another text in another language. Of course, the source 
text is not simply a linguistic entity, as it enters into networks of 
relationships of not only a linguistic, but also a textual and cultural 
nature. Furthermore, the information which it conveys to its intended 
recipients will be implicit as well as explicit. See also receptor 
language and source text-oriented translation studies.
Source Text-oriented Translation Studies A term used by Toury 
(1980, 1995) to refer to any approach to translation in which certain 
ST features are expected to be reproduced in TT − or in other words 
the relationship between ST and TT is expected to be of a particular 
kind − if TT is to “qualify” as a translation (1980:39-40). The 
notion of Source Text-oriented Translation Studies is thus intended 
to reflect the fact that the type of normative approach which is 
appropriate for the purposes of, for example, translator training 
or translation assessment (see applied translation studies) has 
in the past been allowed to dominate other areas of the discipline 
too, thus stifling the possibility of certain types of inquiry into 
the nature of translation and the translated text (see target text-
oriented translation studies). While Toury’s stance is undoubtedly 
polemical, there are others who share the basic insight that the 
discipline has been preoccupied with promoting various kinds of 
source-target relationship, which a TT “must” display with its ST; 
Nida, for example, states that “the traditional focus in discussions 
of translating has been the verbal comparison of the source and 
target ... texts”, and observes that “generally arguments about the 
legitimacy of a translation have dealt almost exclusively with the 
issue of literal versus free correspondences” (1995:223; see literal 
and free translation). One result of this situation has been that many 
traditional approaches to translation have been centred on a normative 
notion of equivalence, and have thus viewed all TTs as inadequate 
reflections of their STs. Some commentators on translation have 
even pessimistically concluded that translation (particularly the 
translation of poetry) is impossible, because the web of linguistic, 
textual and cultural relationships which ST enters into can never be 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
159
fully reproduced in any TT, no matter how ingenious it may be. 
Associated with this perspective has been the tendency to treat any 
and all apparent discrepancies between ST and TT as “errors”, rather 
than investigating the possible motivation the translator might have 
had for incorporating them in the translation (see shifts). See also 
prescriptive translation studies, transfer-oriented translation 
studies and translatability. Further reading: Toury 1980, 1995.
Specification (or Modulation/Specification) A term used by van 
Leuven-Zwart (1989, 1990) to refer to one of two types of modulation 
2. Specification is distinguished from the other type, generalization, 
in that here the shift which occurs between ST and TT transemes 
is in the direction of a higher level of explicitness. In other words, 
a shift towards greater specification will produce a transeme the 
meaning of which is made more precise, by either the addition of extra 
words or the use of words with a less general meaning. Van Leuven-
Zwart considers the phenomenon of specification alongside that of 
explanation (see modification), which she posits as a universal of 
translation; following on from work by Levý (1969) and van den 
Broeck & Lefevere (1979), she concludes that both these phenomena 
and also that of generalization are important features of translated text 
per se, although she disagrees with the earlier writers by maintaining 
that specification is commoner than generalization (1990:89). 
One possible rationalization which van Leuven-Zwart offers for 
the widespread occurrence of the phenomenon of specification is 
− in line with that offered for explanation by van den Broeck & 
Lefevere (1979) − that it is “the translator’s attempt to make the 
text accessible to the reader by opening up and exposing as much 
of the foreign fictional world as possible” (1990:90); in this way 
she demonstrates how a consistent tendency in the shifts observed in 
the textual microstructure can cast significant light on the specific 
translational policy adopted by the translator. See also architran-
seme, explicitation, integral translation and mutation. Further 
reading: van Leuven-Zwart 1989, 1990.
Sprachschöpferische Übersetzung See linguistically creative 
translation.
Structure Shift According to Catford (1965), a type of category 
shift which involves a change in grammatical structure between 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
160
ST and TT. The English sentence I love you with its word order 
subject-verb-object is translated into French as Je t’aime with a 
slightly different word order; this change from English to French 
structure is an example of structure shift. Like that of other types of 
category shift, the notion of the structure shift serves as an illustration 
of the microstructural incompatibility between the linguistic systems 
of SL and TL. See also class shift, intra-system shift, level shift, 
shifts and unit shift. Further reading: Catford 1965.
Stylistic Equivalence (or Translational Equivalence) Defined 
by Popovič as “functional equivalence of elements in both original 
and translation aiming at an expressive identity with an invariant of 
identical meaning” ([1976]:6). Popovič also terms this type of equi-
valence adequacy ([1976]:1), expressive correspondence ([1976]:7) 
and faithfulness to the original ([1976]:8). Stylistic equivalence 
thus involves preserving the expressive character of (elements of) 
ST, while at the same time retaining as much as possible of its basic 
semantic content. However, even on the occasions when direct se-
mantic correspondence cannot be established the translator should 
still choose a TL item which is stylistically equivalent with the 
given element of ST ([1976]:7). See also equivalence, linguistic 
equivalence, paradigmatic equivalence and textual equivalence 2. 
Further reading: Popovič [1976].
Sublanguage A term used in the context of machine translation to 
refer to “a language used to communicate in a specialized technical 
domain or for a specialized purpose” (Arnold et al. 1994:216). Ac-
cording to Arnold et al., sublanguages are characterized by “the high 
frequency of specialized terminology and often also by a restricted 
set of grammatical patterns” (1994:216); thus weather bulletins, 
medical reports and business letters can all be considered examples 
of this kind of language. One of the main advantages of designing a 
dedicated machine translation system to specifically cope with input 
in the form of a particular sublanguage is that the number of param-
eters which it will need to include will be considerably reduced, with 
the result that the quality of the output will be noticeably enhanced. 
For this reason a considerable amount of research is being carried 
out to improve performance in this area still further. However, a 
second advantage is that the use of sublanguages − as opposed to 
controlled languages − does not require the writer to simplify ST 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
161
but rather exploits the linguistic restrictions which naturally occur in 
the type of text being translated (1994:159). Further reading: Arnold 
et al. 1994; Sager 1994.
Subtitling A term used to refer to one of the two main methods of 
language transfer used in translating types of mass audio-visual 
communication such as film and television (see also dubbing). First 
used in 1929, subtitling can be defined as the process of providing 
synchronized captions for film and television dialogue (and more 
recently for live opera). Subtitles can be either interlingual (the type 
considered here) or intralingual (e.g. for the deaf), open (i.e. form-
ing part of the original film or broadcast) or closed (i.e. broadcast 
separately and accessible for example by means of teletext). There 
are a number of reasons for choosing subtitling rather than dubbing. 
It is for example a faster process, and costs as little as one fifteenth as 
much as dubbing. However, the choice of one or other approach is 
to a large extent simply a matter of the preference of the country for 
which the new version is being produced; thus for reasons of tradi-
tion subtitles tend to be favoured, for example, in Scandinavia, The 
Netherlands, Belgium, Portugal, Greece, Israel, Egypt and throughout 
the Arab world (Gottlieb 1992:169; see also Delabastita 1990:105 n. 2 
and Goris 1993:171). Up to now, subtitling has been largely ignored 
by translation studies as a whole, and − as pointed out by Fawcett 
(1996:69) − in view of the synchronization requirement some have 
even questioned whether it should be considered a type of translation 
at all. For a detailed description of the actual mechanics of subtitle 
production, see Luyken et al. (1991) and Dries (1995). However, it 
should be stated that subtitlers work under a number of constraints 
which are additional to those associated with other types of transla-
tion (see Luyken et al. 1991:42-48). Firstly, the addition of subtitles 
to a screen necessitates interfering with the visual image, at least to 
some extent. For this reason subtitles are usually placed at the bottom 
of the screen, and are generally limited to two lines of a maximum 
of about 35 characters each. Secondly, the time available for display 
depends firstly on the speed at which the material is spoken (which 
is generally faster than the rate at which a full transcription could be 
delivered), the viewers’ average reading speed and the necessity of 
keeping a (short) interval between subtitles; all of these factors must 
be borne in mind if the general requirement of synchrony is to be 
satisfied. Thirdly, subtitles are generally inserted simultaneously with 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
162
the onset of speech and removed ½ to 1½ seconds after the speech 
segment has finished; however, this can be ignored if for example 
there is a danger of the subtitle “overlapping” a scene change. Finally, 
it is important that the subtitles be displayed in a format which ensures 
their clear visibility and easy legibility, and that line-breaks be chosen 
in such  way as to coincide with the natural breaks in sentence structure. 
In view of the first two constraints discussed above it is clear that there 
are serious limitations on the amount of information which can be 
conveyed by most subtitles. Consequently, subtitling a film usually 
entails an overall compression of the original material (although on 
occasion the subtitler may need to add extra information, for exam-
ple to help the TL audience to understand a point which for cultural 
reasons might otherwise be unclear). Furthermore, only a fraction of 
the information contained in the original intonation or tone of voice 
can be conveyed, while it is not always possible to produce an effective 
rendition, for example, of non-standard speech or colloquial vocabu-
lary (see Delabastita 1989:204). See also pivot language. Further 
reading: Delabastita 1989, 1990; Dries 1995; Fawcett 1996; Gambier 
1996; Gottlieb 1992; Ivarsson 1992; Luyken et al. 1991.
Success (German Glücken) A term used by Reiss & Vermeer (1984). 
According to the model of the communication process which they use 
(known as action theory), an essential part of every interaction is the 
feedback (Rückkoppelung), or reaction, which follows the delivery of 
a message. The purpose of this is so that the recipient can indicate to 
the message producer how the message has been received. A message is 
considered to have been successful (geglückt) if it contains no protest 
(or leads to no subsequent protest from the originator), or in other 
words if both the content and the interpretation of the message have 
coherence in the recipient’s situation. The concept is particularly 
relevant to translation theory in the context of skopos theory, as the 
skopos of TT will directly determine the way in which it is received 
and interpreted by the recipient. See also information offer. Further 
reading: Reiss & Vermeer 1984; Vermeer 1983.
Surtraduction See overtranslation 1.
Syntagmatic Equivalence See textual equivalence 2.
System A term derived from the writings of the Russian Formalists, 
a group of literary theorists active in the early part of the twentieth 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
163
century. For the purposes of translation studies, a system is defined as 
“the network of relations that can be hypothesized for a certain set of 
assumed observables” (Even-Zohar 1990a:27); the “assumed observa-
bles” of this definition are usually phenomena of a linguistic, textual, 
literary or cultural nature. In other words, a system is a “stratified 
entity” (Toury 1980:142) created by the dynamic interaction of all 
relevant factors of a linguistic, textual, literary or cultural nature. The 
term can denote entities of various sizes, such as for example Twen-
tieth Century English literature as a whole or just works translated 
into English in the 1980s; however, when referring to a large system 
which consists of a number of smaller ones − a “system of systems” 
(Even-Zohar 1990b:88) − it is usual to use the term polysystem. Toury 
in addition uses the term system more or less synonymously with 
competence to refer to “the totality of possible realizations” which 
the rules of a certain language (or literature, etc.) could theoretically 
produce (Coseriu 1973:44, quoted in Toury 1980:23, translated); in 
this context the term system would, like competence, contrast with 
norm and performance. Further reading: Even-Zohar 1990a, 1990b; 
Frank 1990b; Hermans 1991; Lefevere 1992; Toury 1980.
TAPs See think-aloud protocols.
Target Language (TL) One of two standard terms used to denote 
the language which is being translated into. (The other frequently 
encountered term is receptor language, while goal language is 
also used by some writers.) The target language is usually the trans-
lator’s native language, although there are exceptions to this. For 
example, some countries favour the practice whereby interpreters 
work from their native language, and in many contexts this practice 
is also used for written translation, although it is not generally 
considered to be an ideal arrangement. Furthermore, other more 
complex configurations can also occur, such as when (for example) 
an English-speaking Bible translator translates from an ancient 
language (e.g. Greek or Hebrew) into a non-Indo-European target 
language. Frequently, especially when TT is the product of a literal 
translating strategy, the linguistic incompatibility between SL and 
the target language leads to SL patterns interfering in the target 
text; depending of the extremity of this phenomenon and the com-
mentator’s attitude to it, the result is termed either the third code or

Dictionary of Translation Studies
164
translationese. Some writers (e.g. Toury 1980, 1995) even view 
the language of translated texts as a dialect of the target language. 
Sometimes such interference may be the result of deliberately 
following a particular translation strategy (see for example 
foreignizing translation). See also direction of translation, 
ethnolinguistic model of translation, receptor language, source 
language and target text-oriented translation studies. Further 
reading: Kelly 1979; Sykes 1983.
Target Text (or Target-language Text) (TT) One of the standard 
terms used to describe a text which has been produced by an act of 
translation. A target text is derived from its posited source text in 
accordance with a particular translation strategy (or set of norms), 
which may differ widely between cultures, schools or even individual 
translators; consequently, what is held to be a translation in one cul-
ture may be dismissed as an imitation in another. This situation has 
led scholars working in the field of target text-oriented translation 
studies to adopt a very broad view of what qualifies as a translated 
text, basically accepting the status of “translation” for any text upon 
which it is conferred by a particular culture. However, there is not 
always a simple, one-to-one relationship between a target text and 
its supposed ST, as a text marked as a translation may be based on 
more than one “ST”, in different languages, or else, as in the case 
of pseudotranslations 1, there may be no ST at all. Target texts 
vary greatly in the extent to which they conform to the norms of 
the target system; furthermore, depending on the function which they 
are intended to fulfil, target texts are variously expected to read as a 
target language original or as a faithful reproduction of the source 
language original. The investigation of the nature of target texts 
is one of the most important tasks facing descriptive translation 
studies; it is hoped for example that research into translated texts 
will provide information on a number of phenomena posited as uni-
versals of translation. Finally, for many approaches to translation 
it is in addition important to note that a target text also serves as a 
commentary on, and interpretation of, its ST (see for example Holmes 
1988c, 1988d; see also metapoem). See also indirect translation 1 
and receptor language. Further reading: Toury 1980, 1995.
Target Text-oriented Translation Studies An approach to the study 
of literary translation proposed by Toury (1980, 1985, 1995). Arguing 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
165
that most other approaches ultimately view TT simply in its role as a 
reconstruction of ST, Toury suggests an alternative model in which 
attention is focussed on TT and its position in the target culture; he 
argues that while a TT is (typically) based on another text which 
pre-exists in another language, its identity is determined not so much 
by ST or by translational procedures as by the “constellation of the 
target culture itself” (Toury 1984:75-76). Such a target text-oriented 
approach aims to be entirely non-prescriptive in its understanding 
of how the translation process should be carried out; according to 
Toury, “being regarded as a literary translation ... does not presuppose 
any definite relationship(s) to another text in another language and 
another literary polysystem which is, as a result, regarded as its ST” 
(1980:43). In other words, all texts which a given cultural or literary 
system terms as translations are accepted as such, regardless of the 
translational norms which have been followed in their production. 
In this way TT is to a large extent considered to exist independently 
of its original, having cut itself loose from the source system. This 
kind of approach is thus basically descriptive, and scholars who work 
within it are chiefly interested in “the understanding and explanation 
of translational phenomena within the literary [or cultural, linguistic 
or other] system in their own terms” (Toury 1984:78). Because of this 
reorientation, the phenomenon of pseudotranslation 1 also becomes a 
valid object of study in its own right. In this way, TT becomes the point 
of departure for study, while it is ST which assumes a subordinate 
role, only being consulted to assist in the task of reconstructing “the 
process of decision-making resorted to during the act of translating, 
the extraction of the translational norms on the basis of the existing 
translational relationships, and, ultimately, the general concept of 
translation underlying the corpus in question and responsible for 
those norms, relationships, decisions” (Toury 1984:78). Ultimately, 
the aim of target text-oriented translation studies is to extrapolate 
from particular case studies in order to reach conclusions as to what 
is general or even universal in the process of translation itself. See 
also polysystem theory, pseudotranslation 1, decision-making 
(translation as) and universals of translation. Further reading: 
Toury 1980, 1985, 1995.
Term Banks (or Terminological Data Banks) A term used to refer 
to automated collections of terminology, created to serve particular 
users and stored on-line (Sager 1990:167). Traditionally, term banks 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
166
have had a very similar function to conventional glossaries and 
technical dictionaries; however, as Sager points out, flexibility is 
now becoming an increasingly important criterion in designing 
such machine-readable databases, as information can be stored so 
as to facilitate the type of searches and queries which have up to now 
required the user to scan the entire database by hand (1990:168). 
Thus the type of term bank which Sager envisages should permit 
not only traditional, dictionary-type queries, but also for example 
searches for other terms which are conceptually linked with the 
search item, or requests for glossaries of terms related to a certain 
topic (1990:168-69). In the light of such considerations Sager sug-
gests that a term bank should be defined as “a collection, stored 
in a computer, of special language vocabularies ... together with 
the information required for their identification”, such a collection 
being exploitable “as a mono- or multilingual dictionary for direct 
consultation, as a basis for dictionary production, as a control 
instrument for consistency of usage and term creation and as an 
ancillary tool in information and documentation” (1990:169). See 
also machine-aided translation and machine translation. Further 
reading: Arnold et al. 1994; Sager 1990, 1994; Thomas 1992.
Terminology A term used to refer to the vast bodies of specialist 
vocabulary which is found in the discourse relating to any technical 
domain. A term is distinct from a general word in that it designates 
a single concept; terminology is thus less ambiguous than general 
vocabulary, and therefore also more suited to machine translation 
(Arnold et al. 1994:107). Although in another context the term ter-
minology can also denote an entire discipline in its own right, within 
translation studies it generally has the more restricted meaning 
outlined above; furthermore, the way terminology is most likely to 
feature in translation is in the form of terminology management, or in 
other words the methods of creating, maintaining and utilizing term 
banks. Particular problems which are likely to face the translator 
are the sheer volume of terms which exist in any one field and the 
necessity to ensure consistency in the way such terms are translated 
(Arnold et al. 1994:108). However, careful use of resources such as 
term banks will help translators make correct choices about whether 
to use a pre-existing TL term, to create a neologism, or to paraphrase; 
furthermore, a general awareness of the issues connected with termi-
nology is likely to equip them “to cope with unfamiliar subjects and 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
167
the techniques of producing reliable work despite their limitations of 
knowledge” (Sager 1992:112). See also machine-aided translation. 
Further reading: Sager 1990, 1992.
Tertium Comparationis (Latin) (or Interlingua, or Das Gemeinte 
(Intended Meaning) (German), or Mediating Language, or Lingua 
Universalis (Latin)) A term used by some writers to denote a theo-
retical language which mediates between SL and TL. Writers who 
utilize this notion argue, according to Eco, that “there must ... exist 
a tertium comparationis which might allow us to shift from an 
expression in language A to an expression in language B by deciding 
that both are equivalent to an expression of a metalanguage C” 
(1995:346). Such a metalanguage is posited as a semantic common 
denominator via which the ST meaning, which is understood as 
an invariant which exists independently of ST itself, is simply 
transferred from ST to TT. Koschmieder (1965a, 1965b) refers to this 
interlingual invariant as the Gemeinte, or intended meaning, while 
Popovič ([1976]:11) terms it the mediating language. The acceptance 
of such an “interlingually constant value” (Koller 1979/1992:97, 
translated) implies an inherent belief in unlimited translatability 
(Wilss 1982:46) and in the centrality of linguistic equivalence; 
for this reason, most linguistic theories of translation implicitly 
rely on the concept of the tertium comparationis (see Snell-Hornby 
1988/1995:15-16). Use of the notion of the tertium comparationis 
is particularly associated with bilingual generative models of 
translation inspired by Chomskyan linguistics, in which translation 
is conceived as the process of decoding and recoding an unchanging 
message; within this framework the tertium comparationis is thus 
viewed as an “archimedean point” from which the surface structure 
of both languages can be generated (Hönig 1976:49, translated). 
Nida & Taber’s (1969/1982) model of the translation process is 
typical of this perspective (see for example analysis). However, as 
observed by Hönig, the concept of the tertium comparationis “does 
not represent a real basis for the translator’s operations” (1976:50, 
translated). There are a number of reasons for this. The first of these 
is that the existence of the tertium comparationis cannot be verified. 
The second concerns what literary theorists term the “intentional 
fallacy” (Gentzler 1993:57), or the notion that the author’s intended 
meaning and the meaning that a work expresses are not the same; in 
view of such semantic multivalency, the idea that one can reduce the 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
168
meaning of a text to basic underlying forms becomes an unrealistic 
oversimplification. A third problem is that translation is a basically 
parole-based procedure (Koller 1979/1992:98, 223); in other words, 
it is not simply a matter of converting decontextualized, idealized 
phrases and sentences from one language to another, but rather 
entails recodifying an elusive, context-bound, implicature-laden 
ST in TL in the most appropriate way (see Gutt 1991). However, 
in spite of such problems, use of a kind of tertium comparationis is 
sometimes recommended in translation comparison (see architranseme) 
and translation evaluation (Sager 1994), as well as being a standard 
procedure in many multilingual machine translation systems (where 
it is termed interlingua; see Arnold et al. 1994 and Schubert 1992). 
Further reading: Eco 1995; Koller 1971, 1979/1992; Koschmieder 
1965a, 1965b; Nida & Taber 1969/1982.
Text Typology See expressive texts, informative texts, multi-medial 
texts and operative texts.
Texteme A term used by Even-Zohar (1990c) and Toury (1980, 
1995) to refer to any linguistic or textual feature (ranging in size 
from a single sound to an entire textual segment) which takes on a 
special functional significance in a given literary text (or context). 
Toury defines textemes as “linguistic units of any type and level, 
participating in textual relationships and, as a result, carrying textual 
functions in the text in question” (1980:108). The role of textemes in 
a literary text is such that their decoding is “indispensable for a proper 
understanding of the text” (Even-Zohar 1990c:249). When a literary 
text is translated, many original textemic relations will inevitably be 
lost, and some will have their textemic status preserved in a modified 
form (Even-Zohar 1990c:249), as the translator seeks to maintain the 
integrity of the text as a literary entity. Key points in literary texts 
which consist of several simultaneous textual functions are termed by 
Toury (1980:115) as junctions. While the specific nature of textemes 
varies from text to text, rhyming words, key repetitions and puns 
are all typical examples of textemic features. See also repertoreme. 
Further reading: Even-Zohar 1990c; Toury 1980, 1995.
Text-type Restricted Theories of Translation (or Discourse-type 
Restricted Theories of Translation) A term used by Holmes (1988e) 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
169
to refer to one of six types of partial theory of translation. Text-
type restricted theories of translation deal with the problems of 
translating specific text or genre-types. Examples of this type of 
theory would be discussions of the translation of scientific texts, 
poetry or the Bible. However, the development of such theories 
is problematic because of the lack of a formal theory of text or 
discourse-types; another problem is raised by the possibility of 
a TT belonging to a different text-type to that of its ST. See also 
area-restricted, medium-restricted, problem-restricted, rank- 
restricted and time-restricted theories of translation. Further 
reading: Holmes 1988e.
Textual Equivalence 1 Defined by Catford as a type of equivalence 
which occurs when any TL text or portion of text is “observed on 
a particular occasion ... to be the equivalent of a given SL text or 
portion of text” (1965:27). Thus for example in the sentences My 
son is six and Mon fils a six ans the English phrase my son and the 
French expression mon fils would be said to be textual equivalents. 
Catford suggests that textual equivalence can be identified either 
“on the authority of a competent bilingual informant or translator” 
(1965:27), or more formally by means of commutation, or changing 
items in ST and observing “what changes if any occur in the TL text 
as a consequence” (1965:28). Obviously, in a text of any length it 
is almost certain that many items will occur more than once. In this 
case textual equivalences can be computed statistically; for example, 
the textual equivalences in a collection of English texts of the French 
item dans might be observed to be in with a probability of 73%, into 
with 19%, from with 1.5% and about/inside with 0.75% (1965:30). 
According to Catford, probabilities of this type, if based on a large 
enough corpus of texts, could be used to form “translation rules” 
(1965:31). Further reading: Catford 1965.
2 (or Syntagmatic Equivalence) A term used by Popovič to refer 
to the “arrangement of the elements upon the syntagmatic axis of the 
text” ([1976]:6). By “syntagmatic axis” Popovič means the specific 
ordering of stylistic and expressive elements in a given text, so that 
the term textual equivalence is used to denote equivalence on the 
level of structure, form and shape (Bassnett 1980/1991:25). Ac-
cording to Popovič, textual equivalence is a function of two factors: 
firstly, the “expressive feeling” of the translator, and secondly, the 
existence of suitable “expressive means” in the “paradigmatic ‘stock’ 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
170
of style” ([1976]:6). See also equivalence, linguistic equivalence, 
paradigmatic equivalence and stylistic equivalence. Further read-
ing: Popovič [1976].
Textual Norms (or Textual-linguistic Norms) Defined by Toury 
(1980, 1995) as one of two types of operational norm (see also 
matricial norms). The function of such norms is to determine the 
selection of TL material to replace the textual and linguistic material 
of the original. In other words, translational equivalents will be chosen 
for ST items in accordance with this type of norm. Such material may 
be either linguistic or literary in nature, thus including such features as 
lexical items or rhyme schemes. Textual norms may be either general 
(i.e. relevant to all types of translation) or particular (i.e. pertaining 
to only one specific mode of translation or genre). It should be pointed 
out that Toury (1995) uses the term textual-linguistic norms to refer 
to this type of norm. See also initial norm and preliminary norms. 
Further reading: Toury 1980, 1995.
Theoretical Translation Studies According to Holmes (1988e), one 
of two branches making up the area of pure translation studies 
(the other being descriptive translation studies). The aim of 
Theoretical Translation Studies is “to establish general principles 
by means of which [the phenomena of translating and translation(s)] 
can be explained and predicted” (1988e:71); this objective is 
pursued on the basis of data provided by Descriptive Translation 
Studies and insights and information from other disciplines, such as 
linguistics, literary studies and psychology. Theoretical Translation 
Studies is further subdivided into general and partial theories of 
translation. For a full discussion of the content and nature of this 
branch of the discipline, however, see translation theory 2. See 
also applied translation studies and translation studies. Further 
reading: Holmes 1988e.
Theory of Sense (French Théorie du Sens) See interpretive theory 
of translation.
Theory of Translation See theoretical translation studies and 
translation theory 2.
Thick Translation Defined by Appiah as a translation “that seeks 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
171
with its annotations and its accompanying glosses to locate the text in 
a rich cultural and linguistic context” (1993:817). Although Appiah is 
referring specifically to the problems involved in translating African 
proverbs it is clear that the term may be used to refer to any TT which 
contains a large amount of explanatory material, whether in the form 
of footnotes, glossaries or an extended introduction. The purpose of 
providing such voluminous background information is to engender 
in the TT reader a deeper respect for the source culture and a greater 
appreciation for the way that people of other backgrounds have 
thought and expressed themselves. See also direct translation 3 and 
ethnographic translation. Further reading: Appiah 1993.
Think-Aloud Protocols (or Thinking-Aloud Protocols) (TAPs) A 
technique used to probe the cognitive processes entailed in different 
kinds of mental activity. TAPs constitute one of a number of empiri-
cal methods used in the investigation of the psychological aspects of 
the act of translating. When used in the field of translation studies, 
TAPs will typically involve the “subjects” verbalizing everything 
that comes into their minds and all the actions they perform as they 
work on the creation of a TT. The verbal report thus produced is 
recorded (or videoed) and analysed for the insights which it reveals 
into what goes on inside the “black box” of the translator’s mind; 
sometimes the translator’s eye movements are also monitored for the 
additional information which they yield. In this way TAPs combine 
introspection and external observation to produce insights into such 
diverse features of the translation process as the subjects’ under-
standing of translational problems, their use of reference works, their 
semantic analysis of ST items, the way in which they compare possible 
TL equivalents, and so forth (Krings 1986b:267). While research is 
still at an early stage, tentative models of the translation process have 
been produced (see for example Krings (1986b:269), who provides 
a flow-diagram detailing a number of different strategies which trans-
lators have recourse to while producing a TT); the ultimate goal of the 
approach is the establishment of a definitive psychological model of 
translation. Various claims have been made for the technique. Gerloff 
describes TAPs as “a rich source of data” (1987:152), while according 
to Krings “the thinking-aloud technique no doubt provides the most 
direct means of access to the translation process” (1986b:266). One 
further advantage is that TAPs are introspective rather than retro-
spective (Lörscher 1991:75), which means that verbalization occurs 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
172
immediately rather than after some time has elapsed. However, 
it has been pointed out that at their present stage of development 
TAPs are useful only for forming rather than testing hypotheses 
(Lörscher 1991:75 n.). Other objections have also been raised, such 
as for example a) the argument that subjects’ verbalizations are 
incomplete or are an attempt to produce commentaries on processes 
which are to a large extent unconscious (Krings 1987:163), b) the 
fact that the technique potentially confuses the spoken and written 
modes of translation, each of which may entail different thought 
processes (Toury 1995:235), and c) the question of whether the very 
act of thinking aloud influences what goes on in the translator’s 
head (Lörscher 1991:71). One interesting side-effect of TAPs is 
that they seem to help subjects to solve translation problems more 
systematically and successfully than members of a control group who 
perform identical tasks silently (Lörscher 1991:74). See also decision-
making (translation as) and descriptive translation studies. Further 
reading: Fraser 1996; Gerloff 1987; Krings 1986a, 1986b, 1987; 
Lörscher 1991; Toury 1995.
Third Code A term coined by Frawley (1984) within the context of 
a discussion of literary translation. Frawley argues that TT, having 
what he terms dual lineage (i.e. being influenced by both ST and 
TL), “emerges as a code in its own right, setting its own standards 
and structural presuppositions and entailments, though they are 
necessarily derivative of [ST] and [TL]” (1984:169). In other words, 
within each unique set of translational circumstances, the language 
of TT will take over those SL and ST features that it needs in order 
to communicate source items in TL. The concept of the third code, 
which originates within a basically semiotic approach to translation, 
has also been taken up by writers more interested in analysing the 
linguistic features which typify TTs. Thus Baker also argues that a 
TT is the “result of the confrontation of the source and target codes” 
(1993:245); on the basis of evidence from studies of phenomena such as 
the patterns of cohesion and the distribution of common lexical items 
she concludes that TTs differ in nature from both their own STs and 
from original texts written in TL. Although there has so far been little 
investigation into this phenomenon, other target features which it is 
believed may represent examples of the third code are explicitation 
and the other posited universals of translation, as well as the 
frequent appearance in TT of items of source culture realia. While 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
173
none of these features constitute actual infringements of TL norms, 
their appearance, according to Shamaa, “leave[s] a vague impression 
of being culturally exotic” (1978:172, quoted in Baker 1993:245); 
their presence may thus account for a text being perceived as having 
an indefinable “translated feel”. It should, however, be noted that such 
features are not those associated with the concept of translationese; 
while the two notions are clearly related, the term third code generally 
denotes more subtle deviations from TL linguistic norms, and its use 
implies on the part of the writer not only a lack of disapproval, but also 
the belief that such phenomena are worthy of systematic investigation 
for their own sake. Toury (1980, 1995) discusses similar phenomena 
as part of his rationale for the discipline of target text-oriented 
translation studies, claiming that TTs in a given language differ 
“dialectally” from original texts composed in that language (1980:42); 
a similar insight is provided by Rabin (1958:144-45), who argues that 
translation from language A to language B becomes progressively 
easier, as translators build up a “translation stock” of tried and tested 
solutions to translation problems (which would subsequently mark 
such TTs as translations). In this way the third code can extend and 
enrich the linguistic repertoire of TL, as features absorbed through 
translation can be adopted in the language as a whole, or at least 
contribute to a change which is already taking place. Useful insights 
into the third code can be gained from a study of pseudotransla-
tions 1, and our understanding is also likely to increase as more use 
is made of comparable corpora. See also linguistically creative 
translation and target language. Further reading: Baker 1993, 
1995; Frawley 1984; Toury 1980, 1995.
Third Language See translationese.
Time-restricted Theories of Translation One of Holmes’ (1988e) 
six types of partial theory of translation. Time-restricted 
theories of translation are concerned with either the translation of 
contemporary texts or those of an older period. In the latter case 
one may also speak of Cross-temporal Theories of Translation 
(see intertemporal translation); however, of the two, this is the 
branch which has led to fewer significant conclusions. See also 
area-restricted, medium-restricted, problem-restricted, rank-
restricted and text-type restricted theories of translation. 
Further reading: Holmes 1988e.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
174
Total Translation According to Catford’s (1965) model, the mode of 
translation that contrasts with restricted translation. Total transla-
tion is what is generally meant by the non-technical use of the word 
“translation”; however, on a formal level it may be defined as the 
“replacement of SL grammar and lexis by equivalent TL grammar and 
lexis with consequential replacement of SL phonology/graphology 
by (non-equivalent) TL phonology/graphology” (1965:22). Thus it 
is only SL grammar and lexis which is directly replaced by equiva-
lent TL substance; the replacement on the levels of phonology and 
graphology, on the other hand, is concomitant on those two former 
levels. Consequently, phonological and graphological substance is not 
generally replaced by equivalent TL substance, although exceptions to 
this are provided by instances such as film dubbing or the translation 
of poetry, where TT graphology or phonology is sometimes partially 
equivalent to that of ST. See also grammatical, graphological, 
lexical, phonological and unbounded translation. Further reading: 
Catford 1965.
Tower of Babel See babel (tower of).
Traduction Absolue See absolute translation.
Traduction avec Reconstructions See reconstructions (transla-
tion with).
Traduction Diagrammatique See diagrammatic translation.
Traduction Directe See direct translation 4.
Traduction Documentaire See selective translation.
Traduction Sélective See selective translation.
Traduction Signalétique See keyword translation.
Traduction Synoptique See abstract translation.
Traductology (French Traductologie; Spanish Traductología) A term 
coined in the early 1970s by Harris to refer to “the scientific study of 
translation” (see 1977:90-91). While enthusiastically adopted by a 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
175
number of writers in various countries, the term has not acquired a very 
general currency as, like translatology, it is perceived by many as 
an unnecessary neologism (see for example Holmes 1988e:69 and Pym 
1992a:181), and has − at least in English − been widely replaced by 
more recent, less scientistic-sounding designations such as transla-
tion studies (Holmes 1988e:70). See also science of translation. 
Further reading: Harris 1977; Vázquez-Ayora 1977.
Transcription A general term used to refer to a type of interlingual 
transfer in which the forms of the original (e.g. sounds, letters or 
words) are preserved unchanged in TT. According to Nord, trans-
cription represents one of the two extreme limits of translation, the 
other being free text production (1991a:30); all types of “translation 
proper” consequently lie somewhere between these two poles. Thus 
like transliteration transcription is not itself usually considered to be 
an example of translation as such; furthermore, because its purpose is 
the preservation of form rather than meaning it is not generally applied 
to entire texts. However, it is frequently resorted to within a translated 
text, for example as a technique for rendering ST names, realia or 
other items which have no precise TL equivalent (see voids). It should 
also be pointed out that Catford (1965) uses the term transcription to 
refer to transliteration from non-alphabetical scripts such as Chinese. 
See also graphological translation and interlinear translation. 
Further reading: Levý 1969.
Transeme A term used by van Leuven-Zwart (1989, 1990) to refer 
to a basic unit for the linguistic comparison of a literary text and 
its integral translation. Reasoning that “sentences are generally 
too long and words too short to be easily compared” (1989:155), 
van Leuven-Zwart suggests the transeme as a suitable basic unit 
of comparison. The transeme is ultimately derived from criteria 
suggested by Dik (1978), and occurs in one of two varieties: the state 
of affairs transeme, which consists of a predicate and its arguments, 
and the satellite transeme, which acts as an adverbial extension of a 
state of affairs transeme. In this way, a sentence will typically consist 
of one or more transemes. The detailed micro-structural comparison 
of ST and TT transemes via a hypothetical architranseme is the 
first step in a process designed to reveal the translator’s translation 
policy and the ways in which this causes TT to differ from the 
original on the macrostructural level. Depending on how the ST and 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
176
TT transemes each differ from the architranseme, it is possible to 
classify the relationship which obtains between them as being one 
of modification, modulation 2 or mutation. If consistent trends can 
be observed in the shifts which occur between a large number of ST 
and TT transemes, then it may be possible to draw conclusions about 
the translational policies or norms which the translator has been 
adhering to in the translation process. On the basis of an investigation 
into an extensive corpus of Dutch translations of Spanish and Spanish-
American literature, van Leuven-Zwart has observed that an average 
of one shift per transeme is typical. See also generalization and 
specification. Further reading: van Leuven-Zwart 1989, 1990.
Transfer 1 A general term which has various different meanings. 
First of all, the term transfer is used by some (see for example Catford 
1965) as a synonym for the process of translation (Wilss 1982:63). 
Secondly, transfer is occasionally understood in the psychological 
sense as the interference of one language in another, whether in the 
process of translating or of learning another language; in translation 
such interference might result in the production of features associated 
with phenomena such as translationese or the third code. However, 
perhaps the term is used in translation studies most frequently to 
refer to the set of processes to which translation belongs and to the 
other members of which it may be fruitfully compared. Used in this 
sense the term will thus describe all processes which involve the in-
troduction of a text (or other collection of signs) into another language 
(or non-linguistic system). Thus Reiss & Vermeer, for example, define 
translation as a “special type of transfer” (1984:108, translated) of 
signs from one system into another; as instances of other types, they 
cite the minuting of a conversation, the dramatization of a novel, the 
filming of a story or the constructing of a cathedral from the archi-
tect’s plans (1984:89). In other words, their view of transfer broadly 
corresponds to Jakobson’s (1959/1966) three-fold concept of transla-
tion (see interlingual, intersemiotic and intralingual translation). 
Similarly, Eco (1976) lists three types of semiotic transfer: copying, 
transcribing and translating (quoted in Frawley 1984:160). Even-
Zohar (1990d) understands transfer as referring to transplantation 
from one cultural system to another. He talks about the advantages 
of viewing translation in this wider context; such a shift in perspec-
tive would, according to him, have the consequence of elucidating 
the nature and role of translation (1990d:74). An alternative view of 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
177
transfer is offered by Pym, who uses the term text transfer to refer to 
“the simple moving of inscribed material from one place and time 
to another place and time” (1992a:13), or in other words, not to a 
more general notion than translation, but to something which is a 
precondition for its taking place at all (1992a:18). Pym also refers 
to this physical movement as external transfer, and contrasts it with 
what he terms internal transfer, which denotes the “sets of rules or 
procedures for adapting structures to new interpretative systems” 
(1992b:172), and which for him is basically synonymous with transla-
tion (1992b:172-74). Thus for Pym the difference between (external) 
transfer and translation is that the former is a material movement 
between cultures which entails neither adaptation nor interpretation 
(1992b:173), and which is akin to the movement of, for example, 
merchandise or expertise (1992a:13), while the latter is a semiotic 
activity which can on occasion become divorced from the physi-
cal realities of the accompanying transfer (1992a:13-14). See also 
transfer-oriented translation studies. Further reading: Even-Zohar 
1990d; Pym 1992a, 1992b; Reiss & Vermeer 1984.
2 A term used to refer to the second stage of Nida & Taber’s 
(1969/1982) three-stage model of the translation process. The model 
which they propose is specifically designed to reflect the process of 
Bible translation, and is based on elements of Chomsky’s transfor-
mational grammar (see for example Chomsky 1965). Nida & Taber’s 
three stages − which do not necessarily occur strictly sequentially 
(1969/1982:104) − are analysis, transfer and restructuring; transfer 
is defined as the stage “in which the analyzed material is transferred 
in the mind of the translator from language A to language B” 
(1969/1982:33). Transfer takes place near the level of the kernels 
− the “basic structural elements” (1969/1982:39) which are posited 
for a particular language − which have been derived in the analysis 
stage. In other words, the translator takes the kernels and, modifying 
them in the light of his or her knowledge of TL structure, produces 
forms which “will be optimal for transfer into the receptor language” 
(1969/1982:51). During the transfer process kernels are not treated 
in isolation, as the temporal, spatial and logical relations which exist 
between them also need to be transferred (1969/1982:104). Furthermore, 
adjustments are made as necessary: firstly, to redistribute the semantic 
elements, where the need arises, through such processes as expansion 
(e.g. of one SL word into several TL words) and synthesis (e.g. of 
an SL phrase into a single TL word), and secondly, to compensate 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
178
for structural differences between SL and TL at the discourse, 
sentence, word and even sound level. Consequently transfer involves 
the reconfiguration in TL of sets of semantic and structural SL 
components, rather than the simple replacement of actual SL elements 
with their most literal TL equivalents; in other words, Nida & Taber 
envisage the transfer being performed on the basis of contextual 
(rather than verbal) consistency, thus contributing towards the 
establishment of dynamic equivalence. It should be pointed out that 
transfer is not presented as a watertight procedure which guarantees 
absolute “preservation of meaning”, as in any transfer there is “an 
inevitable modification in the meaning, generally associated with 
some degree of loss, especially in the degree of impact of the original 
communication” (Nida 1969:492). Further reading: Gentzler 1993; 
Nida 1969; Nida & Taber 1969/1982.
Transfer-oriented Translation Studies A term used to refer to an 
approach to historical-descriptive translation research developed by 
the Göttingen Center for the Cooperative Study of Literary Trans-
lation. The transfer-oriented approach grew out of a number of practical 
research projects, including for example a major study of German 
translations of American literature. Although they share many of the 
concerns of polysystem theorists and their target text-oriented ap-
proach − such as a view of literature as being composed of systems 
and an interest in the role played by translation in the historical devel-
opment of national literatures − some of their conclusions are different 
from those of the latter group (Gentzler 1993:183-84). Indeed, the 
very name of the Göttingen group’s approach implies a contrast with 
target text-oriented (and also source text-oriented) translation studies. 
The transfer-oriented approach focusses on a translation “as the result 
of an act of transfer across lingual, literary, and cultural boundaries” 
(Frank 1990a:12); it is thus more comprehensive than a pure TT 
orientation as it embraces “considerations of the source side, the tar-
get side, and of the differences between them” (1990a:12), and also 
significantly brings the translator into the equation. More specifically, 
it views literary translation as the result of a compromise on the part 
of the translator between the demands of four norm areas: “the source 
text as understood by the translator; the source literature, language, 
and culture as implicated in the text; the state of translation culture 
(which includes concepts of translation, previous translations of the 
same and of other texts, etc.); and the target side (for instance in the 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
179
form of publisher’s policies, local theater conventions, censorship, 
etc.)” (1990a:12). Besides these main areas, other more minor factors 
also need to be taken into consideration, such as the interference of 
other literatures, the translator’s first-hand experience of the source 
country, the particular dictionaries consulted by the translator, 
and the conditions in which the translation was produced (Frank 
1992:383). In all of these areas it is of course the perceptions of the 
translator which are paramount (Frank 1990b:54); thus a translation 
will inevitably reflect an individual translator’s ethos in that it will 
have been formed as a result of his or her decisions (Frank 1992:371). 
See also descriptive translation studies. Further reading: Frank 
1990a, 1990b, 1992; Gentzler 1993.
Transference Defined by Catford as containing an “implantation 
of SL meanings into the TL text” (1965:48; emphasis original). In 
other words, the term refers to a process in which an SL item is used 
in a TT, but with an SL meaning. This commonly happens when for 
cultural, geographical or other reasons TL has no suitable equivalent 
for an SL item and consequently “borrows” the item. However, true 
transference is uncommon, as such borrowed items typically change 
their meaning, either because the item acquires a foreign feel or 
because only one of the total range of meanings which it possesses 
in SL is transferred. Further reading: Catford 1965.
Transformation See restructuring.
Translat (Translated Text, or Translatum) (German) A term coined 
by Kade (1968) to circumvent the ambiguity of the word Überset-
zung. While this latter word can traditionally denote either the process 
or the product of translation, the term Translat was specifically de-
signed to refer to the translated text, as the product of the process of 
translation. Further reading: Kade 1968; Reiss & Vermeer 1984.
Translatability A term used − along with its opposite, untranslat-
ability − to discuss the extent to which it is possible to translate either 
individual words and phrases or entire texts from one language to an-
other. Discussion of this concept has arisen from the tension between 
two basic arguments. The first of these is the indisputable fact that 
different languages do not “mesh together”, in that the unique configu-
rations of grammar, vocabulary and metaphor which one finds in each 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
180
language inevitably have some bearing on the types of meaning that 
can be comfortably expressed in that language; the second is that, in 
spite of this consideration, translation between languages still occurs, 
often with an ostensibly high degree of success. Considering translat-
ability on the word level, Catford demonstrates that grammatically 
encoded SL meaning (such as the inbuilt femininity of French elles 
“they”) will almost inevitably fail to find a direct reflection in TL and 
will therefore be “lost”; however, he classifies such minor linguistic 
discrepancies as being “functionally irrelevant” to the question of 
equivalence (1965:94). Other writers discuss word-level lexical 
incompatibility, which can be caused either by differences between 
source and target cultural phenomena or by the simple non-existence 
of a TL word to label a given item or concept (see realia and voids). 
However, it is generally agreed that this type of untranslatability oc-
curs only on the level of single lexical items, and can frequently be 
circumvented by means of paraphrase or explicitation in such a way as 
to ensure that all the semantic features of ST are retained; furthermore, 
above the word level other strategies such as compensation can also 
be employed. Yet it is not enough to consider simple retention of the 
same basic semantic features as the sole criterion for translatability. 
The existence of further semantic dimensions which are added by 
such concepts as connotation and collocational meaning supports the 
conclusion that an absolute meaning does not exist independently of 
any particular language and that translatability can consequently 
only be a limited notion. In addition to this, textual and contextual 
features such as implied meaning, as well as formal features such as 
puns, wordplays and poetic devices, which are notoriously difficult 
to preserve through the translation process, indicate that meaning 
is to a large extent generated by a specific text. In the light of such 
considerations Frawley, for example, argues that there can be no ex-
actness in translation in any “but rare and trivial cases” (1984:163), 
and concludes that “any interlingual translation that seeks to transfer 
only semantics has lost before it has begun” (1984:168). If this is the 
case, then any idea of absolute translatability must be abandoned. 
The notion of translatability therefore has to be considered in relation to 
each instance of translation as “a concrete act of performance” (Toury 
1980:28), and must be linked with the text-type of ST, the purpose 
of translation and the translation principles being followed by the 
translator. Thus for example, texts suited to House’s (1977) notion of 
covert translation will lend themselves to different kinds of transla-
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
181
tion strategies from those for which overt translation would be more 
appropriate, with the result that different types of equivalence will be 
established in each of these two types of translation. Similarly, a text 
which would be considered highly untranslatable using, for example, 
a strategy based on formal equivalence might be held to be more 
translatable if the opposite approach, that of dynamic equivalence, 
were to be employed. Because of such considerations Wilss concludes 
that the translatability of a text can “be measured in terms of the 
degree to which it can be recontextualized in the TL, taking into 
account all linguistic and extralinguistic factors” (1982:49). See also 
indeterminacy and tertium comparationis. Further reading: Catford 
1965; Koller 1979/1992; Toury 1980; Wilss 1977, 1982.
Translation An incredibly broad notion which can be understood 
in many different ways. For example, one may talk of translation 
as a process or a product, and identify such sub-types as literary 
translation, technical translation, subtitling and machine translation; 
moreover, while more typically it just refers to the transfer of written 
texts, the term sometimes also includes interpreting. A number of 
scholars have also suggested further distinctions between different 
types of translation (see for example covert vs. overt translation, 
or domesticating vs. foreignizing translation). Furthermore, many 
writers also extend its reference to take in related activities which 
most would not recognize as translation as such (see for example 
diagrammatic translation, inter-semiotic translation, paraphrase 
and pseudotranslation 1). Translation is frequently characterized 
metaphorically, and has − amongst many other things − been compared 
to playing a game or making a map. Each of these analogies, however, 
is only intended to capture one particular facet of translation. Not 
surprisingly, many formal definitions have also been offered, each of 
which reflects a particular underlying theoretical model. The linguistic 
aspects of the translation process have been encapsulated in a large 
number of definitions, mostly dating from the 1960s or earlier. Thus 
Catford, for example, defines translation as “the replacement of 
textual material in one language (SL) by equivalent textual material 
in another language (TL)” (1965:20). However, as Sager points 
out, most older definitions of this type tend to centre around the 
importance of maintaining some kind of equivalence between ST 
and TT (1994:121). Thus for Sager Jakobson’s definition is in this 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
182
sense innovative. Jakobson sees translation in semiotic terms as “an 
interpretation of verbal signs by means of some other language” 
(1959/1966:233; see interlingual translation), understanding the 
translation process as a substitution of “messages in one language 
not for separate code-units but for entire messages in some other 
language” (1959/1966:233, emphasis added). Working along similar 
lines, Lawendowski defines translation as “the transfer of ‘meaning’ 
from one set of language signs to another set of language signs” 
(1978:267). An approach based on the importance of preserving 
the effect of the original is reflected in Nida & Taber’s definition: 
“translating consists in reproducing in the receptor language the 
closest natural equivalent of the source-language message, first in 
terms of meaning and secondly in terms of style” (1969/1982:12). 
However, as stated by Koller, many definitions tend to be normative 
rather than descriptive, as they frequently state not only what 
translation is, but also what it is supposed to be (1979/1992:94; see 
also prescriptive translation studies). An exception to this is Toury’s 
target text-oriented definition, which states that a translation is 
“taken to be any target-language utterance which is presented or 
regarded as such within the target culture, on whatever grounds” 
(1985:20). Vermeer, rejecting notions of translation as a two-stage 
process of decoding and recoding, offers a similarly non-normative 
definition of translation as “‘information’ about a source text in another 
language” (1982:97, translated; see information offer). This approach 
engenders a view of translation in which the way a TT functions in a 
specific cultural context is paramount: “translation is the production 
of a functional target text maintaining a relationship with a given 
source text that is specified according to the intended or demanded 
function of the target text (translation skopos)” (Nord 1991a:28; see 
skopos theory). Finally, to reflect the environment in which much 
professional translation activity takes place Sager suggests widening 
previous definitions by specifying that “translation is an externally 
motivated industrial activity, supported by information technology, 
which is diversified in response to the particular needs of this form 
of communication” (1994:293; see industrial process (translation 
as)). See also translation. Further reading: Bathgate 1981; Kelly 
1979; Koller 1979/1992; Neubert 1991a; Neubert & Shreve 1992; 
Sager 1994; Wilss 1977, 1982.
Translation (Process of Translation) (German) A term introduced 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
183
by Kade (1968) as a general designation for the two distinct concepts 
übersetzen (i.e. written translation) and dolmetschen (i.e. interpret-
ing). Previously German had had no satisfactory word which could 
be used to refer generically to both of these terms. However, unlike 
the English word ‘translation’, Translation refers exclusively to the 
translation process, rather than to the translated text, which is known 
by the term translat. Further reading: Kade 1968; Reiss & Vermeer 
1984.
Translation and the Theory of Games See games (translation and 
the theory of).
Translation as Decision-making See decision-making (transla-
tion as).
Translation as Industrial Process See industrial process (transla-
tion as).
Translation Equivalence See equivalence.
Translation Studies A term used to describe the “discipline which 
concerns itself with problems raised by the production and description 
of translations” (Lefevere 1978:234). The term was originally 
suggested by Holmes (see for example 1988e) to address a perceived 
problem with the use of the term translation theory 1 as a title for the 
discipline; Holmes argued that much research was being carried out 
into translation which did not, strictly speaking, “fall within the scope 
of theory formation” (1988e:69). Thus Holmes proposed using the 
designation Translation Studies to give a “more tentative and open 
range to scholarly activities than ‘science’, ‘theory’, etc.” (Lambert 
1991:26-27). However, the fact that the term was originally 
suggested by Holmes and enthusiastically adopted by the scholars 
associated with the so-called manipulation school, who tend to 
approach translation from a background in comparative literature, 
has led to the mistaken perception that Translation Studies refers 
exclusively to the study of literary translation and translations. It 
is true that some writers both inside and outside the “manipulation 
school” (e.g. Gentzler 1993; see also Lambert 1991:27) use the 
term to distinguish this school from other approaches found 
within the discipline; yet it is clear that Holmes’ original intention 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
184
was that “Translation Studies” should contain no such limitation 
(1988e:71ff.). Indeed, Holmes’ (1988e) division of the discipline 
(sometimes illustrated by means of a “map”; see for example Toury 
1995:10) into applied, descriptive and theoretical translation 
studies, along with a multitude of further smaller categories, indicates 
the breadth of his vision for the discipline. (Working along similar 
lines, Bassnett (1980/1991:7-8) divides Translation Studies into 
four categories: history of translation, translation in the TL culture, 
translation and linguistics, and translation and poetics.) The tendency 
to use the term as the overall designation for the discipline has been 
strengthened in recent years by Snell-Hornby’s (1988/1995) choice 
of Translation Studies as the expression under which to unite the 
separate interests and emphases of the “manipulation” approach and 
that associated with the science of translation. Snell-Hornby stresses 
that “a discipline of translation studies must embrace a spectrum 
including all kinds of translation, from literary to technical, and 
should also extend to the neglected field of interpreting” (1991:19). 
She envisages the discipline − or interdiscipline, to use her preferred 
term (which she (1991:19) attributes to Toury; see also Snell-Hornby 
et al. 1994) − as consisting of “special language studies, terminology 
and lexicography, machine translation and machine-aided translation; 
relevant areas of linguistics such as semantics, contrastive grammar, 
text linguistics, socio- and psycholinguistics; literary translation 
(including all forms of stage translation, film dialogue and dubbing, 
sub-titles and so forth) and neighbouring fields of interest from literary 
history to psychology” (Snell-Hornby 1991:19; see also dubbing, 
machine-aided translation, machine translation, subtitles and 
terminology). However, not even such an extended list manages to 
do justice to the staggeringly interdisciplinary nature of Translation 
Studies, which also overlaps with such further areas as anthropology, 
comparative literature, economics, ethnology, history, philosophy, 
politics and semiotics. See also traductology and translatology. 
Further reading: Bassnett 1980/1991; Gentzler 1993; Holmes 1988e; 
Leuven-Zwart & Naaijkens 1991; Neubert 1991a; Neubert & Shreve 
1992; Snell-Hornby 1988/1995; Snell-Hornby et al. 1994; Toury 
1995.
Translation Theory 1 A term used to refer to the entire discipline of 
translation studies. Thus Popovič, for example, defines translation 
theory as a “discipline engaged in the systematic study of translation”, 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
185
whose task consists of “modeling the translational process and text” 
([1976]:23). However, this use of the term is probably most closely 
associated with Newmark, who describes translation theory as “the 
body of knowledge that we have and have still to have about the 
process of translating” (1981/1988:19). Such views, however, increas-
ingly represent the minority, as the term is now more widely used in 
the sense discussed under translation theory 2; thus Lambert, for 
example, states that at the time of writing “few theoreticians define 
the entire field of scholarly work linked to translation as ‘Transla-
tion Theory’” (1991:30). The reason for this, as argued by Holmes, 
is that “there is much valuable study and research being done in the 
discipline, and a need for much more to be done, that does not, strictly 
speaking, fall within the scope of theory formation” (1988e:69). See 
also manipulation school, science of translation, traductology and 
translatology. Further reading: Holmes 1988e.
2 (or Theory of Translation) A term used to refer to a specific 
attempt to explain in a systematic way some or all of the phenomena 
related to translation. However, the use of the term is surrounded 
with some confusion. The reason for this is that in an area which 
lacks unanimity over any universal principles of translation, the 
term has often been used to refer to statements which lay down 
guidelines about how translation should be done, and which of-
ten exist in rivalry with other such statements. Thus for example 
Reiss & Vermeer define a theory as containing “1) the statement 
of its basis, 2) the description of its object, and 3) an inventory 
of rules” (1984:3, translated). Similarly, Newmark − who also 
uses the term in the sense described under translation theory 1 
− argues that translation theory’s chief concern is to determine 
“appropriate translation methods” and to provide “a framework 
of principles, restricted rules and hints for translating texts and 
criticizing translations” (1981/1988:19). However, there is a broad 
consensus within at least part of the discipline of translation 
studies that “Theory attempts to account for what happens, not 
tell you how it should happen” (Baker, quoted in Gamal 1994:16). 
Thus Holmes, for example, defines a theory in general terms as 
a “series of statements, each of which is derived logically from 
a previous statement or from an axiom and which together have 
a strong power of explanation and prediction regarding a certain 
phenomenon” (1988f:93-94); elsewhere he describes a theory of 
translation as “a full, inclusive theory accommodating so many 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
186
elements that it can serve to explain and predict all phenomena 
falling within the terrain of translating and translation, to the exclu-
sion of all phenomena falling outside it” (1988e:73). Yet the fact is 
that the formulation of such a theory is a matter of extreme difficulty. 
The reasons for this are basically twofold, and are related to the mul-
tifaceted nature not only of translation itself, but also of the discipline 
as a whole. As regards the first of these, Graham sees translation as 
comprising “an indefinite or fuzzy set of somewhat similar smaller 
problems” (1981:29) which differ from each other sufficiently 
to make it difficult to view them all within a single theoretical 
framework. It is thus no easy matter to derive useful, non-banal 
generalizations about such an unpromisingly varied phenomenon; 
indeed, the only form in which it is likely to prove possible is as a 
complex, abstract, “highly formalized” (Holmes 1988e:73) body of 
statements, which taken together are capable of providing a broad 
enough view of all the phenomena which translation involves. Re-
garding the second reason – which comes about largely as a result 
of the first – it should be stated that the production of a theory of 
translation is made harder not only because of the wide-ranging 
interdisciplinary nature of Translation Studies, but also because 
of the fact that theorists inevitably approach the matter with their 
own, frequently mutually exclusive assumptions, preconceptions 
and agendas (see for example Pym 1992a:188). The result of this 
has been that theories have often been produced which only address a 
particular set of problems associated with translation, or else which 
specifically concern themselves only with certain types of transla-
tion. Thus Holmes, for example, considers that many translation 
theories to date are not general but specific in scope, and deal with 
only some of the various aspects of translation theory (1988e:73; 
see partial theories of translation). Furthermore, Pym talks about 
the lack of a sufficiently high vantage point from which to view all 
possible facets of translation (1992a:186), and also about the mutual 
exclusivity of the various “external assumptions” brought to bear 
on translation, concerning such matters as “the nature of God’s 
Word, the supposed equality of different cultures or the ethical duty 
to convey information” (1992a:188). It is considerations like these 
that lead Holmes to conclude that “most of the theories that have 
been produced to date are in reality little more than prolegomena 
to ... a general translation theory” (1988e:73; see general theories 
of translation). Holmes posits that such a comprehensive theory 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
187
would need to consist of at least four sub-theories, concerned with the 
translation process, the translation product, the function of transla-
tion and translation didactics (1988f:95); furthermore, he argues that 
the fourth − the only element which should be normative − can only 
be constructed on the basis of the other three (1988f:95-96), which 
would in turn be developed using the insights gained by descriptive 
translation studies (1988e:73). Thus translation theory will, accord-
ing to Toury, become a “series of truly interconnected hypotheses” 
(1995:267); these will be probabilistic in nature and stated largely 
in the form of if ... then laws (1995:264-65). See also theoretical 
translation studies. Further reading: Holmes 1988e, 1988f; Pym 
1992a; Toury 1995.
Translation Unit See unit of translation.
Translation Universals See universals of translation.
Translation with Reconstructions See reconstructions (transla-
tion with).
Translational Equivalence See stylistic equivalence.
Translationese (or Third Language) A generally pejorative term 
used to refer to TL usage which because of its obvious reliance 
on features of SL is perceived as unnatural, impenetrable or even 
comical. Translationese is typically caused by an excessively literal 
approach to the translation process or an imperfect knowledge of TL 
(as for example in inverse translation when used in inappropriate 
contexts), and is reflected in the perception that “the source language 
of a translation seems reluctant to make its exit; it prefers to seek re-
incarnation in the target language” (Tsai 1995:242). Inappropriate SL 
metaphors and syntax, unnatural word order and a high concentration 
of unnatural-sounding terminology are the sort of features which are 
typical of translationese. Duff uses the term the third language to refer 
to the same phenomenon, claiming that a text can be preserved as a 
coherent entity only if the translation does not represent a mixture of 
styles and languages, or a “patchwork” made up of SL and TL ele-
ments (1981:12); so strong does he consider the potential influence 
of SL interference to be that he talks of SL wielding a “tyranny” over 
TT (1981:113). In this way, examples of translationese are not simply 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
188
“anecdotal instances of bad translations” (Gellerstam 1986:88), but 
rather reveal a “systematic influence on [TL] from [SL]” (1986:88). 
Some theorists, such as Robinson (e.g. 1991:60) and Venuti (e.g. 
1995:3-4, 117-18), however, question the inevitable association of 
translationese with “bad” translation, arguing that there is simply a 
cultural taboo against allowing a translation to sound like a transla-
tion. Translationese generally differs from the related notion of the 
third code in that it represents a more extreme deviation from target 
norms, although some writers (for example Granger 1996) use the 
term to refer to language reflecting the more elusive features usually 
associated with this latter concept. In applied linguistics the phenom-
ena linked with translationese are also known as inter-language. The 
potential of translationese is frequently tapped for its comic effect, as 
can be seen in Malcolm Bradbury’s spoof guidebook, Why Come To 
Slaka?, the whole of which is written in a kind of mock translationese, 
and which for example contains the advice that “the waters of our 
cities are potable usually, but in the country always fry your waters 
before tippling” (Bradbury 1987:63). See also overtranslation 2 and 
undertranslation. Further reading: Duff 1981; Gellerstam 1986.
Translatology (German Translatologie) A term suggested as a pos-
sible title for the discipline now generally known as translation 
studies. The term translatology has been used since the early 1970s 
by some authors, most notably in Canada, Germany and Denmark. 
Where it is used by English-language writers it tends to refer to 
linguistically oriented approaches to translation (Snell-Hornby 
1988/1995:14), while the term in German has the advantage of ex-
plicitly including both written translation and spoken interpreting 
(Reiss & Vermeer 1984:1; see also translation). However, there seems 
to be a high level of resistance to this term amongst many English-
speaking writers on translation (see for example Holmes 1988e:69 
and Pym 1992a:181) as, like traductology, it is widely perceived 
as an ungainly neologism. Thus Goffin’s (1971:59) prediction that 
it would soon come to be the standard name for the discipline has 
so far failed to come true. See also science of translation. Further 
reading: Harris 1977; Radó 1979.
Translatorial Action (or Translational Action, or Intercultural 
Cooperation) (German Translatorisches Handeln) A term intro-
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
189
duced by Holz-Mänttäri (1984) to describe the collaborative process 
which leads up to the production of a TT. Holz-Mänttäri’s concept is in 
many ways similar to that of skopos theory, although it is arguably 
more radical than that approach. The radicalness of Holz-Mänttäri’s 
translatorial action is reflected in the term itself, in which the word 
translation is avoided, being replaced by the neologism translatorial 
(German translatorisch); indeed, her entire description of the concept 
is typified by such terminological innovation. However, the reason for 
this is only partly terminological, since the term translatorial action 
represents a more general concept than does translation, as it includes 
other types of text production such as paraphrase and re-editing. The 
concept of translatorial action places the act of (technical) translation 
in its broader professional context, in which not only the translator, but 
also the ST author, the client or commissioner and the TT reader play 
a role in the process of TT-production. The translator is viewed as an 
expert who cooperates with other experts in the production of a TT 
which is in line with the product specification which has been agreed 
on in advance by the parties concerned. The role of translatorial ac-
tion is then to produce a target message transmitter (or text) which 
will overcome all cultural barriers in order to fulfil its function in the 
target situation. The extent to which such a message transmitter will 
reflect ST depends on the respective functions of ST and TT, as ST is 
viewed as only “part of the source material” (1986:362) which might 
contribute to the final shape of TT. In other words, for Holz-Mänttäri, 
ST exists solely in order to “meet the requirements of the situation” 
(Nord 1991a:28); should the function of TT which has been agreed 
in the product specification differ from that of ST then the translator 
is expected to make the necessary changes to ST, or to supplement 
it with additional material by way of explanation. Consequently, 
although translatorial action is a more literal English translation of 
the term, Nord’s (1991a) rendering intercultural cooperation more 
effectively conveys the essence of the type of professional interaction 
which Holz-Mänttäri is visualizing. See also commission and loyalty. 
Further reading: Holz-Mänttäri 1984, 1986; Vermeer 1989.
Translatum See translat.
Transliteration 1 According to Catford, a process in which “SL 
graphological units are replaced by TL graphological units” (1965:66). 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
190
However, Catford distinguishes between transliteration and the re-
lated concept of graphological translation. This can be seen by the 
fact that the transliterated version of the Russian word СПУТПИΚ 
is not CHYTHNK (the graphological translation equivalent) but 
SPUTNIK. Transliteration is seen as a three-stage process, which 
can be summarized as follows: SL letters  SL phonological units 
 TL phonological units  TL letters (1965:66). However, the 
process is complicated by the presence of three theoretical problems 
(1965:67-68). Firstly, an SL letter can have more than one phonologi-
cal equivalent. Secondly, there may not be one-to-one equivalence 
between SL and TL phonological units. Thirdly, it is possible that 
arbitrary choices may have to be made between more than one TL 
letter which can represent a TL phonological unit. According to Cat-
ford, when languages such as Chinese are involved the conversion 
of SL into TL forms is known as transcription. Transliteration as a 
process is distinct from translation because of its conventionalized, 
predictable nature; consequently, most commentators do not include 
it in a consideration of translation. See also transcription. Further 
reading: Catford 1965.
2 See signed language interpreting.
Transmutation See intersemiotic translation.
Transposition (French Transposition) According to Vinay & 
Darbelnet (1958, 1958/1995), one of seven translation procedures. 
Transposition is defined as the process of “replacing one word 
class with another without changing the meaning of the message” 
(1958/1995:36). For example, we might translate French il a an-
noncé qu’il reviendrait as he announced that he would return or 
as he announced his return; here the former translation would be 
literal, and the latter transposed. Transposition may be obligatory or 
optional. For example, dès son lever must be translated into English 
as as soon as he gets/got up since English lacks a noun which cor-
responds to French lever; on the other hand, après son retour may be 
translated as either after he comes back or after his return (1958:50, 
1958/1995:36). Vinay & Darbelnet refer to a particularly frequent type 
of transposition as interchange (French chassé-croisé); this occurs 
when SL and TL emphasize different elements of a phrase, with the 
result that the components of the phrase change grammatical category 
when translated from SL to TL, as for example in blown away and 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
191
emporté par le vent (1958:105, 1958/1995:103). Transposition is 
classified as one of four types of oblique translation, in that it does 
not involve a direct transfer between parallel SL and TL categories or 
concepts (1958:46, 1958/1995:31). See also adaptation 2, borrowing, 
calque, equivalence 2, literal translation and modulation 1. Further 
reading: Vinay & Darbelnet 1958, 1958/1995.
Übersetzen (Written Translation) (German) The usual German word 
for written translation, redefined by Kade (1968) to include any act 
of interlingual transfer in which ST is fixed, or can be repeated at 
will, and which may consequently be checked or corrected by the 
translator on a subsequent occasion. This means, for example, that 
the translation of a recording of a speech belongs to the activity of 
Übersetzen. See also correctability, dolmetschen and verifiability. 
Further reading: Kade 1968; Reiss & Vermeer 1984.
Unbounded Translation A term used by Catford to denote a type of 
total translation in which “equivalences shift freely up and down 
the rank scale” (1965:25; the “rank scale” is a kind of hierarchy 
of linguistic units which is used in Halliday’s (1961) grammatical 
system.) In other words, what unbounded translation describes is a 
“normal” translation in which the translator is free to translate an SL 
grammatical unit of a certain size by a TL equivalent of a different 
size (for example, a word by a clause or a morpheme by a word). 
The opposite of unbounded translation is rank-bound translation, a 
somewhat artificial procedure which nevertheless has some limited 
practical application; however, the inevitable linguistic discrepancies 
which occur even between two “closely related” languages make 
unbounded translation in most contexts a necessity. See also free 
translation. Further reading: Catford 1965.
Undertranslation A term used by Newmark (1981/1988) to refer to 
one of two phenomena frequently found in translated texts (see also 
overtranslation 2). According to Newmark, the inevitable loss of 
ST meaning entailed by every act of translation can, depending on 
the precise circumstances, lead to an increase in either detail or general-
ization in TT; if it leads to the latter, it is termed undertranslation. 
An example of undertranslation would be if, translating for a general 
audience, a translator decided to render the Russian bely grib (“white 
mushroom”) in general terms as wild mushroom, rather than using the 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
192
more precise, but relatively unknown, equivalent cep. communicative 
translation 2, with its tendency of conforming to TL conventions, 
frequently favours undertranslation. See also degree of differen-
tiation and generalizing translation. Further reading: Duff 1981; 
Newmark 1981/1988, 1988.
Unit of Translation (or Translation Unit) A term used to refer to 
the linguistic level at which ST is recodified in TL. Barkhudarov 
defines a unit of translation as “the smallest unit of SL which has an 
equivalent in TL”; he comments that a unit of translation can itself 
“have a complex structure”, although “its parts taken individually are 
‘untranslatable’, in that no equivalents can be established for them in 
TT” (1969:3, translated). Thus for example not only the word gener-
ally, but also the expression by and large, although it is made up of 
three words, would be treated as a single unit. For Barkhudarov the 
possible units of translation are phonemes (e.g. in transcription), 
morphemes (e.g. in calques), words, phrases, sentences and entire 
texts. The wording at a given point in ST would determine the most 
appropriate unit of translation, which could be expected to vary in the 
course of a text or even a single sentence. Furthermore, it frequently 
happens that an ST unit is translated by a TL unit of a different size; 
for example, a word may be translated by a phrase or vice versa. If 
a translator uses larger translation units than is necessary to convey 
the basic meaning of ST this will lead to a free translation being 
produced; similarly, translating at a lower level than necessary will 
result in a literal translation. However, as argued by Koller, it 
seems likely that a translation between unrelated languages will 
usually involve larger units than if SL and TL are closely related 
(1979/1992:100). Barkhudarov (1993) raises the problem of whether 
units of translation should be elements of linguistic form or content; 
Vinay & Darbelnet (1958, 1958/1995), however, consider that units of 
thought, lexicological units and units of translation are synonymous. 
Barkhudarov (1969) argues that the entire text can sometimes serve 
as the unit of translation, although in practice limits this to the case of 
poetry; in a similar way Koller (1979/1992) restricts this possibility 
to poetry and advertising. However, Bassnett, writing about literary 
translation, widens the applicability of this perception to include 
prose texts (and by implication other genres too); she argues that in 
such translation the text is the prime unit, as every text is “made up 
of a series of interlocking systems, each of which has a determinable 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
193
function in relation to the whole” (1980/1991:118). Thus a translator 
who translated such a text sentence by sentence might lose certain 
important structural features, which a more non-linear approach (which 
might, for example, include use of compensation strategies) would 
permit to be preserved. See also logeme, unbounded translation and 
unit shift. Further reading: Barkhudarov 1993; Koller 1979/1992; 
Vinay & Darbelnet 1958, 1958/1995.
Unit Shift According to Catford (1965), a type of category shift in 
which strict rank-rank correspondence (that is, equivalence between 
SL and TL sentences, clauses, groups, words and morphemes) is 
not observed; as such, unit shifts clearly constitute a major feature 
of virtually any “normal” translation. A situation in which unit shift 
frequently occurs is when an SL lexical item for which no one con-
venient TL equivalent exists is translated by a phrase (such as French 
vieillard “old man” or Russian belet’ “to appear white”). Like other 
types of category shift, unit shifts as envisaged by Catford represent 
an obligatory rewording forced on the translator through minor lin-
guistic incompatibilities between SL and TL. See also class shift, 
intra-system shift, level shift, shifts and structure shift. Further 
reading: Catford 1965.
Universals of Translation A term used to refer to a number of fea-
tures of TTs which are posited by some as being the almost inevitable 
by-products of the process of translation, irrespective of the specific 
language pair involved. Baker defines universals of translation as 
“features which typically occur in translated text rather than original 
utterances and which are not the result of interference from specific 
linguistic systems” (1993:243). She suggests six features which 
might be viewed as belonging to this category; these are as follows. 
1) A tendency towards explicitation is a common characteristic of 
translated texts. 2) Many TTs tend to simplify and disambiguate pas-
sages which are unclear in ST. 3) A TT will frequently “normalize” 
wayward SL grammar as well as standardizing other unconventional 
features of ST. 4) Instances of repetition will either be rephrased us-
ing synonyms, or else some of the occurrences will be simply omitted 
(Toury 1980:130). 5) In an attempt to “naturalize” TT, a translator 
may exaggerate or overuse typical TL features. 6) The process of 
translation might give rise to “a specific type of distribution of certain 
features in translated texts vis-à-vis source texts and original texts in 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
194
the target language” (Baker 1993:245); such features might include, 
for example, cohesive devices or certain lexical items. The presence 
of unusual distributions of features of this type is one of the factors 
contributing to the phenomenon which is sometimes known as the 
third code. The existence of universals of translation is still only 
being tentatively and intuitively suggested, and it is generally agreed 
that much more investigation of specific texts will be needed before 
any more detailed statements can be made on the subject. Further 
reading: Baker 1993, 1996; Laviosa-Braithwaite 1997.
Untranslatability See translatability.
Verbal Consistency (or Concordance, or Verbal Concordance) 
Defined by Nida & Taber within the context of Bible translation 
as the “quality resulting from the effort to translate a given word 
from the original consistently by a single word in the receptor 
language” regardless of the variety of contexts in which it appears 
(1969/1982:208); as such it contrasts with the quality of contextual 
consistency. However, as Nida & Taber observe, words are not sim-
ply “points of meaning” (1969/1982:15), and because the semantic 
areas covered by corresponding words in different languages are 
not identical, the choice of the word in TL which will translate an 
SL item depends upon the context, rather than upon a fixed system 
of equivalences (1969/1982:15). An approach based on verbal con-
sistency thus tends to result in formal equivalence, and frequently 
produces renderings which are “both unnatural and misleading” 
(1969/1982:16). Beekman & Callow (1974) also discuss the concept 
of verbal consistency, although use the term concordance. Further 
reading: Beekman & Callow 1974; Nida & Taber 1969/1982.
Verbal Translation See metaphrase.
Verifiability (German Kontrollierbarkeit) Suggested by Reiss & 
Vermeer (1984), on the basis of Kade (1968), as one of two features 
which distinguish the process of übersetzen (i.e. translation) from 
that of dolmetschen (i.e. interpreting). For a TT to be considered 
verifiable it is necessary for the translator to be able to revise his or 
her translation while it is still being produced, for example by cross-
referencing with sections which have already been completed. This 
means that oral translation without the aid of a recording tends in 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
195
most situations to be considered an example of Dolmetschen rather 
than Übersetzen. See also correctability. Further reading: Kade 
1968; Reiss & Vermeer 1984.
Version 1 A term commonly used to describe a TT which in the view 
of the commentator departs too far from the original to be termed a 
translation. Typical reasons for using this term include the fact that 
the translator has adapted the text for a particular target audience, 
has imposed a definite interpretation on it or foregrounded one of 
several possible interpretations contained in ST, or has simply used 
a free rather than literal translation strategy. Use of this term can 
frequently be prescriptively motivated and even pejorative; however, 
some writers prefer to see versions as constituting a separate text-type 
and serving a different but equally valid purpose to that of “transla-
tions proper”. This view is represented by Hollander, who argues 
that when we use the term version rather than translation “we tend to 
emphasize the unique properties of the particular rendering in ques-
tion” (1959/1966:220). Further reading: Hollander 1959/1966.
2 A term used by Lefevere (1975) to refer to one of two sub-types 
of the translation strategy which he terms interpretation. In all, 
Lefevere’s typology consists of seven categories, which he identifies 
in his study of English translations of a poem by Catullus. However, 
as with the other sub-type, imitation 2, Lefevere considers the pro-
cedure of version-writing to be distinct from translation proper. He 
characterizes versions as adaptations 1 of ST made in accordance 
with the taste of both version-writer and TL audience (1975:102) in 
order to heighten the communicative impact of the text in the target 
context (1975:76). Thus use of paraphrase, colloquialisms, additional 
similes and metaphors, asides and modernization are all typical 
features of versions. However, unlike the producer of imitations, the 
version-writer basically shares the ST author’s interpretation of the 
work, although makes substantial changes to the form in which it is 
presented (1975:76, 84). In this way the production of a version can 
be seen as an exercise in rewriting (1975:103). See also blank verse 
translation, literal translation 2, metapoem, metrical translation, 
phonemic translation, poetry into prose and rhymed translation. 
Further reading: Lefevere 1975.
Vertical Translation According to Folena (1973/1991), one of two 
modes of translation used in the Middle Ages (see also horizontal 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
196
translation). Folena, whose main concern is with the “role played 
by translation in the Middle Ages in the development of vernacular 
languages” (Bassnett 1994:153), coins the term to refer to the type 
of translation where “the source language, usually Latin, has prestige 
and value which transcend that of the target language” (1973/1991:13, 
translated). According to Bassnett, there are two ways in which this 
process of “vulgarization” can be performed: either word-for-word or 
sense-for-sense (1980/1991:53). See also intertemporal translation. 
Further reading: Bassnett 1980/1991; Folena 1973/1991.
Voids (or Semantic Voids, or Lacunes (French), or Blank Spaces 
or Gaps) Defined by Dagut as the “non-existence in one language 
of a one-word equivalent for a designatory term found in another” 
(1978:45). Voids are found only at word level, as larger SL units 
may always be expressed in TL, if necessary through the use of re-
wording. Similarly, SL words which lack a TL equivalent may also 
be periphrastically glossed in TL. However, as Dagut points out, 
“the absence of any one-word [TL] equivalent clearly reflects the 
unconcern of [TL]-speakers as a whole with this aspect of ‘reality’” 
(1978:46); a void thus tends to be revealed only when speakers of a 
language are made “uncomfortably aware” of it (1978:84) through 
contact with other languages. Dagut identifies four types of void. 
Firstly, environmental voids are those voids which arise from the 
untranslatability of natural phenomena (e.g. Arabic wadi or Russian 
tundra). The most effective way to deal with such voids is through 
transcription; as can be seen from the examples, such transcribed 
forms are frequently accepted into TL as new words. The second type 
consists of cultural voids, divided by Dagut into the religious and 
the secular. Hebrew bar mitzvah, English cream tea and Russian 
samovar all frequently give rise to voids of this type as they all point 
to cultural phenomena which would almost certainly have no direct 
TL equivalent. Generally more translation-resistant than type one, 
such voids can once again generally be most effectively filled in TL 
by means of transcription, if necessary with a footnote added. These 
first two types both “stand beyond the limit of full translatability” 
(1978:83); however, in the case of the third type, the lexical void, 
while no single TL word exists, the “referents are present in the 
experience of the speech community” (Rabin 1958:127, quoted in 
Dagut 1978:65). For example, German gemütlich or Russian toska 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
197
both denote concepts for which there is no one-word equivalent in 
English. With this type of void the problem is that a particular set 
of semantic features denoted by a single word in one language may 
only be expressible by a phrase in another. However, in contrast with 
the first two types, it is sometimes possible to find an adequate and 
intelligible formulation to fill a lexical void. Three translation tactics 
are commonly encountered: selecting a one-word equivalent which 
covers part of the meaning of the SL original, paraphrasing selected 
features of the SL item (a technique which is sometimes unaccept-
able for stylistic reasons), or omitting it altogether. The last type of 
voids are termed syntactical voids. These are caused by “structural 
asymmetries between SL and TL” (1978:89); in other words, TL has 
a suitable equivalent, but it may only be used if some syntactical 
rearrangement is made. For example, translating Russian podruga as 
“girl-friend” involves adding a separate gender-marker, while Ger-
man der wievielte (“the how many-th”) cannot be directly translated 
into English, even though the semantic information it contains is 
conveyed by English how many, a different part of speech. See also 
realia. Further reading: Dagut 1978; Ivir 1977; Rabin 1958; Vinay 
& Darbelnet 1958, 1958/1995.
Whispered Interpreting (French Chuchotage) A form of inter-
preting in which the interpreter sits next to the client or delegate for 
whom he or she is interpreting and whispers the interpreted version 
of what is being said. It is used in various settings, such as business 
meetings, conferences and trials; perhaps most famously it was one 
of the interpreting modes employed in the Demjanjuk trial (The State 
of Israel vs. Ivan John Demjanjuk, criminal case 373/86, Jerusalem 
1987-8). It is usually carried out simultaneously, but occasionally 
consecutively; however, it does not strictly speaking classify as 
simultaneous interpreting proper because the interpreter does not 
work from a booth; as a reflection of this, Mackintosh classifies it as 
a third interpreting mode, alongside consecutive and simultaneous 
interpreting (1995:125). See also conference interpreting and court 
interpreting.
Word-for-word Translation (or Word-by-word Translation) A 
method of translating which entails precise fidelity to the wording 
of ST. Like its opposite, sense-for-sense translation, the term was 
originally coined in the first century BC by the Roman writers Cicero 

and Horace. Although it is held by some to be synonymous with 
literal translation 1 (see for example Vinay & Darbelnet 1958, 
1958/1995), most writers now consider it an extreme form of literal 
translation in which a TL word is substituted for each ST word without 
reference to syntactical factors such as word order. Thus for example 
Ich habe gelesen das Buch would be a (grammatically incorrect) 
word-for-word translation for I have read the book, while the more 
standard Ich habe das Buch gelesen would be merely literal (see Wilss 
1982:88). In linguistic terms word-for-word translation is defined by 
Catford (1965) as rank-bound translation performed at the word-
rank, although possibly also including some morpheme-morpheme 
equivalences (1965:25). Word-for-word translation can be a useful 
technique for illustrating how the syntax of a foreign language works, 
or as a reading aid for people with only a limited knowledge of a lan-
guage, although in such contexts it is often termed back-translation 
or interlinear translation. See also free translation and unit of 
translation. Further reading: Catford 1965.
Writer-oriented Machine Translation According to Sager (1994), 
the method of producing a machine-translated text on the basis of 
interaction with the writer of the original. Such a procedure involves 
a writer in a pre-editing process in which the machine asks questions 
about elements which it cannot analyse (for example because they are 
not included in its grammar or dictionaries); the machine’s editing 
device is TL-sensitive, and so will anticipate translation difficulties. 
The main advantage of this procedure is that the writer’s original 
intention will be translated by the machine, rather than a translator’s 
interpretation of what the writer wished to communicate (1994:283); 
furthermore, where interaction with the writer has resolved any 
points of uncertainty the approach can produce TTs which are fully 
usable without the need for post-editing. See also industrial process 
(translation as) and reader-oriented machine translation. further 
reading: sager 1994.
Dictionary of Translation Studies
198
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank

This page intentionally left blank
www.ebook3000.com

Bibliography
Where later editions of a work have been consulted both the date of 
the first edition and that of the later one are given, separated by a 
slash (e.g. Snell-Hornby 1988/1995); where appropriate, a slash is 
also used with translations to separate the date of the original from 
that of the translation (e.g. Vinay & Darbelnet 1958/1995). Square 
brackets are used with undated publications to indicate that the date 
given is only approximate (e.g. Popovič [1976]). For some important 
articles alternative locations are also suggested. For ease of reference, 
works about translation, actual translations and other works are all 
listed together.
Aijmer, Karin, Bengt Altenberg, & Mats Johansson (1996) “Text-
based Contrastive Studies in English. Presentation of a Project”, 
in Karin Aijmer, Bengt Altenberg, & Mats Johansson (eds) Lan-
guages in Contrast: Papers from a Symposium on Text-based 
Cross-linguistic Studies, Lund 4-5 March 1994, Lund Studies in 
English No. 88, Lund University Press, 73-85.
Appiah, Kwame Anthony (1993) “Thick Translation”, in Callaloo 
16:4, 808-19.
Arnold, D., L. Balkan, R. Lee Humphreys, S. Meijer & L. Sadler 
(1994) Machine Translation: An Introductory Guide, Manchester 
& Oxford: NCC Blackwell.
Baker, Mona (1992) In Other Words: A Coursebook on Translation, 
London: Routledge.
Baker, Mona (1993) “Corpus Linguistics and Translation Studies: 
Implications and Applications”, in Mona Baker, Gill Francis & 
Elena Tognini-Bonelli (eds) Text and Technology: In Honour of 
John Sinclair, Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins Pub-
lishing Company, 233-50.
Baker, Mona (1995) “Corpora in Translation Studies: An Overview 
and Some Suggestions for Future Research”, in Target 7:2, 223-
43.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
202
Baker, Mona (1996) “Corpus-based Translation Studies: The Chal-
lenges that Lie Ahead”, in Harold Somers (ed.) Technology, LSP 
and Translation: Studies in Language Engineering, in Honour 
of Juan C. Sager, Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins 
Publishing Company, 175-86.
Ballester, Ana (1995) “The Politics of Dubbing. Spain: A Case 
Study”, in Peter Jansen (ed.) Translation and the Manipulation 
of Discourse: Selected Papers of the CERA Research Seminars 
in Translation Studies 1992-1993, Leuven: CETRA, The Leuven 
Research Center for Translation, Communication and Cultures 
[Preprint collection], 159-81.
Barkhudarov, Leonid (1969) “Urovni yazykovoy iyerarkhii i perevod” 
[“Levels of language hierarchy and translation”], in Tetradi per-
evodchika [The Translator’s Notebooks] 6, 3-12.
Barkhudarov, Leonid (1993) “The Problem of the Unit of Transla-
tion”, in Palma Zlateva (ed.), 39-46.
Barnstone, Willis (1993) The Poetics of Translation: History, Theory, 
Practice, New Haven & London: Yale University Press.
Barsky, Robert F. (1996) “The Interpreter as Intercultural Agent in 
Convention Refugee Hearings”, in The Translator 2:1, 45-63.
Barthes, Roland (1964) “Criticism as Language”, in The Critical 
Moment: Essays on the Nature of Literature, London: Faber & 
Faber, 123-29.
Bassnett, Susan (1980/1991) Translation Studies, London: Routledge.
Bassnett, Susan (1994) Review of Gianfranco Folena (1973/1991) 
Volgarizzare e tradurre, in Translation and Literature, 3, 153-54.
Bassnett, Susan & André Lefevere (eds) (1990) Translation, History 
and Culture, London: Pinter Publishers.
Bassnett, Susan, & André Lefevere (1990a) “Introduction: Proust’s 
Grandmother and the Thousand and One Nights: The ‘Cultural 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
203
Turn’ in Translation Studies”, in Susan Bassnett & André Lefevere 
(eds), 1-13.
Bathgate, Ronald H. (1980) “Studies of Translation Models 1: An 
Operational Model of the Translation Process”, in The Incorpo-
rated Linguist 19:4, 113-14.
Bathgate, Ronald H. (1981) “Studies of Translation Models 2: A Theo-
retical Framework”, in The Incorporated Linguist 20:1, 10-16.
de Beaugrande, Robert (1978) Factors in a Theory of Poetic Trans-
lating, Assen: Van Gorcum.
Beeby Lonsdale, Allison (1996) Teaching Translation from Spanish 
to English: Worlds beyond Words, Ottawa: University of Ottawa 
Press.
Beekman, John & John Callow (1974) Translating the Word of God, 
Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan.
Benjamin, Andrew (1989) Translation and the Nature of Philosophy: 
A New Theory of Words, London: Routledge.
Benjamin, Walter (1916/1977) “Über die Sprache überhaupt und über 
die Sprache des Menschen”, 140-57 in Gesammelte Schriften II.1, 
Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag.
Benjamin, Walter (1916/1979) “On Language as such and on the 
Languages of Man”, in One Way Street (translated by Edmund 
Jephcott & Kingsley Shorter), London: NLB, 107-23. [Translation 
of W. Benjamin 1916/1977.]
Benjamin, Walter (1923/1963) “Die Aufgabe des Übersetzers”, in 
Hans Joachim Störig (ed.) (1963) Das Problem des Übersetzens, 
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft [Wege der For-
schung Band VIII], 182-95.
Benjamin, Walter (1923/1970) “The Task of the Translator: An In-
troduction to the Translation of Baudelaire’s Tableaux parisiens”, 

Dictionary of Translation Studies
204
69-82 in Illuminations (edited and introduced by Hannah Arendt; 
translated by Harry Zohn), London: Jonathan Cape. [Translation 
of W. Benjamin 1922/1963.]
Berk-Seligson, Susan (1990) The Bilingual Courtroom: Interpreters 
in the Judicial Process, Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Blum-Kulka, Shoshana (1986) “Shifts of Cohesion and Coherence 
in Translation”, in Juliane House & Shoshana Blum-Kulka (eds), 
17-35.
Bradbury, Malcolm (1987) Why Come To Slaka?, London: Arena.
Brennan, Mary & David Brien (1995) “MA/Advanced Diploma 
in British Sign Language/English Interpreting, Deaf Studies 
Research Unit, University of Durham”, course profile in The 
Translator 1:1, 111-28.
Brislin, Richard W. (ed.) (1976) Translation: Applications and Re-
search, New York: Gardner Press.
Broeck, Raymond van den (1978) “The Concept of Equivalence in 
Translation Theory: Some Critical Reflections”, in James S. Hol-
mes, José Lambert & Raymond van den Broeck (eds), 29-47.
Broeck, Raymond van den & André Lefevere (1979) Uitnotiging 
tot de vertaalwetenschap [Invitation to Translation Studies], 
Muiderberg: Coutinho.
Brower, Reuben A. (ed.) (1959/1966) On Translation, New York: 
OUP.
Burgess, Anthony (1962/1972) A Clockwork Orange, Harmonds-
worth: Penguin.
Casagrande, Joseph B. (1954) “The Ends of Translation”, in Interna-
tional Journal of American Linguistics 20:4, 335-40.
Catford, J. C. (1965) A Linguistic Theory of Translation, London: 
OUP.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
205
Chan, Sin-Wai & David E. Pollard (eds) (1995) An Encyclopaedia 
of Translation: Chinese-English – English-Chinese, Hong Kong: 
The Chinese University Press.
Chernov, G. V. (1978) Teoriya i praktika sinkhronnogo perevoda 
[Theory and Practice of Simultaneous Interpreting], Moscow: 
Mezhdunarodnye otnosheniya.
Chernov, G. V. (1987) Osnovy sinkhronnogo perevoda [Fundamentals 
of Simultaneous Interpreting], Moscow: Vysshaya shkola.
Chesterman, Andrew (ed.) (1989) Readings in Translation Theory, 
Finland: Oy Finn Lectura Ab.
Chesterman, Andrew (1993) “From ‘Is’ to ‘Ought’: Laws, Norms and 
Strategies in Translation Studies”, in Target 5:1, 1-20.
Chomsky, Noam (1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Chukovsky, Kornei Ivanovich (1966) Vysokoe iskusstvo [A High Art] 
[Collected Works, Vol. 3, 237-627], Moscow: Khudozhestven-
naya literatura.
Chukovsky, Kornei Ivanovich (1984) The Art of Translation: Kor-
nei Chukovsky’s “A High Art”, (edited & translated Lauren G. 
Leighton), Knoxville, Tenn.: University of Tennessee Press. 
[Translation of Chukovsky 1966.]
Clark, Robert (1994) “Computer-assisted Translation: the State of 
the Art”, in Cay Dollerup & Annette Lindegaard (eds) Teaching 
Translation and Interpreting 2: Insights, Aims and Visions. Papers 
from the Second Language International Conference, Elsinore, 
4-6 June 1993, Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins 
Publishing Company, 301-308.
Colin, Joan & Ruth Morris (1996) Interpreters and the Legal Pro-
cess, Winchester: Waterside Press.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
206
Coseriu, Eugenio (1973) Probleme der strukturellen Semantik, 
Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag. [Tübinger Beiträge zur Linguistik 
Band 40].
Cowley, Abraham (1656/1905) Works. The English Writings of 
Abraham Cowley. Volume 1: Poems. Miscellanies, The Mistress, 
Pindarique Odes, Davideis, Verses Written on Several Occasions, 
etc. (ed. A. R. Waller), Cambridge: University Press.
Dagut, Menachem (1978) Hebrew-English Translation: A Linguis-
tic Analysis of Some Semantic Problems, Haifa: University of 
Haifa.
Danan, Martine (1991) “Dubbing as an Expression of Nationalism”, 
in Meta 36:4, 606-14.
Davidson, Donald (1984) Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation, 
Oxford: OUP.
Delabastita, Dirk (1989) “Translation and Mass-Communication: 
Film and TV Translation as Evidence of Cultural Dynamics”, in 
Babel 35:4, 193-218.
Delabastita, Dirk (1990) “Translation and the Mass Media”, in Susan 
Bassnett & André Lefevere (eds), 97-109.
Delisle, Jean (1980) L’analyse du discours comme méthode de tra-
duction, Ottawa: Presses de l’Université d’Ottawa.
Delisle, Jean (1988) Translation. An Interpretive Approach, trans-
lation of Part I of L’Analyse du discours comme méthode de 
traduction, translated by Patricia Logan & Monica Creery, Ottawa: 
University of Ottawa Press.
Delisle, Jean (1993) La traduction raisonnée, Ottawa: Presses de 
l’Université d’Ottawa.
Derrida, Jacques (1978) “The Retrait of Metaphor” (translated by 
Frieda Gasdner, Biodun Iginla, Richard Madden & William West), 
in Enclitic 2:2, 5-33. [Translation of “Le retrait de la métaphore”, 
Poésie 7 (1978), 103-26.]
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
207
Derrida, Jacques (1980) “Des Tours de Babel”, in Psyché. Inventions 
de l’autre, Paris: Galilée, 203-36. [Also in Joseph F. Graham (ed.) 
(1985), 209-48.]
Derrida, Jacques (1985) “Des Tours de Babel” (translated by Joseph 
F. Graham), in Joseph F. Graham (ed.), 165-207. [Translation of 
Derrida 1980.]
Dik, Simon C. (1978) Functional Grammar, Amsterdam, New York 
& Oxford: North-Holland.
Diller, Hans-Jürgen (1992) “Old Stories in Other Words: The Histo-
ricity of Linguistic Systems as a Problem in Translating Beowulf 
into Modern German”, in Harald Kittel (ed.) Geschichte, System, 
Literarische Übersetzung/Histories, Systems, Literary Transla-
tions, Berlin: Erich Schmidt Verlag, 281-306.
Diller, Hans-Jürgen & Joachim Kornelius (1978) Linguistische Prob-
leme der Übersetzung, Tübingen: Niemeyer.
Downing, Bruce T. & Kate Helms Tillery (1992) Professional Train-
ing for Community Interpreters: A Report on Models of Interpreter 
Training and the Value of Training, Minneapolis: Center for Urban 
and Regional Affairs.
Dries, Josephine (1995) Dubbing and Subtitling: Guidelines for 
Production and Distribution, Manchester: The European Institute 
for the Media.
Dryden, John (1680/1989) “Metaphrase, Paraphrase and Imitation”, 
in Andrew Chesterman (ed.) (1989), 7-12. [Originally appeared 
as the Preface to Ovid’s Epistles, Translated by Several Hands; 
also in T. R. Steiner (1975), 68-72.]
Duff, Alan (1981) The Third Language: Recurrent Problems of 
Translation into English, Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Eco, Umberto (1976) A Theory of Semiotics, Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
208
Eco, Umberto (1995) The Search for the Perfect Language (translated 
by James Fentress), Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Edwards, Alicia Betsy (1995) The Practice of Court Interpreting, Am-
sterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Even-Zohar, Itamar (1978a) Papers in Historical Poetics,Tel Aviv: 
Porter Institute for Poetics and Semiotics. [Papers on Poetics and 
Semiotics 8].
Even-Zohar, Itamar (1978b) “The Position of Translated Literature 
within the Literary Polysystem”, in James S. Holmes, José Lam-
bert & Raymond van den Broeck (eds), 117-27.
Even-Zohar, Itamar (1990) Polysystem Studies [special issue of Poet-
ics Today 11:1].
Even-Zohar, Itamar (1990a) “The ‘Literary System’”, in Even-Zohar 
(1990), 27-44.
Even-Zohar, Itamar (1990b) “System, Dynamics, and Interference in 
Culture: A Synoptic View”, in Even-Zohar (1990), 85-94.
Even-Zohar, Itamar (1990c) “The Textemic Status of Signs in Trans-
lation”, in Even-Zohar (1990), 247-51.
Even-Zohar, Itamar (1990d) “Translation and Transfer”, in Even-
Zohar (1990), 73-78.
Fawcett, Peter (1995) “Translation and Power Play”, in The Transla-
tor 1:2, 177-92.
Fawcett, Peter (1996) “Translating Film”, in Geoffrey T. Harris (ed.) 
On Translating French Literature and Film, Amsterdam: Rodopi, 
65-88.
Fitch, Brian T. (1983) “L’intra-intertextualité interlinguistique de 
Beckett: la problématique de la traduction de soi”, in Texte 2, 85-
100.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
209
Fitch, Brian T. (1985) “The Status of Self-translation”, in Texte 4, 
111-25.
Fitch, Brian T. (1988) Beckett and Babel: An Investigation into the 
Status of the Bilingual Work, Toronto, Buffalo & London: Uni-
versity of Toronto Press.
Florin, Sider (1993) “Realia in Translation”, in Palma Zlateva (ed. 
& trans.), 122-28.
Fodor, István (1976) Film Dubbing: Phonetic, Semiotic, Esthetic and 
Psychological Aspects, Hamburg: Helmut Buske.
Folena, Gianfranco (1973/1991) Volgarizzare e tradurre, Turin: 
Einaudi. [Originally published in 1973 as “‘Volgarizzare’ e ‘tra-
durre’: idea e terminologia della traduzione dal Medio Evo italiano 
e romanzo all’umanesimo europeo”, in La Traduzione. Saggi e 
studi, Trieste: Edizioni LINT, 57-120.]
Frank, Armin Paul (1990a) “Forty Years of Studying the American/
German Translational Transfer: A Retrospect and Some Perspec-
tives”, in Amerikastudien/American Studies, 35:1, 7-20.
Frank, Armin Paul (1990b) “Systems and Histories in the Study of 
Literary Translations: A Few Distinctions”, in Roger Bauer & 
Douwe Fokkema (eds) Proceedings of the XIIth Congress of the 
International Comparative Literature Association (Munich 1988), 
München: Iudicium, 1, 41-63.
Frank, Armin Paul (1991) “Translating and Translated Poetry: The 
Producer’s and the Historian’s Perspectives”, in Kitty M. van 
Leuven-Zwart & Ton Naaijkens (eds), 115-40.
Frank, Armin Paul (1992) “Towards a Cultural History of Literary 
Translation: ‘Histories,’ ‘Systems,’ and Other Forms of Syn-
thesizing Research”, in Harald Kittel (ed.) Geschichte, System, 
Literarische Übersetzung/Histories, Systems, Literary Transla-
tions, Berlin: Erich Schmidt Verlag, 369-87.
Fraser, Janet (1996) “The Translator Investigated: Learning from 
Translation Process Analysis”, in The Translator 2:1, 65-79.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
210
Frawley, William (1984) “Prolegomenon to a Theory of Transla-
tion”, in William Frawley (ed.) Translation: Literary, Linguistic, 
and Philosophical Perspectives, London & Toronto: Associated 
University Presses, 159-75.
Frost, William (1955) Dryden and the Art of Translation, New Ha-
ven, Connecticut: Yale University Press. [Yale Studies in English, 
Vol. 128.]
Gamal, Muhammad Y. (1994) “The Second International Conference 
on Linguistics, Literature and Translation” (Report on Conference 
which took place on 4-8 April 1994, Yarmouk University, Irbid, 
Jordan), in Language International 6:4, 16.
Gambier, Yves (ed.) (1996) Les transferts linguistiques dans les 
médias audiovisuels, Villeneuve d’Ascq: Presses Universitaires 
du Septentrion.
Gellerstam, Martin (1986) “Translationese in Swedish Novels 
Translated from English”, in Wollin, Lars and Hans Lindquist 
(eds) Translation Studies in Scandinavia: Proceedings from The 
Scandinavian Symposium on Translation Theory (SSOTT) II Lund 
14-15 June, 1985, [Lund Studies in English 75], Lund: CWK 
Gleerup, 88-95.
Gentile, Adolfo, Uldis Ozolins & Mary Vasilakakos (eds) (1996) 
Liaison Interpreting: A Handbook, Melbourne: Melbourne Uni-
versity Press.
Gentzler, Edwin (1993) Contemporary Translation Theories, London: 
Routledge.
Gerloff, Pamela (1987) “Identifying the Unit of Analysis in Transla-
tion: Some Uses of Think-Aloud Protocol Data”, in Claus Færch 
& Gabriele Kasper (eds) Introspection in Second Language 
Research, Clevedon & Philadelphia: Multilingual Matters Ltd., 
135-58.
Gerver, David & H. Wallace Sinaiko (eds) (1977) Language Inter-
pretation and Communication, NATO Conference Series, New 
York & London: Plenum Press.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
211
Gile, Daniel (1985) “Le modèle d’efforts et l’équilibre d’interpré-
tation en interprétation simultanée”, in Meta 30:1, 44-48.
Gile, Daniel (1988) “Le partage de l’attention et le modèle d’effort 
en interprétation simultanée”, in The Interpreters’ Newsletter 1, 
4-22.
Gile, Daniel (1995a) Basic Concepts and Models for Interpreter and 
Translator Training, Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins 
Publishing Company.
Gile, Daniel (1995b) Regards sur la recherche en interprétation de 
conférence, Lille: Presses universitaires de Lille.
Gile, Daniel (1995c) “Fidelity Assessment in Consecutive Interpreta-
tion: An Experiment”, in Target 7:1, 151-64.
Goffin, Roger (1971) “Pour une Formation Universitaire ‘sui generis’ 
du Traducteur: Réflexions sur Certains Aspects Méthodologiques 
et sur la Recherche Scientifique dans le Domaine de la Traduc-
tion”, in Meta 16:1-2, 57-68.
González, Dueñas Roseann, Victoria F. Vásques & Holly Mikkelson 
(1991) Fundamentals of Court Interpretation: Theory, Policy 
and Practice (University of Arizona Summer Institute for Court 
Interpretation Series), Durham, North Carolina: Carolina Aca-
demic Press.
Goris, Olivier (1993) “The Question of French Dubbing: Towards a 
Frame for Systematic Investigation”, in Target 5:2, 169-90.
Gorlée, Dinda L. (1986) “Translation Theory and the Semiotics 
of Games and Decisions”, in Wollin, Lars and Hans Lindquist 
(eds) Translation Studies in Scandinavia: Proceedings from The 
Scandinavian Symposium on Translation Theory (SSOTT) II 
Lund 14-15 June, 1985, Lund Studies in English 75, Lund: CWK 
Gleerup, 96-104.
Gorlée, Dinda L. (1994) Semiotics and the Problem of Translation: 
With Special Reference to the Semiotics of Charles S. Peirce, 
Amsterdam: Rodopi.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
212
Gottlieb, Henrik (1992) “Subtitling – A New University Discipline”, 
in Cay Dollerup & Anne Loddegaard (eds) Teaching Translation 
and Interpreting: Training, Talent and Experience, Amsterdam & 
Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 161-70.
Gouadec, Daniel (1989) Le traducteur, la traduction et l’entreprise, 
Paris: AFNOR gestion.
Gouadec, Daniel (1990) “Traduction Signalétique”, in Meta 35:2, 
332-41.
Graham, Joseph F. (1981) “Theory for Translation”, in Marilyn Gaddis 
Rose (ed.) Translation Spectrum: Essays in Theory and Practice, 
Albany: State University of New York Press, 23-30.
Graham, Joseph F. (ed.) (1985) Difference in Translation, Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press.
Gran, Laura & Christopher Taylor (eds) (1990) Aspects of Applied 
and Experimental Research on Conference Interpretation, Udine: 
Campanotto Editore.
Granger, Sylviane (1996) “From CA to CIA and back: An Integrated 
Contrastive Approach to Bilingual and Learner Computerised 
Corpora”, in Karin Aijmer, Bengt Altenberg, & Mats Johansson 
(eds) Languages in Contrast: Papers from a Symposium on Text-
based Cross-linguistic Studies, Lund 4-5 March 1994, [Lund 
Studies in English No. 88], Lund: Lund University Press, 37-51.
Grutman, Rainier (1994) “Honoré Beaugrand traducteur de luimême”, 
in Ellipse 51, 45-53.
Guide to Good Practice (1989) Cambridge: British Association of 
Community Interpreters.
Gutt, Ernst-August (1991) Translation and Relevance, Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell.
Güttinger, Fritz (1963) Zielsprache. Theorie und Technik des Über-
setzens, Zürich: Manesse Verlag.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
213
Haeseryn, René (1994) “International Federation of Translators and 
its Role in the Arab World”, in Robert de Beaugrande, Abdulla 
Shunnaq & Mohamed H. Heliel (eds) Language Discourse and 
Translation in the West and Middle East, Amsterdam & Philadel-
phia: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 209-19.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1961) “Categories of the Theory of Grammar”, 
in Word, 17:3, 241-92.
Halliday, M. A. K., A. McIntosh & P. D. Strevens (eds) (1964) The 
Linguistic Sciences and Language Teaching, London & New 
York: Longman.
Harris, Brian (1977) “Toward a Science of Translation”, in Meta 
22:1, 90-2.
Harris, Brian (1988) “Bi-text, a New Concept in Translation Theory”, 
in Language Monthly, 54, 8-10.
Harrison, Bernard (1979) An Introduction to the Philosophy of Lan-
guage, London: Macmillan.
Hartmann, R. R. K. (1980) Contrastive Textology, Heidelberg: Julius 
Groos.
Harvey, Keith (1995) “A Descriptive Framework for Compensation”, 
in The Translator 1:1, 65-86.
Hatim, Basil, & Ian Mason (1990) Discourse and the Translator, 
London & New York: Longman.
Hayes, P. L. (1992) “Educational Interpreters for Deaf Students: 
their Responsibilities, Problems and Concerns”, in Journal of 
Interpretation, 5:1, 5-24.
Herbst, Thomas (1994) Linguistische Aspekte der Synchronisation 
von Fernsehserien, Tübingen: Niemeyer.
Hermans, Theo (ed.) (1985) The Manipulation of Literature: Studies 
in Literary Translation, London: Croom Helm.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
214
Hermans, Theo (1985a) “Introduction: Translation Studies and a New 
Paradigm”, in Theo Hermans (ed.), 7-15.
Hermans, Theo (1991) “Translational Norms and Correct Transla-
tions”, in Kitty M. van Leuven-Zwart & Ton Naaijkens (eds), 
155-69.
Hermans, Theo (1994) “Translation between Poetics and Ideology”, 
in Translation and Literature 3, 138-45. [Article reviewing various 
works, including André Lefevere (1992) Translation, Rewriting, 
and the Manipulation of Literary Fame.]
Hermans, Theo (1995) “Toury’s Empiricism Version One: Review 
of Gideon Toury’s In Search of a Theory of Translation”, in The 
Translator 1:2, 215-23.
Hervey, Sándor & Ian Higgins (1992) Thinking Translation: A Course 
in Translation Method: French to English, London: Routledge.
Hockett, Charles F. (1954) “Translation via Immediate Constituents”, 
in International Journal of American Linguistics, 20:4, 313-15.
Hollander, John (1959/1966) “Versions, Interpretations, and Perform-
ances”, in Reuben A. Brower (ed.), 205-231.
Holmes, James S. (1988) Translated! Papers on Literary Translation 
and Translation Studies, Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Holmes, James S. (1988a) “On Matching and Making Maps: From a 
Translator’s Notebook”, in Holmes (1988), 53-64.
Holmes, James S. (1988b) “Describing Literary Translations: Models 
and Methods”, in Holmes (1988), 81-91.
Holmes, James S. (1988c) “Poem and Metapoem: Poetry from Dutch 
to English”, in Holmes (1988), 9-22.
Holmes, James S. (1988d) “Forms of Verse Translation and the 
Translation of Verse Form”, in Holmes (1988), 23-33.
Holmes, James S. (1988e) “The Name and Nature of Translation 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
215
Studies”, in Holmes (1988), 67-80. [Also in Gideon Toury (ed.) 
(1987), 9-24]
Holmes, James S. (1988f) “Translation Theory, Translation Theo-
ries, Translation Studies, and the Translator”, in Holmes (1988), 
93-98.
Holmes, James S. (1988g) “The Future of Translation Theory: A 
Handful of Theses”, in Holmes (1988), 99-102.
Holmes, James S. (1988h) “The Cross-Temporal Factor in Verse 
Translation”, in Holmes (1988), 35-44.
Holmes, James S., José Lambert & Raymond van den Broeck (eds) 
(1978) Literature and Translation: New Perspectives in Literary 
Studies with a Basic Bibliography of Books on Translation Stud-
ies, Leuven: Acco.
Holz-Mänttäri, Justa (1984) Translatorisches Handeln. Theorie und 
Methode, Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia.
Holz-Mänttäri, Justa (1986) Translatorisches Handeln − theoretisch 
fundierte Berufsprofile, in Snell-Hornby (ed.) Übersetzungswis-
senschaft − eine Neuorientierung: Zur Integrierung von Theorie 
und Praxis, Tübingen: Franke Verlag, 348-74.
Hönig, Hans G. (1976) “Zur Analysephase beim Übersetzen aus der 
Fremdsprache”, in Drescher, Horst W. & Signe Scheffzek (eds) 
Theorie und Praxis des Übersetzens und Dolmetschens: Referate 
und Diskussionsbeiträge des internationalen Kolloquiums am 
Fachbereich Angewandte Sprachwissenschaft der Johannes 
Gutenberg-Universität Mainz in Germersheim (2.-4. Mai 1975), 
Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 48-58.
Hönig, Hans G. & Paul Kussmaul (1982) Strategie der Übersetzung: 
Ein Lehr- und Arbeitsbuch, Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag. 
[Tübinger Beiträge zur Linguistik Band 205.]
House, Juliane (1977) A Model for Translation Quality Assessment, 
Tübingen: TBL Verlag Gunter Narr.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
216
House, Juliane (1986) “Acquiring Translational Competence in 
Interaction”, in Juliane House & Shoshana Blum-Kulka (eds), 
179-91.
House, Juliane & Shoshana Blum-Kulka (eds) (1986) Interlingual and 
Intercultural Communication, Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag.
Hutchins, W. J. & H. L. Somers (1992) An Introduction to Machine 
Translation, London: Academic Press.
Isham, William P. (1995) “On The Relevance of Signed Languages 
to Research in Interpretation”, in Target 7:1, 135-49.
Ivarsson, Jan (1992) Subtitling for the Media: A Handbook of an Art, 
Stockholm: Transedit.
Ivir, Vladimir (1969) “Contrasting via Translation: Formal Cor-
respondence vs. Translation Equivalence”, in The Yugoslav 
Serbo-Croatian − English Contrastive Project, Studies 1, 13-25.
Ivir, Vladimir (1977) “Lexical Gaps: A Contrastive View”, Studia 
Romanica et Anglica Zagrabiensia 43, 167-76.
Ivir, Vladimir (1981) “Formal Correspondence vs. Translation 
Equivalence Revisited”, in Poetics Today 2:4, 51-59.
Jakobson, Roman (1959/1966) “On Linguistic Aspects of Transla-
tion”, in Reuben A. Brower (ed.), 232-39.
Jakobson, Roman (1960) “Closing Statement: Linguistics and Poet-
ics”, in Thomas A. Sebeok (ed.) Style in Language, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: MIT Press, 350-77.
Johansson, Stig & Knut Hofland (1994) “Towards an English-
Norwegian Parallel Corpus”, in Udo Fries, Gunnel Tottie & Peter 
Schneider (eds) Creating and Using English Language Corpora: 
Papers from the Fourteenth International Conference on English 
Language Research on Computerized Corpora, Amsterdam: 
Rodopi, 25-37.
Kade, Otto (1968) Zufall und Gesetzmässigkeit in der Übersetzung, 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
217
Leipzig: VEB Enzyklopädie. [Beiheft zur Zeitschrift Fremd-
sprachen I.]
de Kay, Ormonde (1983) N’Heures Souris Rames: The Coucy Castle 
Manuscript, London: Angus & Robertson Publishers.
Keith, H. A. (1985) “Liaison Interpreting as a Communicative Language- 
learning Exercise”, in Noel Thomas & Richard Towell (eds) 
Interpreting as a Language Teaching Technique: Proceedings of 
a Conference Convened by and Held at the University of Salford, 
2-5 January 1985, London: Centre for Information on Language 
Teaching and Research, 1-12.
Kelly, Louis G. (1979) The True Interpreter: A History of Translation 
Theory and Practice in the West, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Koller, Werner (1971) “Übersetzungswissenschaft”, in Folia Linguis-
tica: Acta Societatis Linguisticae Europaeae V, 194-221.
Koller, Werner (1979/1992) Einführung in die Übersetzungswis-
senschaft, Heidelberg: Quelle & Meyer.
Koller, Werner (1989) “Equivalence in Translation Theory” (translat-
ed by Andrew Chesterman), in Andrew Chesterman (ed.), 99-104. 
[Translation of Koller 1979 (i.e. first edition of 1979/1992), 
186-91.]
Komissarov, Vilen (1993) “Norms in Translation”, in Palma Zlateva 
(ed. & trans.), 63-75.
Koschmieder, Erwin (1965a) “Das Gemeinte”, in Beiträge zur allge-
meinen Syntax, Heidelberg: Carl Winter, 101-106.
Koschmieder, Erwin (1965b) “Das Problem der Übersetzung”, in Beiträge 
zur allgemeinen Syntax, Heidelberg: Carl Winter, 107-115.
Krings, Hans P. (1986a) Was in den Köpfen von Übersetzern vorgeht. 
Eine empirische Untersuchung zur Struktur des Übersetzung-
sprozesses an fortgeschrittenen Französischlernern, Tübingen: 
Gunter Narr Verlag.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
218
Krings, Hans P. (1986b) “Translation Problems and Translation Strat-
egies of Advanced German Learners of French (L2)”, in Juliane 
House & Shoshana Blum-Kulka (eds), 263-76.
Krings, Hans P. (1987) “The Use of Introspective Data in Transla-
tion”, in Claus Færch & Gabriele Kasper (eds) Introspection in 
Second Language Research, Clevedon & Philadelphia: Multilin-
gual Matters Ltd., 159-76.
Lambert, José (1991) “Shifts, Oppositions and Goals in Translation 
Studies: Towards A Genealogy of Concepts”, in Kitty M. van 
Leuven-Zwart & Ton Naaijkens (eds), 25-37.
Lambert, Sylvie & Barbara Moser-Mercer (1994) Bridging the Gap: 
Empirical Research in Simultaneous Interpretation, Amsterdam 
& Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Larson, Mildred L. (1984) Meaning-Based Translation: A Guide 
to Cross-language Equivalence, Lanham: University Press of 
America.
Lavault, Elisabeth (1996) Review of Marianne Lederer’s La traduc-
tion aujourd’hui, in The Translator 2:1, 96-100.
Laviosa-Braithwaite, Sara (1997) The English Comparable Corpus 
(ECC): A Resource and a Methodology for the Empirical Study 
of Translation, Ph.D. Thesis, Manchester: UMIST.
Lawendowski, Boguslaw P. (1978) “On Semiotic Aspects of Trans-
lation”, in Thomas A. Sebeok (ed.) Sight, Sound and Sense, 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 264-82.
Lederer, Marianne (1994) La traduction aujourd’hui, Paris: Hachette.
Leech, Geoffrey N. (1969) A Linguistic Guide to English Poetry, 
London: Longmans.
Lefevere, André (1975) Translating Poetry: Seven Strategies and a 
Blueprint, Assen & Amsterdam: Van Gorcum.
Lefevere, André (1978) “Translation Studies: The Goal of the Dis-
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
219
cipline”, in James S. Holmes, José Lambert & Raymond van den 
Broeck (eds), 234-5.
Lefevere, André (1982) “Mother Courage’s Cucumbers: Text, System 
and Refraction in a Theory of Literature”, in Modern Language 
Studies 12:4, 3-20.
Lefevere, André (1983) “Poetics (Today) and Translation (Studies)”, 
in Daniel Weissbort (ed.) Modern Poetry in Translation: 1983, 
London & Manchester: MPT/Carcanet, 190-95.
Lefevere, André (1985) “Why Waste Our Time on Rewrites? The 
Trouble with Interpretation and the Role of Rewriting in an Al-
ternative Paradigm”, in Theo Hermans (ed.), 215-43.
Lefevere, André (1992) Translation, Rewriting, and the Manipulation 
of Literary Fame, London: Routledge.
Lehmuskallio, Arto, Viktor Podbereznyj & Hannu Tommola (1991) 
“Towards a Finnish-Russian Dictionary of Finnish Culture-Bound 
Words”, in Sonja Tirkkonen-Condit (ed.), 157-64.
Leighton, Lauren G. (1991) Two Worlds, One Art: Literary Transla-
tion in Russia and America, DeKalb: Northern Illinois University 
Press.
Leuven-Zwart, Kitty M. van (1989) “Translation and Original: Simi-
larities and Dissimilarities, I”, in Target 1:2, 151-81.
Leuven-Zwart, Kitty M. van (1990) “Translation and Original: Simi-
larities and Dissimilarities, II”, in Target 2:1, 69-95.
Leuven-Zwart, Kitty M. van (1991) “Translation and Translation 
Studies: Discord or Unity?”, in Sonja Tirkkonen-Condit (ed.), 
35-44.
Leuven-Zwart, Kitty M. van & Ton Naaijkens (eds) (1991) Transla-
tion Studies: The State of the Art. Proceedings of the First James 
S. Holmes Symposium on Translation Studies, Amsterdam: 
Rodopi.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
220
Levý, Jiří (1965) “Will Translation Theory be of Use to Translators?”, 
in Rolf Italiaander (ed.) Übersetzen: Vorträge und Beiträge vom 
Internationalen Kongress literarischer Übersetzer in Hamburg 
1965, Frankfurt am Main: Athenäum Verlag, 77-82.
Levý, Jiří (1967) “Translation as a Decision Process”, in To Honor 
Roman Jakobson, The Hague: Mouton, Vol. 2, 1171-82. [Also in 
Andrew Chesterman (ed.) (1989), 37-52.]
Levý, Jiří (1969) Die literarische Übersetzung: Theorie einer Kun-
stgattung, Frankfurt am Main: Athenäum.
Lewis, Philip E. (1985) “The Measure of Translation Effects”, in 
Joseph F. Graham (ed.), 31-62.
Lörscher, Wolfgang (1991) “Thinking-Aloud as a Method for 
Collecting Data on Translation Processes”, in Sonja Tirkkonen-
 
Condit (ed.), 67-77.
Luce, R. D. & H. Raiffa (1957) Games and Decisions in Conflict 
Resolution, New York: Wiley.
Luyken, Georg-Michael, with Thomas Herbst, Jo Langham-Brown, 
Helen Reid & Herman Spinhof (1991) Overcoming Language 
Barriers in Television: Dubbing and Subtitling for the European 
Audience, Manchester: The European Institute for the Media.
Mackintosh, Jennifer (1995) “A Review of Conference Interpretation: 
Practice and Training”, in Target 7:1, 119-33.
Macpherson, James (1996) The Poems of Ossian and Related Works 
(ed. Howard Gaskill), Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
[A collection of writings first published in 1760s.]
Malmkjær, Kirsten (1993) “Underpinning Translation Theory”, in 
Target 5:2, 133-48.
de Man, Paul (1986) “‘Conclusions’: Walter Benjamin’s ‘The Task of 
the Translator’”, in The Resistance to Theory [Theory and History 
of Literature, Volume 33], Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 73-105.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
221
Melby, Alan (1992) “The Translator Workstation”, in John Newton 
(ed.), 147-65.
Miko, František (1970), “La théorie de l’expression et la traduction”, 
in James S. Holmes, Frans de Haan and Anton Popovič (eds) The 
Nature of Translation, The Hague: Mouton, 61-77.
Morris, Ruth (1995) “The Moral Dilemmas of Court Interpreting”, 
in The Translator 1:1, 25-46.
Moser-Mercer, Barbara (1984) “Testing Interpreting Aptitude”, in 
Wolfram Wilss & Gisela Thome (eds) Translation Theory and Its 
Implementation in the Teaching of Translation and Interpreting, 
Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag, 318-25.
Murry, John Middleton (1923) Pencillings: Little Essays on Litera-
ture, London: Collins.
Nabokov, Vladimir (1964/1975) “Foreword”, in A. S. Pushkin Eu-
gene Onegin, (ed. & trans. Vladimir Nabokov, 4 Vols.), London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul, vii-xii.
Neubert, Albrecht (1970) “Elemente einer allgemeinen Theorie der 
Translation”, in A. Graur (editor-in-chief) Actes du Xe Congrès 
International des Linguistes. Bucarest 28 août − 2 septembre 1967, 
Editions de l’Académie de la République Socialiste de Roumanie, 
Bucarest, Vol. 2, 451-56.
Neubert, Albrecht (1973) “Invarianz und Pragmatik: Ein zentrales 
Problem der Übersetzungswissenschaft”, in Walter Graul, Otto 
Kade, Karl Kokoschko & Hans Zikmund (eds) Neue Beiträge 
zu Grundfragen der Übersetzungswissenschaft, Leipzig: VEB 
Verlag Enzyklopädie, [Beihefte zur Zeitschrift Fremdsprachen, 
V-VI],  13-26.
Neubert, Albrecht (1985) Text and Translation, Leipzig: VEB Verlag 
Enzyklopädie.
Neubert, Albrecht (1991a) “Models of Translation”, in Sonja Tirkkonen-
Condit (ed.), 17-26.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
222
Neubert, Albrecht (1991b) “Computer-Aided Translation: Where Are 
the Problems?”, in Target 3:1, 55-64.
Neubert, Albrecht (1994) “Competence in translation: a complex 
skill, how to study and how to teach it”, in Mary Snell-Hornby, 
Franz Pöchhacker & Klaus Kaindl (eds), 411-20.
Neubert, Albrecht & Gregory M. Shreve (1992) Translation as 
Text, Kent, Ohio: The Kent State University Press. [Translation 
Studies 1]
Newman, A. (1980) Mapping Translation Equivalence, Leuven: 
Acco.
Newmark, Peter (1981/1988) Approaches to Translation, Hemel 
Hempstead: Prentice Hall.
Newmark, Peter (1988) A Textbook of Translation, Hemel Hempstead: 
Prentice Hall.
Newton, John (ed.) (1992) Computers in Translation: A Practical 
Appraisal, London: Routledge.
Newton, John (1992a) “Introduction and Overview”, in John Newton 
(ed.) (1992), 1-13.
Nida, Eugene A. (1964) Toward a Science of Translating: With Spe-
cial Reference to Principles and Procedures Involved in Bible 
Translating, Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Nida, Eugene A. (1969) “Science of Translation”, in Language 45:3, 
483-98. [Also in E. Nida (1975) Language Structure and Trans-
lation: Essays by Eugene A. Nida (selected and introduced by 
Anwar S. Dil), Stanford University Press, 79-101, and in Andrew 
Chesterman (ed.) (1989), 80-98.]
Nida, Eugene A. (1995) “Dynamic Equivalence in Translating”, in 
Sin-Wai Chan & David E. Pollard (eds), 223-30.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
223
Nida, Eugene A. & Charles R. Taber (1969/1982) The Theory and 
Practice of Translation, Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Nord, Christiane (1988) Textanalyse und Übersetzen: Theoretische 
Grundlagen, Methode und didaktische Anwendung einer überset-
zungsrelevanten Textanalyse, Heidelberg: Groos.
Nord, Christiane (1991a) Text Analysis in Translation, Amsterdam: 
Rodopi. [English version of Nord 1988.]
Nord, Christiane (1991b) “Scopos, Loyalty, and Translational Conven-
tions”, in Target 3:1, 91-109.
Nord, Christiane (1996) “Text Type and Translation Method, An Ob-
jective Approach to Translation Criticism: Review of Katharina 
Reiss’ Möglichkeiten und Grenzen der Übersetzungskritik”, in The 
Translator 2:1, 81-88.
Nord, Christiane (1997) Translating as a Purposeful Activity: 
Functionalist Approaches Explained, Manchester: St. Jerome 
Publishing.
Oettinger, Anthony G. (1960) Automatic Language Translation: Lexical 
and Technical Aspects, with Particular Reference to Russian, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. [Harvard 
Monographs in Applied Science 8.]
Osers, Ewald (1983) “International Organizations”, in Catriona Picken 
(ed.), 171-82.
Ozolins, Uldis (1995) “Liaison Interpreting: Theoretical Challenges 
and Practical Problems around the World”, in Perspectives 1995:2, 
153-60.
Pannwitz, Rudolf (1917) krisis der europäischen kultur, Nürnberg: 
H. Carl.
Pergnier, M. (1980) Les fondements sociolinguistiques de la traduction, 
Paris: Librairie Honoré Champion.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
224
Picken, Catriona (ed.) (1983) The Translator’s Handbook, London: 
Aslib.
Pöchhacker, Franz (1994) Simultandolmetschen als komplexes 
Handeln, Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag.
Pol, Balth van der (1956) “An Iterative Translation Test”, in Colin 
Cherry (ed.) Information Theory. Papers read at a Symposium 
on ‘Information Theory’ held at the Royal Institution, London, 
September 12th to 16th 1955, London: Butterworths Scientific 
Publications, 397-98.
Popovič, Anton (1970) “The Concept ‘Shift of Expression’ in Trans-
lation Analysis”, in James S. Holmes, Frans de Haan and Anton 
Popovič (eds) The Nature of Translation, The Hague: Mouton, 
78-87.
Popovič, Anton (1976) “Aspects of Metatext”, in Canadian Review 
of Comparative Literature, 3, 225-35.
Popovič, Anton ([1976]) Dictionary for the Analysis of Literary 
Translation, Edmonton: Department of Comparative Literature, 
The University of Alberta.
Postgate, J. P. (1922) Translation and Translations: Theory and 
Practice, London: G. Bell & Sons, Ltd.
Pound, Ezra (1954) Literary Essays, London: Faber.
Puurtinen, Tiina (1989) “Assessing Acceptability in Translated Chil-
dren’s Books”, in Target 1:2, 201-13.
Pym, Anthony (1992a) Translation and Text Transfer: An Essay on 
the Principles of Intercultural Communication, Frankfurt am 
Main: Peter Lang.
Pym, Anthony (1992b) “The Relation between Translation and Mate-
rial Text Transfer”, in Target 4:2, 171-89.
Quine, W. V. (1959/1966) “Meaning and Translation”, in Reuben A. 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
225
Brower (ed.), 148-72.
Quine, W. V. (1960) Word and Object, Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
MIT Press.
Rabin, C. (1958) “The Linguistics of Translation”, in A. H. Smith (ed.) 
Aspects of Translation (The Communication Research Centre, 
University College, London: Studies in Communication, Vol.5), 
London: Secker & Warburg, 123-45.
Radó, György (1979) “Outline of a Systematic Translatology”, in 
Babel 25:4, 187-96.
Reiss, Katharina (1971) Möglichkeiten und Grenzen der Überse-
tzungskritik. Kategorien und Kriterien für eine sachgerechte 
Beurteilung von Übersetzungen, München: Max Hueber Verlag. 
[Hueber Hochschulreihe 12.]
Reiss, Katharina (1976) Texttype und Übersetzungsmethode. Der 
operative Text, Kronberg: Scriptor.
Reiss, Katharina (1977) “Texttypen, Übersetzungstypen und die 
Beurteilung von Übersetzungen”, in Lebende Sprachen 22:3, 
97-100.
Reiss, Katharina (1977/1989) “Text-types, Translation Types and 
Translation Assessment” (translated by Andrew Chesterman), in 
Andrew Chesterman (ed.) (1989), 105-15.
Reiss, Katharina (1990) “Brief an den Herausgeber”, in Lebende 
Sprachen 35:4, 185.
Reiss, Katharina & Hans J. Vermeer (1984) Grundlegung einer allge-
meinen Translationstheorie, Tübingen: Niemeyer.
Roberts, Roda (1985) “Translation and Communication”, in Nucleo 
1, 139-76.
Robinson, Douglas (1991) The Translator’s Turn, Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
226
Rose, Marilyn Gaddis (1981) “Translation Types and Conventions”, 
in Marilyn Gaddis Rose (ed.) Translation Spectrum: Essays in 
Theory and Practice, Albany: State University of New York 
Press, 31-40.
Sager, Juan C. (1990) A Practical Course in Terminology Process-
ing, Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing 
Company.
Sager, Juan C. (1992) “The Translator as Terminologist”, in Cay 
Dollerup & Anne Loddegaard (eds) Teaching Translation and 
Interpreting: Training, Talent and Experience, Amsterdam & 
Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 107-22.
Sager, Juan C. (1994) Language Engineering and Translation: 
Consequences of Automation, Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins Publishing Company.
Sager, Juan C., D. Dungworth & P. F. McDonald (1980) English 
Special Languages: Principles and Practice in Science and Tech-
nology, Wiesbaden: Brandstetter.
Savory, Theodore (1957) The Art of Translation, London: Cape.
Schleiermacher, Friedrich (1838/1963) “Ueber die verschiedenen 
Methoden der Uebersezens”, in Hans Joachim Störig (1963) Das 
Problem des Übersetzens, Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buch-
gesellschaft [Wege der Forschung Band VIII], 38-70.
Schleiermacher, Friedrich (1838/1977) “On the Different Methods of 
Translating”, in André Lefevere (ed. & trans.) (1977) Translating 
Literature: The German Tradition from Luther to Rosenzweig, 
Assen & Amsterdam: Van Gorcum, 66-89. [Translation of Sch-
leiermacher 1839/1963].
Schubert, Klaus (1992) “Esperanto as an Intermediate Language for 
Machine Translation”, in John Newton (ed.), 78-95.
Scott-Gibson, Liz (1991) “Sign Language Interpreting: An Emerging 
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
227
Profession”, in Susan Gregory & Gillian M. Hartley (eds) Con-
structing Deafness, London: Pinter Publishers, Ltd., 253-58.
Searle, John (1969) Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of 
Language, London: Cambridge University Press.
Seleskovitch, Danica (1968) L’interprète dans les conférences inter-
nationales, Paris: Minard Lettres Modernes.
Seleskovitch, Danica (1968/1978) Interpreting for International Con-
ferences: Problems of Language and Communication (translated 
by Stephanie Dailey & E. Norman McMillan), Washington, D.C.: 
Pen & Booth. [Translation of Seleskovitch 1968.]
Seleskovitch, Danica (1976) “Interpretation, A Psychological Ap-
proach to Translating”, in Richard W. Brislin (ed.), 92-116.
Seleskovitch, Danica (1977) “Take care of the sense and the sounds 
will take care of themselves or why interpreting is not tantamount to 
translating languages”, in The Incorporated Linguist 16, 27-33.
Seleskovitch, Danica & Marianne Lederer (1984) Interpréter pour 
traduire, Paris: Didier Erudition.
Seleskovitch, Danica & Marianne Lederer (1989) Pédagogie rai-
sonnée de l’interprétation, Bruxelles & Luxembourg: Office des 
Publications des Communautés Européennes, and Paris: Didier 
Erudition.
Sengupta, Mahasweta (1990) “Translation, Colonialism and Poetics: 
Rabindranath Tagore in Two Worlds”, in Susan Bassnett & André 
Lefevere (eds), 56-63.
Shackman, Jane (1984) The Right to be Understood, a Handbook on 
Working with, Employing and Training Community Interpreters, 
Cambridge: National Extension College.
Shamaa, N. (1978) A Linguistic Analysis of Some Problems of Arabic 
to English Translation, D. Phil. Thesis, Oxford University.

Dictionary of Translation Studies
228
Shen, Dan (1989) “Literalism: NON ‘formal-equivalence’”, in Babel 
35:4, 219-35.
Shen, Dan (1995) “Literalism”, in Sin-Wai Chan & David E. Pollard 
(eds), 568-79.
Shlesinger, Miriam (1991) “Interpreter Latitude vs. Due Process. 
Simultaneous and Consecutive Interpretation in Multilingual 
Trials”, in Sonja Tirkkonen-Condit (ed.), 147-55.
Shlesinger, Miriam (1995a) “Shifts in Cohesion in Simultaneous 
Interpreting”, in The Translator 1:2, 193-214.
Shlesinger, Miriam (1995b) “Stranger in Paradigms: What Lies Ahead 
for Simultaneous Interpreting Research?”, in Target 7:1, 7-28.
Shveitser, A. D. (1988) Teoriya perevoda: status, problemy, aspekty 
[Translation Theory: Status, Problems, Aspects], Moscow: 
Nauka.
Shveitser, A. D. (1993) “Equivalence and Adequacy”, in Palma Zlat-
eva (ed. & trans.), 47-56.
Snell, Barbara & Patricia Crampton (1983) “Types of Translations”, 
in Catriona Picken (ed.), 109-20.
Snell-Hornby, Mary (1987) “Translation as a Cross-cultural Event: 
Midnight’s Children - Mitternachtskinder”, in Gideon Toury (ed.), 
91-105.
Snell-Hornby, Mary (1988/1995) Translation Studies: An Integrated 
Approach, Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publish-
ing Company.
Snell-Hornby, Mary (1991) “Translation Studies − Art, Science or 
Utopia?”, in Kitty M. van Leuven-Zwart & Ton Naaijkens (eds), 
13-23.
Snell-Hornby, Mary, Franz Pöchhacker & Klaus Kaindl (eds) (1994) 
Translation Studies: An Interdiscipline, Amsterdam & Philadel-
phia: John Benamins Publishing Company.
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
229
Spalatin, L. (1967) “Contrastive Methods”, in Studia Romanica et 
Anglica Zagrabiensia 23, 29-48.
Sperber, Dan & Deirdre Wilson (1986) Relevance: Communication 
and Cognition, Oxford: Blackwell.
Spilka, I. (1978) “Translation in a Bilingual Situation”, in McGill 
Journal of Education, 13:2, 211-18.
Stein, Dieter (1979) “Texttheorie − Instruktionslinguistik − Über-
setzen”, in Mitteilungsblatt für Dolmetscher und Übersetzer, 
25.2, 6-15.
Stein, Dieter (1980) Theoretische Grundlagen der Übersetzung-swis-
senschaft, Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag [Tübinger Beiträge zur 
Linguistik 140].
Steiner, George (1972) “Extraterritorial”, in Extraterritorial: Papers 
on Literature and the Language Revolution, London: Faber & 
Faber, 3-11.
Steiner, George (1975/1992) After Babel: Aspects of Language and 
Translation, Second Edition, Oxford: OUP.
Steiner, T. R. (1975) English Translation Theory 1650-1800, Assen: 
van Gorcum.
Sturrock, John (1991) “On Jakobson on Translation”, in Thomas A. 
Sebeok & Jean Umiker-Sebeok (eds) Recent Developments in 
Theory and History: The Semiotic Web 1990, Berlin & New York: 
Mouton de Gruyter, 307-21.
Sykes, John B. (1983) “The Intellectual Tools Employed”, in Catriona 
Picken (ed.), 41-45.
Thomas, Patricia (1992) “Computerized Term Banks and Transla-
tion”, in John Newton (ed.), 131-46.
Tirkkonen-Condit, Sonja (ed.) (1991) Empirical Research in Transla-
tion and Intercultural Studies: Selected Papers of the TRANSIF 
Seminar, Savonlinna 1988, Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag. [Lan-
guage in Performance 5.]

Dictionary of Translation Studies
230
Tommola, Jorma (ed.) (1995) Topics in Interpreting Research, Turku: 
University of Turku.
Toury, Gideon (1980) In Search of a Theory of Translation, Tel Aviv: 
The Porter Institute for Poetics and Semiotics.
Toury, Gideon (1984) “Translation, Literary Translation and Pseu-
dotranslation”, in E. S. Shaffer (ed.) Comparative Criticism 6, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 73-85.
Toury, Gideon (1985) “A Rationale for Descriptive Translation Stud-
ies”, in Theo Hermans (ed.), 16-41.
Toury, Gideon (1986) “Translation: A Cultural-Semiotic Perspective”, 
in Thomas A. Sebeok (ed.) Encyclopaedic Dictionary of Semio-
tics, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, Vol. 2, 1111-24.
Toury, Gideon (ed) (1987) Translation Across Cultures, New Delhi: 
Bahri.
Toury, Gideon (1991) “What are Descriptive Studies into Translation 
Likely to Yield apart from Isolated Descriptions?”, in Kitty M. 
van Leuven-Zwart & Ton Naaijkens (eds), 179-92.
Toury, Gideon (1995) Descriptive Translation Studies and Beyond, 
Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Com-
pany.
Tsai, Frederick (1995) “Europeanized Structure in English-Chinese 
Translation”, in Sin-Wai Chan & David E. Pollard (eds), 242-
48.
Turk, Horst (1990) “Probleme der Übersetzungsanalyse und der 
Übersetzungstheorie”, in Jahrbuch für Internationale German-
istik, 21: 2, 8-82.
Tymoczko, Maria (1985) “How Distinct are Formal and Dynamic 
Equivalence?”, in Theo Hermans (ed.), 63-86.
Tytler, Alexander Fraser (1791/1978) Essay on the Principles of 
Translation (new edition with an introductory article by Jeffrey F. 
Huntsman), Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publish-
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
231
ing Company. [Amsterdam Studies in the Theory and History of 
Linguistic Science, Volume 13.]
Ure, Jean, Alexander Rodger & Jeffrey Ellis (1969) “Somn: Sleep 
−An Exercise in the Use of Descriptive Linguistic Techniques in 
Literary Translation”, in Babel 15:1, 4-14 & 15:2, 73-82.
Vázquez-Ayora, Gerardo (1977) Introducción a la Traductología, 
Washington D. C.: Georgetown University Press.
Venuti, Lawrence (1995) The Translator’s Invisibility, London: 
Routledge.
Vermeer, Hans J. (1982) “Translation als, Informationsangebot”, in 
Lebende Sprachen 27:3, 97-101.
Vermeer, Hans J. (1983) Aufsätze zur Translationstheorie, Heidel-
berg: Groos.
Vermeer, Hans J. (1986) “Übersetzen als kultureller Transfer”, in 
Mary Snell-Hornby (ed.) Übersetzungswissenschaft − eine Neuo-
rientierung: Zur Integrierung von Theorie und Praxis, Tübingen: 
Franke Verlag, 30-53.
Vermeer, Hans J. (1989) “Skopos and Commission in Translational 
Action” (translated by Andrew Chesterman), in Andrew Chesterman 
(ed.), 173-87.
Vermeer, Hans J. (1989/1992) Skopos und Translationsauftrag − 
Aufsätze, Frankfurt am Main: IKO.
Vinay, Jean-Paul & Jean Darbelnet (1958) Stylistique comparée du 
français et de l’anglais: Méthode de Traduction, Paris: Didier.
Vinay, Jean-Paul & Jean Darbelnet (1958/1995) Comparative 
Stylistics of French and English: A Methodology for Translation 
(translated and edited by Juan C. Sager & M.-J. Hamel), Am-
sterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company. 
[Translation of Vinay & Darbelnet 1958.]

Dictionary of Translation Studies
232
Vladova, Iliana (1993) “Essential features and specific manifestations 
of historical distance in original texts and their translations”, in 
Palma Zlateva (ed.), 11-17.
Vlakhov, Sergei and Sider Florin (1970) “Neperevodimoye v per-
evode: realii” [“The Untranslatable in Translation: Realia”], 
in Masterstvo perevoda 1969 [The Craft of Translation 1969], 
Moscow: Sovetskii pisatel’, 432-56.
Voegelin, C. F. (1954) “Multiple Stage Translation”, in International 
Journal of American Linguistics, 20:4, 271-80.
de Waard, Jan & Eugene A. Nida (1986) From One Language to 
Another: Functional Equivalence in Bible Translating, Nashville: 
Thomas Nelson Publishers.
Wadensjö, C. (1992) Interpreting as Interaction − On Dialogue 
Interpreting in Immigration Hearings and Medical Encounters. 
Linköping University: Department of Communication Studies.
Wadensjö, C. (1995) “Dialogue Interpreting and the Distribution of 
Responsibility”, in Hermes, Journal of Linguistics 14, 111-29.
Wandruszka, Mario (1978) “Die falschen Freunde des Übersetzers”, 
in Lillebill Grähs, Gustav Korlén & Bertil Malmberg (eds) Theory 
and Practice of Translation (Nobel Symposium 39, Stockholm, 
September 6-10, 1976), Bern: Peter Lang, 213-34.
Whitman-Linsen, Candace (1992) Through the Dubbing Glass: 
The Synchronization of American Motion Pictures into German, 
French, and Spanish, Frankfurt am Main & New York: Peter 
Lang.
Wilss, Wolfram (1977) Übersetzungswissenschaft. Probleme und 
Methoden, Stuttgart: Klett.
Wilss, Wolfram (1982) The Science of Translation: Problems and 
Methods, Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag. [English version of 
Wilss 1977.]
www.ebook3000.com

Dictionary of Translation Studies
233
Wilss, Wolfram (1988) Kognition und Übersetzen: zu Theorie und 
Praxis der menschlichen und der maschinellen Übersetzung, 
Tübingen: Niemeyer.
Wilss, Wolfram (1994) “A Framework for Decision-Making in Trans-
lation”, in Target 6:2, 131-50.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1953) Philosophical Investigations, translated 
by G.E.M. Anscombe, Oxford: Basil Blackwell. (References are 
to parts and paragraphs.)
Zimmer, Rudolf (1981) Probleme der Übersetzung formbetonter 
Sprache: Ein Beitrag zur Übersetzungskritik, Tübingen: Niemeyer.
Zimman, Leonor (1994) “Intervention as a pedagogical problem in 
community interpreting”, in Cay Dollerup & Annette Lindegaard 
(eds) Teaching Translation and Interpreting 2: Insights, Aims and 
Visions. Papers from the Second Language International Confer-
ence, Elsinore, 4-6 June 1993, Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins Publishing Company, 217-24.
Zlateva, Palma (ed. & trans.) (1993) Translation as Social Action: 
Russian and Bulgarian Perspectives, London: Routledge.
Zukofsky, Celia & Louis Zukofsky (translators) (1969) Catullus (Gai 
Valeri Catulli Veronensis Liber), London: Cape Goliard. [Transla-
tion of poems by Catullus.]

