DICTIONARY OF
e-BUSINESS
A Deﬁnitive Guide
to Technology
and Business Terms
Second Edition
FRANCIS BOTTO

Copyright 2003
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester,
West Sussex PO19 8SQ, England
Telephone (+44) 1243 779777
Email (for orders and customer service enquiries): cs-books@wiley.co.uk
Visit our Home Page on www.wileyeurope.com or www.wiley.com
All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning or otherwise, except under the terms of the Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of a licence issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency
Ltd, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP, UK, without the permission in writing of
the Publisher. Requests to the Publisher should be addressed to the Permissions Department,
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex PO19 8SQ,
England, or emailed to permreq@wiley.co.uk, or faxed to (+44) 1243 770571.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to
the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the Publisher is not engaged
in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is
required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Other Wiley Editorial Ofﬁces
John Wiley & Sons Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
Jossey-Bass, 989 Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94103-1741, USA
Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Boschstr. 12, D-69469 Weinheim, Germany
John Wiley & Sons Australia Ltd, 33 Park Road, Milton, Queensland 4064, Australia
John Wiley & Sons (Asia) Pte Ltd, 2 Clementi Loop #02-01, Jin Xing Distripark,
Singapore 129809
John Wiley & Sons Canada Ltd, 22 Worcester Road, Etobicoke, Ontario, Canada M9W 1L1
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears
in print may not be available in electronic books.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 0-470-84470-1
Typeset in 10/12pt Times by Laserwords Private Limited, Chennai, India
Printed and bound in Great Britain by TJ International, Padstow, Cornwall
This book is printed on acid-free paper responsibly manufactured from sustainable forestry
in which at least two trees are planted for each one used for paper production.

PREFACE
This dictionary deﬁnes important terms and phrases relating to e-business in
the context of design, development and usage. It addresses the many milestone
decisions, implementation processes and technologies along the migration
paths that lead to e-business sites, as well as those along the paths that lead
away from them. These deliverables via the Internet or World Wide Web
provide a borderless world with geographically insensitive marketing, adver-
tising and selling channels. Wall Street’s response to this most contemporary
of ‘gold rushes’ sees company revenues sky rocket as Web sites make the
transition from specialist entities to global successes. Virtual stores, search
engines, information services, and the many other Internet-related terms now
grace the vernacular of Internet Investors and analysts the world over.
A myriad of migration paths to e-business Web architectures exists as the
surrounding technologies develop at a pace, and as new and advancing method-
ologies dictate change. A notable change is the emergence of 3rd generation
(3G) mobile networks that are poised to advance the application of mcom-
merce (mobile commerce) where users may make purchases using mobile
handsets or phones
In spite of the seemingly singular medium that is the World Wide Web, CD-
based applications continue to play a role with DVD variants offering high
quality MPEG-2 video and an attractive medium for POI or E-catalogues.
Hybrid CD-ROM and DVD-ROM multimedia productions may provide the
local delivery of high quality video as well as present hyperlinks to e-business
Web sites for on-line ordering and for transaction processing.
E-business is another important chapter in the evolution of the role of tech-
nology in commerce. It is shrouded in a multiplicity of questions that this
dictionary seeks to address through an in-depth study of the technologies, the
services, their acquisition, migration paths, investment strategies and compar-
ative advantages. More than a glossary or dictionary with scant deﬁnitions, it
includes informative essays that address key issues.
It is hoped that you ﬁnd this text a useful source of information.
Francis Botto
v

INTRODUCTION
E-business is an awesome, fast changing subject, driving multiple paradigm
shifts that are as radical as those that splintered from the industrial revolutions
with all their recorded social, economic and technological impacts. For the
ﬁrst time virtual stores may provide advertising and selling channels leading
to the global market.
The beneﬁts of e-business have been the focus of numerous papers, publi-
cations and conferences for some time, and far outweigh the much-publicised
potential pitfalls that include security and the threat of larceny resulting from
illegally obtained customer payment details, and the threat of an exodus of
traders from the high street.
Industry’s response to the security issue has proved technically complex
with numerous solutions having been driven into obsolence in what seems
like a ﬂeeting moment. Standardisation and advancements in security – that
continue to exhibit minor ﬂaws – see today’s secure e-business sites win the
conﬁdence of consumers, banks and notable credit card companies including
Visa and MasterCard. E-business technology and the Web in general is shaped
by the:
• constantly updated developer’s workbench that includes Microsoft Visual
Studio.NET
• advancing operating systems (OSes) like Windows, Mac OS X, Linux
and Unix
• evolving programming languages such as Java, JavaScript, XML, HTML,
DHTML, C++, C#, Objective-C, Visual Basic and VBScript
• developing Object Web with its standard components and building blocks
• constantly updated mainstream Web site development tools from software
publishers that include Microsoft, Asymetrix and Macromedia.
The aforementioned technologies are driving change, and are being driven
themselves by underlying hardware advancements including:
• new processors primarily from Intel (and other chip makers)
• client/server architectures that use server technologies like SMP, NUMA,
and MPP
vii

• advancing peripheral devices including modems
• the vast network that supports the Internet, including physical or wireless
digital pathways and mobile networks
• more efﬁcient protocols.
Access technologies like ISDN and cable are part of the English language,
with many people enquiring of their existence when buying or renting a prop-
erty. To the vast audience currently beneﬁting from e-business, these are as
transparent as the methodologies and the multiplicity of complex processes
and sub-processes that constitute the development life cycles of Web sites.
The same may be said of the development life cycle required to produce the
tools and technologies themselves, where the levels of granularity and tech-
nical detail are incomprehensibly ﬁne for all but those directly involved with
their creation.
Everyday e-business terms and phrases are entering the English language
at a pace, and are beginning to frequent dictionaries of a general nature; terms
that are preﬁxed by on-line are widespread, including on-line shopping, on-
line banking, on-line share dealing, on-line travel agencies etc. E-business is
yet another feature of modernity driven by the Internet and by technology as a
whole, and is a new specialisation for analysts, and for industry professionals
such as Web site designers, developers, researchers and technologists. Many
new technologies, software enhancements and development tools are now pre-
ﬁxed by the term e-business, and it drives new global markets in the effort to
capitalise on the swing of consumer shopping habits towards the Internet.
Coordination is a key feature pinned to that ubiquitous growing entity that
has come to be known as the Internet or to some, the Information Superhigh-
way. More than ever, standards organisations including the Object Manage-
ment Group (OMG), ITU, ISO and SET provide makers with the opportunity
to develop compatible products and at the same time reduce wasted resources
and expended energies while attempting to forge proprietary standards. Not
that major manufactures will ever be relieved of this effort, but the growing
transparency of hardware platforms from a Web-based e-business applica-
tion viewpoint introduces stability and reassurance for those investing in such
implementations and services.
E-business implementations used to address the mass market are at the heart
of the current revolution, but more specialist impacts such as those in banking,
stock markets, and money markets might be considered more signiﬁcant as
they are inﬂuential in determining the performance of an economy. A country’s
IT infrastructure, as well as those of its enterprises, drives trade at home and
abroad.
Selling via the direct channel off the page or over the telephone or via
TV shopping is meant to offer the consumer savings, but the theoretical price
differential does not always favour the direct seller. Some of the consumer
electronics giants favour high street and out-of-town stores with lower prices
viii

as they prefer to win consumer conﬁdence by allowing them to experience
their products at ﬁrst hand. Furthermore shopping in conventional stores is
perceived as a leisurely experience to many consumers. Whatever arguments
are presented, it seems that it is most probable that numerous sales chan-
nels will serve consumers, giving more choice, but the price differentials that
exist between them will eventually subside as a slightly imperfect equilibrium
takes hold.
Francis Botto
ix

NUMERALS AND
SYMBOLS
&
An ampersand symbol used as a preﬁx in the hexadecimal count-
ing system.
*
A wildcard that may be used as a substitute for an undeﬁned series of
characters in a search string.
.COM
A domain category that generally signiﬁes a commercial enterprise.
.JPG
An extension for JPEG ﬁles.
(See DCT and JPEG.)
.NET
A Microsoft initiative and strategy for OOP-based development
tools and languages that include VB.NET (Visual Basic), and supports:
• Inheritance
• Structured exception handling
• Garbage collection
• Object capabilities like parameterised constructors and shared members.
.NET is a departure from the COM-based strategy, and was announced in
Orlando, Florida, in July 2000 at the PDC (Professional Developers Confer-
ence). The .NET framework includes:
• languages
• environments
• execution platform
• class libraries
• built-in functionality
• protocols such as SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) as an Internet glue
• server-based products called .NET Enterprise Servers that will replace
Microsoft BackOfﬁce.
1

.NET My Services (MS)
The .NET initiative also embodies the Microsoft products:
• SQL Server 2000
• Commerce Server 2000
• BizTalk Server
• Exchange 2000
• Host Integration Server
• Internet and Security Administration (ISA).
VS.NET (Visual Studio.NET) is the IDE and framework used by all .NET
developers.
(See VB.NET, DNA, Visual Studio.NET and Visual Basic.)
.NET My Services (MS)
Microsoft.NET My Services is a number of
XML Web services that may be developed into Web sites/services, applica-
tions and devices. .NET My Services are user-oriented, where the emphasis is
on user data, and not applications, platforms, or devices. .NET My Services
includes the security and privacy of the Microsoft .NET Passport service. Stan-
dard XML Web services are platform independent. .NET My Services serve
XML-based user data that is interpreted and rendered by the target device.
Use is made of the XML Message Interface (XMI) that is bound to a .NET
Passport Unique ID (PUID) – which identiﬁes a user or group of users.
.NET My Services Operation
.NET My Services are XML Web services
accessed over HTTP or DIME using SOAP messages holding XML data, and
using the .NET Passport authentication.
.NET Passport Authentication
.NET Passport uses the Kerberos dis-
tributed security protocol that is a proven industry standard and is also used by
MicrosoftWindows2000 and XP. Kerberos authenticates client requests
and distributes tickets or temporary encryption keys:
1. The user clicks on the .NET Passport sign-in scarab, and enters a sign-in
name and password.
2. A request is made to .NET Passport for a ‘ticket-granting-ticket’ (TGT).
3. If appropriate, .NET Passport grants the TGT that may be cached.
4. The client presents the TGT to .NET Passport or ‘ticket granting server’
(TGS), and request is made for a session ticket.
5. .NET Passport uses TGTs to verify clients and to validate tickets, and
then returns a session ticket and session key to the requested .NET My
Services service.
6. The client or Web site sends the session ticket to the .NET My Ser-
vices service.
.ORG
A domain category that generally signiﬁes an organisation.
(See Domain.)
2

<FORM>
/
A forward slash used as a separator in URL addresses such as https://
www.FrancisBotto.com, and to integrate comments in many languages.
/etc/password
A Unix ﬁle used to store passwords.
(See Unix.)
?
1. A part of a URL address that marks the beginning of data used by a
CGI program that may be executed using a GET method. The URL deﬁnes
the CGI program (such as credit.cgi for example) and the accompanying data
used by the server that follows the question mark:
www.FrancisBotto.com/cgi-bin/credit.cgi?subject
=transaction
2. A wildcard that may be used as a substitute for a single undeﬁned character
in a search string.
(See CGI Environment variables.)
<? xml version=’1.0’?> <! DOCTYPE wml PUBLIC “-//WAPFORUM//
DTD WML 1.2//EN”
A WML document prologue that declares the WML
deck as consisting of XML statements. The second line deﬁnes the document
using the DTD (Document Type Deﬁnition) mnemonic as adhering to the
WAP Forum WML 1.2 speciﬁcation.
(See WML.)
<APPLET>
An HTML tag that encloses a Java applet.
(See Applet and Java.)
<EMBED>
Browsers harness plug-ins using the <EMBED> tag that
includes the SRC attribute that points to the ﬁle used. The following form
plays a sound ﬁle called mozart.wav using a plug-in:
<EMBED SRC="mozart.wav" HEIGHT=40 WIDTH=100>
(See Plug-in.)
<FORM>
A HTML tag for creating forms:
<FORM> NAME="Customer" ACTION="http://botto.com/cgibin/
form/cgi METHOD=get>
</FORM>
The <FORM> tag may have the attributes:
• NAME that is the form’s name.
• ACTION that indicates the URL where the form is sent to.
• METHOD that indicates the submission method that may be POST or GET.
3

<INPUT TYPE>
• TARGET that indicates the windows or frame where the output from the
CGI program is shown.
<INPUT TYPE>
An HTML tag used to deﬁne input components such
as radio buttons. For example, using HTML you may add radio buttons using
the following form that merely displays four radio buttons labeled £30, £40,
£50 and £60:
<FORM>
NAME="Customer" ACTION="http://botto.com/cgibin/form/cgi
METHOD=get>
<INPUT TYPE="radio" NAME="rad" VALUE="1">
£ 30
<INPUT TYPE="radio" NAME="rad" VALUE="2">
£ 40
<INPUT TYPE="radio" NAME="rad" VALUE="3">
£ 50
<INPUT TYPE="radio" NAME="rad" VALUE="4">
£ 60
</FORM>
(See HTML, <META>, <TITLE>, Search engine and Web page description.)
<META>
A HTML tag which may be used to enclose descriptive meta
data used by search engines as an alternative to the 200 characters that follow
the <BODY> (See HTML) tag.
<HEAD>
<TITLE>Francis Botto home page</TITLE>
<META name="description" content="IT Research">
</HEAD>
Francis Botto
IT Research
The <META> tag may also be used to add keywords of up to 1,000 characters
to a Web page, and may be retrieved through appropriate search phrases, i.e.:
<META name="keywords" content="Multimedia, MPEG, DVD">
(See Search Engine, <TITLE> and HTML.)
<tag attr = “wxyz”/>
A WML attribute that speciﬁes additional infor-
mation about an element.
(See WML.)
<tag/>
A WML structure that identiﬁes elements without content.
(See WML and <tag>content</tag>.)
4

1.44 Mbytes
<tag>content</tag>
A WML expression that speciﬁes elements hold-
ing content in the WML deck. These may be:
• Tasks performed in response to events
• Character entities
• Card delimiters.
(See WML.)
<TITLE>
A HTML tag that encloses the Web page title that is used as
meta data by popular search engines when retrieving Web documents, dis-
playing it as the document’s title. Such data is collected by search engines
periodically, but may remain transparent to some if your ISP uses a robots.txt
ﬁle to stop web robots from indexing Web pages. It is possible to determine
if a server has a robots.txt ﬁle by entering the Web page’s URL (including its
domain name and domain category) and including robots.txt as a sufﬁx:
• http://www.FrancisBotto.com/robots.txt
Sending Web page URLs to search engines may cause them to be categorised
as available via additional search words and phrases, other than those contained
in the Web pages themselves.
(See HTML, <META>, <TITLE>, Search engine and Web page description.)
1 billion
A 30 bit digital video, animation or colour graphic may have up
to (around) 1 billion (230) colours.
1,000
The number of bits transferred in one second, using the unit Kbps.
1,000,000
The number of bits transferred in one second using a 1 Mbps
data transfer rate.
1,024
1. A Kilo Byte (KB) has 1,024 Bytes. 2. A Mega Byte (MB) has
1,024 Kilo Bytes. 3. A Giga Byte (GB) has 1,024 Mega Bytes. 4. A Tera Byte
(TB) has 1,024 Giga Bytes.
1.2 Mbps
A data transfer rate measured in Mbits/sec, and one for which
the original MPEG-1 video standard was designed. It is the approximate
data transfer rate that is offered by single-speed CD variants like CD-ROM.
1.2 Mbps approximates 150 Kbytes per second.
(See CD-ROM.)
1.2 mm
The thickness of a DVD or CD disc variant.
(See CD-ROM and DVD-ROM.)
1.44 Mbytes
The formatted data capacity of a 3.5 in high-density ﬂoppy
disk for the PC.
5

1.544 Mbps
1.544 Mbps
1. A data transfer rate offered by a single T1 line.(See T1.)
2. A data transfer rate of a primary rate multiplex of 255 channels of 64 Kbps
ISDN channels.
(See ISDN.)
1024-by-768
A standard display resolution sometimes referred to as XGA
(eXtended Graphics Array).
10base2
An industry name for thin-Ethernet or cheapernet LAN technol-
ogy. It uses inexpensive coaxial cable, and is popular for small networks. Com-
pliant network computers /devices are ﬁtted with Ethernet cards (or chipsets)
and are connected using coaxial cables.
(See Ethernet and LAN.)
10base5
An industry name for basic Ethernet LAN technology. Network
computers /devices are ﬁtted with Ethernet cards (or chipsets) and are con-
nected using coaxial cables. It provides 10 Mbits/sec data rates up to a distance
of 500 m.
(See Ethernet and LAN.)
1600-by-1200 pixels
A standard graphics resolution used on many PCs,
and its delivery requires an appropriate graphics card and display.
1995
1. The year when the World Wide Web became a 3-tier client/server
architecture based on the HTTP/CGI model. (See 3-tier, CGI and HTTP.)
2. The year when SunSoft announced the Java programming language.
(See Java.)
1999
The year when SunSoft launched its Jini technology and JavaSpaces.
(See Jini.)
1G Network (First Generation)
A category of public analogue mobile
network that offers mainly telephony services, and may be assumed to be obso-
lete in most developed countries. In 1977 Illinois Bell introduced the cellular
network AMPS (Advanced Mobile Telephone System) that was developed by
AT & T’s Bell Laboratories and operated between the 800 MHz and 900 MHz
bands. The development of GSM (Global System for Mobile Communications)
began in 1982, and emerged globally in 1993.
Early 1G networks offered small capacities, because they were not cel-
lular, and an early internationally agreed standard analogue network did not
exist. Standard national networks included Nordic Mobile Telephone (NMT-
Scandinavia), Total Access Communications System (TACS), C-Netz (West
Germany), Radiocomm 2000 (France) and, of course, Advanced Mobile Phone
Service (AMPS).
6

2-D
The UK adopted TACS that was based on AMPS but using the 900 MHz
frequency band; TACS became successful in the Middle East and in Southern
Europe. The American AMPS standard used the 800 MHz frequency band
and was also used in South America, Far East, and in the Asia Paciﬁc region
including Australia and New Zealand. In the Asia Paciﬁc country of Japan,
NTT’s MCS system was the ﬁrst commercial delivery of a mobile 1G Japanese
network. While most ﬁrst-world countries are closing 1G networks, many Less
Developed Countries (LDCs) are actively investing in, and upgrading, them.
(See 2.5G, 3G, GPRS and UMTS.)
2.5G EDGE
EDGE is an overlay solution for existing ANSI-136/TDMA
networks, and may use the existing ANSI-136 30 kHz air-interface. EDGE is
on the migration path to UMTS, and may even co-exist with it so as to provide
services for wide-area coverage. EDGE standards support mobile services in
ANSI-136/TDMA systems with data rates of up to 473 kbps.
A signiﬁcant change in the ANSI-136/ TDMA standards to support higher
data rates is the use of modulation schemes including 8-PSK (Phase Shift
Keying) and GMSK (Gaussian Minimum Shift Keying). GMSK provides
for wide area coverage, while 8-PSK provides higher data rates but with
reduced coverage.
(See 3G.)
2.5G HSCSD
HSCSD (High-Speed Circuit-Switched Data) usually uses
a maximum of four time slots (that may be 9.6 Kbps or 14.4 Kbps) for data
connections. Because HSCSD is circuit switched, used time slots are con-
stantly allocated even when there is no transmission. This disadvantage makes
HSCSD appropriate for real-time applications with short latencies. HSCSD
also requires appropriate handsets that are not as widespread as GPRS for
example, but at the same time HSCSD is a less expensive network upgrade
than GPRS for operators.
2.5G Networks
A category of public mobile network that offers improved
data rates by adding an overlay such as GPRS (General Packet Radio Ser-
vice) to a 2G network like GSM. Other 2.5G solutions include HSCSD
(High-Speed Circuit-Switched Data) and EDGE (Enhanced Data Rates for
Global Evolution).
2B + D
Using the basic rate interface (BRI), this denotes two bearer (2B)
channels and one (D) ISDN channel.
(See ISDN.)
2-D (Two dimensional)
An image that may be visualised from a 2D
vector coordinate data set, and is devoid of the Z dimension of depth. [X, Y]
vector coordinates may be used to store the image data in an array that may
7

2-D curve
be held in memory, or on hard disk or on other DSMs like CD-ROM or DVD.
Sets of 2D coordinates are manipulated using a transformation matrix [T], and
in the case of ordinary coordinates this is a 2-row matrix:
[X, Y][T]=[X1, Y1]
To accommodate a three-row transformation matrix, the homogeneous coordi-
nate representation is used where [X, Y] becomes [X, Y, H], and the resulting
transformed coordinate set may be normalised so it can be plotted.
(See 3-D.)
2-D curve
A curve that is devoid of the Z dimension, and may be gener-
ated or visualised using:
• a set of 2-D vector coordinates, or 3-D homogeneous coordinates stored in
an array. This method may be considered an inefﬁcient use of memory (if
the coordinates are stored within the code itself) but improves the speed of
drawing and transformation.
• coordinates generated using an equation (i.e. x = cos(y)) and then written
to an array; as used memory is reclaimed after plotting, it is regarded as
memory efﬁcient but requires more processing.
• coordinates loaded from a mass storage device such as CD-ROM, DVD or
hard disk, or downloaded from a server.
(See 2-D and 3-D.)
2G Network (Second Generation)
A category of public mobile network
offering the earliest mobile digital telecommunications and includes varia-
tions of:
• Global System for Mobile (GSM)
• Digital-AMPS (D-AMPS)
• Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA – IS95)
• Personal Digital Cellular (PDC).
Typically a 2G GSM network provides users with data rates of 9.6 kbps
or 14.4 kbps.
Two GSM variants include Digital Cellular Systems 1800 (DCS-1800 or
GSM-1800) and PCS-1900 or GSM-1900 that is used in North America and
Chile. The different frequency is used because of the lack of capacity in the
900 MHz band. The 1800 MHz band accommodates a larger number of mobile
users particularly in densely populated areas. The coverage area of 1800 MHz
networks is often smaller, and therefore dual band phones are used, able to
roam between either network.
ETSI has also published GSM-400 and GSM-800 speciﬁcations, with the
former suited to large geographic area coverage, and can therefore be used in
conjunction with higher frequency band networks in sparsely populated regions.
8

2G Network
BSC
BTS
VLR
AuC: Authentication Centre. EIR: Equipment Identity Register.
GGSN: Gateway GPRS Support Node. HLR: Home Location Register.
ISDN: Integrated Services Digital Network. MSC: Mobile Switching
Centre. VLR: Visitor Location Register.
HLR
MSC
AuC
EIR
OMC
Comparable to GSM, DCS-1800 (Digital LPC Cellular System) is used in
the UK. It operates in the uplink radio band between 1710 MHz and 1785 MHz
and can be assumed to provide a user data rate of 9.6 kbps, and exhibits a
250 km/hour speed threshold on the mobile station.
9

GSM Network Operation
GSM Network Operation
1. When switched on, a mobile phone registers
its presence with the nearest MSC that is then informed of the location of the
mobile user. 2. If the user is outside the geographical area of the home MSC,
the nearest MSC will implement a registration procedure. This procedure uses
the home MSC to acquire information about the mobile device. This informa-
tion is held by the home MSC in a database called the home location register
(HLR) that holds mapping information necessary so as calls can be made to
the user from the PSTN (Public Switched Telephone Network). The local MSC
duplicates part of this information in the VLR (Visitor Location Register) for
as long as the caller is in the MSC area. 3. Normally one HLR and one VLR
is associated with each MSC that provides switching, and a gateway to other
mobile and ﬁxed networks. 4. Mobile devices have SIM chips holding user
identiﬁcation and conﬁguration data. SIM chips permits an authorisation pro-
cedure to be implemented between MSCs and EIRs (Equipment Identiﬁcation
Register). The EIR has a black list of barred equipment, a grey list of faulty
equipment or for devices that are registered for no services, and a white list
for registered users and their service subscriptions.
When either voice or data trafﬁc originates at the subscriber terminal, it
goes over the air interface to the BTS, from where it goes to the BSC.
2G Origins
In 1982 CEPT (Conference Europeene des Postes et Telecom-
munications) assembled the Groupe Special Mobile (GSM) committee so as to
specify a pan-European cellular radio system that would increase the capac-
ity of the analogue systems like the Nordic Mobile Telephone system, NMT. A
pan-European bandwidth of 890–915 MHz and 935–960 MHz was agreed. The
proposed systems were piloted in Paris in 1986, when ELAB’s offering was cho-
sen. By June 1987 a narrow-band TDMA system based on ELAB’s was agreed,
and would support eight (and eventually 16) channels per carrier. GMSK was
chosen because of its improved spectral efﬁciency, and the initial drafts of the
GSM speciﬁcations were published in mid-1988. At the request of the United
Kingdom, a version of GSM operating in the 1800 MHz dual band was included
in the speciﬁcation for Personal Communications Networks (PCN) that became
Digital LPC Cellular System at 1800 MHz (DCS 1800 or GSM 1800). 1988
saw GSM become a Technical Committee within the European Telecommu-
nications Standards Institute (ETSI). In 1991 the GSM Technical Committee
was renamed Special Mobile Group (SMG) and given the task of specifying
a successor to GSM. The group SMG5 was assigned the task of specifying
the Universal Mobile Telecommunication System (UMTS), but has since been
discontinued and the task of specifying UMTS is given to other committees.
(See 2G, 2.5G, 3G, GSM and UMTS.)
2 Mbits/s
A threshold bandwidth beyond which a network or access tech-
nology is described as broadband. 2 Mbits/sec = 2,000,0000 bits per second.
(See Access technology and B-ISDN.)
10

320-by-240 pixels
2-tier
A client/server architecture where application logic, data and pre-
sentation are distributed between client systems (at tier 1) and one or more
servers (at tier 2). Now consigned to history, early versions were based on
‘dumb terminals’ (or client systems) that did little more than send and receive
messages to and from a server that was invariably a mainframe.
The World Wide Web of the early 1990s was a 2-tier client/server model
where the Web/HTTP server simply published HTML documents to the client
via a largely uni-directional path. The early static Web and the many intranets
were 2-tier, where the user simply received published information (or Web
pages) from the Web server. There was no feedback from the client system,
and the application elements were partitioned so that data and logic were on
the server-side.
PC
MAC
NC
Client
Client
Client
Client
Two-tier client/server
Network
Print
Server
File
Server
Database
Server
This changed in 1995 with the introduction of CGI (Common Gateway
Interface). The dynamic or active Web model that was initially driven by CGI
impacted the partitioning of the application elements of data, logic and presen-
tation. File servers, print servers and database servers may also be integrated
in the design architecture so as to distribute processing and optimise perfor-
mance. The connection or access technology between servers and clients is
provided by a LAN variant.
(See 3-tier, Client/server and CGI.)
320-by-240 pixels
A frame resolution that may be used as a SIF (Source
Input Format) for an MPEG-1 video sequence encoded using an NTSC
11

32 bit
broadcast television/video source. The playback frame rate is standardized
at 30 frames/second.
(See MPEG.)
32 bit
1. A program or operating system that uses 32 bit instructions. 32 bit
operating systems include Windows 98, Windows NT and OS/2 Warp. Win-
dows 95 is not a pure 32 bit operating system due to certain 16 bit instructions,
but is generally regarded as 32 bit OS.
32 bit software is able to access memory more efﬁciently than 16 bit vari-
ants. It is capable of ﬂat memory addressing in which 4GBytes (232) memory
segments can be addressed. A 32 bit segment register is used to point to
addresses within a 4GByte range.
(See Operating system and Windows.)
2. A 32 bit processor using 32 bit instructions. The earliest Intel 32 bit pro-
cessor was the third generation 80386. 3. A data bus width (in terms of
the number of its lines) connected to a device such as a processor, hard
disk controller, memory card, or graphics card. 4. An extension of the 24 bit
image depth, an additional Byte (or Alpha Channel) provides control over
the transparency of pixels. Red, green and blue are each represented by
eight bits, giving 256 tones of each, which in turn leads to over 16.7 million
(256 ∗256 ∗256) colours. The additional eight bits (the Alpha Channel in
Apple parlance) are used to control transparency. 32 bit graphics make pos-
sible photographic quality images. The Apple Macintosh is remembered as
the ﬁrst platform upon which the 32 bit graphics capability became commer-
cially available.
36 bit
An image depth.
(See 32 bit.)
384-by-288 pixels
A frame resolution that is described as the SIF (Source
Input Format) for an MPEG-1 video sequence encoded using a PAL broadcast
television/video source.
(See MPEG.)
3-D
A 3-D computer image or animation stored and generated using abso-
lute or relative coordinates that include X (horizontal), Y (vertical) and Z
(depth) dimensions. Standard ﬁle formats and standard languages for develop-
ing 3-D animations for multimedia and virtual reality (VR) have emerged. The
VRML (Virtual Reality Modeling Language) is suitable for the development
of 3-D World Wide Web (WWW) pages. Web content development tools may
be used to create 3-D graphics and animations for Web pages, and often do
not require knowledge of VRML.
12

3-D
Chips aimed at the acceleration of 3-D graphics include the Glint family
that was developed by 3DLabs. Creative Labs licensed Glint technology from
3DLabs in 1994, following which they collaborated to develop the GLINT
3-D processor. This is used in the Creative 3D Blaster that was ﬁrst shown at
Creativity ’95 in San Francisco – a milestone in the development of 3-D gra-
phics cards. 3-D engines that may be used to generate 3-D animations include:
• Microsoft Direct3D
• Apple QuickDraw3D
• Silicon Graphics OpenGL
Authentic 3-D animations depend upon matrix multiplication where sets of
coordinates are multiplied by a transformation matrix. 3-D vectors, or ordinary
3-D coordinates, [X Y Z], may be exchanged for homogeneous vector coordi-
nates [X Y Z H]. The homogeneous dimension (H) is added to accommodate
a four-row transformation matrix, so increasing the number of possible 3-D
transformations. The transformation of homogeneous coordinates is given by:
 X
Y
Z
H
 =
 x
y
z
1
 T
The resulting transformed coordinates may be normalised to become ordinary
coordinates:
 x∗
y∗
z∗
1
 =
 X/H
Y/H
Z/H
1

Consider the 4 × 4 transformation matrix:


a
b
c
p
d
e
f
q
h
i
j
r
l
m
n
a


=
T
Scaling, shearing and rotation is achieved using the 3 × 3 matrix sector:


a
b
c
d
e
f
h
i
j


The transformation matrix:


1
0
0
0
0
cos θ
sin θ
0
0
−sin θ
cos θ
0
0
0
0
1


is used to rotate a 3-D object by the angle θ around the X-axis.
13

3-D
A rotation of an angle θ about the y-axis is achieved using the transforma-
tion matrix:


cos θ
0
−sin θ
0
0
1
0
0
sin θ
0
cos θ
0
0
0
0
1


A rotation of an angle θ about the z-axis is achieved using the transforma-
tion matrix:


cos θ
sin θ
0
0
−sin θ
cos θ
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1


It is possible to concatenate the rotational transformation matrices so as to per-
form two rotations concurrently through one matrix multiplication. However,
the rotations are non-commutative, so attention must be paid to the order of the
transformation matrices during multiplication. To perform a rotation about the
x-axis and the y-axis, the transformation matrix may be achieved as follows:


1
0
0
0
0
cos θ
sin θ
0
0
−sin θ
cos θ
0
0
0
0
1

×


cos θ
0
−sin θ
0
0
1
0
0
sin θ
0
cos θ
0
0
0
0
1


=


cos θ
0
−sin θ
0
sin2 θ
cos θ
cos θ sin θ
0
cos θ sin θ
−sin θ
cos2 θ
0
0
0
0
1


Translation is achieved through the 1 × 3 matrix sector:
[l
m
n]
Perspective transformation is achieved using the 3 × 1 matrix sector:


P
Q
R


14

3DO
The remaining element “a” produces overall scaling. For instance, overall
scaling is achieved using the transformation matrix:


1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
s


Normalising the transformed coordinates drives the scaling effect:
 x∗
y∗
z∗
1
 =
 x/s
y/s
z/s
1

It is important to note that 3-D images can also be stored using 2-D vector
matrices that include X and Y dimensions only.
Graphics transformation algorithms may be written in appropriate high level
languages such as C++, Java and Visual Basic, and even in machine code
or assembly language. Any high-level programming language that supports
arrays may be used to develop graphics transformation software. However,
APIs for popular 3-D engines such Microsoft Direct3D, Apple QuickDraw3D
provide the necessary high-level programming statements, in order to bypass
the underlying mathematical elements. Intel MMX technology gives improved
delivery of 3-D graphics and animations.
(See MMX and VRML.)
3-D Modeler
An artist that creates 3-D animations.
(See Autodesk Animator.)
3D Now
A 3-D technology/instruction set enhancement integrated in
AMD processors.
(See 3-D.)
3-D surface
A surface that exists in three dimensions. APIs for popular
3-D engines such as Microsoft Direct3D and Apple QuickDraw3D provide
the necessary high-level programming statements.
(See 3-D.)
3-D vector coordinate
Authentic 3-D animations depend upon matrix
multiplication where sets of coordinates are multiplied by a transformation
matrix. 3-D vectors, or ordinary 3-D coordinates, are represented by [X Y Z].
(See 3D.)
3DO
A company engaged in the manufacture of multimedia related prod-
ucts including video capture hardware. It produces real-time MPEG-2 video
encoding hardware used to capture, and to compress, video in real time.
(See MPEG-2 and Video capture.)
15

3G Network
3G Network (Third Generation)
A category of public mobile network
capable of offering user data rates that may extend to Mbps, and describes the
universal mobile telecommunication system (UMTS) that was shaped in part
by the Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP). 3G services include:
• Video applications using MPEG standards
• Video telephony
• Videoconferencing
• Video on demand (VoD)
• Telepresence
• Surrogate services such as exploration
• Client for remote services
• Web/Internet browsing
• Client for VPN
• Client connection for teleworkers
• mcommerce – retailing, online banking etc.
• Point of Information (POI) in real estate sector etc.
• Point of Sale (POS) for secure purchasing
• CCTV Closed Circuit Television Security
• UAV (Unmanned Aerial Vehicle) video communication and navigation
A 3G UMTS provides global roaming and is architected using orbiting
satellites that may integrate BTSs (Base Transmitter Stations) and BSCs (Base
Switching Centers). To create this type of network, satellites may orbit at alti-
tudes between 780 km and 1414 km so as to minimise signal transmission
latency. One example of a satellite network is Teledesic whose Consortium
is led by Bill Gates. Other mobile satellite services include Motorola’s Irid-
ium (with 66 satellites), Loran’s/Qualcom’s Globalstar (with 48 satellites) and
TRW-Matra’s Odyssey (with 10 satellites orbiting at high altitude).
UMTSes offer broadband user data rates and operate in the K-band (10.9–
36 GHz) and L-band (1.6–2.1 GHz). Aeronautical and maritime telecommuni-
cations were catalysts in the development and deployment of satellite mobile
telephone services with the ﬁrst maritime satellite launched in 1976. Called
MARISAT it consisted of three geostationary satellites and was used by the US
Navy. This later evolved into the INMARISAT (International Maritime Satel-
lite Organization) that provide public telecommunications services to airliners.
3G Layers
A 3G network consists of layers dedicated to:
• Transport – carries data (bits) over the IP backbone and wireless access
network that may be ATM, SONET or an alternative.
• Control – controls calls, authenticates calls, manages mobility, manages ses-
sions, and is accommodated in the network nodes that include RNC/BSC,
MSC, SGSN and GGSN.
16

3-tier
• Applications/services – hosts applications and services and is otherwise
known as the service network.
3G history
WAP and I-mode have been key to mass-market mobile wire-
less applications that converge on the Internet, giving limited access to Web
content. The precursor to WAP is, of course, SMS (Short Message Service)
where text is sent to mobile users’ handsets, and while this is considered the
trailing edge of mobile applications, such solutions remain a practical industry
for many WASPs globally. WASPs such as these are (generally) positioned
close to the trailing edge, as opposed to being leading edge enterprises that
may be engaged in developing core software solutions.
The European RACE 1043 project began with the aim of identifying ser-
vices that Y2K 3G services would deliver, and evaluating how the mobile
network infrastructure would evolve in the mass market telecommunications
sector. The project’s forecasts include a displacement theory where TACS
(Total Access Communications System) would be displaced by GSM that
would then be displaced by UMTS (Universal Mobile Telecommunications
System) – a term that was coined by the project.
(See 2G and UMTS.)
3G GGSN (Third Generation GGSN)
A Gateway serving node for a
3G public mobile network such as UMTS.
(See 3G, GPRS and UMTS.)
3G QoS (Third Generation Quality of Service.)
A threshold or series
of thresholds that determines the overall standard of service provided by the
operator, and includes among other things:
• Latencies or delays
• Minimum bit rate guarantee that may be within a speciﬁed coverage area.
3G SGSN (Third Generation SGSN)
A Server serving node for a 3G
public mobile network such as UMTS.
(See 3G and UMTS.)
3GPP (Third Generation Partnership Project)
An international Group
of telecommunications representatives/entities that shaped the UMTS.
3-tier
A client/server architecture where the elements presentation, appli-
cation logic and data may be perceived as distributed across different plat-
forms. The three tiers are separate and independent, and interact via appropriate
glues or middleware and include:
• Tier 1: presentation that is the front-end and may be composed of view objects
• Tier 2: application logic that is the middle-tier
• Tier 3: data that is the back-end
17

44.1 KHz
• Tier 0 devices are those that connect with clients (at tier 1) and include
printers, DVD-ROMs, scanners etc.
The partition that separates these three entities, in terms of those that reside on
the client and those that reside on the server, is a function of the client/server
implementation, and the clients may be PCs, Macintosh computers, or NCs.
If middleware is included, it may be based on an interface deﬁnition language
(IDL) like CORBA.
(See Client/server, OMG, CORBA, IDL, WAP and UMTS.)
Client side
Server side
ORB
CORBA
IIOP
Tier 1
Tier 2
Tier 3
ORB
CORBA
message
Clients
Business
objects
Backend
Data
Groupware
TP
monitor
ORB
CORBA
IIOP
44.1 KHz
A sampling rate required to produce CD quality audio when
using a 16 bit sample size. The resulting digital audio may be stored using
media such as:
• CD
• CD-ROM
• Hard disk
• Zip disk
• Jaz disk
• Mini Disc
• CD-R
• DVD-RAM
• DVD-ROM
(See Digital audio.)
18

44.1 KHz
Tier 0
Peripheral device(s)
PDA
Printer
DVD-ROM
Application
logic
Portable appliance
Phone
Palm
Laptop
Organiser
etc.
Docking
bay
Tier 1
System/client
Short range
wireless
technologies
JetSend
BlueTooth
IrDA
Client
Memory
Data
Application
logic
OS(es)
Tier 2
Lookup
Jini
service
Java
applets
Scripting
languages
E-mail
Video
/streaming
media
HTTP
servers
Security
•Firewall
•Security gateway
•SET
•SSL
etc.
Enterprise
network
JavaSpaces
service
ActiveX
controls
Office
LAN
Jini network
Web application
RMI
Residential
LAN
Tier 3
3-tier client/server CORBA-based OO architecture (simplified)
Backend
TP
manager
data
TP
server
Backend
application
Transaction
manager
Transaction
participants
Web sites
CD-R
DVD-RAM
CD-ROM
Scanner
Digital
camera
WAP services
Video services
ebusiness services
WAP
browser
iMode
WAP
Servlets
SIM chip
•WTLS
HTTP/CGI Web model
Object Web 
19

48 KHz
48 KHz
A sampling rate required to produce high quality digital audio
that may be stored on Mini Disc, DAT, hard disk or another DSM that offers
an appropriate data transfer rate.
(See Digital audio.)
4GL (Fourth Generation Language)
A programming language/envi-
ronment that does not require the programming of code on a line by line
basis. One of the earliest 4GL programming tools for the PC was Mapper
from Sperry that later became part of Unisys.
(See C++, Java, OOP and Visual Basic.)
4 KHz
The bandwidth of POTs (Plain Old Telephone services).
56.6 Kbps
A standard modem speed that is implemented using the stan-
dards x2 Technology and Rockwell K56ﬂex. It exceeds the proven bandwidth
limit calculated using Shannon’s theorem by using PCM, and a digital link
between the telephone company and the ISP. 56.6 Kbps modems are asym-
metrical offering wider downstream bandwidths, so downloading times are
shorter than those of uploading.
The ITU has attempted to amalgamate two the industry standards:
• X2
• K56ﬂex
The resulting V.90 standard was speciﬁed provisionally and ﬁnally released
in 1998.
(See Access technology and Modem.)
64 Kbps
A data transfer rate offered by a single ISDN line.
(See ISDN.)
8 bit image depth
An 8 bit image depth gives a maximum of 256 colours
for digital video, and computer generated animations and images. The colour
information for each pixel (or dot) is stored using eight bits giving a maximum
of 256 (28) colours.The 8 bit colour information may be edited using a palette
editor such as Microsoft PalEdit that is part of the complete implementation
of Microsoft Video for Windows, and Asymetrix Multimedia ToolBook. A
palette editor may be used to:
• alter the order of colour cells in a palette
• reduce the number of colours in a palette by deleting unwanted colour cells
• alter brightness
• alter colour contrast
• fade and tint colours
• copy colour cells from one palette to another
20

8-PSK
• merge two or more palettes into one
• develop common colour palettes that may be used with a number of dif-
ferent 8 bit video sequences so as to reduce any ﬂicker that may occur as
a result of palette switching when one image, animation or video sequence
is exchanged for another. This operation may also be implemented using a
palette optimiser.
(See AVI, MPEG, Streaming, and Video.)
8-PSK (8-Level Phase Shift Keying)
An enhanced modulation method
that is used in the EDGE radio interface. In this context 8-PSK:
• Has three bits per symbol
• and gives a gross bit rate per slot of 69.2 Kb/s (including overhead, and
given that the symbol rate is 271 ksymbols/s).
All rates per time slot include 22.8, 34.3, 41.25, 51.6, 57.35 and 69.2 Kb/s for
code rates of 0.33, 0.50, 0.60, 0.75, 0.83 and 1.
(See EDGE and GPRS.)
21

A
AAEI
American Association of Exporters and Importers.
ABA
American Bankers Association.
Absolute addressing
A method of addressing stored information, where
addresses are independent of one another. CD-ROM block addresses include
measurements of time and data blocks read. Minutes, seconds and blocks
provide enough information to locate information. For example, a one-hour
CD-ROM, would use the addressing scheme:
• Minutes (M): 0–59
• Seconds (S): 0–59
• Blocks (B): 0–74
A track beginning mid way through the CD-ROM then, is addressed 29 : 29 : 37
(M : S : B).
(See CD-ROM, DVD and IP address.)
Abstract class
A class with at least one abstract method that is declared
but has no implementation. An abstract class therefore requires a subclass to
provide implementations for the abstract method(s).
(See Class, Java, OOP, and Servlet.)
abstract type
A deﬁnition in a property list that gives characteristics of
documents.
Accelerator
1. A graphics card offering high-speed operation and opti-
mised for GUIs like X-Windows, Windows and OS/2. (See 3-D and Graphics
card.) 2. A video accelerator is a graphics card that is able to speed up the
playback frame rate of video sequences. The acceleration may be achieved by
inserting duplicate frames, though today the challenge is to playback video
at the capture frame rate rather than artiﬁcially accelerate it. VideoLogic was
23

Access
one of the ﬁrst companies to demonstrate the acceleration of Windows. AVI
video ﬁles.
(See MPEG.)
Access
A process where users gain the rights to operate a local or remote
system, or application, or program. The user may be required to enter an ID
and one or more passwords.
(See Encryption and Security.)
Access technology
A method used to connect to the Internet, or to a
remote network or computer system. Access technologies may be physical or
wireless and include:
• PSTN and analogue modem offering speeds up to 56.6 Kbits/sec
• ISDN
• GPRS
• 3G
• UMTS
• EDGE
• T1
• Cable
• DSL
• ADSL
• GSM
• DCS
• DBS (Direct Broadcast Satellite)
(See 3G, 56.6 Kbps, ADSL, DSL, B-ISDN, ISDN, Cable modem, GPRS, ATM,
T1, Mobile Network and Modem.)
Access time
An interval between a data request and the retrieval of that
data. Hard disk and CD-ROM access times are measured in milli seconds (ms)
(or thousandths of a second.) The length of access time depends largely on
electromechanical architecture, but increasingly controllers play an important
role. For instance, hard disk cache controllers may reduce a measured disk
access time to tenths of a milli second. In the perspective of DVD and CD-
ROM average access time is a measure of the time taken for the laser head
to locate and begin reading an appropriate region of disc. Access time tends
to increase with turns of track that are farthest from the disc’s centre.
(See CD-ROM, DVD and Hard disc.)
Account number
A unique number that identiﬁes an account held at a
ﬁnancial institution such as a bank or credit card company. It reveals the
24

Acquiring processor
ﬁnancial institution, type of account, and even the branch or ofﬁce that holds
the account.
ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability.)
A series of
properties that deﬁne the real-world requirements for transaction process-
ing (TP).
Atomicity
A process of ensuring that each transaction is a single workload unit.
If any subaction fails, the entire transaction is halted, and rolled back.
Consistency
A process of ensuring that the system is left in a stable state. If this
is not possible the system is rolled back to the pre-transaction state.
Isolation
A process of ensuring that system state changes invoked by one running
transaction do not inﬂuence another running transaction. Such changes must only
affect other transactions, when they result from completed transactions.
Durability
A process of guaranteeing the system state changes of a transaction
are involatile, and impervious to total or partial system failures.
(See Server and Transaction.)
Acknowledge
A message in an OO (Object Orientated) system that ver-
iﬁes a state, and may be passed between client and server objects that may
perhaps conﬁrm that a client is able to receive a series of packets or messages
that may be data or events.
Acquirer
(See Acquiring bank.)
Acquiring bank
A bank whose clients are Merchants that accept credit
cards for customer payment transaction purposes. Each Merchant is assigned
an account into which is deposited the value of their card sales. Batches of
sales slips are used to credit Merchants accounts. The bank submits charges
destined for banks to the interchange network either directly or through third
parties.
Acquiring Financial Institution
(See Acquiring bank.)
Acquiring processor
A company specialising in card processing, offering
services that include:
• Billing
• Settlement
• Management Information Services (MIS).
25

Acrobat
Acrobat
An Adobe ﬁle format that permits formatted documents to be
deployed efﬁciently over the Web. Adobe Acrobat Reader is required to read
Acrobat ﬁles (that have the. PDF extension). Acrobat ﬁles offer scalability
where users may zoom in on document portions; they are therefore effective
for intranets and Internet sites where complex diagrams and large images are
to be published.
(See ActiveX.)
ActionMedia II
An i750 chipset-based graphics card that can play video
compressed according to the Intel Indeo video standard. It is an evolved ver-
sion of the original i750-based ActionMedia board developed to play and
record video according to the Intel Digital Video Interactive (DVI) standard.
Two ActionMedia DVI boards were required: one for playback and another
for video capture and compression. DVI was a notable milestone in the devel-
opment of the PC as a multimedia device, and in the evolution of digital video
in the PC environment.
(See DVI and MPEG.)
Active channel
A connection between a consumer and supplier, or
between a client and server that adheres to the push or pull model for
publishing digital information over networks such as the Internet. The channel
variants exist in the CORBA/OMG NS as deﬁned by the OMG (Object
Management Group)
(See OMG, CosNotiﬁcation, Active Desktop, CORBA, Push technology and
www.omg.com.)
Active Channels
A connection to a Web site where information is pushed
or pulled to the client.
(See Active Channel.)
Active Desktop
A term used to describe the client side of an Active
Web application, and to describe the addition of Active Desktop Components
(ADCs) to a Browser. The Web page uses ActiveX scripting (with VBScript
or JScript) in order to integrate and coordinate:
• Active Desktop Components (ADC)
• HTML code
• ActiveX controls
• Java Applets.
Selected Active Channels invoke the Explorer browser in full screen mode
that provides standard Web Browser options. The Fullscreen button allows
users to switch between the normal Microsoft Internet Browser application
and the full screen view. Both views share many of the same user interface
26

Active Web Architecture
features. The application window view provides additional features, such as
the ability to add Web addresses to a Favourites folder. These may then be
visited without having to enter a Web address.
(See Active Desktop Components, Active Server, ActiveX Controls, Java, Visual
Basic, VBScript and JScript and OLE Controls.)
Active Server Components
(See ASP.)
Active Server Page (ASP)
(See ASP.)
Active Template Library (ATL)
A development tool used to create
Active Server Components that may be in-process or out-process.
(See ASP.)
Active Web Architecture
An architecture which provides bi-directional
information ﬂow between the HTTP server and HTTP client. The resulting
interactivity on the client side, permits data entry and the editing of HTML
documents.
It uses the Common Gateway Interface (CGI) between the HTTP server
and its applications and databases. CGI is a protocol, which provides the
27

Active window
CGI
CGI
Applications
Database
Client
Client
Client
Client
Browser
Active Web
IP network
Internet or Intranet
HTTP
Server
necessary communications. CGI scripts are created using a scripting language
or programming tool.
(See CGI and Perl.)
Active window
A window is active or currently selected for use when
the user:
• clicks on the window
• selects its related application button from the Taskbar
• selects the window from the Window menu
• selects the window using the keyboard by pressing Alt-Esc, or by pressing
Alt-Tab.
(See Windows.)
ActiveMovie
A Microsoft streaming video technology that is integrated
in the Microsoft Internet Explorer and supports the video formats QuickTime,
MPEG and AVI.
(See ASF and www.microsoft.com/imedia.)
ActiveX control
An object or component that adds functionality to an
application that may be stand-alone, or deployed over the Web or a network.
Microsoft ActiveX is an object architecture initially based on OLE 2.0, and
intended for deployment over the Internet and compatible IP networks. More
accurately, ActiveX is a reincarnation of OCX and may use COM and DCOM
as glues. ActiveX controls may take the form of a streaming video player, or a
28

ActiveX scripting
streaming audio player that might be added to the Microsoft Internet Explorer,
and are embedded in HTML pages performing various functions that may be
the generation of a simple Marquee. ActiveX controls may be created using
Visual C++, Visual Basic 5 Control Creation Edition, Java, Java 2 and other
development tools. There are ActiveX controls in the public domain, as well
as in the shareware sector, and those that might be conventionally marketed
and sold. ActiveX components running on the same system may interact using
the COM protocol as a glue. Industry-wide support beyond Microsoft exists,
and ActiveX compatible development tools include:
• Borland Delphi
• Powersoft PowerBuilder (see www.powersoft.com)
• Powersoft Optima++ (see powersoft.com)
• Symantec C++ (see www.symantec.com)
• MetroWerks Code Warrior (see www.metrowerks.com).
Guidelines for creating ActiveX controls
• Refer to existing Active controls in the public domain, to those that are shareware,
and to those that might be conventionally marketed and sold. The economics of
recreating that, which has already been created, might prove undesirable. Study
the functionality of the ActiveX Controls, and try to obtain real-world reviews of
them, in order to gain an understanding of what may be expected from them.
• Use the latest editions of development tools such as Visual Basic Control Edition,
Visual Studio etc.
• Supply detailed design, architecture, implementation and functionality documenta-
tion. If the ActiveX Control may be modiﬁed at the code-level, provide adequate
comments in the source listing. Also include an impact statement of how the
ActiveX Control changes targeted applications, together with a reuse strategy of
useful code segments or algorithms designed.
• Do not intentionally integrate patented algorithms in your ActiveX Control. It is
accepted that such infringements can be implemented unwittingly by the devel-
oper/programmer.
• Test the ActiveX Control.
• Provide case scenarios giving real-world examples of their integration in Web
applications.
• Refer to Microsoft Web sites for the latest ActiveX speciﬁcation and development
tools.
• Integrate conﬁguration features, which may be used from within the application
where the ActiveX Control is embedded.
• State the development environments/tools with which the ActiveX Control has
been tested.
(See Active Desktop, Active Server, Active Document, Authenticode, COM,
DCOM, Glue, HTML, Java, Middleware, CORBA and Visual Basic.)
ActiveX scripting
A process where ActiveX Controls and Java Applets
are integrated in the underlying HTML code of an interactive Web application.
29

ActiveX SDK
Such scripting is generally used with Web applications, though stand-alone
applications may also be built using the same. A basic HTML based applica-
tion may be given functionality, and responses to events through:
• JScript code.
• VBScript code.
• ActiveX Controls such as Shockwave and multimedia streaming components.
• Java applets.
Such a development strategy may be used to give the client-side a level of
intelligence. Validations of user/customer data and interactions distribute pro-
cessing to the client-side. This lessens the volume of data trafﬁc, and serves
to optimise application performance.
(See ASP, CGI, HTML, Java, Java applets, JScript, Shockwave, VBScript.)
ActiveX SDK (Software Development Kit)
A programming tool used
for creating ActiveX controls that may also be created using the:
• C++ programming language.
• Java programming language.
• Visual Basic programming language.
(See Active X Control, Java, and Visual Basic.)
ActiveX security
A term used to describe the ﬁltering of unwanted
ActiveX controls, or presenting the user with an option to do so.
(See Authenticode and Security gateway.)
ADC (Analogue to Digital Converter)
A device or electronic assembly
used to convert continuously varying analogue signals into digital form. The
accuracy achieved depends largely on the size of samples and on the sampling
rate. Video capture boards and sound cards include analogue to digital (ADC)
converters. Standard PC and Macintosh sound cards tend to record using 8 bit
or 16 bit samples at sampling rates of 11.25 KHz, 22.05 KHz or 44.1 KHz.
Highly speciﬁed sound cards may record using sampling rates of up to 48 KHz
that equates to DAT quality.
Video capture cards generally play a dual ADC role, converting audio as
well as video into digital form. Normally audio is digitised using the same
sample sizes and sampling frequencies available on most fully speciﬁed sound
cards. Whether capturing from a VHS or S-VHS video source recording, the
process of digitising a video signal requires a great deal more computation
than that of an analogue audio signal. The maximum frame capture rate of a
video capture card is a function of its maximum sampling rate which is linked
to the maximum data rate at which it can operate.
30

ADO
Address
1. (See IP Address.) 2. CD-ROM addresses include measure-
ments of time and data blocks read. Minutes, seconds and blocks provide
enough information to locate information. For example, a one-hour CD-ROM,
would use the addressing scheme:
• Minutes (M): 0–59
• Seconds (S): 0–59
• Blocks (B): 0–74
A track beginning mid way through the CD-ROM might be addressed
29 : 29 : 37 (M : S : B). The length of a CD-ROM track in minutes may be used
to calculate user data capacity. 3. A binary address of data or instructions that
are stored in memory. 32 bit software is able to access memory more efﬁciently
than 16 bit variants. It is capable of ﬂat memory addressing in which 4 GBytes
(232) memory segments may be addressed. A 32 bit segment register is used
to point to addresses within a 4 GByte range. At a machine code level, the
addresses of data and instructions are held in a register called a Program
Counter. Typically its contents grow by increments of one, except when a
conditional or unconditional jump occurs to a new memory location. This
normally occurs when a subroutine is executed. At such times, the contents
of the program counter are placed on a stack that is a portion of memory
that operates according to the LIFO (Last In First Out) system. This ensures
that the last address placed on the stack is the ﬁrst to be retrieved. When the
subroutine is completed (perhaps using the RET command), the return address
is recovered from the stack, and placed back into the program counter register.
Address Book
A Windows NT-based server that is part of the Microsoft
Commercial Internet System (MCIS). It allows users to query a database of
users that may include dynamic values such as IP addresses, as well as static
values that might include names, addresses, age, interests, occupation etc. It
is compatible with:
• NetMeeting that supports Internet telephony and conferencing.
• Internet Locator server that may be used to query the database.
• Microsoft SQL Server that may be used as the database.
(See Internet telephony, MCIS and Microsoft SQL Server.)
Address bus
A unidirectional address bus on a processor consisting of a
number of lines, and interfaces with memory devices and memory decoders.
Address space
A range of memory used by a running process that may
not share address space with another process.
ADO (ActiveX Data Object.)
A client/server technology that is used to
access data using an OLE DB provider, and has since evolved into ADO.NET.
(See ADO.NET and ASP.)
31

ADO.NET
ADO.NET (ActiveX Data Object.NET)
An advancement of ADO,
ADO.NET is designed for distributed applications that typically have HTTP
to glue tiers, and XML may be used to transfer data among them.
Adobe After Effects
A 2-D/3-D animation program that permits various
effects and enhancements.
Adobe Dimensions
A 3-D graphics program.
Adobe FrameMaker
A professional desktop publishing package from
Adobe.
Adobe Illustrator
A graphics program used widely for Web and multi-
media production, and for originating images for print.
Adobe PageMaker
A professional desktop publishing package from
Adobe and originally published by Aldus for the Apple Macintosh.
Adobe PageMill
A Web site development tool that may be used to develop
Web applications.
(See ActiveX, Java, CGI, Web Server, MCIS.)
Adobe PhotoShop
A program used widely for image manipulation, en-
hancement and editing.
Adobe Premier
A video editing tool.
(See Multimedia production, and Video capture.)
Adobe Streamline
A graphics package that provides a number of tools,
and may convert images into line drawings, as can PaintShop Pro.
ADPCM (Adaptive Differential Pulse Code Modulation)
A process
where an analogue signal is converted into digital form and is a develop-
ment of Pulse Code Modulation (PCM). The sampling rate inﬂuences how
accurately sharply varying analogue signals are digitised. It is used in many
digital audio, video and multimedia technologies.
ADSL (Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line)
An access technology that
has a downstream bandwidth which is considerably wider than its upstream
bandwidth:
• Downstream bandwidth of between 1.5 Mbits/sec and 8 Mbits/sec. Typically
it is 1.5 Mbits/sec.
• Upstream bandwidth of the order of 16 to 640 Kbits/sec that may be a
function of the line length. Typically it is 384 Kbits/sec.
32

AI
• Line lengths of up to 5 Km are quoted. Typically a repeater is required with
distances greater than 1,800 feet in order to overcome attenuation.
Applications include:
• High speed Internet access.
• VHS quality videoconferencing.
• VoD (Video-on-demand).
• Multimedia networks.
• et al.
Discrete multitone (DMT) modulation according to ANSI T1.413 separates
upstream data from downstream data by separating the signal into separate
43 kHz carrier bands.
(See Access technology and DSL.)
Afﬁliate Companies
Companies that provide a web front-end or brand for
other manufacturers or retailers goods or services. End users select a product
at the afﬁliate web site, but the sale is actually transacted at the sponsoring
merchant’s web site.
Agent
1. An Agent/manager architecture is used for system management
in client/server systems. The agents represent managed subjects that are com-
municated with, and manipulated by, managers. 2. A triggered agent is a
program that responds to events with appropriate actions. The actions might
be little more than answering a telephone call. More sophisticated agents may
modify software, or build databases or even data warehouses, or add items
to a cache, in response to usage habits. Events such as changes to ﬁles or
directories may also be used as triggers. 3. An habitual agent may be pro-
grammed to implement tasks at a precise frequency, such as hourly or daily.
4. A Microsoft ActiveX control intended to enhance the UI of local and Web
applications. 5. In a telecommunications network, an agent interprets various
commands, and responds to them appropriately.
Agent log
A log of Browsers used by visitors to an e-business site.
AI (Artiﬁcial Intelligence)
A term used to describe the use of a system
to emulate human decision making and learning abilities. The founding father
of artiﬁcial intelligence is Alan Mathison Turing, through his writings that
include Computing Machinery and Intelligence (1950). Alan Mathison Turing
OBE, an English mathematician, second world war code-breaker and com-
puter scientist and inventor, also described the ‘Turing machine’, and how it
could theoretically implement logical processes. Expert systems, or Knowl-
edge Based Systems (KBSs), and neural networks (NNs) are perceived as part
33

Algorithm
of AI. Related areas include NNs and Rule-base systems, that are applied to
automated decision making in the ﬁnancial sector for such activities as money
laundering and fraud detection.
(See AML, KBS and Neural net.)
Algorithm
1. ‘An algorithm is a set of rules for getting a speciﬁc output
from a speciﬁc input. Each step must be so precisely deﬁned that it may
be translated into computer language and executed by machine.’ (Donald
E. Knuth). 2. A collective name describing the components of the problem
solving process. It may be a program or series of steps deﬁning a modus
operandi that yields what is regarded to be an acceptable solution. 3. A term
used loosely to describe a program, or program segment. Algorithms for com-
pression, and those that perform other operations, are often patented.
alias
A reference to ﬁles and folders.
Alpha
1. A family or RISC processors manufactured by Digital. 2. A pre-
release copy of an application that is distributed and tested. It is the penultimate
development stage that precedes beta testing. (See Beta.) 3. An 8 bit data chan-
nel on 32 bit colour systems that provides control over the transparency of
pixels, thus facilitating numerous video effects.
AltaVista
A search engine.
Alternate Style Sheet
A stylesheet used to deﬁne an alternate style to
those declared as persistent and/or preferred. The persistent style is of course
the default style and may be overridden by the alternate style.
Amazon
A very large and world famous on-line bookseller and auction
house.
AMD (Advanced Micro Devices)
A chip manufacturer that produces PC
processors. AMD came to prominence when it reverse engineered Intel’s third
generation 80386 processor, and won the legal right to market and sell it.
(See Pentium.)
American Express
A large credit card company.
AMIS
Audio Messaging Interchange Speciﬁcation
AML (Anti Money Laundering)
A solution that alerts banks and ﬁnan-
cial institutions of irregular customer activity that is consistent with money
34

Annual company report
laundering. AML software is perceived as ‘business intelligence’, and is imple-
mented using one or more of the following approaches:
• Neural networks (NNs) that are able to program themselves through unas-
sisted learning.
• Rule-based consisting of business logic in the form of rules and heuristics.
• Genetic algorithms.
• Statistical analysis and adaptive proﬁling.
And
1. A logic gate that has two or more inputs and a single output. The
output is one or positive when all inputs are set to one. 2. A logical operation
in a search string that requires the presence of two or more words or phrases.
3. An operator in a program that tests for two or more conditions.
(See C++, Java, Jscript, VBScript and Visual Basic.)
Andreeson, Marc
A computer scientist and entrepreneur, who created the
Netscape Navigator Web Browser, and is the founder of Netscape. He also
worked on one of the earliest Web Browsers, Mosaic that was developed at the
National Center for Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois.
(See Browser, Hypertext and Web.)
Animation
A series of frames used to create the illusion of movement.
Animation types include:
• morphing that dissolves one image into another, and may be created using
dedicated morphing programs, or equivalent such features in animation
programs
• sprite, where one or more screen objects are moved
• cell-based, where entire frames are updated fully or partially to give the
illusion of movement
• micons, where a continuous series of frames is repeated conditionally. The
condition might be a mouse-click event.
(See Animation programs.)
Animation program
A program designed for the production of 2-D and
3-D animations. Autodesk Animator Pro and Autodesk 3D Studio are pop-
ular off-the-shelf packages. Other 3-D animation development tools include
NewTek’s LightWave 3D, Strata Studio, and the Electric Image Animation
System.
Annual company report
A document that addresses the previous ﬁnan-
cial performance of a company using balance sheets and proﬁt and loss
35

Anonymous class
accounts, and may also make certain forecasts regarding growth. It is typically
used by business analysts and investors and even by potential employees as
they gauge the performance and current state of the enterprise.
(See Balance sheet.)
Anonymous class
An extension of the local class, it is declared, and using
Java it may be instantiated using a single expression.
Anonymous FTP (File Transfer Protocol)
An FTP server to which users
may connect, browse its ﬁles, download ﬁles, and possibly upload ﬁles also.
An ftp client may be used to login to secure ftp sites so as to download and
upload ﬁles.
(See Archie and TCP/IP.)
ANSI (American National Standards Institute)
A highly inﬂuential
standards institution. The array of ANSI standards cover everything from
character sets to programming languages such as C++.
Anti fraud detection
A solution that alerts banks, ﬁnancial institutions,
and credit card companies of irregular customer activity that is consistent with
fraud. Anti fraud detection software is perceived as intelligent and there are
two main types:
• Neural networks (NNs) that are able to program themselves through unas-
sisted learning.
• Rule-based consisting of business logic in the form of rules and heuristics.
• Genetic algorithms.
AOL (America On-line)
A large, international ISP that has POPs (points
of presence) in many major cities. The Compuserve ISP is part of the AOL
corporation.
Apache
A Web server that is free of charge and used with Unix operating
system, and may be perceived as superseding the original NCSA Web server
that is also available free of charge and runs on top of the Unix operating
system.
API
A set of interfaces and methods used by programmers that deﬁne
operations speciﬁc to applications and hardware. For example, a development
environment built using the CORBA-based Notiﬁcation Services will have
IDL modules or ﬁles as its collective API. In OOP languages, including Java,
C++ and Objective-C, an API consists of deﬁned classes.
(See CORBA-based Notiﬁcation Services.)
36

Apple Mac OS X
Apple Computer
A computer manufacturer founded by technologist and
entrepreneur Steve Wozniak, and by entrepreneur Steve Jobs. Together they
revolutionised computing by mass producing one of the world’s most afford-
able microcomputers known simply as the Apple, and later the Apple II. It
was designed by Steve Wozniak, whose dream was always to own a computer,
once saying ‘I don’t care if I live in the smallest house, just so long as I have
my very own computer.’
Microsoft founders, Bill Gates and Paul Allen, had already written a Basic
interpreter for the Altair personal computer. While Microsoft mined massive
revenues from its DOS operating system for the IBM PC XT and AT, Apple
Computer shook the computing world once again in 1984 with its Apple Mac-
intosh or ‘Mac’ that changed the human-machine interface forever. It had a
multi-tasking windows operating system exactly like that deﬁned by Douglas
Engelbart, and implemented at Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC),
and it also had a mouse, another invention of Douglas Engelbart. A more
subtle technical innovation was the use of an analogue graphics port in the
Mac design that could theoretically drive an unlimited number of colours.
Immediately it opened the door to affordable desktop publishing using such
software packages as PageMaker that was then owned by Aldus, a company
aptly named after the Italian inventor of the italic typeface. The Apple Macin-
tosh was advertised during the 1984 Superbowl, and was the greatest success
in the history of Apple Computer.
Microsoft responded with Windows, its own multi-tasking windows-based
operating systems and GUI. This ﬁnally gained a respectable user base through
the release of Windows 3.0. IBM’s belated response to the ‘Mac’ was the
Personal System/2 (PS/2) which was launched in the Summer of 1987, and
offered 16-colour VGA and 256-colour MCGA colour graphics. This was
signiﬁcant for Microsoft because it was the driving technology which shaped
the software it produced, and was a milestone in the evolution of the PC as a
colour graphics system, and one that could theoretically become a multimedia
appliance. Later Apple products include the Apple PowerBook, the Apple
Newton PDA, and the more contemporary iMac series of personal computers.
(See Windows.)
Apple event
An event that is deﬁned by the Apple Event Interprocess
Messaging Protocol (AEIMP), and is typically a message from an application.
Apple iMac
A family of personal computers produced by Apple Com-
puter.
Apple Mac OS X
An Apple Computer operating system (OS) and envi-
ronment that also combines Unix, and delivers multi-tasking and a windows-
based environment.
37

Apple Macintosh
Apple Macintosh
A range of desktop computers produced by Apple Com-
puter, and when introduced in 1984 it pushed forward the boundaries of
desktop computing through the:
• Graphical user interface (GUI or “gooey”)
• Mouse input device
• Analogue graphics port – PC users had to wait until 1987 before gaining
analogue graphics.
It marked the beginning of affordable desktop publishing, with PageMaker
becoming the chosen application, and was ﬁrst advertised during the Super
Bowl in January 1984. The advertisement was based on Orwell’s novel 1984
where the Apple Macintosh was portrayed as saving society from the night-
mare of Orwell’s Big Brother scenario/theory. It became hugely successful
and led Apple Computer to produce a series of Apple Macintosh computers.
Modern incarnations of the Macintosh include the:
• iMac
• PowerBook
• iBook
• Power Mac G4
• Server G4.
(See GUI.)
Apple QuickTime
A digital video playback technology and standard
developed by Apple Computer.
Applet
A program that resides on a server, and when requested, it is
downloaded and executed by the client Browser. Applets deployed on the Web
require machine independence, and a virtual processor such as the Java Virtual
Machine installed on the client. The applet concept is not new, predating Java
by a considerable margin. The Java Virtual Machine is described variously as
a runtime environment or even virtual processor because it actually processes
Java byte codes, and interprets them into an executable form.
(See Java.)
AppleTalk
A family of network protocols included in Macintosh com-
puters.
Application development
A process where an application is created. The
development life cycle might include various standard stages that include:
• Project planning
• Analysis
• Design
• Scripting
38

Application software
• Prototyping a storyboard design
• Multimedia production
• Production
• Coding in a multimedia language such as OpenScript or Lingo
• Coding in Internet-related languages such as Java, VBScript, JScript, HTML,
VRML and Perl
• Coding in general purpose languages such as Visual Basic and Visual C++
• Alpha testing
• Beta testing
• Packaging the application for distribution on a CD variant, or for deploy-
ment on a network.
In the perspective of the Web or Internet, application development may require
the use of:
• Content authoring programs, such as those that permit the generation of
animations, and multimedia production tasks.
• Web Site development tools that permit production tasks such as integrating
media with navigation schemes et cetera.
(See C++, Java, MCIS, VBScript and Visual Basic.)
Application development tool/software
A software package dedicated to
the development of applications, with the most popular commercial example
being Microsoft Visual Studio.
(See Microsoft Visual Studio.)
Application kit
A Cocoa framework that provides a program structure
for an application’s event-driven UI.
Application Message Queue
A buffer used in Microsoft Windows to
store messages posted by an application using the PostMessage routine. The
size of the queue may be set using SetMessageQueue.
Application renovation
An upgrade path used to modernise legacy sys-
tems that may be based on older mainframe computers, and essentially adds
new client and connectivity components. The process may be viewed as an
alternative to migrating from a mainframe-based solution to more modern
client/server implementations. It offers the advantage of reduced costs, but
relatively high maintenance costs associated with mainframe computers are
seen as a key disadvantage.
(See Client/server.)
Application software
A program or suite of programs designed to per-
form a particular task, or set of tasks. Mainstream business applications include
39

Application-level gateway
word processors, spreadsheets, relational databases, and contact managers.
These are generally included in integrated packages.
Examples include:
• integrated packages – such as Microsoft Ofﬁce, Microsoft Works, and Clar-
isWorks.
• word processors – such as Microsoft Word, WordPerfect, and Lotus
Word Pro.
• spreadsheets – such as Microsoft Excel, Lotus 123 and Quattro Pro
• databases – such as Microsoft Access, Paradox and DataEase.
• contact managers – such as Outlook, Goldmine, and those supplied with
many integrated packages.
• et al.
The three staple elements of an application are:
• presentation that is required by those applications that feature user-
interaction
• logic that is required to process and manipulate data
• data that may be of many different types.
The physical, or perceived, location of the three functional elements depends
upon a series of logical topologies devised by the Gartner Group. This is
explained under the entry Client/server.
(See Client/server and Microsoft Ofﬁce.)
Application-level gateway
An application-level gateway is able to pro-
cess store-and-forward trafﬁc, and provide security features. They may be
programmed to maintain logs of application usage. Users must log in to the
application gateway machine.
(See Firewall and Security gateway.)
Archie
An on-line database of indexed words from FTP sites that was
developed at Montreal’s McGill University. The database may be searched
using TelNet, or by sending e-mail messages that have simple instructions, to
Archie servers.
For example, to ﬁnd FTP sites and ﬁles that contain the word occam, the
e-mail message would read:
set search sub
find occam
The archie would then return a listing of appropriate ﬁles and FTP sites. This
information may be used to download the ﬁles using an FTP client program.
40

Architecture
Alternatively, e-mail messages with appropriate instructions may be sent to
the relevant sites.
Architecture
1. A description of a client/server implementation and may
include a vast array of information such as:
• number of tiers
• CGI/HTTP and Object model
• Server side languages
• Back-end databases
• Protocols and Glues including HTTP, COM, DCOM
• Operating systems
• Software model adopted – such as DNA or the Microsoft. NET initiative
A description of a client/server hardware solution may include:
• Client systems
• LAN technology
• File servers
• Firewalls
• Fax servers
• Proxy hosts
• Hosts
• Dual-homed hosts
• Mail servers
• Modems
• Digital links such as ISDN, T1, cable, etc.
• Security perimeters
• VPN
• LAN Servers
• Network cards/speciﬁcations
• Routers
• Bridges
• Backbone switches (See Client/server.)
2. A processor architecture refers to the internal design in terms of:
• whether it includes a CISC or RISC instruction set
• multimedia functionality such as MMX Technology
• internal cache, and internal cache size
• size of registers
• external and internal data bus size
• types of registers
• whether the processor is a von Neumann serial design (such as an Intel
Pentium II), or a parallel variant
• number of devices.
• et al.
41

Archive
3) A system architecture generally refers to the type of operating system, and
the types of hardware it uses. For example, the hardware and software might
be proprietary. 4) An underlying object architecture of an application in terms
of the types of objects used that might be ActiveX controls or even OLE
objects. Its glues such as COM and DCOM may also form part of an archi-
tectural description. (See Glue.) 5) An open system architecture is an attempt
to standardise hardware and software. The rationalisation of hardware and
software standards means that products from numerous manufacturers may be
integrated into one system. 6) A ﬁrewall architecture includes component parts
such as screening routers. (See Firewall and Security gateway.) 7) A general
term that might be used to refer to the design of hardware and software, rang-
ing from mainframes and networks, to applications programs and operating
systems (OSes).
Archive
A method of storing ﬁles for backup or long-term storage.
Removable media that may be used for archiving purpose include 100 MB
Zip disks and 1 GB Jaz disks from Iomega, as well as media devices from
SyQuest. Other media include conventional hard disk, and CD-R discs and
DVD-RAM discs. Various ﬁle compression utilities may be used for backup
purposes, including the popular WinZip program.
(See DVD.)
ARP (Address Resolution Protocol)
An IP protocol that may be used to
convert logical IP addresses (such as 18.170.103.34) into physical addresses.
An ARP request results in a node’s physical address that might be used by
Ethernet networks, Token Ring and FDDI that may have a bandwidth of up
to 100 Mbps.
(See TCP/IP.)
ARPA (Advanced Research Projects Agency)
A US government agency
formerly called DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency).
ARPANET (Advanced Research Projects Agency NETwork)
An early
network developed by the then DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency) for researchers. Originally coined DARPANET its development was
commissioned in 1969, resulting in a working network of four computers
by 1970, and growing to 37 computers by 1972 by which time it became
ARPANET. Some assert that DARPANET was the technical, and possibly,
conceptual birth of the information superhighway or Internet. The key develop-
ment resulting from ARPANET is the TCP/IP family of protocols. ARPANET
ceased to exist in 1990.
(See TCP/IP.)
42

ASF
Array
1. A two- or three-dimensional matrix of data values that may be
character, numeric, or even binary objects. All modern high-level program-
ming languages support arrays, and the concept is similar to the use of tables
in databases and data warehouses. (See Data warehouse.) 2. An uncommitted
logic array (ULA) is an electronic package that has electronic devices (or
gates) that are unconnected. By adding the connections in the form of a met-
alisation layer the ULA is given a speciﬁc functionality. 3. A transformation
array is used to manipulate a 2-D or 3-D set of coordinates.
(See 3-D and Java.)
As We May Think
A prophetic and momentous article published in
July 1945 in Atlantic Monthly. Its author Vannevar Bush, Science Adviser
to President Roosevelt, put forward a new paradigm for information storage
and retrieval. He foresaw the imminent miniaturisation of storage media, and
described a central repository of published information accessible via multiple
access points. Calling it Memex, its functionality approximated that of the
evolving Internet, Infobahn, or information superhighway. As such, Memex
may be considered the conceptual birth of the Internet.
Vannevar’s vision relates to hypertext. Hypertext set a familiar continuum
in motion, ﬁrst yielding hypermedia that introduced still images, and later
modern multimedia that added computer animation, motion video, synthesised
sound and digitally recorded waveform audio to hypermedia.
ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange)
A
standard set of codes introduced to promote compatibility in terms of
characters and symbols. Originally, it consisted of 128 Ascii characters derived
from seven bits. Eight bits were not used in order to preserve the sign bit.
ASCII has since been extended into a larger highly standardised character set.
ASF (Advanced Streaming Format.)
A storage container data format
(and standard) for streaming and local-playback multimedia. The contents of
the container are not deﬁned, and neither is the communications protocol
which may be:
• HTTP
• TCP
• RTP
• UDP.
The ASF container ﬁle contents are read by an appropriate media server, and
transmitted to the client, where it may be stored or played.
(See MPEG and Streaming.)
43

ASN.1
ASN.1 (Abstract Syntax Notation One)
A standard that deﬁnes the
encoding, transmission and encoding of data and objects that are architecture
neutral.
ASP (Active Server Page)
A server side software architecture that is
Browser neutral. ASPs may be normal HTML that glues together scripts writ-
ten in Jscript, VBScript, Javascript or other ActiveScript compliant languages.
The following ASP is compiled by the server and then the resulting HTML
code downloaded to the browser
<% for a = 1 to 2 %>
<font size= <% = a %> > Hello World
</font> <br>
<% next %>
Downloaded HTML:
<font size= 1 > Hello World </font> <br>
<font size= 2 > Hello World </font> <br>
ASP applications may use ODBC databases, VBScript objects and ActiveX
DLLs. ASP objects include Request that may be used to retrieve cookies using
request.cookies, and to request information from forms using request.form.
ASP pages also have a response object that is used to write to the HTML ﬁle
using Response.write, and to write to a cookie using response.cookies.
DCOM and COM may be used as glues within ASP-based applications.
Resulting Web applications may acquire information about the client browser,
and act accordingly. This enables compatible HTML pages to be served to the
Browser without error messages. The Microsoft Active Server provides the
component parts to implement the aforementioned functionality, and includes
the components:
• Browser Capabilities that acquires the connected browser’s key features
• ActiveX Data Object (ADO) that provides access to backend data (irrespec-
tive of its location), and is not limited to ODBC compliant data sources
• TextStream that is used to create and open ﬁles.
Third-party and bespoke components may be integrated in an Active Web
site and may be developed using an ActiveX control developer’s workbench,
including:
• Visual Basic
• Visual C++
• Visual C++ ControlWizard that is used for OLE development
• ActiveX Software Development Kit.
Active Server Pages (ASPs) offer the advantages of:
44

ATA
• shorter Web application development life cycle – particularly with develop-
ers/development teams that are devoid of, or have little, CGI programming
experience
• optimised server-side processing, because calls to CGI programs may invoke
new processes on the server.
(See Active Desktop, Active Server, ActiveX, and CGI.)
Asymetrix
A company founded in 1985 by Paul Allen, who along with
Bill Gates also founded Microsoft. Asymetrix is a leading developer and pub-
lisher of Windows-based multimedia and client/server application development
tools. Its headquarters are in Bellevue, Washington and its European opera-
tion centres around its Paris ofﬁces with further subsidiaries in London and
Munich. Its ﬂagship product is Multimedia ToolBook that was used to develop
Microsoft Multimedia Beethoven: The Ninth Symphony.
(See OpenScript and ToolBook.)
Asymmetric
compression
A
compression/decompression
algorithm
where the processes that constitute compression are not reﬂected in
decompression.
(See DCT, JPEG and MPEG.)
Asymmetric key cryptography
A cryptosystem where the keys used to
encrypt and decrypt data are dissimilar.
(See Ciphertest, Plaintext, Encryption, SET, Brute Force, cryptosystem, RSA,
public key encryption, asymmetric, Transposition and Dictionary attack.)
Asynchronous
1. A data transmission technique where the sending device
and receiver are not synchronised in real time. Each transmitted item, or
packet, is encoded with start and stop bits, so the receiving device can decode
it without ever receiving a timing signal from the sending device. Because the
asynchronous data transmission technique makes good use of available band-
width or data rates, it is particularly suitable for networked multimedia. 2. A
‘distributed computing’ mode of communications between running threads,
where a call from one thread to another does not require a response before
it may continue processing. Rather it proceeds processing, and receiving and
sending messages.
Asynchronous messaging
(See Asynchronous.)
AT & T (American Telephone and Telegraph)
A telecommunications
giant (or telco).
ATA
A standard hard disk controller.
45

ATA-2
ATA-2
A disk interface technology.
(See Hard disk.)
ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode)
An internationally agreed tele-
communications standard that supports transmission line speeds of up
to 622 Mbits/sec. Other line speeds include 2 Mbits/sec, 12 Mbits/sec,
25 Mbits/sec, 34 Mbits/sec, 45 Mbits/sec, 52 Mbits/sec and 155 Mbits/sec.
The CCITT accepted ATM in 1990 as an internationally agreed standard
for data, voice and multimedia networks.
ATM bases itself on cell relay that is a form of statistical multiplexing,
and is similar to packet switching. The data transmission consists of cells that
have 53 octets or bytes, including a 5-octet header.
Using 52 Mbits/sec line speed, a single cell may be transmitted in:
53∗8/52 Mbits = 8.15∗10−6
= 8.15 micro seconds
The cells from different signals are interleaved, and the signal propagation
delay or jitter, is a function of the transmission line speed. It is sufﬁciently
low to give a stream of contiguous cells that is acceptable for real-time data,
voice, audio and video transmission.
Like packet headers, cell headers contain destination addresses.
(See Frame relay.)
ATMI
American Textile Manufacturers Institute.
Attachment
A ﬁle that is sent and received along with an email message.
The ﬁle may be binary or text, and is opened using an appropriate application.
(See E-mail.)
Attenuation
(See Digital audio.)
Auction
An electronic market that offers buyers and vendors an automated
bidding service.
Audio
(See Digital audio.)
Audio compression
A term used to describe the process of compressing
audio data that may be decompressed and played using streaming audio tech-
nologies. In uncompressed form the large size of wave audio ﬁles occasionally
place unreasonable demands on distribution media in terms of data capacity
and/or bandwidth. Wave audio compression gives smaller ﬁle sizes that are
decompressed on playback using either dedicated hardware and software, or
46

Authoring
software alone such as an MP-3 player. Standard wave audio compression
algorithms include MP-3, A-Law, IMA (Interactive Multimedia Association)
ADPCM and MPEG-1. Whatever compression standard is used, the resul-
tant ﬁle sizes, or the compression ratios achieved, depend on the compres-
sor parameter settings chosen. As the compression ratio is increased, the
resultant playback quality diminishes. High quality wave audio therefore,
tends to be compressed by a great deal less than a dialogue recording, for
instance.
(See Streaming.)
Audio Video Interleave
(See AVI.)
Authenticode
1. A technology supported by the Microsoft Internet
Explorer that permits components such as ActiveX Controls and Java applets
to be digitally signed. When such a signed component is encountered,
Explorer checks its signature status. An unsigned component causes Explorer
to display an appropriate prompt, while a signed component causes Explorer to
display a certiﬁcate. The certiﬁcate includes information about the component
and its author. The user is given the option to download the component.
2. Authenticode ensures that software is not illegally altered prior to download
and provides an ID of the software’s publisher.
Authoring
A process of developing a multimedia e-business site, and may
include the processes of:
• design
• scripting
• agreeing on the content required in terms of images, video, text and sound
• developing an interactive design
• prototyping
• implementing the interactive design
• testing the interactive design
• multimedia production
• digitising text
• digitising images and retouching them in-house or using an appropriate
bureau
• recording wave audio ﬁles
• composing Midi ﬁles
• capturing video ﬁles
• application development
• implementing the interactive design
• production
• uniting acquired media ﬁles with the interactive design
• testing.
47

Authoring station
CD-based authoring requires an authoring station and authoring tool such as
Icon Author, Macromedia Authorware Professional or Asymetrix ToolBook.
For Multimedia production, or for the creation and gathering of all necessary
media ﬁles, it may be necessary to use:
• video capture software and hardware such as VidCap and a VideoBlaster
card
• Animation software such as ﬂash
• video editing software such as VidEdit
• wave audio recording and editing software
• midi sequencer such a CakeWalk.
Authoring consists of design, multimedia production, navigational scheme
design, and production. For distribution purposes, disc pressing or deployment
over a network may constitute a ﬁnal stage.
(See Authorware, Lingo, OpenScript and ToolBook.)
Authoring station
A hardware platform and software tool required to
author a multimedia application. Normally it will have a video capture card
and digital sound recording facility. It may also provide a means through which
resultant material may be submitted to a replication company for mastering
and manufacture.
Authoring tool
A program or program suite that permits the creation
of multimedia e-business applications. Generally, it is more complex than a
presentation program, providing more advanced features such as indigenous or
standard authoring/programming languages that are often visual in nature. (See
Authoring language, Lingo and OpenScript.) Occasionally authoring tools are
bundled with bitmap editors (graphics programs), palette editors, and video
capture and editing programs. Modern authoring tools permit the deployment
of applications over the Internet. Popular authoring tools include:
• Authorware Professional
• IconAuthor.
Modern authoring tools aimed at the production of CD-based multimedia may
provide cost-effective migration paths to the Internet, and should also provide
support for Java applets.
(See ToolBook and Authorware.)
Authorization
A formal clearance from a credit card or bankcard issuer
indicating that a transaction will be honoured.
Authorization code
A code that indicates the willingness of the card
issuer to honour a credit card or bankcard transaction.
48

AWT
Authorware Professional
An authoring tool for Windows-based multi-
media applications produced by Macromedia. The authoring process consists
of dragging objects onto a ﬂowline that runs vertically in its own window.
Authorware is considered as requiring no programming skills.
(See Lingo, OpenScript and ToolBook.)
Autodesk 3D Studio
A 3-D animation development program.
Autodesk Animator Pro
A 2-D animation development program.
Availability
(See Reliability, MTBF and MTTR.)
AVI (Audio Video Interleave)
A Microsoft ﬁle format for storing inter-
leaved audio and video. Using many video editing and video capture tools, the
interleave ratio may be varied. The ratio may be speciﬁed as a single ﬁgure
where, for instance, an interleave ratio of 7 indicates that seven video frames
separate each audio chunk. Using Microsoft VidEdit, the statistics of a video
ﬁle may be shown where the interleave ratio is displayed alongside the phrase
Interleave Every.
The interleave ratio is expressed as the number of video blocks that sep-
arate audio blocks. Generally high interleave ratios are applicable to video
stored on hard disk, whereas. AVI video stored on a CD variant is optimised
using lower interleave ratios which often equate to one video frame for every
audio chunk. Sound track quality commonly found in AVI ﬁles ranges from
mono 8 bit recordings digitised at 11 KHz, to 16 bit stereo recordings digitised
at 44.1 KHz.
(See MPEG and Video.)
AWT Abstract Windows Toolkit
A set of Windows development tools
focusing on GUI components like radio buttons, check boxes, data entry ﬁelds,
dialogues and other similar widgets.
49


B
B2B (Business-to-Business)
An activity that sees business enterprises
trade directly with one another, without dealing directly with a mass of
customers or end-users. A WASP offering services to telecommunications
operators is considered a B2B.
Backbone
A core high-speed transmission line, which serves a number
of networks. Switches and bridges provide the physical connections between
it and the multiple networks for which it provides bi-directional data traf-
ﬁc paths.
A backbone is comparable to a main artery in anatomy, which divides into
smaller veins and capillaries that might be thought of as switches and networks.
A backbone might comprise ATM backbone switches, which comprise a
number of ports for connection to networks. Enterprise backbones that have
ATM backbone switches, offer scalability, fault tolerance, and are based on
internationally agreed standards.
(See ATM, Frame relay and Screening router.)
Backdoor
A ﬂaw in the security defenses of a system or a network. For
example, modem access either inbound or outbound, may bypass the network’s
collective security infrastructures.
(See Firewall and Security.)
Backdrop
A background image or colour in a multimedia presentation or
title that remains constant for a given number of frames.
Backend
Another name for tier 3.
(See 3-tier and client/server.)
Background
1. Multi-tasking operating systems such as Windows 98,
Windows NT and OS/2 Warp, are able to run applications in the background
51

Background task
of others. Background applications and tasks generally receive less process-
ing time, and run more slowly. 2. A background sound may be added to
a Web page using FrontPage and other Web development tools. The sound
technology used may be wave audio or MIDI. 3. In Windows, Background
Mode permits the background colour to be toggled between opaque (on) and
transparent (off).
Background task
A task that takes place in a multi-tasking operating
environment and is allocated a speciﬁc and changing portion of process-
ing time. The amount of time is less than allocated to tasks that are in
the foreground.
Backtracking
A process of retracing a user’s path of interaction by per-
haps using the Back button in the application window. All fully speciﬁed
authoring tools – such as Multimedia ToolBook – and Help System develop-
ment tools allow the developer to integrate a backtracking feature in applica-
tions. Web browsers also feature backtracking controls.
(See Hypertext and Multimedia.)
Backward compatible
A hardware component, program object, lan-
guage compiler, program or operating system that is compatible with an
earlier version.
Balance sheet
A comparison between assets and liabilities of an enterprise
that is normally published annually as part of companies’ annual report. Assets
may be intangible, tangible, or liquid, and may include buildings, proﬁts,
amounts due, intellectual property such as patents and copyrights, investments,
shares, ﬁxtures, etc. Liabilities may include general running costs, leases, mort-
gage repayments, tax, amounts owed, materials, ofﬁce supplies, miscellaneous
operating expenses, etc.
Bandwidth
A rate at which data is transferred to, or from, a computer or
appliance, using a medium that might be physical or wireless.
Media and their bandwidths:
• A single-speed CD-ROM has a bandwidth of 1.2 Mbps (or 150 Kbytes/sec),
and generally CD-ROM drives exhibit data transfer rates, which are broadly
multiples of 150 Kbytes/sec.
• A single ISDN line will provide a bandwidth of 64 Kbits/sec, whereas B-
ISDN may offer multiples of that rate.
• The average bandwidth of a 24-speed CD-ROM drive is about 3,600 KBytes/
sec.
• ADSL has a downstream bandwidth of between 1.5 Mbits/sec and 8 Mbits/sec.
Typically it is 1.5 Mbits/sec.
52

BASIC
• ADSL upstream bandwidth of the order of 16 to 640 Kbits/sec, which can
be a function of the line length. Typically it is 384 Kbits/sec.
(See 2.5G, 3G, Access technology, ADSL, ATM, DBS, ISDN, B-ISDN, CD-ROM
and DVD.)
Bandwidth
1. A data transfer rate supported by physical or wireless media.
2. A range of frequencies supported by media.
Bankcard
A card that is linked to one or more bank accounts, and may
have an assigned PIN in which case it may be used with cash dispensers, and
it may perform transactions using international standards that include Switch,
EFTPOS, and Cirrus.
Bankers EDI Council
A council formed by NACHA to help banks make
the transition to EDI for corporate customers.
Barclay card
A credit card.
Barings
A merchant bank that collapsed in the 1990s owing to the irregu-
lar trading practices of a certain individual. A rescue package was put together
by ING that now operate the bank under the name ING Barings.
Base case
A system that is speciﬁed as being a base case is the minimum
implementation, or the bottom of a product range.
A base case NC will have only the essential elements of the ofﬁcial speci-
ﬁcation, as will a base case NC.
(See NC.)
BASIC (Beginners All-purpose Symbolic Instructional Code)
A high-
level language developed by Kemeny and Kurtz in the 1960s. Early imple-
mentations for personal computers include the BASIC interpreter developed
by Microsoft founders Bill Gates and Paul Allen in the mid 1970s for the
MITS Altair – the world’s ﬁrst affordable computer. Interpreted languages dif-
fer from compiled languages in that they are not compiled into object code
(such as. EXE ﬁle) before execution. Instead the source code is interpreted
in real-time when the program is run. In the late seventies and early eight-
ies, almost every microcomputer (or personal computer) had its own BASIC
interpreter stored in a ROM variant. Even the original IBM PC XT had a
BASIC ROM. It was at this time that Acorn Computer (Cambridge, England)
introduced Structured BASIC, advancing the language to structured program-
ming. (See structured programming.) Structured BBC BASIC gave procedures
and routines names such as PROCﬁnd, for instance, and were ended using
commands like ENDPROC. BBC BASIC was also recursive in that procedures
could be called from within procedures. Its most unusual feature, however,
53

Bastion host
was the ability to include 6502 assembly language code within the high-level
listing itself. This feature gave it ﬂexibility, and helped programmers increase
the speed of program execution by conﬁning certain procedures to assembly
language or machine code. This functionality evades many of the industry
standard languages of today. The structure programming model adopted by
BBC BASIC made the GOTO command redundant, and later did the same to
line numbers – though BBC BASIC did include the GOTO command. Until
the advent of structured programming, the ﬂow of program execution was
directed solely using the GOTO <line number> command. After structured
programming, the next signiﬁcant advancement for BASIC came when visual
and object-oriented programming (OOP) arrived. Such Visual Basic develop-
ment tools allowed programmers to draw objects in order to, perhaps, create
a user interface. All the programmer then needed to do was to add code to
the objects in order to deﬁne their behaviour in response to events such as
mouse clicks. The Basic syntax has changed dramatically, though it continues
to be a procedural high-level language, and one that is considerably more than
language for novice programmers. It can be used to tackle demanding pro-
gramming projects, and is considerably more portable than the early interpreted
versions for popular microcomputers.
(See Visual Basic.)
Bastion host
A host that is critical to a network’s security and Firewall
architecture. This is the focus of network management, security monitoring,
and is a network’s principal defense against illegal usage. A dual-homed host
may play the role of a bastion host.
(See Firewall.)
Batch ﬁle compression
A technique by which ﬁles may be compressed
for distribution, archiving or backup purposes. It is appropriate for modem-
based ﬁle transfer and DSM-based distribution. It can be used to compress
any binary ﬁle. In the context of video distribution its main disadvantage is
the fact that end-users have to decompress or unpack the ﬁles before they can
be played. Decompression can be carried out using an installation program,
a program such as PkUnzip, or in the case of a self extracting compressed
ﬁle the user simply types the name of the compressed ﬁle. Standard batch ﬁle
compression programs include WinZip.
Batch settlement
An accrued number of card transactions that may
be processed.
Baud rate
A rate at which data is transferred from one point to the next,
which broadly equates to bps. More precisely it is a measure of logic/bit
changes per second over media which may be physical or wireless. It is
54

Berners-Lee, Tim
the namesake of French telegraphic communications pioneer J M E Baudot
(1845–1903). It is a rarely used term nowadays, and is replaced by bits/second
(bps) – which is not quite the same thing.
(See Modem.)
BBS (Bulletin Board Service)
A dial-up service that is independent of
the Internet. It can be used for publishing information, distributing ﬁles, and
for electronic conferencing.
BCBSA
Blue Cross Blue Shield Association.
BCPL (Basic Combined Programming Language)
A high level pro-
gramming language, BCPL was designed by Martin Richards in 1967, as a
compiler writing and system programming tool. It was based on CPL (Com-
bined Programming Language), which was developed jointly by Cambridge
and London Universities. BCPL is perceived as a forerunner to C and C++.
Further reading
BCPL the Language and its Compiler, Martin Richards & Colin Whitby Ste-
vens, Cambridge University Press, 1980.
(See C, C++, Java, JScript, VBScript, and Visual Basic.)
Bend
A bend in an optical ﬁbre results in increased attenuation. Such
losses can be used to determine the degree to which a ﬁbre is bent. This
forms the basis of operation for many gloves and suits used in VR, where the
ﬁbres run along the lengths of ﬁngers or limbs.
(See LED and Optic ﬁbre.)
BER (Bit Error Rate)
A measurement of how error-free the storage or
transmission of data is. Typically expressed as the average number of bits in
which one bit-error will occur. CD-ROM has appropriate error detection and
correction codes. In Mode 1 CD-ROM data blocks, 4 Bytes are reserved for
error detection and 276 Bytes are reserved for error correction. The three layers
of error detection and correction integrated in the CD-ROM format include
CIRC, EDC and ECC. Typically the bit error rate of CD-ROM equates to
10–18, which amounts to one error for every 1,000,000,000,000,000,000 bits.
Berkeley Sockets
(See Socket.)
Berners-Lee, Tim
The original architect of the World Wide Web, and
inventor of its accompanying HTML (Hypertext Markup Language). The birth-
place of HTML is considered to be CERN in Geneva. These origins LED the
original server to be referred to as the CERN server. The conceptual birth
of the Web might be accredited to the visionary Vennevar Bush through his
55

Beta copy
momentous article, ‘As We May Think.’ Theodore Nelson is also signiﬁcant
(but much more contemporary), through his work Literary Machines, and the
project Xanadu. If Vannevar Bush and Ted Nelson were responsible for putting
forward the concept of the Web, then Tim Berners-Lee must be considered
its architect.
(See IP, HTML, HTTP, Web and Xanadu.)
Beta copy
A test copy of a software product that has yet to be commer-
cially released. Usually beta copies are distributed externally to beta test sites.
(See Alpha.)
BIAC
Business Industry Advisory Council.
Bi-directional
1. A highly compressed frame in an MPEG-1 data stream.
(See MPEG.) 2. A link which offers upstream and downstream data trans-
mission. 3. A link in an information structure that can be following in either
direction.
Big Blue
A nickname for IBM. It originates from the fact that early IBM
mainframes were painted blue.
BIN (Bank Identiﬁcation Number)
A three or ﬁve-digit code that adheres
to the ISO 8663 recommendation and dictates account numbers that are owned
by card companies.
Binary
A counting system comprising only two states, either ‘1’ or ‘0’.
All electronic ﬁles are stored in binary form. Binary ﬁles generally contain
executable programs and program data, and have the. EXE or. COM extension.
BIOS (Basic Input Output System)
A program stored in ﬁrmware on
all PCs and includes low-level code for implementing I/O operations, startup
code and the setup program. The setup program permits the system to be
conﬁgured, and is invoked by pressing the Del key during the memory check,
when the system is booting.
BISAC
Book Industry Systems Advisory Committee.
B-ISDN (Broadband ISDN)
An access technology that offers a wider
bandwidth than conventional (narrow bandwidth) N-ISDN, which offers data
transfer rates of 64 KBits/second per single connection. Low-end B-ISDN imple-
mentations include multiple 64 Kbits/second channels. For instance videocon-
ferencing architectures that feature FMFSV might include 6∗64 bits/second
channels, yielding a collective bandwidth of 384 Kbits/second.
(See Access technology and ISDN.)
56

Block
Bit
A single, indivisible item of binary data that might be ‘1’ or ‘0’.
Bit error rate
(See BER.)
BitBlt
1. (BIT-BLock Transfer) A method of copying areas of an image
from one point to the next. 2. (BIT-boundary BLock Transfer) A Windows
GDI (Graphics Device Interface) function that moves rectangular geometric
shapes such as windows and dialogue boxes.
BitEdit
An 8 bit bitmap editor supplied with Video for Windows (VfW)
and Asymetrix Multimedia ToolBook. Multiple instances of BitEdit program
(which is supplied with VfW) may be run.
Bitmap
An image represented by pixel data which deﬁnes each pixel. The
pixel data is referred to as bit map. Can provide intricate control over graphics
resulting in high quality.
(See Image Compression, DCT and JPEG.)
Bitmapped Display
Graphic controller and display partnership, where
pixel data representing each pixel is stored in memory
(See Bit Map).
Black
An account or balance that is in credit.
Black box
A conceptual view of software or hardware where the internal
architecture and operation are ignored. All that is considered are input and
output values.
Black list
A list of barred equipment held in an EIR (Equipment Iden-
tiﬁcation Register) of a mobile network. The EIR has a grey list of faulty
equipment or for devices that are registered for no services, and a white list
for registered users.
(See 2G and GSM.)
BLOB (Binary Large Object)
An item of binary data that is of no spe-
ciﬁc type, but is identiﬁed simply as containing some sort of digital data. It
may be a graphic, a video ﬁle, a midi ﬁle, a wave audio ﬁle, a program ﬁle,
or any type of digital data.
(See DBMS and OODBMS.)
Block
1. A segment of code that is enclosed within opening ‘{’ and closing
‘}’ braces. 2. A block of 2,352 Bytes on a CD/CD-ROM track. (See CD-ROM.)
3. A section in a program.
57

Block address
Block address
(See Absolute Addressing.)
Blue Book
A speciﬁcation for multi-session CDs, and was announced by
Sony, Philips, Apple and Microsoft.
(See CD-ROM.)
BlueTooth
A wireless connection technology for home appliances.
BMP
A graphics ﬁle format that tends to lead to larger ﬁles than more
compressed variants such as Compuserve’s GIF and JPEG.
(See JPEG.)
BNC
A connector consisting of round socket and plug which are locked
together with a twist. It was invented by the engineers Neill and Concelman
at Bell Laboratories.
Body suit
An item of clothing that provides a means of interfacing a
user with a virtual or synthesised environment. It permits user-interaction to
varying degrees that extend from giving simple hand signals, to grasping
and manipulating virtual objects; it may also provide a means of stimulating
the user’s sensory organs through changes in temperature, pressure, moisture
levels and so on. It may be used for:
• telepresence and telemanipulation
• computer aided design
• computer games
• translating sign language into speech
• researching the effectiveness of manual or semi-automatic processes so as
to reﬁne ergonomic environments and minimise the risk of RSI (Repetitive
Strain Injury)
• sports medicine.
Low speciﬁcation suits simply sense the ﬂexing of limbs and ﬁngers using
silica ﬁbres of the sort commonly used for data transmission and telephone
networks. A silica or optic ﬁbre is embedded along the length of jointed limbs.
The operation hinges on the fact that the losses experienced by a beam of
light propagated in a silica ﬁbre increase when the ﬁbre is physically bent.
The resultant varying signal is referred to as bend information. The light
sources use LEDs (Light Emitting Diodes). More highly speciﬁed variants
include a greater number of optic ﬁbres or ﬂex sensors to relay a greater
number of movements. These will also contain a detection system that provides
the spatial 3-D coordinates of the entire suit. The level of sophistication can
extend to integrated transducers that sense angular rotation in three dimensions,
temperature, pressure and moisture. Tactile feedback devices might also be
included in the form of inﬂatable bladders.
(See LED, Optic ﬁbre and VR.)
58

Bps
Bolt-on-application
An application that is coupled with another, as is a
SET implementation that is added to a Merchant Commerce Server.
Bookmark
A marker inserted at a speciﬁc point in a document so as it
may be revisited with ease.
Boolean
A variable type that has one of two states: either yes or no.
Named after Irish mathematician George Boole who pioneered logic-based
Boolean algebra, they feature in programming languages search engines and
databases. AND, OR, NOR, NAND and NOT are Boolean operators. They
are also logic gates used in electronics and in the architecture of digital com-
ponents, and their behaviour can be described using a truth table. A truth
table is a simple table which shows the output obtained for each and every
combination of inputs.
Borland
A software company, whose name was changed to Inprise in
1998. It is best known for programming tools such as Delphi, Turbo Pascal
and Turbo C++, as well as business applications. It is headquartered in Scotts
Valley, CA. Its lesser known products include the Sprint word processor for
DOS. The company was founded by Philippe Kahn, and its initial rapid growth
can be attributed largely to its PC programming tools that include Turbo Pas-
cal. Inprise (UK) International is headquartered in Twyford, and its European
headquarters are considered to be in Amsterdam. Kahn is now the President
of StarFish.
(See C++ and Inprise.)
Borland JBuilder
(See Jbuilder.)
Borland Turbo C++
An implementation of C, based on the object-
oriented programming (OOP) model.
(See C++, Java, Object and OO.)
Bottom-up analysis
A design approach, where the process begins with
the design of low-level components, and progresses to the design of higher
level components; top-down analysis represents the opposite.
(See Top-down analysis.)
Bps (bits per second)
A measurement of data transfer rate. Modems are
frequently speciﬁed in terms of their data transmission and reception speeds.
(See Modem and V-standards.)
59

Brand certiﬁcate authority
Brand certiﬁcate authority
A party authorised by a credit card company
like Visa or MasterCard to carry out digital certiﬁcate management.
Branded payment card
A credit card or charge card that has the brand
of a sufﬁciently large company like American Express, Visa or Mastercard.
BRI ISDN (Basic Rate Interface Integrated Services Digital Network)
access technology that provides two 64 Kbits/sec bearer (B) channels, and one
16 Kbps data (D) channel for signaling. The B channels carry user data. ISDN
drives improvements through voice telephony, Internet access, and videocon-
ferencing. Internationally agreed ISDN standards are maintained by the ITU.
International ISDN standards include:
• North America – National ISDN-1AT&T 5ESS
• Europe – Euro ISDN (CTR 4)
• Japan – INS-64
• France – VN-3
• Australia – AUSTEL TS013
(See ISDN.)
Broadband
A term used to describe access technologies and networks that
typically offer bandwidths of 2 Mbits/sec and more, though narrow bandwidth
networks and access technologies may also be described as broadband. Broad-
band offers high speed data transfer and is useful for multimedia networks.
(See Access technology, ATM and ISDN.)
Broadcast Quality
1. A video recording whose quality approximates that
of broadcast television. (See MPEG.) 2. A camcorder able to provide video
recordings that are considered broadcast quality.
Browse (browsing)
A process of following the intricate paths through a
hypertext-based information structure. The user passes to and from nodes or
objects. In the context of the Internet, it has come to be known as surﬁng. It
normally takes place at the micro-level but can also exist at the macro-level
also, where the user may be described as navigating as opposed to browsing.
The line that divides navigating from browsing is made clearer by considering
the difference between a walker and a motorist. The motorist gains a high
level view of travel, and is thus navigating. The walker’s experience of a
journey is inﬁnitely more detailed, hence the walker is browsing.
(See Browser, Client, Microsoft Internet Explorer and Netscape Navigator.)
Browser
An application that permits the user to browse the World Wide
Web. The most popular Web browsers are Netscape Navigator and Microsoft
60

Browser
Internet Explorer. Earlier implementations include Cello and Mosaic. A mod-
ern browser allows users to:
• add Web sites/pages to an address book or a folder called Favourites
• navigate backwards and forwards through visited Web pages
• open a URL that is entered using the keyboard
• playback streaming audio and video using a plug-in or ActiveX control
• playback streaming multimedia using an appropriate plug-in or ActiveX
control.
• send e-mail messages – though a Browser is not an e-mail client/application
• specify various preferences including the appearance of Web pages when
displayed
• open HTML ﬁles that might be local or remote
• chat in real-time, using an appropriately enabled Browser
• view Web pages that contain Java applets (using a Java enabled browser)
• download ﬁles
• make telephone calls over the Internet using an appropriate Web phone
• take part in videoconferences using appropriate hardware and software.
(See World Wide Web and Active Desktop.)
Back and
forward
browse buttons
Stop − terminate download of HTML pages/information
Refresh − reload HTML pages/information
Home − go to the home page of the connected Web site
Search − connect with a search engine on the Web
Favourites − browse and choose selected Web sites
History − browse and select previously visited Web pages
Channels − browse and select Active Channels
Fullscreen − switch on or off the Fullscreen mode
Mail − send and receive e-mail
Print − print Web pages
Edit − edit Web pages
61

Brute Force Attack
History of
selectable
actions
Favourites may be used to access, 
and to add to, your most frequently
visited Web sites.
Links to
Web addresses
Current Web
address
Brute Force Attack
An attempt to crack a cryptosystem. Using public
key cryptography, the attacker usually has the public key, and attempts to
gain the private key.
(See Brute Force RSA Factoring.)
Brute Force RSA Factoring
A means of deciphering RSA. Attackers
may be armed with the public-key (n,e), and then attempt to determine d in
order to gain the private-key (n,d). This process begins by factorising n in
order to yield the two large primes that are a common method of deciphering
RSA. Other methods, such as calculating (p −1)(q −1), and attempting to
determine d through iterative techniques are deemed equally difﬁcult.
Factoring may be carried using the algorithms of:
• Trial division that attempts to ﬁnd all the prime numbers <= sqrt(n)
• Quadratic Sieve (QS) that is deemed fastest for numbers that are less than
110 digits
• Multiple Polynomial Quadratic Sieve (MPQS)
• Double Large Prime Variation of the MPQS
• Number Field Sieve (NFS) that is the fastest algorithm for numbers larger
than 110 digits.
In 1977 Rivest asserted that it would take 40 quadrillion years to factor a
125-digit number. However, the 1994 factoring of RSA129 took about 5000
MIPS-years. A MIPS-year equates to 1,000,000 instruction per second over a
period of one year.
(See Cryptography and RSA.)
62

Burst mode data transfer
BSD (Berkeley Software Distribution.)
An acronym once used for the
Berkeley version of UNIX. 4.4BSD Lite 2 and FreeBSD – a ‘ﬂavor’ of 4.4 BSD,
is used in the Mac OS X.
BSR
Board of Standards Review – ANSI.
BT (British Telecommunications)
A UK-based international telecom-
munications operator (or telco). It evolved as a state-owned enterprise, but
was privatised in the 1980s by the British conservative government, which
was LED by Margaret Thatcher.
BTLZ (British Telecom Lempel-Ziv)
A data compression technique syn-
onymous with modem-based data communications. It can be assumed to yield
a compression ratio of around 4 : 1.
(See Compression.)
Buffer
A quantity of RAM (Random Access Memory) that improves
the rate at which data may be transferred between computers and periph-
eral devices.
(See Queue.)
buffered window
A window with a memory buffer that holds rendered
drawings.
Bug
A hardware or software fault. The ﬁrst recorded case of an actual
bug was witnessed by Grace Hopper, a computer pioneer who did much work
in developing valve computers and high-level languages. Using the Harvard
Mk 2 computer she discovered a hardware fault caused by a moth caught
between the contacts of a relay. After debugging the system, the unfortunate
moth was entered in the computer’s log at 15.45, 9 September 1945. The
process of authoring or developing multimedia often requires extensive testing
and debugging.
Build
1. A version number which denotes the version of a program or
operating system. It is interchangeable with the term development build. 2. A
word used to describe the process of developing hardware or software.
bundle
A directory that stores executable code and related resources.
Burst mode data transfer
1. A heightened volume of data trafﬁc over
a network. 2. A maximum, unsustainable data transfer rate from a CD-ROM
drive. It is many times greater than the average data transfer rate, and is
sustainable for a limited period only.
63

Bush, Vannevar
Bush, Vannevar
A science advisor to President Roosevelt. He put forward
a paradigm for information storage and retrieval in the 1940s. He may be con-
sidered the originator of the Internet concept, and of the ‘relational model’ for
storing and retrieving information. His name, therefore, is linked with stan-
dalone multimedia as well as with multimedia on the Internet. Principal facets
of the Internet such as World Wide Web (WWW) and the many hypertext-
based navigation and browsing tools have their origins in Bush’s vision. His
momentous article ‘As We May Think’, covering what he called Memex, was
published in Atlantic Monthly. Hypertext evangelist, Ted Nelson admitted
publicly that he may have read this article.
(See Hypertext, Web and Xanadu.)
Business audio
A program that permits you to control a computer using
voice commands. It is possible to do the same with dictation systems such as
IBM ViaVoice.
Depending upon which system is used, they also have proofreading and
text-to-speech capabilities. Microsoft Windows Sound System is a typical
example of a business audio system. Modern business audio tools are voice
independent.
(See Speech recognition, Wave audio and ViaVoice.)
Business Intelligence
A broad term that leads to decision making that may be
automated requiring no human intervention, semi-automated, or automated. It may
be based on DSS (Decision Support Systems) that use data warehousing and OLAP
to answer questions about operations including Sales and Supply chains, etc. Other
examples include automated fraud detection and anti money laundering.
Business Process Re-engineering
A procedure that aims to optimise an enter-
prise in terms of proﬁtability. It focuses on processes rather than functions, and
involves design, evolution and implementation of integrated systems, reorganisation
of personnel, and infrastructure.
Business system engineering
A collective term used to describe the pro-
cesses of implementing business system, which fulﬁls an enterprise’s require-
ments. The business system includes:
• business processes
• IS (Information Systems)
• personnel.
Business to business
(See B2B.)
Button
An active area on screen, which may be an iconic representation of
an option, feature or application. Windows buttons are labeled with appropriate
identifying text such as Close or OK. Using visual programming tools buttons
64

Bytecode
can be created simply by drawing them on screen. Once drawn they become
objects that can be moved or copied. Their colour, frame thickness, fonts and
other attributes can be altered usually by right-clicking them. As is the case
with all event driven applications development tools, the button is responsive
to a mouse click. Its behaviour or response to such an event is determined
by its method which usually takes the form of short segment of code. The
method or code might run a video clip, for instance. Buttons can also be
selected using the keyboard, usually by pressing the Alt key together with an
appropriate letter that corresponds with a letter in the button’s label. Using
development tools such as MS Visual Basic, you simply draw buttons and
then add methods (code) to them, thus determining their behaviour.
(See ToolBook and Visual Basic.)
Byte
1. A piece of digital information that is eight bits in length. 2. A
computer magazine (BYTE) published by McGraw-Hill.
Bytecode
A machine language used by virtual processors for interpretation
and program execution. Such programming languages include the OO variants
Java and SmallTalk. These languages are suited to heterogeneous environ-
ments, and may therefore be deployed effectively over the Web as applets. The
virtual processor physically exists on the client, and is implemented in soft-
ware, and is independent of hardware and accompanying operating systems.
They may not be as responsive as native code components, where perhaps
an ActiveX control is running on a Windows platform. However, any perfor-
mance difference may be eradicated through the hardware implementation of
the virtual processor on the client system, in which case it ceases to be virtual.
(See Java Virtual Machine, Java and OOP.)
65


C
C
A high-level programming language that is little used in industry today
because it is considered obsolete. Its OOP version is Objective-C that adds
OO constructs to the original C syntax, permitting messages to be sent to
objects.
(See Objective-C, C++ and C#.)
C# (C sharp.)
A Microsoft OO programming language that has roots in
C and C++ and competes with languages like Java and to a lesser extent
Objective-C. It may be used with XML in the Microsoft .NET framework.
C# offers:
• type-safety
• garbage collection
• simpliﬁed type declarations
• versioning.
(See C, C++ and Java.)
C++
An object-oriented version of the C programming language. Like
modern programming languages such as Java, it provides the programmer
with OO methodologies. Bjarne Stroustrup evolved C++ from C, which has
links with BCPL (Basic Combined Programming Language). It extends the C
programming language through the inclusion of the OO concepts of:
• inheritance
• polymorphism
• encapsulation
• data hiding.
(See Inheritance, Polymorphism, Encapsulation, Data Hiding.)
ANSI C++ is an internationally agreed standard for the C++ programming
language.
67

C++
#INCLUDE <FILE>
When compiled the #include statement is implemented by
the preprocessor, which reads the contents of a named ﬁle.
MAIN ()
A C++ program must have a main () function, which begins and
ends with open { and close } braces. This is the ﬁrst function called when the
program is run, and may be used to deﬁne variable types.
COMMENTS
Single-line comments in a C++ program must begin with //, and
multiple line comments begin and end with /* and */.
SYNTAX (BASIC)
All statements have a semi colon (;) as their sufﬁx. White
space may be included, which is ignored by the compiler. Compound statements
such as those of a function or a subroutine begin with a single open brace “{”, and
end with a closing brace “}”.
C++ VARIABLES
C++ variable types may be deﬁned as follows:
#include iostream()
main()
{
char find;
float prime;
double prime large;
short int xx;
long int xxxx;
unsigned short int yy;
yy=35;
//assign the
unsigned long int yyyy;
}
/* the character variable find, may store 256
character values */
// the variable prime, may store signed 4Byte values
/* the variable prime large, may store signed 8Byte
values*/
// the variable xx, may store signed 2Byte values
// the variable xxxx, may store signed 4Byte values
// the variable yy, may store unsigned 2Byte values
// the variable yyyy, may store unsigned 4Byte values
Deﬁned variables may be equated to values using the statement:
yy=35;
Variables may be deﬁned, and assigned values using the statement:
unsigned short int xx=45;
Multiple variables of the same type are deﬁned using a comma as a separator:
unsigned long int yyyy, yflow
68

C++
TYPEDEF
A method of deﬁning types and vaiables. Using typedef, mnemonics
may be assigned to the statements used to deﬁne variables and their types. The fol-
lowing statement assigns the word xxxx to the unsigned short int statement:
#include <filename>
typedef unsigned short int xxxx;
int main ()
{
xxxx coordinate;
// define coordinate as an unsigned short integer
variable
}
C++ LITERAL CONSTANTS
A variable may be assigned a value that is
considered a literal constant:
int yearsAfter=25;
A literal constant may also be used when performing arithmetic operations on vari-
ables. In the following statement where the time variable is assigned to the product
of the variable present and 10, 10 is considered a literal constant:
time=present*10
C++ SYMBOLIC CONSTANT
A symbolic constant has a name, and is assigned
an unchanging value. It may be used just like an integer constant. Symbolic constants
improve program maintenance and updating; a single change made to a symbolic
constant, is echoed at every point it may occur.
A symbolic constant multiplier may be assigned the value 10 using the statement:
#define multiplier 10
or,
const unsigned short int multiplier = 10
C++ ENUMERATED CONSTANTS
Enumerated constants take the form of
a type, and are a useful shorthand for deﬁning a number of what might be related
constants. The following code deﬁnes the constants back, forward, left, and right,
where Move is the enumeration.
enum Move { back=4, forward, left=6, right=3};
The forward constant is assigned the value 5, an increment (of one) relative to the
previously deﬁned constant back.
C++ PRECEDENCE
In C++, arithmetic operators have a precedence value.
These indicate the order in which such operators are implemented is signiﬁcant with
expressions such as:
dev = xx + yy * zz + yy;
69

C++ to IDL language mapping
Control over such arithmetic operations is obtained using parentheses, i.e:
dev = (xx + yy) * zz;
Parentheses may be nested.
C++ IF STATEMENT
The If statement determines whether or not the ensuing
statement is executed, based on a single condition:
{
if
(xxx = yyy)
transform = Scale;
}
C++ IF. . . ELSE STATEMENT
The If. . . else statement is used to implement
either one of two statements:
{
if
(xxx = yyy)
transform = Scale;
else
transform = Scale * adjust;
}
C++ LOGICAL OPERATORS
Logical AND, OR and NOT are implemented
using the syntax ‘&&’, ‘||’, and ‘!’.
(See Java, Object, and OOP.)
C++ to IDL language mapping
A mapping that equates C++ to the
IDL equivalent.
Cabbing
A method of compressing objects such as Active X controls
and Java objects into a single CAB ﬁle. This optimises their rate of transfer
across networks.
(See ActiveX.)
Cable modem
A modem that may operate over cable TV networks. The
speed of operation is many times greater than the fastest analogue modems.
Typically, a cable modem’s data transfer rate is considerably greater down-
stream than it is upstream. For example, the Motorola CyberSurf cable modem
offers an upstream rate of 768 Kbps and a downstream rate of 10 Mbps. Com-
peting cable modems have downstream rates approaching 30 Mbps and faster.
Cable modems offer high speed access to the Internet, and are offered as extras
by such ISPs as Telstra Big Pond (Australia).
(See Access technology, ADSL and ISDN.)
70

Cardholder
Cache
1. A segment of SRAM (Static Random Access Memory) that
drives processor performance gains. Its rationale is to expedite the rate at
which data may be read from, and written to, memory. It may be an inte-
gral part of the processor (internal), or external in the form of dedicated
SRAM chips on the PC motherboard. The fast speed of SRAM overcomes
the slower speed of DRAM (Dynamic Random Access Memory) making up
the system memory. They signiﬁcantly improve system performance. Exter-
nal memory cache sizes are relatively small, ranging from just 128 KBytes to
1 MByte in size. An algorithm is used to estimate what portions of system
memory should reside in the memory cache. The Pentium Pro has an internal
cache accommodated on a single die or chip. 2. An area of memory or hard
disk used as a temporary store for downloaded HTML ﬁles and data, including
URLs. The size of the cache may be speciﬁed. (See Browser.) 3. A hard disk
controller that expedites hard disk performance. A hard disk cache controller
typically comprises MBytes of RAM, and is usually expandable. It speeds
up read/write operations by using its on-board RAM as an intermediate data
store between disk and system memory. Based upon which data is most often
requested, a caching algorithm estimates which portions of hard disk should
reside in on-board RAM, thus making it more readily available. The ingenuity
of this technique simply takes advantage of the inescapable fact that a small
percentage of disk data is rewritten and accessed most frequently. The decision
making process which is insulated from the system processor fuels the view
that it is an intelligent controller. Cache controllers are the most expensive of
all variants, and in terms of random access and data transfer rate they may
be assumed to outperform all others. 4. A RAID often features a cache for
improved performance. (See RAID.)
Caffeine
A programming environment that has similarities with RMI and
is produced by Netscape and Visigenic, and requires VisiBroker for Java, and
allows developers to create CORBA distributed objects without programming
with CORBA IDL.
Capture reversal
An event that sees the reversal of a capture response
when goods are returned after the completion of a sale.
Carbon
A set of programming interfaces for the Mac OS X, derived from
earlier versions of the Mac OS. Carbon applications may run on Mac OS X,
OS 9, and OS 8.1.
Card association
A bank that supports franchise for shown card brands.
Card issuer
A card company or bank that has powers to grant credit or
bank cards.
Cardholder
An authorised owner and user of a credit card or bank card.
71

Card-not-present
Card-not-present
A card transaction where there is no physical evidence
of the card, and typically exists in a MOTO (Mail Order/Telephone Order)
scenario.
Cardshield
A service proved by Shielded Technologies Inc. that may be
applied in the development of a Web commerce solution that includes credit
card transactions.
Carrier
A carrier signal is used to transport a signal over media that may
be physical or wireless. The carrier might be encoded using frequency mod-
ulation (FM), amplitude modulation (AM), or another modulation technique.
CAS
China Association for Standardization.
Casting
A process where one data type is converted into another.
CBA
Canadian Bankers Association.
CBEMA
Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers Association.
CCC
Customs Cooperative Council–an international organisation.
CCIR 601
A standard for uncompressed digital video, that also known
as D1. Using CCIR 601 in order to digitise a 525-line NTSC signal run-
ning at 30 frames per second, its chrominance elements U and V, and its
luminance Y elements are digitised individually. The Y element is digitised
using 858 samples per line, and the U and V elements each are digitised using
429 samples per line. Each pixel is generated using 10 bits per sample. The
digital video is coded at 270 Mbits/sec which is derived as follows:
Y: 858 * 525 * 30 * 10 = 135 Mbits/sec
U: 429 * 525 * 30 * 10 = 67.5 Mbits/sec
V: 429 * 525 * 30 * 10 = 67.5 Mbits/sec
270 Mbits/sec
(See DCT, MPEG, MPEG-1, MPEG-2, Multimedia and Video.)
CCITT
International Telegraph & Telephone Consultative Committee
(that has become ITU-T).
CCITT (Committ´ee Consultatif International T´elephonique et T´el´e-
graphic)
An international standards organisation that issues recommen-
dations and standards for communications.
CD
(See CD-ROM.)
72

CD-ROM
CD-R (CD-Recordable)
A drive capable of writing to blank CD-R discs,
usually in a variety of different formats including Video CD, Photo CD, CD-
ROM XA, CD-I and CD-ROM. The mid 1990s saw the launch of more
affordable CD-R drives, bringing low-volume CD-ROM publishing to the
desktop. Important factors to consider when acquiring CD-R drives include:
• The maximum data capacities supported.
• The read rate of the drive, which may be single-speed, double-speed, triple-
speed, quad-speed or faster.
• The disc recording speed, which may be single-speed, double-speed, triple-
speed, quad-speed or even faster. High recording speeds yield saving in
terms of person hours consumed.
• The disc formats supported, which might include audio CD, CD-ROM,
CD-ROM XA, CD-I, Photo CD and Video CD.
• The interface type; most operate over the SCSI bus variants.
• What type of interface software is provided? It is important that this should
be user friendly.
(See CD-ROM and DVD.)
CD-ROM (Compact Disc–Read Only Memory)
A universal distribu-
tion medium based on Compact Disc. It was the ﬁrst viable multimedia
distribution medium. Announced in 1983 it is typically a 12 cm diame-
ter optical disc offering data capacity in the hundreds of MBytes range.
The standard 12-cm-diameter CD-ROM supports up to about 660 MBytes
(692,060,000 Bytes) data capacity. A single disc is equivalent to between
approximately 400 1.44 MByte ﬂoppy disks or 1,500 360 KByte ﬂoppy disks.
8-cm-diameter CD-ROMs are also available.
1.2 mm
Printed surface
Clear polycarbonate base
Aluminium or gold metallisation
Protective lacquer
Pit
Land
CD-ROM disc cross-section
Like audio CD, a CD-ROM disc physically consists of a metallic disc bonded
to a polycarbonate base. This is coated with a transparent, protective lacquer.
73

CD-ROM data block
A track spiraling from its centre measures some 5 km long, and is arranged at
a density of 16,000 tracks per inch.
Audio CD
12 bytes 4 bytes
2048 bytes
2336 bytes
2352 bytes
12 bytes
CD-ROM/CD block
4 bytes
Sync
Header
User data
288 bytes
Error
detection
and
correction
CD-ROM Mode 1
CD-ROM Mode 2
The CD-ROM physical format includes:
• Mode 1 data blocks that are used to store code and data where accuracy
is critical.
• Mode 2 data blocks that are used to store data that might be impervious to
miner errors.
Data blocks are supported by all fully speciﬁed CD-ROM drives. A one hour
Mode 1 disc yields 527 MBytes data capacity and Mode 2 gives 602 MBytes
data capacity. A Mode 1 data block will yield just 2,048 Bytes (2 KBytes) user
data, while Mode 2 capacitates 2.28 KBytes user data.
(See CD-ROM data block and DVD.)
CD-ROM data block
A CD-ROM data block has 2,352 Bytes. User data
yielded by each block is a function of the Mode of operation.
CD-ROM drive
A device for reading CD-ROM discs. It may be portable,
external or integral to the computer/multimedia system. Modern drives are able
to read Mode 1 and Mode 2 discs, as well as audio CDs. Principal factors
which govern the performance of a CD-ROM drive include access time and
data transfer rate. In general, a CD-ROM drive may be speciﬁed in terms of
the following information:
• Access time; highly speciﬁed drives may offer access times little longer
than 100ms.
• Average data transfer rate may be generally speciﬁed in terms of how fast the
disc is rotated; a single-speed drive will give a data transfer rate of around
150 KBytes/sec. This data rate is broadly doubled, tripled and quadrupled
using double-, triple-, and quad-speed drives.
74

CGI
• The physical interface type may be proprietary, IDE, SCSI, SCSI-2 or use
may be made of a PCMCIA card or parallel port. H
• Compatibility in terms of disc formats that may be read is generally speciﬁed
in terms of 8 cm-diameter CD-ROM, CD-ROM XA, linear CD-I, Video CD
and Photo CD.
• Physical characteristics include whether the drive is internal, external or
portable.
• The maximum number of drives that may be daisychained.
(See DVD.)
Certiﬁcate authority
A third party that issues digital certiﬁcates for creat-
ing digital signatures and public/private keys. The CA seeks to guarantee that
individuals granted certiﬁcates are identiﬁed. The CA may have an agreement
with a ﬁnancial institution that provides conﬁrmation of individual’s identity.
CFM (Code Fragment Manager)
The library manager and code loader
for Apple Carbon PEF object ﬁles.
(See Carbon.)
CGI (Common
Gateway
Interface)
A
protocol
that
provides
bi-
directional information ﬂow within the active or dynamic Web model, and
may be perceived as permitting users to interact with remote applications such
as E-business implementations. It is a protocol that provides bi-directional
information ﬂow between a HTTP server and HTTP client. The resulting
interactivity on the client side, permits data entry and the editing of HTML
documents. The Common Gateway Interface (CGI) may connect the HTTP
server and its applications and databases. CGI scripts are created using a
scripting language or programming tool. CGI may be used to:
• query databases and post the output to HTML documents.
• generate HTML forms for data entry.
• interact with the indexes of on-line documents to produce searching and
retrieval features.
• interact with email.
CGI programming is possible using Unix, Windows and Macintosh servers.
CGI scripts may be created using:
•
Perl
• Apple Script
CGI programs may be created using almost any high level programming lan-
guage including:
• C++
• Visual Basic
• et al.
75

CGI environment variables
The protocol that is CGI bases itself on standard environment variables that
are sometimes extended by the Web server used.
(See CGI environment variables.)
CGI environment variables
A set of variables that deﬁne the CGI (Com-
mon Gateway Interface), and are normally set when a CGI script or program
is called by using the:
• GET method where the URL deﬁnes the CGI program (such as credit.cgi
for example) and the accompanying data used by the server that follows
the question mark:
www.FrancisBotto.com/cgi-bin/credit.cgi?subject
=transaction
• POST method in which the program is speciﬁed as part of the URL, passing
data using the requester path: which is a uni-directional link from the client
to the server.
www.FrancisBotto.com/cgi-bin/credit.cgi
HTTP ACCEPT
Holds the ‘Accept:’ headers from the client.
HTTP COOKIE
Holds the contents of ‘Cookie:’ headers from the client.
HTTP FROM
Holds the contents of the ‘From:’ header from the client that may
be the client’s:
• Correct e-mail address if not withheld
• Incorrect e-mail address which is simply false, or entered in error.
HTTP REFERER
Holds the contents of the ‘Referer:’ header from the client,
containing a URL.
HTTP USER AGENT
Holds the contents of the ‘User-Agent:’ header from the
client, containing the Browser’s name.
PATH INFO
Holds the URL’s sufﬁx or that data which follows the script’s name.
QUERY STRING
Holds the ‘query’ part of an HTTP GET request that is the
URL’s sufﬁx portion following ‘?’.
REMOTE ADDRESS
Holds the client’s or proxy’s IP address from where the
request is being made.
REMOTE HOST
Holds the hostname of the client or proxy making the request, or
its IP address only when NO DNS HOSTNAMES is deﬁned in the conﬁg.h ﬁle.
SCRIPT NAME
Holds the name and path of the CGI script being executed.
76

Checksum validation
SERVER SOFTWARE
Holds the name and perhaps version of the server software.
SERVER NAME
Contains name of host on which server is running.
SERVER PROTOCOL
Contains ‘CGI 1.1’.
SERVER PORT
Holds the port on which server is running.
(See CGI.)
CGI program
(See CGI.)
CGI Script
(See CGI.)
CGI scripting language
A language that may be used to create CGI
programs or scripts.
(See CGI.)
Chargeback
1. An instance when an end-user contests a charge through
their bank, and the previous transaction amounts are reversed. 2. An instance
when a customer account is credited with a previously charged amount.
Charging gateway
A gateway in a mobile network that records service
usage on a time-charged or packet-used basis.
Chat
1. A real-time, text-based communications medium, carried out over
a network, or over the Internet. (See IRC.) 2. A Windows NT-based server that
is part of the MCIS. (See MCIS.) The Chat server provides real-time text-based
communications. The communications may be private (one-to-one), one-to-
many, or conferences. It has its own proprietary protocol and supports the
IRC protocol. A Chat SDK and ActiveX control, permit the integration of
Chat functionality, where a single server may support up to 48,000 users.
Checksum validation
A method of validating credit card numbers by
using the mod 10 check digit algorithm and is implemented by:
1. Doubling the value of alternative digits of the credit card number by begin-
ning with the second digit:
1
3
6
5
8
9
7
6
2
4
2
7
6
0
8
7
6
10
18
12
8
14
0
14
2. Adding the product values to the alternate digits beginning with the ﬁrst:
7
+
16
+
26
+
17
+
10
+
16
+
6
+
22
=
120
77

Ciphertext
In this instance the credit card number has passed the validity check because
the result is evenly divisible by 10.
Ciphertext
An input into a decryption algorithm that sees it returned
to plaintext.
(See Ciphertest, Plaintext, Encryption algorithm, SET, Brute Force, cryp-
tosystem,
RSA,
public
key
encryption,
asymmetric,
Transposition
and
Dictionary attack.)
class
A class deﬁnition declares data (or instance variables in Objective-
C) and deﬁnes methods. Objects with the same data (or instance variable)
types and with access to the same methods belong to the same class.
Class diagram
A pictorial representation of the class hierarchy, including
links of inheritance, revealing sub-classes and their superclasses. It illustrates
how interfaces and methods are inherited within the class hierarchy of an
architecture.
(See C++ and Java.)
Classic
An application environment for the Mac OS X that runs non-
Carbon Mac OS software.
Classpath
A path used by a Java program that points to folders
containing classes, and it may be downloaded dynamically to a client using
a codebase.
Clicks and Mortar
A term used to describe a business that is both phys-
ically operating in a traditional high-street or shopping mall, and is selling via
an e-business site.
clickstream data
A trail of electronic information left at Web sites fol-
lowing user interaction. It can be stored by a Website’s server and may be
used to provide usage habits.
Click-Through
(See Impression.)
Client
1. A collective portable or desktop system that provides the human
machine interface to a client/server architecture, including:
• e-mail client such as Microsoft Outlook for receiving and sending e-mail
messages
• client software such as Web browsers which may be Netscape, Explorer
or HotJava
• client operating system which is typically Windows 95/98/2000/NT.
78

Client/server
Between clients and servers there may be a number of hardware and software
entities, including:
• Access technologies such as ISDN or wireless media such as GSM
• Modems or NIC (Network Interface Cards)
• Protocols such as TCP/IP at the transport layer, HTTP and UDP
• Middleware such as those based on the IDLs of DCOM or CORBA NS that
provide a means of exchanging messages
• ORB (Object Request Broker).
(See OSI, TCP/IP, HTTP and UDP.) 2. In the context of middleware based
on the OMG Notiﬁcation Services, such client applications are termed con-
sumers, while the server applications become suppliers or publishers. In this
context, clients may operate according to the push and pull models within the
client/server architecture. (See CORBA NS.) 3. A device or appliance that is
driven by remote server applications and data. It may be a portable device
such as a PDA or palmtop appliance manufactured by enterprises that include
Psion, Casio and 3Com. (See CORBA NS and Client/server.)
Client/server
A distributed system architecture where client systems are connected to
server systems. The client provides an interface to applications and data that
is stored on the server. The interface may be provided through a browser such
as the:
• Microsoft Explorer
• Netscape Navigator
• Sunsoft HotJava.
Client activity and processing is said to be on the client-side, while server
activity and processing is on the server-side. The network that provides con-
nection between clients and servers might be a:
• LAN
• WAN
• Internet
• intranet.
Industry client/server standards for database manipulation include:
• ODBC (Open Database Connectivity), which is the most common
• IDAPI (Integrated Database Application Programming Interface).
Client/server network protocols include:
• IP/TCP
• IPX (Internet Packet eXchange).
79

Client/server
Using the three-element representation of an application, the client/server
model (which is observed by the Web) may be explained.
 Data
management
Application
 Data
management
Application
 Data
management
 Data
management
 Data
management
Server
Client
Application
Presentation
 Data
management
Application
Presentation
Application
Presentation
Application
Presentation
Presentation
Presentation
Client/server logical topologies as once defined by the Gartner Group
1
2
3
4
5
Network and Access technology
The ﬁve shown topologies are:
1. Distributed presentation, which distributes a portion of the user inter-
face (UI), and may be equated to the inactive Web model, where the
browser is used only to view documents.
2. Remote presentation, which distributes the entire UI to the client system.
3. Distributed function, which divides application logic between the server
and the client. In Web context this processing distribution may be achieved
using appropriate plug-ins and ActiveX controls with Netscape Navigator
or Microsoft Internet Explorer.
4. Remote data access, which is a model that sees the so-called fat client.
This means that the client system is substantial (or ’fat’) in terms of appli-
cation logic.
5. Distributed database, which distributes the data management functions
between the client- and server-side. This conﬁguration is used in Web-
casting, where users are served information that matches their predeﬁned
criteria.
80

Codebase
Server
Client
Web client/server model with
Java applets/ActiveX
controls or plug-ins
Data
Logic
Presentation
The distribution of the three key application elements (namely Presentation,
Logic and Data or Data Management) may be used to explain the many
client/server models. This is achieved using the simple diagram below:
(See 2-tier, 3-tier, n-tier, Application, Client, Server and Webcasting.)
Client side
A term that indicates the presence of software or data on client
systems. Synonym: local.
Client software
An application that resides on the client side within a
client/server architecture.
(See Client.)
Client system
A collective system with which users interact directly, and
which is physically located on users’ desktops or in similarly close proximity.
(See Client.)
Client/server architecture
A hardware infrastructure used to platform
client/server applications. It may be 2-tier, 3-tier or n-tier.
(See 2-tier, 3-tier and n-tier.)
Cocoa
A set of frameworks for object-oriented development using the
Mac OS X and programming with Java and Objective-C to create applications.
Codebase
An entity that may be downloaded dynamically to a client
and contains a classpath to remote classes.
(See Classpath.)
81

co-location
co-location (of servers)
A term that often refers to a physical server
located on a network that does not belong to the server’s/site’s owner(s).
COM (Component Object Model)
An object model used by OLE objects
and software services. COM-based technologies include Distributed COM
(DCOM), COM+, MicrosoftTransaction Server (MTS), ActiveX Controls,
and more.
COM+
A COM enhancement that was announced at the 1997 Profes-
sional Developers Conference in San Diego, CA. It provides developers with
an improved workbench allowing them to program in almost any language,
and using many different tools, and offers backward compatibility with COM.
Commerce Server
A server solution that provides e-commerce sites, and
has business analysis tools to identify business opportunities and to perfect
online business promotions.
Command line
An editor that is used to enter commands directly. Exam-
ples include DOS and Linux command lines.
(See Linux.)
Compaq
A large international computer manufacturer and services com-
pany.
Compiled
A process by which the source code of a high-level language is
translated into machine-executable form or machine code. Generally, compiled
languages offer better run-time performance than interpreted languages.
(See C++, Java, Object, and OOP.)
Compiler
A program or program module able to convert source code
into machine-executable code. Unlike interpreter which attaches precise code
to high-level statements each time a program is run, a compiler produces
machine-executable object code once. Inexpensive to develop, BASIC inter-
preters were widely used in the microcomputer industry in the 1980s.
Compound document
A document that may integrate different document
types, and media types that emanate from different sources. The various doc-
uments may be OLE objects provided by an appropriate OLE 2.0 server.
Alternatively they may be objects of a similar architecture such as the more
modern Microsoft ActiveX component architecture. Equally, they may objects
that comply with OpenDoc or JavaBeans component architectures.
(See ActiveX, JavaBeans and OLE.)
Compound object
An object that is constructed using multiple objects.
(See C++, Java,OOP and OODBMS.)
82

Computer
Compressed Image
An image following compression through hardware
and/or software means.
(See JPEG and MPEG.)
Compression
1. A method by which data of any sort (often image and
video data) is scaled down in size, eventually consuming less storage space
and requiring a narrower bandwidth. 2. Video compression optimises both
the bandwidth and data storage capacity of media. Popular video compres-
sion schemes include Intel Indeo, MPEG-1, MPEG-2 and M-JPEG. (See
MPEG.) 3. Audio compression serves to reduce the data storage requirements
of wave audio ﬁles, and optimise the bandwidth of distribution media. (See
Wave audio.) 4. Disk compression increases the data storage capacity of hard
disks. Commercial disk compression programs include Stacker (Stac Electron-
ics) which is also available in hardware form giving improved performance
over software-only solutions. Stac Electronics made international news when
it won a $100,000,000 dollar lawsuit, resulting from Microsoft infringing its
patents for compression algorithms. 5. Batch ﬁle compression is useful for
archiving ﬁles and compressing them for distribution purposes. Compressed
program ﬁles have to be unpacked or uncompressed before they may be run.
Popular batch ﬁle compression programs include Pkzip and Lharc. 6. Data
compression to reduce the size of data parcels transmitted and received using
a modem. Standard data compression in this context include V.42bis.
Compression parameters
A video compressor setting may be used to
optimise a video sequence for playback using a target system of a given
bandwidth. MPEG compression parameters include the placement of I frames.
More general compression parameters might include interleave ratio, frame
playback speed, and compression ratio requirements. Generally the quality of
video diminishes as the compression ratio increases.
(See MPEG.)
Compression ratio
A ratio that relates the size of a data ﬁle before and
after compression. The video compression ratio using fully speciﬁed compres-
sors may be altered.
(See MPEG.)
Compressor
A hardware and/or software solution used to compress
motion video or still computer graphics. Using video compressors, it is
possible to specify a number of compression settings.
Computer
A system or appliance able to process and store digital infor-
mation. Its many components and subsystems may include:
• Processor or CPU (Central Processing Unit)
•
Modem
83

Computer graphics
• DVD-ROM drive
• Graphics engine or card
• Hard disk
• Sound card
• Electronic memory devices including RAM, SRAM, VRAM, ROM and
NVRAM
• Colour display
• Video playback device such as MPEG-1 or MPEG-2 decoder
• QWERTY Keyboard
•
Mouse
•
Microphone
• Television tuner
• Radio tuner
• Set-top box decoder
•
Scanner
(See Client, Thin client and Fat client.)
Computer graphics
A means of displaying images using a computer. The
advancement of computer graphics has unleashed numerous computer applica-
tions ranging from Computer Aided Design (CAD) to colour desktop publish-
ing (DTP), VR, multimedia and 3-D graphics. Through the coupling of high-
resolution colour monitors and high speciﬁcation graphic controllers, truly
photographic quality images are now possible. Built up of digitally deﬁned
pixel elements, computer images are invariably complex. For example, a 1024-
by-768 pixel image yields 786,432 individual pixels. Digitising such a black
and white image requires a corresponding number of bits, or 98,304 Bytes
(786,432/8), or 96 KBytes (98,304/1024). Progressing to a grey-scale arrange-
ment using bits per pixel to give 256 (28) grey shades, the same 1024 by
768 pixel image requires 768 KBytes–eight times the storage capacity of its
black-and-white equivalent. Such is the complexity of photographic quality
images, a minimum of 24-bit colour graphics are required. Red, green and
blue are each represented by eight bits, thus facilitating the selection of
256 tones of each. By combining each colour component, over 16.7 million
(256 ∗256 ∗256) colours are made available. Yet higher quality results are
achieved using 32-bit and 36-bit graphics. Such 24-bit graphics on a 1,024
by 768 pixel resolution monitor means that a single frame consumes around
3,072 KBytes. Large image ﬁles of this sort are costly to process, transmit and
store. They are also slow to transfer from computer to screen, as well as to
and from hard disk. A solution to these problems lies in image compression.
Many popular image ﬁle formats such as JPEG feature image compression.
(See JPEG.)
Computer name
The name of the computer/system connected to a net-
work. All Windows 98/NT systems have names when connected to a network.
84

Cookie
Additionally, their users are given passwords that may be used to log on and
retrieve their speciﬁed or default Windows conﬁguration.
(See Microsoft Windows.)
Concurrent computing
An environment in which processes, or program
elements execute simultaneously.
(See MPP.)
Concurrent programming
A programming model where processes are
implemented in parallel.
Concurrent programming language
A programming language that may
be used to implement processes in parallel.
Conﬁdence factor
A measure of the percentage probability of an event or
circumstance being correct. In KBSs (Knowledge Based Systems), it may be
applied so as to weigh facts and conclusions that exist in a knowledge base.
Constant
An unchanging entity.
Container
An entity that is used to hold an object. For example, using
Visual Basic a container may hold an object such as the Media Player, and so
give dimensions, appearance and physical behaviour to the Media Player.
Content authoring tool
A development tool that permits the creation of
Web and multimedia content.
(See Multimedia authoring tool.)
Content provider
A company or individual that provides usually copy-
righted material for inclusion in a hosted Web site or service. Content providers
typically include publishers, recording companies, photo libraries and so on.
Controller
A generic name for a hardware component which controls a
peripheral device, such as a disk drive, CD-ROM drive or monitor.
(See Graphics card and Hard disk.)
Cookie
A minor transaction that allows server-side components such as
CGI scripts and programs, to store and retrieve data from the client system.
It gives Web applications the ability to write data to the client that reﬂects
usage habits. For example, the data may relieve the user from repetitive tasks,
such as the re-entry of ID numbers or data each time a Web site is visited.
Instead the server-side components may identify the user through cookies on
the client system, extract them, and perform the necessary processes.
(See Security gateway and Shopping cart.)
85

Cooperative multitasking
Cooperative multitasking
An environment where running processes may
receive processing time from other process/programs.
(See Preemptive multitasking.)
CORBA (Common Object Request Broker Architecture)
An object
architecture featuring an IDL (Interface Deﬁnition Language) and managed
by the Object Management Group (OMG).
(See CORBA IDL and OMG NS.)
CORBA IDL (Common Object Request Broker Architecture Interface
Deﬁnition Language)
A language that is based on C++, and may be
compiled into Java and C++ using appropriate compilers such as IDL2JAVA
and IDL2CPP.
Corel Draw
A popular graphics program used by many professional illus-
trators and graphics artists. Used widely in the production of graphics for
multimedia applications/titles.
CosNotiﬁcation
An IDL module which deﬁnes the operations (or meth-
ods) used by the CORBA Notiﬁcation Services which supports push and pull
models on networks. The collective IDL modules might be referred to as
the API of the implementation.
module CosNotification {
// The following two are the same, but serve different
purposes.
typedef CosTrading::PropertySeq OptionalHeaderFields;
typedef CosTrading::PropertySeq FilterableEventBody;
typedef CosTrading::PropertySeq QoSProperties;
typedef CosTrading::PropertySeq AdminProperties;
struct EventType {
string domain name;
string type name;
};
typedef sequence<EventType> EventTypeSeq;
struct PropertyRange {
CosTrading::PropertyName name;
CosTrading::PropertyValue low val;
CosTrading::PropertyValue high val;
};
typedef sequence<PropertyRange> PropertyRangeSeq;
enum QoSError code {
UNSUPPORTED PROPERTY,
UNAVAILABLE PROPERTY,
UNSUPPORTED VALUE,
UNAVAILABLE VALUE,
86

CosNotiﬁcation
BAD PROPERTY,
BAD TYPE,
BAD VALUE
};
struct PropertyError {
QoSError code code;
PropertyRange available range;
};
typedef sequence<PropertyError> PropertyErrorSeq;
exception UnsupportedQoS { PropertyErrorSeq
qos err; };
exception UnsupportedAdmin { PropertyErrorSeq
admin err; };
// Define the Structured Event structure
struct FixedEventHeader {
EventType event type;
string event name;
};
struct EventHeader {
FixedEventHeader fixed header;
OptionalHeaderFields variable header;
};
struct StructuredEvent {
EventHeader header;
FilterableEventBody filterable data;
any remainder of body;
}; // StructuredEvent
typedef sequence<StructuredEvent> EventBatch;
// The following constant declarations define the
standard
// QoS property names and the associated values each
property
// can take on. The name/value pairs for each
standard property
// are grouped, beginning with a string constant
defined for the
// property name, followed by the values the property
can take on.
const string EventReliability = "EventReliability";
const short BestEffort = 0;
const short Persistent = 1;
const string ConnectionReliability
= "ConnectionReliability";
// Can take on the same values as EventReliability
const string Priority = "Priority";
const short LowestPriority = -32767;
const short HighestPriority = 32767;
87

CosNotiﬁcation
const short DefaultPriority = 0;
const string StartTime = "StartTime";
// StartTime takes a value of type TimeBase::UtcT
when placed
// in an event header. StartTime can also be set to
either
// TRUE or FALSE at the Proxy level, indicating
whether or not the
45 // Proxy supports the setting of per-message stop
times.
const string StopTime = "StopTime";
// StopTime takes a value of type TimeBase::UtcT when
placed
// in an event header. StopTime can also be set to
either
// TRUE or FALSE at the Proxy level, indicating
whether or not the
// Proxy supports the setting of per-message stop
times.
const string Timeout = "Timeout";
// Timeout takes on a value of type
TimeBase::TimeT
const string OrderPolicy = "OrderPolicy";
const short AnyOrder = 0;
const short FifoOrder = 1;
const short PriorityOrder = 2;
const short DeadlineOrder = 3;
const string DiscardPolicy = "DiscardPolicy";
// DiscardPolicy takes on the same values as
OrderPolicy, plus
const short LifoOrder = 4;
const string MaximumBatchSize = "MaximumBatchSize";
// MaximumBatchSize takes on a value of type long
const string PacingInterval = "PacingInterval";
// PacingInterval takes on a value of type
TimeBase::TimeT
interface QoSAdmin {
QoSProperties get qos();
void set qos ( in QoSProperties qos)
raises ( UnsupportedQoS );
void validate qos (
in QoSProperites required qos,
out PropertyRangeSeq available qos )
raises ( UnsupportedQoS );
}; // QosAdmin
// Admin properties are defined in similar manner as
QoS
88

Credit Card Merchant Account
// properties. The only difference is that these
properties
// are related to channel administration policies, as
opposed
// message quality of service
const string MaxQueueLength = "MaxQueueLength";
// MaxQueueLength takes on a value of type long
const string MaxConsumers = "MaxConsumers";
// MaxConsumers takes on a value of type long
const string MaxSuppliers = "MaxSuppliers";
// MaxSuppliers takes on a value of type long
The Notiﬁcation Module
Counter program
A program which records the number of occasions (or
hits) a Web page or URL is opened. Such program variants may count Web
pages that are opened and served to the client, and not merely count URLs.
The program may be embedded in a HTML script.
(See CGI.)
Coupling
A term used to describe efﬁciency of communication between
network hardware and software components. Tight coupling between two
network components indicates comparatively high speed communication capa-
bilities. Loose coupling indicates the exact opposite.
crawler (search engine)
Crawler programs may be deployed by Search
engines so as to gather metadata (such as indexes) from Web sites.
(See Search engine.)
CRC (Cyclic Redundancy Check)
An error detection scheme used on
CD variants as well as other devices.
Cray, Seymour
A computer scientist made famous by his work in the
ﬁeld of MPP.
(See MPP.)
Creative Labs
A Singapore-based company specialising in sound cards
and video capture cards. Its SoundBlaster card became and industry standard.
Its video capture cards include the VideoBlaster range which extends to video
conferencing. It also marketed and sold the rather dated VideoSpigot video
capture card, though it did not develop it.
Credit card fraud
An illegal use of a credit card.
(See Anti fraud detection.)
Credit Card Merchant Account
A POS feature that enables an
e-business Web site to process credit card transactions. Numerous companies
89

Credit card number
offer such facilities over the World Wide Web where users are required
to complete on-line forms, and produce relevant evidence of their on-
line business.
(See POS.)
Credit card number
A number assigned to a credit card.
(See Checksum validation.)
Critical error
An error resulting from a hardware or software bug.
Using DOS, the user will be prompted by R(etry), I(gnore), F(ail), or A(bort).
Cropping
A process of trimming an image or frame. In terms of video
or picture editing, image or video data is cropped as you would snip a photo-
graph using a pair of scissors. Most editing programs provide an Undo Crop
command (on the Edit menu) in order to cancel a previous cropping operation.
Cross platform
A software program, module or object that may be run
on more than one platform. Java applications are cross-platform. Such appli-
cations may be described as platform or hardware independent. For instance,
a platform independent program might run on Windows, OS/2 and 386 Unix.
(See Java.)
CRT (Cathode Ray Tube)
A display device used in desktop colour mon-
itors, consisting of a screen area covered with phosphor deposits (or pixels)
each consisting of red, blue and green phosphors. The CRT was the ﬁrst
optronic device. The distance between the phosphors is termed the dot-pitch.
Most monitors feature a dot-pitch of .26, while more highly speciﬁed versions
offer a smaller dot-pitch. An electron beam is projected from the back of the
CRT on to the inner screen, using an electron gun. To help focus the electron
beam a ﬁne mask is included behind the screen phosphors. This ﬁne gauze
separates the three-colour phosphors allowing the electron beam to shine more
accurately upon them while improving picture deﬁnition in the process. The
electron beam scans each of the phosphor-lines horizontally. The rate at which
the electron gun scans a single line is termed the horizontal frequency, or the
line frequency. There are two methods of scanning the lines:
• interlaced
• non-interlaced.
In a non-interlaced arrangement all the lines are scanned one after another.
The rate at which all lines are scanned is termed the refresh rate or the vertical
frequency. Using an interlaced conﬁguration the lines making up the screen
are scanned in two separate ﬁelds. One ﬁeld is used to scan even numbered
lines and the other to scan odd numbered lines. This interlaced technique
was introduced in television broadcasting speciﬁcally to reduce screen ﬂicker.
90

Cryptography
Today, however, a monitor that operates at high resolutions in a interlaced
mode is thought to be one that will ﬂicker. Non-interlaced monitors with
sufﬁciently high screen refresh rates are preferred. They provide ﬂicker-free
images, with improved stability, and are least likely to cause eye strain. The
minimum acceptable refresh rate, or vertical frequency, for a non-interlaced
monitor is around 70 Hz.
Cryptoanalysis
A subject/science which addresses attacks on cryptosys-
tems.
(See Brute Force, cryptosystem, RSA, public key encryption, asymmetric and
Dictionary attack.)
Cryptography
A process that ensures data or information is read or used
only by its intended readers or users. This is achieved through:
• encryption that disguises input information or data, so it may not be read
or used. Resulting encrypted information or data may only be read or used
following decryption
• decryption that returns the decrypted data or information to its original
usable and readable form.
Implementations of cryptography are called cryptosystems, and take the form
of algorithms. Cryptosystems may be categorised in two main groups:
• secret-key, where the processes of encryption and decryption each require
the use of a single key which is the same. The key is a number, and prefer-
ably a large one, hence the phrase 56-bit key etc. Unless the recipient of
the encrypted data already knows the key, it may be left to the sender to
transmit its details unencrypted. This is a notable ﬂaw of secret-key encryp-
tion, because it exposes the key to unintended users such as eavesdroppers.
A remedy is found in public-key encryption that is described below.
• public-key, where the sender need only know the recipient’s public key.
This may be obtained in unencrypted form, because it may not be used
to decrypt data, rather all it may do is encrypt data. In order to decrypt
data, the recipient uses a private key that is the mathematical inverse of
the public key. It may be considered impossible to determine the private
key from the public key in so far as most security requirements are con-
cerned.
The mathematics that underline public-key encryption have a simple goal:
namely, to make difﬁcult the derivation of the private key from the public
key. This is achieved through a one-way function that describes the difﬁculty
of determining input values when given a result. RSA is among the best-
known cryptosystems or algorithms. This was developed by MIT professors
Ronald L. Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard M. Adleman.
(See RSA and www.rsa.com.)
91

Cryptology
Cryptology
A subject/science that addresses cryptography and cryptoanal-
ysis.
(See SET, Brute Force, cryptosystem, RSA, public key encryption, asymmetric
and Dictionary attack.)
Cryptosystem
A means of securing data so as it is read only by its
intended users.
(See RSA, SET, asymmetric and Public key.)
Cryptosystem Operation
(See Symmetric Cryptosystem Operation.)
Crystal Reports
A reporting engine.
CSS (Cascading Style Sheets Language)
A styling language used to cre-
ate style sheets that may be attached to HTML documents, and declares the
appearance of entities/properties that include margins, positioning, colour or
size. Such stylesheets may be included in HTML using:
• <LINK>
• <STYLE>
• the CSS @import syntax.
• <STYLE>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>title</TITLE>
<LINK REL=STYLESHEET TYPE="text/css"
HREF="http://botto.com/cool" TITLE="Cool">
<STYLE TYPE="text/css">
@import url(http://botto.com/basic);
H1 { color: blue }
</STYLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY>
<H1>Headline is blue</H1>
<P STYLE="color: green">While the paragraph is
green.
</BODY>
</HTML>
Currency convertor
An on-line service that provides real-time conver-
sion between currencies.
Current directory
An active directory whose ﬁles may be listed or exe-
cuted directly. Using DOS current directory ﬁles may be listed by entering
DIR at the command prompt. Directories may be changed by entering CD
92

CVS
followed by the directory name. Using Windows dialogue boxes it is possi-
ble to change directories by double-clicking the directory name shown in the
Directories box; a root directory is indicated as ‘..’.
Cursor
A visible bitmap that indicates the point of data entry or user-
interaction on screen. It may take the form of a pointer, hand, or even hour
glass when the underlying software is busily computing.
CU-SeeMe
An enterprise within Cornell University that produces an Inter-
net videoconferencing solution.
Customer facing
An interface with potential customers. A brochure or
ﬂier describing a product or service may be preﬁxed ‘customer facing’.
Customer relationship management (CRM)
The systems and infras-
tructure required to analyse, capture and share all parts of the customer’s
relationship with the enterprise.
Cut
A technique where video footage is switched from one sequence
to another.
Cut and paste
A process by which a section of a screen image or video
sequence is removed (cut) and implanted (pasted) elsewhere.
CVS (Concurrent Versioning System)
A Linux repository that permits
multiple users to work on the same ﬁles. Files may be checked out and returned
to the repository where their contents may be merged with other versions of the
same ﬁle. For Windows systems, access to the CVS is provided by WinCVS, or
alternatively a Telnet and ftp session may be established between the Windows
system and the system hosting the CVS. Consider a scenario where you want
to write ﬁles from a Windows system to the CVS:
Establish a Telnet session with the network system (such as lin3) holding
the CVS. This requires Telnet software on the Windows machine, where the
command used would logically following the pattern:
Telnet lin3
Respond the prompts:
username:
password:
Open a DOS window and change to the directory holding the ﬁle(s) you
wish to write to the CVS. To do this use the standard cd and cd/ commands.
Establish an ftp session with the network system (such as lin3) holding the
93

Cybercafe
CVS. Again this requires software on the Windows system. Typically you
would type in a DOS window:
ftp lin7
In the DOS window change to the directory on lin3 where the ﬁles are to be
copied. By default Linux is now primed for an Ascii transfer, but if the ﬁles
are to be read using an intranet, and are perhaps PDFs, they will be corrupt,
and the intranet will not work for local and for remote workers. A binary
transfer is therefore necessary, and this is achieved simply by typing ‘binary’.
Copy the ﬁle(s) by typing:
put
Or
mput outerwall.*
Type:
cvs commit
Finally in the Telnet window type:
cvs update
Cybercafe
A cafe that provides customers with access to the Internet
usually via coin (or card) operated computers.
Cyberspace
A term used to describe the Internet (or Net).
Cyclic redundancy check
(See CRC.)
Cyrix
A chip maker, and manufacturer of PC processors.
94

D
D channel
A 16 Kbps signalling channel that supports two 64 Kbps data
channels, according to the ISDN standard.
(See ISDN standard.)
D1
(See CCIR 601.)
Daemons
A program or process dedicated to perform what is usually
a singular given task, such as sending mail. TCP/IP daemons include those
added by third parties that include SCO.
(See TCP/IP.)
Daisychain
A method of uniting a number of CD-ROM drives or other
connected devices.
Darwin
An alternative name for the Mac OS X core.
Database
An electronic information storage system offering data storage
and retrieval. A generic term that describes the storage of information on a
record by record basis. Records are divided into ﬁelds of different types includ-
ing text, numeric, date, graphic, and even BLOB (Binary Large OBject). The
records are stored in tables or ﬁles. Databases types include ﬂat-ﬁle and rela-
tional. The ﬂat ﬁle database model embodies no links between different ﬁles
or tables. A relational database is quite different in that records from one ﬁle
may be linked to records stored in a separate ﬁle or table. Codd’s standard
text about relational databases published in the sixties speciﬁed different types
of relational links. Types of link include one-to-one, one-to-many, and many-
to-many. There are many commercial examples of the relational database that
base their design on the original writings of Codd. Relational databases are
formally referred to as RDBMSes (Relational Database Management Systems)
which ﬂat-ﬁle databases are termed simply DBMSes (Database Management
95

Database middleware
Systems). Commercial examples of software products that permit the develop-
ment of RDBMSes include Paradox for Windows, dBase, Microsoft Access,
Oracle and Ingress. Relational databases are used to store tabular information
in the form of records, and useful versions are able to generate graphs. Popu-
lar PC relational databases include Microsoft Access, Borland Paradox, dBase,
Q & A and DataEase. Because they are relational, an invoice can extract infor-
mation from a number of different tables or ﬁles. Flat-ﬁle databases are used
to store isolated records, and cannot be used to link ﬁles or tables. They
are used for simple applications such as card ﬁles. Text databases are used to
store documents such as articles and even complete books. Documents may be
indexed where the user-interface simply allows users to search for documents
that contain target words, phrases or sentences.
(See Data warehouse, DBMS, DSS and RDBMS.)
Database middleware
(See Glue and Middleware.)
Database server
(See Server.)
Data compression
(See Compression.)
Data cube
An information storage model. In the context of a data ware-
house, data cubes area evolved as a result of extractions from operational data.
They may be assumed to be static entities that do not change, and may not be
altered or even built from query data. A cube cache is used to store them in
memory. If grown beyond three dimensions, the cube becomes a hyper-cube.
(See Data warehouse.)
Data dictionary
A type of metadata that deﬁnes stored data along with
its relationships. Typically the database dictionary is dynamic, updating its
contents as data structural changes occur.
(See Data warehouse and DBMS.)
Data extraction
A process that abstracts data from one or more sources,
in order to build a static database of unchanging data.
(See Data warehouse.)
Data ﬂow
A sequential record or diagram (called a ‘data ﬂow’) showing
the ﬂow of data through an IT solution.
Data hiding
A means of making the underlying workings of types or
classes transparent to the programmer. The programmer merely has to under-
stand the behaviour and functionality of the class.
(See C++, Java and OOP.)
96

Data type
Data link
A direct serial connection between two nodes or devices, and
is devoid of intermediate switches or devices.
(See MPP.)
Data mart
A single-subject (and generally small-scale) data warehouse
that provides DSS for a limited number of users.
(See Data warehouse.)
Data mining
A data analysis technique, sometimes referred to as data or
knowledge discovery, and implemented using an appropriate tool that may
be used to generate summaries, and information overviews that place data
in perspective to time, usage, geographical location or places it in another
category. It follows that it is a useful technique for analysing patterns of
business operations, and the use of enterprise data, as well as data derived
from external sources and entities that may be monitored for behaviour and
cyclic patterns that inﬂuence decision making process. A practical revelation
discovered by data mining may be as simple as the realisation that cutting
trading hours of a chain of stores in the evening results in signiﬁcant savings.
Data partitioning
A method of segregating data, so it is distributed across
different systems. It may serve to store selected records in more secure (and
often expensive) mass storage (such as SRAM or an appropriate level of
RAID), while storing less important data in conventional storage media, namely
hard disk.
(See RAID.)
Data replication
A dynamic and changeable, verbatim copy of data. A
multiplicity of such replicas may exist.
Data schema
A term that describes a database structure, such as the entity
relationship (E-R) diagram of an RDBMS. The E-R diagram shows the links
that unite the database tables.
(See Data warehouse, Database, and RDBMS.)
Data soniﬁcation
A general term used to describe the process of enhanc-
ing data through the addition of audio.
Data transfer rate
A rate at which data is transferred from a mass storage
device, such as hard disk, or from removable media, or over a physical or
wireless medium.
(See Hard disk and RAID.)
Data type
A classiﬁcation for data. Modern relational databases com-
monly store the following different data types including currency, numeric,
date, alphanumeric, Boolean, graphical and BLOB (Binary Large Object).
(See OODBMS, Data warehouse, BLOB, and Boolean.)
97

Data warehouse
Data warehouse
‘An integrated, subject-oriented, time-variant, non-
volatile database that provides support for decision making.’ (Bill Inmon).
A uniﬁed data repository extracted from multiple data storage structures
that may emanate from various data sources. It provides a single interface
with relational and/or multidimensional data. It is the rebirth of what IBM
termed the Information Warehouse in the 1980s. Data warehouses form the
information storage methodology in modern decision support systems (DSS).
Collectively these systems provide a means of querying data that emanates
from disparate information storage models. On-Line Analytical Processing
(OLAP) is a crucial facet of the data warehouse architecture, providing a
means of abstracting and analysing data in a manner that makes transparent
the multiple data sources and data storage models used. The data mining
system (DMS) is also a key DSS component. Data mining is an attempt to
embed intelligence into the interrogation of stored data, and may automate
the querying of data, and provide user access to new data structures whose
information is in close proximity in terms of related subject matter, and may
assist in solving deﬁned problems. The underlying storage metaphors of a data
warehouse may be:
• two dimensional, where values are stored using the table metaphor, adhering
to the established formal RDBMS model for information storage
• multidimensional, where data is perceived as a three-dimensional cube or a
data cube, where values have x, y and z coordinates.
Data cubes are evolved as a result of extractions from operational data. They
may be assumed to be static entities that do not change, and may not be altered
Operational data
Data warehouse
- two-dimensional data
- multidimensional data
- data cubes
- hypercubes
- integrated
- subject-orientated
- time-variant
- non-volatile
Data
extraction
Data warehouse overview
98

DBMS
or even built from query data. A cube cache is used to store them in memory.
If grown beyond three dimensions, the cube becomes a hyper-cube. According
to Inman’s deﬁnition, a data warehouse is characterised as:
• integrated, providing a uniﬁed interface to multiple data sources that may
use disparate information storage models
• subject-orientated, revealing data which is in close proximity in terms of
subject matter, providing related information, that may be dedicated to spe-
ciﬁc analysis.
• a time-variant, permitting data retrieval and analysis using the dimension
of time.
• nonvolatile, making the collective data entities static in deﬁnition, except
during the periodic instances where updates are driven through the data by
the integrated operational systems. On-line updates are impermissible, and
the data warehouse may be considered as being read-only.
(See Database, DBMS and DSS.)
Further Reading
Inmon, Bill & Chuck Kelley, The 12 Rules Of Data Warehouse For A Client/
Server World, Data Management Review, Vol 4, May 1994, pp 6–16.
DBMS (Database Management System)
A system that provides the
operations necessary to manage stored data that may be two-dimensional or
multidimensional. A DBMS:
• requires a data dictionary that deﬁnes stored data along with relationships.
The database dictionary is dynamic, updating its contents as data structural
changes occur.
• ensures that entered data undergoes pre-deﬁned validity checks.
• transforms entered data so it may be stored by the underlying data structure.
• provides storage for data, its relationships, forms, reports, queries and mis-
cellaneous ﬁles.
• includes security features, such as the password protection of ﬁles, allocated
user access rights, and prohibits certain users from accessing certain ﬁles
and from making data changes.
• may maintain data integrity in a multi-user environment.
• may provide a database communications interface that might permit users
to submit forms-based queries through Web browsers, publish reports and
data using various media that include the Web, E-mail and Lotus Notes.
• provide features pertaining to backup and recovery.
• provide access to data using a query language (such as SQL or a variant
thereof), or a querying mechanism which might involve the completion
of tables using deﬁned query statements (such as the Borland Query By
Example (QBE) technique).
(See Data warehouse.)
99

DBS
DBS (Direct Broadcast Satellite)
A communication and broadcasting
technology, where information is transmitted (from a geostationary satellite)
and received by a satellite dish that is typically 18 in to three feet in diameter.
It can also be applied as an access technology that offers downstream band-
widths of perhaps 400 Kbps. Hughes Network Systems (US) offer such service
and implementation. Up to 200 television channels may be chosen using many
DBS or Direct To Home (DTH) services. MPEG-2 encoding is used for many
DBS services.
(See MPEG-2 and Satellite.)
DCOM (Distributed Component Object Model)
A protocol that glues
software components on networks such as those that use HTTP, and is based
on the Open Software Foundation’s DCE-RPC speciﬁcation. It is compatible
with Java applets and ActiveX components, and was formerly called ‘Network
OLE’, though it has since been evolved.
DCT (Discrete Cosine Transform)
A widely used mathematical tech-
nique for image compression. It provides the basis for lossy image compression
where redundant image data is omitted. It is part of the JPEG algorithm, and
is also used in videotex. (See JPEG and Videotex.)
The DCT process operates by converting image data from the spatial to
the transform domain. The complex underlying mathematics are transcribed
to matrix manipulations. The resulting intensive arithmetic operations are best
implemented using dedicated image processors, or general purpose processors
that have multimedia capabilities such as those integrated into Intel MMX.
Image energy in the spatial domain is deﬁned as the square of the pixel values.
This energy is spread evenly over pixel blocks and resulting coefﬁcients. Fol-
lowing the transformation, the energy is conﬁned to a fewer coefﬁcients. The
process involves dividing the image data into 8 × 8 pixel blocks and perform-
ing a forward DCT:
F = [T] [P] [T]
Where [T]
0.3536
0.3536
0.3536
0.3536
0.3536
0.3536
0.3536
0.3536
0.4904
0.4157
0.2778
0.0975
-0.0975
-0.2778
-0.4157
-0.4904
0.4616
0.1913
-0.1913
-0.4619
-0.4619
-0.1913
0.1913
0.4619
0.4517
-0.0975
-0.4904
-0.2778
0.2778
0.4904
0.0975
-0.4157
0.3536
-0.3536
-0.3536
0.3536
0.3536
-0.3536
-0.3536
0.3536
0.2778
-0.4904
-0.0975
0.4157
-0.4157
-0.0975
0.4904
-0.2778
0.1913
-0.4619
-0.4619
-0.1913
-0.0193
0.4619
-0.4619
0.1913
0.0975
-0.2778
-0.4157
-0.4904
0.4904
-0.4157
0.2778
-0.0975
(See JPEG and MPEG.)
100

Demand paging
DDE (Dynamic Data Exchange)
A standard technique by which data
may be exchanged between running Windows applications. For example, a
database tool might have a DDE interaction with a spreadsheet in order to
draw graphs based on spreadsheet data. A DDE interaction is occasionally
called a conversation. Nowadays most Windows users harness OLE (Object
Linking and Embedding) rather than DDE. OLE 2.0 compatible applications
may be assumed to be considerably less difﬁcult to link.
(See ActiveX and OLE.)
Debit Card
A card issued by a bank that enables transactions. Interna-
tionally agreed debit card standards include Switch and EFTPOS.
Debugger
A program or feature that permits program code to be corrected
or debugged. It assists the process through appropriate prompts and indications
as to where the bugs exist in the source code listing.
Decode
A process by which encoded data that may be compressed, is
interpreted and delivered to the receiving system or device. For example, the
process may involve the decoding of MPEG video.
(See MPEG.)
Decoder
1. A device which is able to interpret an encoded signal. An
MPEG decoder is able to uncompress digital video, as is an MPEG-2 STB.(See
DCT and MPEG.) 2. An electronic device that is able to decode digital
addresses. A simple two-input device may set up to four digital outputs. Such
devices may form part of the address decoding between the processor and
connected electronic devices.
Decryption
A process by which encrypted data is unlocked to become
readable.
(See Encryption.)
Defragmentation program
A program used to defragment a hard disk.
It ensures that used data blocks are arranged in a contiguous stream.
Dell
A large multinational computer manufacturer that uses the direct sell-
ing channel.
Delta channel
(See D channel and ISDN.)
Demand paging
A process where pages of data are read from disk into
physical memory when required.
101

Density
Density
A measure of how densely packed data bits are on a storage
medium.
DES (Data Encryption Standard)
An encryption technique; a symmet-
ric cryptosystem. Both senders and receivers use a common 56 bit key to
encrypt and decrypt messages and data. The US government backed DES
in 1977, and has since recertiﬁed every ﬁve years.
(See Encryption.)
Design
A cryptosystem that uses symmetric key cryptography.
(See SET, Ciphertext, Plaintext, Encryption algorithm, SET, Brute Force, cryp-
tosystem, RSA, public key encryption, asymmetric, Transposition and Dictio-
nary attack.)
Design pattern
A software pattern may be a vocabulary of methods and
guidelines, or a reusable element, or a set of elements that reveal themselves as
common denominators when developing e-business applications. A resulting
reuse strategy may involve the use of pre-built components at the micro level
that include methods and functions, and those at the macro level that include
complete objects and interfaces. It follows then that a design pattern is a
consistency, or an unchanging software component or code fragment that may
require little or no modiﬁcation to be applied in a different client or service
implementation, though this interchangeability may be reliant upon the client
or service application context. The pattern may obviously bring together one
or more classes, interfaces, methods, functions, modules or objects that may:
• Compress the development lifecycle.
• Permit the bypass coding the reuse elements.
• Introduce a consistency in the design of clients and services.
• Help adhere to ofﬁcial or naturally evolved, unofﬁcial software standards.
• Simplify maintenance procedures.
• Provide efﬁciencies in terms of shared source in a team collaborative envi-
ronment.
A replicated worker pattern deals with the implementation of processes through
concurrent processes, and therefore has application in the domain of parallel
computing. It is a distributed computing concept and may consist of a master
process that executes in control of a number of workers, and this terminology
is key to the synonym master-worker pattern.
The origins of software patterns are traced reliably to notable texts like
Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software by Richard
Helm, Erich Gamma, Ralph Johnson, and John Vlissides, and more recently
to Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture: A System of Patterns by Frank
Buschmann, Regine Meunier, Hans Rohnert, Peter Sommerlad, and Michael
Stal. These and the many other texts have a link with the pattern language
102

Digital audio
concept put forward by Christopher Alexander that addresses architectural
design, and his works include Notes on the Synthesis of Form, Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1964, and A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction,
Oxford University Press, 1977.
(See Pattern language.)
DESX
A version of DES encryption.
Device driver
A software component that controls, and reads and writes
data to and from a connected device.
DHTML
An object model and scripting language for creating object ori-
ented Web pages.
Dialup password ﬁle
A ﬁle used to store passwords, authenticating access
to networks via dialup links.
(See TCP/IP.)
Dictionary Attack
An attack on a cryptosystem using the iterative tech-
nique of comparing the key with a dictionary of possibilities, usually beginning
with those that are most likely to match the key.
(See Brute Force Attack and Cryptosystem.)
Digital
A device such as a computer that processes and stores data in
the form of ones and zeros. In a positive logic representation, ‘one’ might be
‘+5’ volts and zero ‘0’ volts. This lowest of levels at which computers operate
is known as machine code. Binary arithmetic and Boolean algebra (named
after Irish mathematician George Boole) permit mathematical representation.
Boolean algebra and Karnaugh maps are used widely for minimisation of logic
algebraic expressions. Though digital signals exist at two levels (one or zero),
an indeterminate state is possible.
Digital audio
An audio signal recorded in digital form. The most com-
mon standard digital format is that deﬁned in the CD-DA Speciﬁcation. Digital
audio is used widely in modern multimedia through wave audio ﬁles. Audio
may be digitised using either video capture boards or sound cards. Audio
sources can take the form of a microphone, CD player, audio tape, audio cas-
sette, and even electronic musical instruments. Audio cards may be regarded
as Analogue to Digital Convertors (ADCs) where the accuracy of digitisa-
tion and subsequent quality achieved largely depends upon the sample rate
and number of bits used per sample. The audio quality required can also
be preset from within many authoring programs. The memory capacity con-
sumed by a sequence is a function of quality. If it is necessary to calculate
103

Digital camera
the exact memory/data capacity consumed, then the following simple formula
may be applied:
Memory capacity required (bits)
= Sequence duration (secs)
* Sampling rate (Hz)
* bits per sample
For example, if an 8-bit sound digitiser with a sample rate of 11 KHz were
used to digitise a 15-second sequence, then:
Data capacity required (bits) = 15 * 11,000 * 8
= 1,320,000 bits
= 165,000 Bytes
= 161.13 KBytes
Memory or disk data capacity required naturally increases linearly with
increased sample rates.
(See Wave audio.)
Digital camera
A camera able to store pictures in digital form. A popular
range of digital cameras is the Kodak DC series.
Digital certiﬁcate
A means of linking an entity’s identity with a public
key and carried out by a trusted party.
(See Certiﬁcate.)
Digital ID
(See Signature.)
Digital signature
A digital signature may be applied to an encrypted mes-
sage. A message digest is ciphered using the sender’s private key and then
appended to the message, resulting in a digital signature.
(See Signature.)
Digital video
A video sequence that is stored and played in digital form.
Digital motion video is the most animating feature of modern multimedia.
Using videodisc players it has been possible to incorporate colour full-motion,
full-screen video (FMFSV) in a computer environment for some time. Because
multimedia is a blend of concurrent processes, its storage on a single optical
disc requires various elements to be interleaved on the same track. Before
this concept could be addressed, the inability of conventional (serial) desktop
computers to play motion video stored on CD-ROM, represented a signiﬁcant
hurdle. Reasons as to why this is not possible lie in the inadequate rate at which
data is transferred from CD-ROM to computer, and in inadequate data storage
capacity. A blanket solution to both problems lies in image-compression. For
104

Distributed computing
example, if frames of video are compressed signiﬁcantly, then the need for
large data storage capacity and, more importantly, high rates of data transfer is
reduced. Intel reﬁned such a technology that it acquired from General Electric
in October 1988. Called Digital Video Interactive (DVI) its home was the Intel
Princeton Operation that is part of the Microcomputer Components Group. It
originally began in the David Sarnoff Research Center, New Jersey – the once
RCA laboratories.
Using DVI up to 72 minutes of FMFSV (at 30 fps) may be stored on a
single 12 cm-diameter CD-ROM disc.
(See MPEG, M-JPEG, Video and Streaming Video.)
Digital wallet
An element of a cardholder that creates the protocol and
assists in the acquirement and management of cardholder digital signatures.
Direct Broadcast Satellite
(See DBS and Satellite.)
Direct channel
A sales channel where the consumer purchases products
off the page, or uses another medium such as television, and usually involves
payment using a credit card or bankcard.
Direct connection
A modem connection without error connection, com-
pression and overﬂow control. It may be assumed that in such a situation the
modem rate equates precisely to the connection rate.
Direct3D
A data stream that encapsulates the user’s public key and Cer-
tiﬁcate Authority’s (CA’s) endorsement.
(See Certiﬁcate and SET.)
Director
A tool used to create interactive movies, and produced by Macro-
media. Resulting productions may include Lingo scripts, and may be deployed
over the Web using Macromedia Shockwave technology.
(See Lingo, Shockwave and Streaming.)
Display
(See Monitor.)
Dissolve
A cut from one image or video sequence to another. More pre-
cisely, it is the fading of an image into a background colour or image, or the
fading of an image while one image is faded up.
Distributed computing
An OO system that sees concurrent processes
interact with shared resources, and inter-component communications imple-
mented in an efﬁcient and co-ordinated way. It involves leasing distributed
events such as those of store and forward agents, and protocols that deﬁne
105

Distributed debugging
processes and sub-processes required to make the collective system opera-
tional and reliable using persistent stores of states that are recoverable follow-
ing failure.
(See Store and forward agent, JavaSpaces, and Jini.)
Distributed debugging
A methodology for debugging client/servers,
where the collective distributed system is perceived as a single system.
(See Distributed computing.)
Distributed events
(See Store and forward agent.)
Distributed glue
A name given to the collective entities that bind together
(dynamically) running components that are on the client and on the server. As
is the case with local glues, standard OO component architectures use different
distributed glues.
(See ActiveX, Glue, JavaBeans, OLE, and OpenDoc.)
Dithering
A process by which the image-depth of a graphic is altered. Pro-
grams such as PaintShop Pro are able to dither images, and may be useful for:
• targeting a system that may be limited to simple 8 bit graphics
• improving the quality of displayed graphics (particularly where a machine
will attempt to display 24 bit images at a 16 bit image depth)
• reducing the size of image ﬁles, so improving the response of a Web
application.
Djinn (Gin)
A community of users, devices and resources that are held
together with Jini software infrastructure, and have agreed policies of trust
and administration.
DLL (Dynamic Link Library)
A ﬁle that contains a number of functions
that may be called by different applications. The Windows architecture is itself
based on DLLs. DLLs may be:
• dynamic, where programs interacts with it at runtime
• static, where the DLL is embedded into the application when compiled.
Static libraries tend to make applications fat, requiring more memory that their
dynamic counterparts. A DLL has a:
• ﬁle which contains its source code, and entry and exit functions.
• module deﬁnition ﬁle.
• resource deﬁnition ﬁle.
Typically DLLs offer:
• leverage program investment through improved reusability
• better code compatibility
• easier migration paths
106

Domain name
• cost-effective system renovations
• better program performance
• improved memory management.
(See C++ and Java.)
DNA (Distributed iNternet Architecture)
A Microsoft solution for a
Windows-based, three-tier enterprise and business architecture that is based
on COM, and includes various other Microsoft solutions and technologies
including ASP (Active Server Page). There are many variations of a DNA
architecture, and the programming logic may be:
• Visual Basic components on the client side.
• Visual Basic components on the server side.
• Visual Basic code in forms.
• Scripting languages for server side ASPs.
• Scripting languages for client side.
• ActiveX components.
• Scripting languages such as HTML, DHTML and CSS (Cascading Style
Sheets).
• XML and XSL.
• Procedures like Transact-SQL for SQL Server and PL-SQL for Oracle.
(See 3-tier, Client server, Visual Basic.Net and Visual Studio.NET.)
DNS (Domain Name Service)
A server that converts domain names (such
as www.digital.com) into IP addresses.
(See TCP/IP.)
DNS Negotiation
A process by which the DNS address is determined by
the PPP server and passed to the PPP client.
(See TCP/IP.)
DOM (Document Object Model)
A standard object model for ECMA
scripting languages such as HTML and JavaScript.
Domain category
A collection of servers on the Internet that share the
same sufﬁx in their URLs. For example, http://www.cia.com.au is in the
domain com.au (which is a mnemonic for commercial site in Australia).
Other domains include .edu (educational), .gov (government), .mil (military)
and .net (network).
(See Domain name, E-mail, TCP/IP and URL.)
Domain name
A name of a domain. For example, in the URL
www.microsoft.com, Microsoft is a domain name.
(See E-mail, TCP/IP and URL.)
107

Dot pitch
Dot pitch
A measurement of the distance between addressable pixels
on a monitor screen, indicating the clarity of picture and maximum reso-
lution supported.
DoubleClick
A user interaction where the right-mouse button is clicked
twice in succession.
Double double
An item of data that consists of 64 contiguous bits. It is
twice as long as a double word.
(See C++.)
Double word
An item of data that contains 32 contiguous bits. It is twice
as long as a 16 bit word.
(See C++.)
DoubleSpace
A real-time disk compression program built into MS-
DOS 6.0 to MS-DOS 6.2. Depending upon the ﬁle types stored on a hard
disk it theoretically doubles disk data capacity. There are numerous other so-
called on-the-ﬂy data compression programs on the market for both the PC
and Apple Macintosh. Foremost among these is Stacker from Stac Electronics.
(See Compression.)
Dow Jones
A share index that moves upward or downward, and averages
the top US Company’s share performance throughout trading.
Downloading
A process of copying ﬁles from a remote server to a local
computer. The reverse process is called uploading.
(See Browser and FTP.)
Downsizing
A process of reducing the complexity of software so as it may
be ported to a less powerful system. For instance, a client/server database appli-
cation could be simpliﬁed to run on a PC-based LAN. Equally an operating
system originally developed for a mainframe or workstation may be downsized
to run on a PC.
DriveSpace
A Microsoft, real-time disk compression utility that is inte-
grated in Windows 98. It increases the data capacity of a hard disk, and
of removable magnetic media, by around two-fold. The compression ratio
attained is a variable, and:
• increases with data ﬁles that are largely uncompressed such as BMP and
text ﬁles.
• diminishes with pre-compressed ﬁles such as JPEG and WinZip.
108

Dumb terminal
Dropped
1. A packet that does not reach its destination. 2. A frame in a
video source recording that does not appear in a captured digital video ﬁle is
said to be dropped.
(See Video capture.)
DSA
An encryption technique.
(See Encryption.)
DSL (Digital Subscriber Line)
A digital access technology that can be
wireless or physical based on twisted pair, or modern media.
(See Access technology.)
DSM (Digital Storage Medium/Media)
A medium used to store digi-
tal data. Commercial examples include audio CD, CD-ROM, CD-ROM XA,
CD-I, Digital Versatile Disc (DVD), ﬂoppy disk, Sony Mini disc, Philips
DCC (Digital Compact Cassette) and DAT (Digital Audio Tape).
(See CD-ROM and DVD.)
DSN (Data Source Name)
A means of identifying, and connecting to, a
database. A DSN is required for many Web applications that interact with and
query databases that are typically ODBC compliant.
(See IDC and ODBC.)
DSS (Decision Support System)
(See Data warehouse.)
DTD (Document Type Declaration.)
A DTD provides applications with
names and structures used by a document type. It is also a description in XML
Declaration Syntax that declares names used for element types and where they
may occur.
<!ELEMENT List (Item)+>
<!ELEMENT Item (#PCDATA)>
The above DTD deﬁnes a list as an element type holding items. It also deﬁnes
items as element types holding plain text (Parsed Character Data – PCDATA).
DTP (Desktop publishing)
A term used to describe the use of a desk-
top computer to design and produce documents of the sort distributed by
the publishing sector. Fully speciﬁed DTP packages provide the user with a
choice of fonts, formatting tools, page make-up features, drawing tools, and a
means to import pictures into documents. Professional DTP packages include
PageMaker and Ventura.
Dual-homed host
(See Firewall.)
Dumb terminal
A client device that is restricted to the presentation ele-
ment of the application. It has no more application logic than that which is
109

DUN
required to send requests, and receive visual information. Physically it consists
of a keyboard, display, and a network interface.
(See Client/server.)
DUN (Dial-up Networking)
A connection to a remote computer or net-
work.
DVD
An optical disc technology that provides a sufﬁciently wide
bandwidth to play MPEG-2 video. DVD was once an acronym for Digital
Video Disc and Digital Versatile Disc. It offers maximum data capacities of
4.7 Gbytes, 8.5 GBytes and 17 Gbytes, and exists in four forms:
• DVD-ROM, which provides the same functionality as CD-ROM, but with
a wider bandwidth and considerably more data capacity
• DVD, which is aimed at the consumer market as a replacement for VideoCD
and VHS video
• DVD-RAM, which is a rewritable format able to support data capacity
of 2.6 Gbytes
• DVD+RW, which is rewritable format offering a data capacity of
3.0 GBytes.
The general DVD speciﬁcation includes a:
• 1.2 mm thick, 120 mm diameter disc
• 4.7 Gbytes for a single layered, single side
• track pitch of .74 micrometers
• 650/635 nanometer laser
• RS-PC (Reed Solomon Product Code) error correction scheme
• variable data transfer rate yielding an average of 4.69 Mbits/second.
DVD-ROM drives offer backward compatibility with CD-ROM, and the impor-
tant factors that apply to the performance of a dedicated CD-ROM drive are
applicable. Features which drive the DVD-ROM speciﬁcation include the:
• supported data capacities, i.e. 4.7 GBytes, 8.5 GBytes and 17 GBytes
• interface type
• ability to record CD-R discs
• burst transfer rate
• MTBF (Mean Time Between Failures.)
• DVD disc average access time
• CD-ROM disc average access time
• average CD-ROM data transfer rate, i.e. 16-speed, 24-speed, 32-speed et al
• CD-ROM burst transfer rate
• disc spin modes that may be either CAV and CLV
• MPC3 requirements are met
• installation may be vertical or horizontal.
(See CAV, CD-ROM, CLV, LED and MPC.)
110

dynamic shared library
DVD video
An alternative term of MPEG-2 video stored on DVD disc.
(See MPEG.)
DVD-ROM
(See DVD.)
DVI (Digital Video Interactive)
A largely obsolete, but nonetheless pio-
neering, video compression and decompression technology for the AT and
MCA bus, thus aimed at PC ATs and PS/2 systems (beginning with model 50).
Intel Indeo superseded DVI. It is speciﬁed as being able to generate full-colour
full-screen, full-motion video (FSFMV). The original speciﬁcation embodied
8 bit digital video. The MPEG were presented with the DVI compression algo-
rithm but it was rejected. However, compression techniques used in DVI were
inﬂuential in the development of the MPEG compression schemes. Digital
Video Interactive (DVI) was demonstrated at the second Microsoft CD-ROM
conference of 1987. An image-compression technology, DVI permits full-
screen, full-motion video in the PC environment. DVI offered full-colour
FMFSV at 10 to 30 fps and a frame size of 512-by-480 pixels resolution.
(See MPEG. and MMX.)
Dynamic
A language that may accept a class while running. Java has
this capability.
Dynamic class handling
A name given to the ability of the Java Applica-
tion Environment (JAE) to download classes from a HTTP server at runtime.
Dynamic Data Exchange
(See DDE.)
Dynamic HTML
(See DHTML.)
Dynamic language
A programming language that supports an incremental
compiler where code changes may be made to running programs.
Dynamic Link Library
(See DLL.)
Dynamic load balancing
(See MPP.)
dynamic shared library
A library shared by concurrent programs.
111


E
e-Bay
An on-line auction service.
e-business
A generic term used to describe business processes imple-
mented in electronic or virtual environments like the World Wide Web.
e-business (Electronic Business)
An application of the Internet that sees
it used in a point-of-sale (POS) guise. One of the earliest e-business Web sites
was the Amazon on-line book store. A key concern of companies contem-
plating e-commerce solutions on the Web, and of users also, is the security
of transactions using credit cards and other electronic funds transfer systems
such as Switch. Encryption plays an important role in the maintaining the
privacy of customer details. SET is seen as the internationally agreed standard
solution for providing such conﬁdentiality.
(See Encryption and SET.)
e-business hybrid CD-ROM
A CD-ROM production that features hyper-
links to e-business Web sites for transaction processing, and has POI applica-
tions that may include video.
e-business site development lifecycle
A collection of processes and sub-
processes required to create an e-business Web site. A Web server facility is
required, and may be:
• An acquired, leased or rented in-house Web server solution featuring an
ISDN or T1 connection, necessitating personnel to maintain and run the
server. It may be chosen for security reasons, or when it is important to
evolve the Web server in house.
• Platformed on a Web host, or a company dedicated to providing turn-key
Web server solutions. The Web server is hosted on a remote site.
• Platformed on a public server such as those offered to its subscribers by
AOL, Compuserve, Prodigy and the many others. Other public servers
113

e-business site domain name
include Geocities and Angelﬁre offering businesses a low-cost migration
path to architecting a low-cost e-business presence on the World Wide Web.
• Co-located on a server farm, where ISDN or T1 connection technologies,
maintenance and day-to-day running take place off site.
Dell, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Olivetti, Compaq and the many other computer
manufacturers produce server implementations, many of which are turn-key
solutions. Such servers are speciﬁed in terms of processor types, number of
processors, mass storage capacity, bundled operating systems and server soft-
ware, as well as the many other such common features. Generally, it may be
assumed that much of the low-level technical descriptions of servers may be
ignored when purchasing off the major producers such as those mentioned
earlier; it may be assumed that they will always bring the latest technolo-
gies to market – at a time when perhaps budget computer makers are not.
Web servers run either the Windows NT or UNIX operating systems (OSes),
and there are many differentiating features that separate them (See Operat-
ing System). A Web server hosted off-site should allow you to include a
domain name of your choice, and for security purposes, to restrict user access
to directories or ﬁles. It must also allow you to conduct transactions in a
secure mode using mainstream encryption techniques such as SHTTP. This
may be veriﬁed by adding the ‘S’ preﬁx to the collective Web address, and
by then opening the site using a Web Browser You may also require a site
certiﬁcate, conﬁrming your ownership rights. It may also be necessary to per-
mit you to run your own programs and scripts, including CGI variants, as
well as accommodate any additional requirements imposed by the Web site
authoring software you may have used such as the FrontPage extensions.
More complex e-business sites require programming in languages such as
Perl, C++, Java Visual Basic, et al. Such languages may be used to create
feedback forms, etc. An e-business site typically comprises many components
like CGI scripts, counters, and applets. Many of these may be gathered from
public domain resources on the World Wide Web, or shareware versions may
used, also.
A e-business site may be secured using many different technologies includ-
ing SSL, RSA and the many products that offer everything from password
protection to ﬁrewalling.
(See Application development, Security and Firewall.)
e-business site domain name
A name of a domain. For example, in the
URL www.microsoft.com, Microsoft is a domain name.
(See E-mail, TCP/IP and URL.)
e-business site map
A map of an e-business site.
e-business site security
(See Security.)
114

EDIFACT
e-cash
A currency metaphor that may be online or ofﬂine. Online e-cash
allows consumers to purchase using locally stored cash amounts. Ofﬂine e-cash
uses smartcards that downloaded electronic units of cash. Online e-cash is
remembered as having been commercially launched by DigiCash.
e-commerce (Electronic Commerce)
(See e-business.)
EDGE
EDGE is an overlay solution for existing ANSI-136/TDMA net-
works, and may use the existing ANSI-136 30 kHz air-interface. EDGE is
on the migration path to UMTS, and may even co exist with it so as to
provide services for wide-area coverage. EDGE standards support mobile
services in ANSI-136/TDMA systems with data rates of up to 473 kbps.
A signiﬁcant change in the ANSI-136/ TDMA standards to support higher
data rates is the use of modulation schemes including 8-PSK (Phase Shift
Keying) and GMSK (Gaussian Minimum Shift Keying). GMSK provides
for wide area coverage, while 8-PSK provides higher data rates but with
reduced coverage. EDGE provides high data rates over a 200 kHz carrier,
giving up to 60 kbps/timeslot that may equate to 473 kbps. EDGE is adap-
tive to radio conditions, giving the highest data rates where there is sufﬁcient
propagation.
(See 3G.)
EDI (Electronic Data Interchange)
A standard set of formats and
protocols for exchanging business information over networks and systems.
Translation programs may play the role of converting extracted database
information into the EDI format so as it may be transmitted to appropriate
entities such as banks that have appropriate EDI capable IT implementations.
EDI Trading Partner
An EDI entity/establishment able to receive or
transmit EDI data.
EDI Transaction Set
A message or block of EDI information that relates
to a business transaction.
EDI Transaction Set Standards
A formal standard that dedicates syntax,
data elements, and transaction sets or messages.
EDI Translation
An EDI conversion to and from the X12 format.
EDI Translator
An entity that converts between the ﬂat ﬁle to EDI for-
mats.
EDIFACT (Electronic Data Interchange For Administration, Commerce
and Transportation.)
A standard for electronic data interchange that is
approved by the UN.
115

e-exchange
e-exchange
An industry spot market for commodity products
EFT (Electronic Funds Transfer)
A transfer of funds from one account
to another using an EFT implementation.
Egg
A credit card and Internet bank.
EGPRS (Enhanced General Packet Radio Service)
From the end user’s
point of view, the EGPRS network is an Internet sub-network that has wireless
access. Internet addressing is used and Internet services can be accessed. A
new number, the IP.
(See 3G and UMTS.)
EIGRP (Extended Interior Gateway Routing Protocol)
A protocol
developed by Cisco for routers.
EJB (Enterprise JavaBeans)
A server-side implementation of the Jav-
aBean component model. EJBs may be used to build applications using appro-
priate tools, and are CORBA compliant.
EJB to CORBA mapping
A mapping that equates EJB to the CORBA
equivalent.
Electronic mail
(See E-mail.)
Electronic publishing
A term used to describe information made avail-
able through electronic means. Through the Internet, hypermedia and hypertext
marked the beginning of a renaissance in electronic publishing, radically alter-
ing the manner in which information is presented and used. Other media for
electronic publishing include CD-ROM and DVD-ROM.
(See Web.)
E-mail
A method of communicating documents and digital ﬁles electron-
ically; a computer-based equivalent of a letter. E-mail addresses generally
conform to the format: name@domain.domain category.country:
• name – might be a login name.
• domain – might be a company name such as Microsoft.
• domain category – is the type of domain (See domain category).
• country – is the geographic location of the server that might be uk (United
Kingdom), nz (New Zealand), au (Australia) and so on.
For instance, subscribers to Compuserve have e-mail addresses that have
the syntax: 123456.7654@compuserve.com. Other ISPs (Internet Service
Providers) allow users to use their name as an ID. Examples include
116

Encapsulation
F−Botto@compulink.co.uk, or fbotto@cia.com.au. E-mail messages may be
sent using browsers (such as Netscape Navigator and Microsoft Explorer),
though these are not e-mail applications or clients such as Microsoft Outlook
or Endora Mail. The latter offer folders such as inbox, outbox and sent
messages, and are dedicated applications that support such e-mail protocols
as SMTP and POP3. Compuserve (owned by AOL) offers e-mail functions
and features, as well as options dedicated to its own services. The MIME
(Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) are applicable to such transmission,
permitting the integration of program and video ﬁles within e-mail documents
and communications. Typically, a computer ﬁtted with a modem (Modulator
Demodulator) is used for transmission and reception of e-mail, though within
organisations NICs are more common. E-mail messages may be sent over
LANs, intranets and the Internet. Users generally read their e-mail messages
by downloading them from a server, and there is often an option within the
e-mail program that allows them to choose whether or not leave a copy of the
e-mail message on the mail server.
(See POP-3.)
E-mail autoreply
A reply to an e-mail message that is created automati-
cally using an e-mail autoresponder such as MReply. In an e-business context,
such responses are useful for conveying the receipt of orders, advertising
related products and promotions, publicising trading hours, and so on.
E-mail responder
A program that replies automatically to received e-mail
messages.
e-marketplace
A broad term that encapsulates all targets of e-business
sales channels.
Embedded style
A style attached to one speciﬁc document using the form:
<HEAD>
<STYLE TYPE="text/css">
<!--
P {text-indent: 10pt}
-->
</STYLE>
</HEAD>
Encapsulation
A term which describes hiding the internal workings of
an object. Resulting objects encapsulate code and data that is hidden from the
user and the remaining collective OO system. Essentially it becomes a black
box, and all that matters are its responses to stimuli, such as deﬁned events
that are intercepted and processed by the object’s public interface.
(See C++, Java and OOP.)
117

Encode
Encode
A process of converting data, or an analogue signal, into another
form in terms of data representation. For example, Video-on-Demand services
often use MPEG-2 video that is encoded using uncompressed source record-
ings that may be analogue or digital. Equally, streaming video/multimedia
sites store video encoded according to the MPEG-1 speciﬁcation.
(See MPEG.)
Encryption
A process of ciphering messages or data so as it may be deci-
phered and read only by intended recipient(s). Encryption techniques include:
• DES
• TripleDES
• DES X
• RSA
• DSS.
(See Decryption, DES, TripleDES, DES X, RSA and DSS.)
End-user
A user of a system, software solution, device, or service.
End-user identiﬁcation
A set of procedures and protocols required to
identify the user.
Enterprise computing
A general term used to describe the application
of computers and Information Technology (IT) in medium-size to large busi-
nesses. Only larger small businesses are considered to be enterprises.
Enterprise JavaBeans
(See EJB.)
Entity Relationship diagram
A diagram that illustrates the design struc-
ture of a relational database, together with all its data tables and links. Pro-
grams that may be used to draft such diagrams include EasyCase. Entity
relationship diagrams rarely include reports and query information, though
some relevant notes might be included.
(See Database.)
Entry
A group of object references in a class package such as
net.jini.core.entry.Entry interface.
Enumerated constants
A type of constant that is supported by C++.
Enumerated constants take the form of a type, and are a useful shorthand
for deﬁning a number of what might be related constants. The following
statement deﬁnes the constants back, forward, left, and right, where Move is
the enumeration.
enum Move {back = 4, forward, left = 6, right = 3};
118

Event driven
The forward constant is assigned the value 5, an increment (of one) relative
to the previously deﬁned constant back.
(See C++.)
e-procurement
An application of an automated purchasing system that
may be Web or Internet based. Buyers may log on to the system to view
supplier catalogues, and to place orders.
ERP – Enterprise Resource Planning
An integration mechanism that
encapsulates business and management processes to give a birdseye view of
organisation activity. It may address:
• company ﬁnancials
• human resources data
• manufacturing information and logistics.
E-purse
A value that may be stored on a SmartCard and represents the
amount that may be used to make small purchases.
Error log
A log of errors experienced by a server.
e-tailer
A retailer that uses sales channels that rely on electronic media
such as the Internet.
Ethernet
A Local Area Network (LAN) standard. Ethernet adapters
included on computers may comprise thin-Ethernet or more expensive thick-
Ethernet connectors and cables. Ethernet may be considered as being put
forward in 1974 by Robert Metcalfe through his Harvard Ph.D. thesis.
Event
A change in state that may be invoked by responses or series of
processes and sub-processes that may be implemented by objects. The event
may be a simple message sent from one object to another, and its origins may
be anything from another message from an agent to a physical mouse click
or key press. Applications and operating system environments that respond to
such events are termed event-driven.
Event driven
1. A concept where state changes of entities such as objects
may be relayed to other listeners or objects in what might be a collective
OO system. Almost all modern software implementations and systems and
environments are event driven. 2. An environment or program that responds
to external events such as mouse clicks. Modern event-driven applications
may be assumed to be object oriented. Objects such as buttons respond to
events, triggering a method or item of code that is attached to them. Windows
is an event-driven environment.
(See Store and forward agent.)
119

Event generator
Event generator
An object whose state changes are relevant to another
object, and may send notiﬁcation messages to compliant objects when events
are generated.
Event listener
An object that responds to events, or more speciﬁcally
responds to one or more event types.
exception
An interruption to the normal ﬂow of program control caused
by the program itself.
(See Exception handling.)
Exception handling
A process where exceptions are detected and efforts
made to suppress them.
Expansion bus
A bus used to provide a means of expanding a PC
to include various peripheral devices that might range from graphics cards
to MPEG players. Standard expansion buses include 16 bit ISA (Industry
Standard Architecture), IBM MCA (Micro Channel Architecture) and EISA
(Enhanced Industry Standard Architecture).
Expert System
(See KBS.)
Explorer
A program which is part of Windows 95 and Windows NT,
and is used to peruse ﬁles, open ﬁles, launch programs, and perform ﬁle
management functions. It shows ﬁle details such as their size in Bytes, the
date and time they were last modiﬁed, and their attributes including whether
they have read, write or read/write status. It is commonly used to move,
rename, copy and delete ﬁles and even complete directories. The move, copy
and delete commands work with multiple selected ﬁles, so you can copy and
move batches of ﬁles without having to go through the monotony of dealing
with one ﬁle at a time. Windows applications may be run from Explorer by
double-clicking them, or by double-clicking ﬁles that were created with them.
Explorer may be used to:
• connect to shared directories on other network users’ drives.
• declare directories as shared.
• give shared directories password protection.
• monitor who on the network is using shared directories.
• stop sharing shared directories.
(See Windows.)
Export Management Company (EMC)
A company that exists in
foreign markets as a sales entity, and offers such sales services to client
companies.
120

e-zine
External Style Sheet
A template/document/ﬁle containing style informa-
tion that may link with one of a number of HTML documents, permitting
a site to be re-styled by editing one ﬁle. They may be linked to a HTML
document using the form:
<HEAD>
<LINK REL=STYLESHEET HREF="style.css" TYPE="text/
css">
</HEAD>
Extranet
A controlled non-public-access network based on IP technolo-
gies such as the Web. Using extranets, companies may allow trusted clients
or partners to view certain information that is ﬁrewalled. They also provide
employees with remote access to company information.
e-zine
An electronic magazine.
121


F
Factory object
An object that instantiates objects.
(See Object, and OO.)
Failover
A contingency measure that provides an alternative service
provider, should a failure occur.
FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions)
A list of questions asked most often
by users and developers.
Fat client
A system within a client/server architecture (such as that of the
Web) which features:
• presentation, which is typically in the form of a Web browser
• complete application(s)
• a data cache, which is used to stored information from a server-side database,
or back-end database.
Many systems connected to the Web may be described as thin clients. Fat
clients depend heavily on client-side processing and resources, while thin
clients do not. This higher demand for hardware results in higher client sys-
tem costs. Generally fat clients may integrate:
• improved intelligence, because the user’s interaction can be personalised
through the local customisation of the application. Additionally, intelligence
features such as those associated with KBSs are more feasible.
• additional local applications, such as industry standard products from com-
panies such as Microsoft, Lotus, Inprise Corporation.
• data veriﬁcation, prior to sending messages to the client side, thus improving
system responsiveness, while reducing network trafﬁc.
• security on the client-side, through password checks, and restricted access
to documents, data, and applications.
(See Application, Client/server, KBS, Thin client and NC.)
FAT32 (File Allocation Table)
A ﬁling system used by the Windows 98
operating system. It is an advancement of the FAT16 implementation, and is
123

Fatbrain.com
able to address hard disks with up to a 2 Gbyte formatted data capacity. It is
more efﬁcient than FAT16, because it uses smaller clusters of 4 Kbytes that are
used to store ﬁles. Clusters are used to store data from a single ﬁle. The larger
32 Kbyte-clusters of FAT16 are comparatively inefﬁcient. For example, when
a 34 Kbyte ﬁle is written to the hard disk, two 32 Kbyte clusters are used. The
second cluster has some 30 Kbyte of unused payload. So even though the ﬁle
is just 34 Kbytes, it consumes 64 Kbytes of hard disk that equates to two of
its 32 Kbyte clusters. Clearly, FAT32’s dependence on 4 Kbyte clusters helps
eradicate the unused data capacity of clusters. This yields considerably storage
capacity gains.
(See Hard disk.)
Fatbrain.com
An online entity that is engaged in book selling.
FDDI (Fibber Distributed Data Interface)
A computer-to-computer ﬁb-
ber link technology, and an internationally agreed ANSI standard. The topol-
ogy comprises a dual multi-mode optic ﬁbber, LED (or laser) and Token ring
network. Data rates of up to 100 Mbps are possible. Without repeaters, trans-
mission distances up to 2 Km are attainable, at a data transfer rate of 40 Mbps.
(See LED and Optic ﬁbre.)
Feedback form
A form that may be used to gather information about
visitors to e-business sites and may be created simply by using HTML.
Fibre Channel
A high-performance communications pathway, which was
introduced by the Fibre Channel Association (FCA). An open standard, it
is a protocol that supports data transfer rates from 133 Mbits/sec up to
100 Mbytes/sec.
Fibre channel can be used to connect sites up to 10 Km apart using a
9-micrometer single mode optic ﬁbre. The ﬁbre channel protocol may also
propagate along traditional copper-based transmission media.
Typical data transfer rates, and maximum transmission distances for a 9-
micrometer single mode optic ﬁbre are:
• 100 Mbytes/sec 10 Km
• 50 MBytes/sec 10 Km
• 25 MBytes/sec 10 Km
For a 50-micrometer multi-mode optic ﬁbre:
• 100 Mbytes/sec 0.5 Km
• 50 MBytes/sec 1 Km
• 25 MBytes/sec 2 Km
For a 62.5-micrometer multi-mode optic ﬁbre:
• 25 Mbytes/sec 500 m
• 12.5 MBytes/sec 1 Km
124

Fibre Channel
For video coax:
• 100 Mbytes/sec 10 Km
• 50 MBytes/sec 10 Km
• 25 MBytes/sec 10 Km
Applications of Fibre channel include mass storage interface and control, and
high-speed networks. Network topologies may be point-to-point, ring, or a
Fibre Channel – Arbitrated Loop (FC-AL), which requires neither switches
nor hubs. Frames are used to send and receive data, each having the ﬁelds:
Fibre channel frame format
4 bytes
4 bytes
4 bytes
Start of
frame
Frame
header
Optional
header
32 bit CRC
End of
frame
24 bytes
64 bytes
0 to 2112 bytes (payload)
2048 bytes (Maximum
payload with optional header )
Fibre
Channel
Controller
Open
Fibre
Control
Media
Open
Fibre
Control
Fibre
Channel
Controller
TX
RX
RX
TX
(Optical
or
copper)
Fibre Channel FC-0 link
• start-of-frame delimiter
• frame header
• optional header
• payload, which is the user data, and may be between 0 to 2112 Bytes
• 32 bit CRC error detection
• end-of-frame delimiter.
125

Field
The Fibre Channel Physical (FC-PH) standard consists of the levels:
• FC-0, which covers physical media, cables connectors, LEDs, short- and
long-wave lasers, transmitters and receivers.
• FC-1, which covers the encoding and decoding protocol, to cater for the
adopted serial transmission techniques.
• FC-2, which covers the signaling protocol, and deﬁnes the shown frame
format (or framing protocol) for data transfer.
Upper FC layers include FC-3, whose common services include:
• multicast, for transmissions to multiple destinations.
• striping, for transmitting to multiple N ports concurrently, and supports
multiple links.
• hunt groups, which is a collection of N ports, which is assigned an alias.
Frames containing the alias are routed to any non-busy N-port within the
deﬁned group.
Upper layer protocols (ULPs) are deﬁned by FC-4, covering industry network
standards, which may be transported using Fibre Channel. These include:
• Internet Protocol
• ATM Adaption layer
• IEEE 802.2
Channel protocols supported by FC-4 include:
• SCSI (Small Computer Systems Interface)
• High Performance Parallel Interface (HIPPI) framing protocol
• Intelligent Peripheral Interface (IPI)
• Single Byte Command Code Set Mapping (SBCCM).
(See Access technology, ADSL, DSL, ISDN and LED.)
Field
A column in a database table or a container for data entry in a form.
Entries within ﬁelds are termed ﬁeld values.
(See Data warehouse.)
Field value
A data item in a database.
FIFO (First In First Out)
A queue whose operation hinges on regurgi-
tating items in the order in which they were deposited. An analogy is that
of a vending machine used to sell chocolate bars that are stored in a vertical
dispensing tube.
Fifth Generation Language
A ﬁfth generation languages is non-proce-
dural. They are declarative in that actions are not implemented through ﬁxed
procedures. They are also known as AI languages and include PROLOG (PRO-
gramming LOGic).
(See AI, Procedural.)
126

Firewall
Financial EDI
An exchange of payment information in standard formats
between business partners.
Find and Replace
A phrase used to describe the automated process of
replacing a speciﬁed word or phrase with another. The phrases ﬁnd-and-replace
and search-and-replace are interchangeable.
Finger
A UNIX user information lookup program that is used via a ‘shell
account’. It displays the user’s login name, real name, terminal name and write
status, idle time, login time, ofﬁce location and ofﬁce phone number.
Firewall
A software/hardware implementation that partitions a network
or system, so restricting access to selected users; it appropriately isolates a
network. A ﬁrewall may be perceived as physically existing
• between the Web server(s) and the ISP’s physical site
• or between the network and the Internet
• or between one or more networks.
It may perform the simple functions of checking client connections and requests,
securing server-side applications and data.
The ﬁrewall’s collective components may intercept inbound data packets,
and perform a number of security checks. These may revolve around the
origins of the packet, checking such packet information as its:
• source IP address
• source IP port that identiﬁes the originating application.
Firewalls are key to many organisations’ security strategy. Other adopted secu-
rity facets include:
• passwords for logging on to networks
• client-side password checks for connecting to Web sites
• client-side password checks for connecting to E-mail applications and ser-
vices
• password protected compressed hard disks, made possible using Stac Elec-
tronics disk compression programs.
Firewalls may also include the ability to virus check, and to screen, incoming
documents and executables such as ActiveX controls, Plug-ins, Java applets
and any other code that is downloaded and intended to be processed. Cookies
may also be ﬁltered.
Firewalls may be at the network level that harness packet ﬁltering tech-
niques using routers. The routers are intelligent in that they may be pro-
grammed to behave as a selective barrier to unwanted network trafﬁc.
Dual-homed host ﬁrewall
A dual-homed host has two network interfaces that
connect with disparate networks, while a multi-homed host typically interfaces with
127

Firewire
two or more networks. The term gateway was used to describe the routing functions
of such dual-homed hosts. Nowadays the term gateway is replaced by router. A
dual-homed host may be used to isolate a network, because it acts as barrier to the
ﬂow of TCP/IP trafﬁc. The implementation of a Unix dual-homed ﬁrewall requires
(among other things) that:
• IP forwarding is disabled, thus yielding a protective barrier
• unrequired network services are removed
• programming tools are uninstalled.
Firewall
Firewall − in the form of a dual-homed host
Internal
network
Internet
Network
interface
Network
interface
Bastion Host
A host that is critical to a network’s security. This is the focus
of network management, security monitoring, and is a network’s principal defense
against illegal usage. A dual-homed host may play the role of a bastion host.
Screened subnets
A subnet which restricts TCP/IP trafﬁc from entering a secured
network. The screening function may be implemented by screening routers.
Commercial ﬁrewall products include
FireWall-1 that is a commercial gateway
product, from the Internet Security Corporation, and uses:
• application gateway
• packet ﬁltering.
ANS InterLock that is a commercial gateway product from Advanced Network
Services. Gauntlet that is a ﬁrewall product from Trusted Information Systems.
(See Security gateway, ATM, Cookies, Encryption, Packet ﬁltering, Risk expo-
sure, Screening Router, Security, SET, STAC Electronics and Subnet.)
Firewire
A high performance interface that permits the connection of
peripheral devices such as mass storage devices, modems and printers. It is oth-
erwise known as IEEE1394, and as such it is an internationally agreed standard.
Firmware
A program or data stored using a ROM variant (See ROM,
EPROM, PROM and EAROM). Firmware is thus involatile and permanent.
Flame and Flame War
A conﬂict that revolves around the exchange of
insults, and personal attacks.
128

FMFSV
Flat-bed scanner
(See Scanner.)
Flat-screen display
A display that is not based on a CRT (Cathode Ray
Tube), but on ﬂat-screen technologies that include:
• TFT (Thin Film Transistor) or active matrix that currently offers the best
response and performance. The response time is the lowest of all current ﬂat-
screen displays and the performance level approximates CRT-based designs
most closely. Screen sizes and screen resolutions vary, as do the number of
colours offered at various resolutions. The latter is a function of the video
chipset implementation. Notebook and Subnotebook screen sizes vary from
about 10.3 in upwards, though larger screen sizes are desirable.
• HPA (High Performance Addressing), which is an enhanced implementation
of passive display technology, offers slightly lower response times, though
the number of colours and resolution is the same. The lower response time
results slight shadows and trails in the case of moving screen images and
sprites.
Low-end notebooks are most likely to be:
• DSTN or a passive display.
• CSTN (Colour Super-Twist Nematic), which is a passive display technology.
Flat-screen technologies are currently displacing CRT-based desktop monitors
at the upper end of the desktop monitor market, and are the standard display
technology used in notebooks.
Floating-Point Data Types
A data type that may represent fractional
numbers which maybe the:
• ﬂoat type, which is allocated a 32-bit single-precision number
• double type, which is allocated a 64-bit double-precision number.
Such data types are implemented using the statements:
float altitude;
double angle, OpenRoad;
Flowchart
A symbolic representation of the ﬂow of program execution.
Flowcharts can also be applied to objective decision making, such as choosing
a computer, sound card, monitor or anything in fact. Windows programs capa-
ble of generating ﬂowcharts including Visio, ABC Flowchart and AllClear.
FMFSV (Full Motion Full Screen Video)
A term used to describe video
that may be assumed to ﬁll the entire screen, or a greater part of it, and provides
the illusion of a frame rate of not less than 25 frames per second (fps) without
the use of duplicated frames. MPEG-2 or DVD video is FMFSV. 25 fps is the
frame rate delivered by PAL and SECAM broadcast standards. The American
129

Folder
NTSC broadcast standard provides 30 fps. Ideally the frame rate should be
greater than 25–30 fps. The frames that make up an FMFSV may be full
frames as in the case of an M-JPEG video stream or a combination of full
frames and partial frames as is the case with MPEG video. The full frames or
reference frames occur at regular intervals, and dictate the number of authentic
random access points provided by an encoded MPEG video sequence. The
frame resolution of what may be described as FMFSV varies, but it should
not fall below around 720-by-360 pixels. Larger standard frame resolutions
may broadly equate to 640-by-480 pixels, 800-by-600 pixels, 1024-by-768
pixels, 1,240-by-1,024 pixels and 1,600-by-1,240 pixels.
(See MPEG and Video.)
Folder
A metaphor for a directory, and is used to store ﬁles which are
usually of a speciﬁc type.
Fork
A data stream that may be accessed individually using a com-
mon ﬁlename. The BSD fork system call creates a process.
Form
1. A metaphor for a paper form that is used by client Browsers
in order to interact with programs and data that may be on the client- or
server-side. Typically forms permit users to enter (among others):
• signup details with Web sites
• contact details
• password details
• credit or Switch card details for purchase from e-business sites.
(See MCIS.) 2. A metaphor for a paper form, used for data entry and viewing
data in a database. RDBMS development tools, such as Excel, DataEase for
Windows, Paradox for Windows, may be used to create table-based applica-
tions. (See Data warehouse and DBMS.) 3. A data sector type on a CD-I disc.
Like CD-ROM blocks, CD-I sectors are 2,352 bytes long – including head-
ers, sync information, error detection and correction data. Like Mode 1 block,
Form 1 sector yields 2,048 bytes user data. Unlike Mode 2 block, however,
Form 2 sector yields 2,324 bytes user data. (See CD-ROM)
Form method
A method of gaining customer information and for taking
orders. Forms may be created using HTML and by using scripting languages:
<FORM> NAME="Customer" ACTION="http://botto.com/cgibin/
form/cgi
METHOD=get>
</FORM>
130

Frame relay
The <FORM> tag may have the attributes:
• NAME, which is the form’s name.
• ACTION, which indicates the URL where the form is sent to.
• METHOD, which indicates the submission method that may be POST or GET.
• TARGET, which indicates the windows or frame where the output from the
CGI program is shown.
Fortune 100
A league table of the top 100 American companies.
Fortune 1000
A league table of the top 1000 American companies.
Fps (Frames per second)
A measure of the speed at which frames mak-
ing up a video sequence are played or captured.
Frame
1. A tiled area of a Browser’s window. A frame provides an efﬁ-
cient method of presenting information without using a separate Web page.
For example, a frame might be used to play a video sequence or animation. A
frame enabled Web application reduces the complexity of designing multiple
pages at design time, and is toured more easily by users. Frames are supported
by many Web page design, and Web application development tools such as
Microsoft FrontPage, for instance. (See FrontPage and Visual InterDev.) 2. A
single image making up a video sequence. Digital video sequences may con-
sists predominantly of partial frames called interframes, or full frames called
intraframes. (See MPEG and Video.) 3. A single item of transmitted data using
the Frame Relay protocol that is designed for modern digital networks, and
does not integrate the demanding error detection and correction schemes preva-
lent in older protocols. (See Frame Relay.)
Frame rate
A measure of the speed of video capture or playback typically
using units of frames per second.
Frame relay
A protocol designed for modern communications networks.
Typically it may be operated at speeds between 9600 bits/sec and 2 Mbits/sec,
though higher speeds are possible. Compared to X.25 it makes better use of
network bandwidth as it does not integrate the same level of intense error
detection and correction. That is not to say that frame relay is unreliable;
it is simply optimised for modern networks which do not impose the same
level of error on transmitted data – which is the case with older network
technologies for which X.25 was designed. The frame relay protocol may be
applied in WAN and backbone implementations, and integrated into solutions
that require high data transfer speeds. Each frame consists of a:
• ﬂag that separates contiguous frames
• address ﬁeld that stores the data link connection identiﬁer (DLCI) and other
information
131

Framework
• control ﬁeld that contains the frame size, and receiver ready (RR) and
receiver not ready (RNR) information
• information ﬁeld that contains up to 65,536 bytes
• frame check sequence that is a CRC for error correction.
(See CRC and X.25.)
Framework
A suite of interfaces, and code that deﬁne the behaviour of
objects or components in an application. The application may be local, or a
client/server implementation.
Freeware
Software that is free of charge and may be freely included in
e-business sites, and include entities like ActiveX controls, CGI scripts and
various programs.
Fremont
A Hewlett-Packard e-business development environment that
requires Java programming.
Frequency band
A range of frequencies used by a given wireless network
or device.
Front-end
A name given to the client application or system that may be
served by a server-side or back-end application. Between the back- and front-
end applications is middleware or glues that exist at a number of levels. These
may bind together and coordinate application logic, data and presentation
distributed across the back- and front-ends.
(See Application, Back-end, Client/server and Glues.)
FrontPage
A Web page development package marketed and sold by
Microsoft, and:
• includes Explorer that is used to display the navigation scheme integrated
in your Web pages
• includes Editor that is used to design Web pages
• includes Web Server that is used to publish and test Web pages before their
deployment over the Internet or compatible IP network
• may be used to integrate ActiveX controls and Java applets in Web pages
• does not require programming skills
• may be used to create Web pages that interact with ODBC compliant
databases.
FrontPage includes the:
• Personal Web Server that provides a testbed for Web applications before
deploying them on the Web
• Server Extensions that are building blocks for driving predeﬁned function-
ality gains through your Web site implementation
132

Functional speciﬁcation
• Explorer and Editor that permits the developed Web design to be navigated,
browsed and edited.
FrontPage is bundled with Windows NT Server, and is available separately.
(See PWS, Visual InterDev, Web Server and ToolBook.)
FTP (File Transfer Protocol)
A protocol used to transfer ﬁles between
FTP servers and client systems. It is a standard method for distributing ﬁles
across IP/TCP networks. Using an FTP client program, users are able to link
with FTP sites, and browse the remote directories and ﬁles as if they were on
a local hard disk. Users can then download ﬁles from the ftp server.
(See Anonymous FTP.)
ftp client
A client that is used to login to ftp sites, and permits ﬁles to be
uploaded and downloaded.
ftp site
A Web site that is accessible using the ftp protocol and an appro-
priate ftp client.
FTSE 100
A share index that moves upward or downward, and aver-
ages the top 100 companies’ share performance throughout trading. It is the
equivalent to the American Dow Jones.
Full duplex
A simultaneous bi-directional transmission of different data
streams.
Full frame updates
A video sequence that is composed of full frames.
Any such frame can provide a valid entry point for non-linear playback or
editing. Such video sequences are also known as intraframe.
(See M-JPEG and MPEG..)
Functional speciﬁcation
A document outlining the functions offered by
a service or implementation.
133


G
Garbage collection
A memory management feature that reclaims the
space occupied by an object at such times when there are no references it.
(See C++, Java and OOP.)
Gates, Bill
An entrepreneurial technologist who along with Paul Allen co-
founded Microsoft. Microsoft’s most signiﬁcant milestone product in its early
development was MS-DOS, an operating systems for the IBM PC and compat-
ible computers, and was based on Digital Research’s CP/M operating systems.
Prior to this, he and Paul Allen had written a Basic interpreter for the Altair, one
of the world’s ﬁrst affordable microcomputers. The Windows family of products
has proved the most successful revenue generating of all Microsoft products.
(See Windows.)
Gateway
A core solution that unites disparate networks. A WAP gateway,
for example, connects an IP network with a mobile network.
(See WAP.)
gateway page (multiple on a web site)
A page designed for Search
engine ranking. AltaVista may prefer 700-word pages, and Excite might favour
300 words, so different pages would be submitted to each.
Gcc
A compiler program.
Geocities
A resource on the World Wide Web that offers among other
things hosting services for Web sites.
GET method
A means of running a CGI script or program where the URL
deﬁnes the CGI program (such as credit.cgi for example) and the accompa-
nying data used by the server that follows the question mark:
www.FrancisBotto.com/cgi-bin/credit.cgi?subject
=transaction
(See CGI environment variables.)
135

GGSN
GGSN
(See 2.5G, GPRS and 3G.)
GIF (Graphics Interchange Format)
A standard graphics ﬁle format
that produces relatively compact ﬁles.
GIF98
A ﬁle format used in animated sequences.
Gigabit Ethernet
An upscaled version of the Fast Ethernet network stan-
dard. It may deliver up to 1,000 Mbps access speeds, and is backwardly
compatible with 10Base-T and 100Base-T Ethernet standards. It may be used
over the media:
• multimode ﬁbre optic cables over a maximum distance of 500 metres
• single- or mono-mode ﬁbre optic cables over a maximum distance of 2 kilo-
metres
• coaxial cable over a maximum distance of 25 meters.
(See Optic ﬁbre.)
GIOP (General Inter-ORB Protocol)
A protocol or set of message for-
mats and data structures for communications between ORBs.
(See IIOP.)
Global roaming
A term used to describe the process of reading email
messages other than by using your local ISP’s point-of-presence. The ability
to access e-mail for subscribers for international ISPs such as Compuserve
is unimportant, due to the availability of worldwide points of presence. Web-
based, global roaming e-mail services are available that simply provide users
with a PIN. Mail may then be read using any Internet access device, such as
those available in so-called Cybercafes.
The term global roaming is also applicable to mobile telephony, in which
major digital carriers offer the ability to use services in speciﬁed countries.
Which may be assumed to include all ﬁrst-world countries.
(See 2.5G, 3G, E-mail, POP3, mobile networks and GSM.)
Glue
A term given to the entities that provide communications between
distributed and local application components. In a client/server context, is an
alternative name for middleware. The underlying client/server system archi-
tecture may be that of the Web. Object-oriented glues include all the collec-
tive entities that provide the communications between distributed components.
Glues in the Web architectural model include the protocols:
• TCP/IP
• HTTP
• SMTP
• miscellaneous low-level protocols including UDP.
136

Gold code
Glues in LANs might include Ethernet and even proprietary protocols. Pro-
tocols are the lowest level glues in both traditional and modern OO systems.
The next level is the programming models that are of concern to systems
programmers, systems architects and programmers. This dictates the method
of communications between components that include:
• remote procedure call (RPC)
• message queuing, where messages are exchanged between components nor-
mally using queues, buffers or even pipes which interface more loosely
coupled components, perhaps via a WAN
• peer-to-peer, where either component can be the server (sending a message)
or the client (receiving the message).
Local glue
A collection of entities that unite client components, so they may
operate collectively. OLE, OpenDoc, ActiveX, JavaBeans components require local
glues so their running operations may be coordinated. These common OO component
architectures use different local glues, where:
• OLE uses ODL (Object Deﬁnition Language)
• ActiveX uses COM
• OpenDoc uses CORBA IDL (Interface Deﬁnition Language.)
• JavaBeans uses a subset of the Java programming language.
(See ActiveX, JavaBeans, OLE, and OpenDoc.)
Scripting
A scripting language such as VBScript or JScript may also be perceived
as a glue, as may be HTML.
(See JScript and VBScript.)
Distributed glues
A name given to the collective entities that bind together
(dynamically) running components that are on the client and on the server. As
is the case with local glues, standard OO component architectures use different
distributed glues.
(See ActiveX, JavaBeans, OLE, and OpenDoc.)
GNUstep
An open source development environment for Objective-C
programmers.
(See www.GNUstep.org)
Gopher
A menu based interface that permits Internet navigation and con-
nects to any other gopher, web, telnet, or ftp site.
Gold code
A ﬁnal build of a program that is released for end users. It
is the ﬁnal stage of development, and will have been alpha and beta tested.
Programs that are sold conventionally, such as those from Microsoft, and those
that are shareware or freeware are termed gold code.
137

GPRS
GPRS (General Packet Radio Service.)
The GPRS overlay increases
the GSM and TDMA user data rate to a maximum of about 171 Kbps, and
includes the following physical network overlay core solutions:
• IP-based GPRS backbone
• GGSN (Gateway GPRS Serving Node)
• SGSN (Server GPRS Serving Node).
Principle features are:
• Packet based transmission
• Packet-based charging as opposed to time-based charging
• Always-on – so a VPN connection for example does not require constant
logging in to the remote/enterprise network/intranet.
• Eight time slots
• A maximum user data rate of about 171 Kbps when all time slots are used.
GPRS Architecture:
• alleviates capacity impacts by sharing radio resources among all mobile
stations in cells.
• lends itself to bursty trafﬁc.
MSC
BSC
BTS
SGSN
GGSN
Internet
IP based
GPRS backbone
IP Network
GPRS Applications include
• E-mail; fax; messaging; intranet/Internet browsing
• Value-added services (VAS); information services; games
• m-business: retail; banking; ﬁnancial trading, advertising
• Geographic: GPS; navigation; trafﬁc routing; airline/rail schedules
138

GPRS Network
• Vertical applications: freight delivery; ﬂeet management; sales-force
automation.
GPRS Terminal Classes
A GPRS terminal phone may be:
• Class A: supports GPRS, GSM and SMS, and may make or receive calls
simultaneously over two services. In the case of CS services, GPRS virtual
circuits are held or placed on busy as opposed to closed down.
• Class B: supports either GSM or GPRS services sequentially, but monitors
both simultaneously. Like Class A, the GPRS virtual circuits will not be
closed down with CS trafﬁc, but switched to busy or held mode.
• Class C: make or receive calls using the manually selected service, with
SMS an optional feature.
GPRS Architecture
The GPRS architecture is an overlay network for
2G GSM networks, and provides packet data for user data rates between 9.6
and 171 kbps. GPRS’ air-interfaces are shared among multiple users.
GSM entity
GPRS overlay
BSC
BSCs require software upgrades and packet
control unit (PCU) hardware that directs
data to the GPRS network.
Core Network
Nodes and gateways that are essentially
packet switched MSCs are required,
including:
• Serving GPRS Support Node (SGSN)
• Gateway GPRS Support Node (GGSN).
Databases (HLR and VLR)
Databases require software upgrades to
handle GPRS functions and call models.
Subscriber Terminal
New subscriber terminals are required to
access GPRS services.
GPRS BSS
To become a GPRS BSC, each GSM BSC requires the instal-
lation of one or more PCUs that give interfaces for packet data out of the BSS.
Like GSM, when either voice or data trafﬁc originates at the subscriber terminal,
it goes over the air interface to the BTS, from where it goes to the BSC. Unlike
GSM however, the trafﬁc is separated; voice is sent to the MSC (like GSM)
and data is sent to the SGSN, through the PCU using a Frame Relay interface.
GPRS Network
2G GSM MSCs are circuit switched (CS) and cannot
therefore handle packet data, so Nodes are introduced:
• Serving GPRS Support Node (SGSN)
• Gateway GPRS Support Node (GGSN).
139

SGSN
The SGSN acts like a packet router or packet-switched MSC that directs
packets to MSs.
SGSN
A 2.5G GPRS SGSN performs the following functions:
• query home location registers (HLRs) to get subscriber proﬁles
• detect new GPRS MSs
• process registration of new subscribers
• keep records of subscribers’ locations
• performs mobility management functions such as mobile subscriber attach/
detach and location management
• connect to the base-station subsystem using a Frame Relay connection to
the BSC’s PCU.
GGSN
A 2.5G GPRS GGSN performs the following functions:
• interface with IP networks like the Internet and enterprise intranets, and
with other mobile service providers’ GPRS provisions
• maintain routing information used to tunnel protocol data units (PDUs) to
SGSNs that serve MSs
• network and subscriber screening
• address mapping
• support multiple SGSNs.
GPRS Mobility Management
1. GPRS mobility management functions track the location of an MS as it
moves within a given area.
2. Visitor location registers (VLRs) store the MS proﬁles that are accessed by
SGSNs via the local GSM MSC.
3. The MS and the SGSN are connected via a logical link in each mobile
network.
4. When transmission ends, or when an MS moves out of an SGSN’s area,
the logical link is released.
Graphical user interface
(See GUI.)
Graphics card
An electronic assembly used to generate graphics and text.
Occasionally it is referred to as a graphics engine or graphics controller. A VGA
card is a graphics engine, but is more commonly referred to as a graphics adapter
or card. Standard IBM graphics cards include Monochrome Display Adapter
(MDA), Colour Graphics Adapter (CGA), Enhanced Graphics Adapter (EGA),
Video Graphics Array (VGA), Multi Colour Graphics Array (MCGA – used
on PS/2 30) and 8514/A. The fastest graphics controllers are of the local bus
variety. These connect more directly to the processor’s data bus. The graphics
card speciﬁcation of a PC is inﬂuential in determining the quality digital video
140

Groupware
playback attainable. A video card comprising dedicated hardware for decoding
and playing MPEG, VideoCD or Intel Indeo will generally yield improved video
playback. The many areas that separate graphics cards include the following:
• The expansion bus type
• 3-D graphics capability
• Screen resolutions supported
• Screen refresh rates at each resolution – particularly important at higher
resolutions and it should not fall below 70 Hz.
• The number of colours possible
• Speed of operation
• Does it require the presence of another graphics card? If yes, what type
of connector does it require? A special features connector or Vesa Media
Channel connector?
• What refresh rates can it deliver at the desired resolutions and will these be
supported by the attached monitor?
• Does it accelerate Video for Windows playback?
• Does it scale up Video for Windows video?
• Does it have the ability to play Intel Indeo video at high speed?
• Does it accelerate 3-D graphics?
• Does it have the ability to play video compressed according to one or more
standards that might include MPEG1 or MPEG2?
• Obvious factors that drive a graphics card performance include the bus
width of the graphics processor used, the amount of Vram (Video RAM) it
has, and its interface type.
Graphics engine
An alternative name for a graphics card, or for the
chipsets responsible for generating graphics.
Graphics format
An image ﬁle may be produced and stored according
to a number of different graphics ﬁle formats that include CompuServe GIF,
PCX, Windows BMP, PIC, TIFF, IMG, EPS and others. The efﬁciency of
various image ﬁle formats in terms of the data capacity they consume tends
to vary signiﬁcantly.
Grey list
(See Blacklist.)
Groupware
A name given to a software implementation that provides
collaboration and communication across an enterprise’s (business’) network
solution, or even over the Web. Orfali, Harkey and Edwards deﬁne groupware
as ‘Software that supports the creation, ﬂow, and tracking of nonstructured
information in direct support of collaborative group activity.’ Conventional
modern groupware integrates:
• e-mail
• conferencing such as whiteboards
141

GSM
• telephony including voice mail
• scheduling
• workﬂow
• shared document databases
• Internet access.
The best known groupware product is Lotus Notes
GSM (Global Service Mobile)
Typically a 2G GSM network provides
users with data rates of 9.6 kbps or 14.4 kbps. Two GSM variants include
Digital Cellular Systems 1800 (DCS-1800 or GSM-1800) and PCS-1900 or
GSM-1900 that is used in North America and Chile. The different frequency
is used because of the lack of capacity in the 900 MHz band. The 1800 MHz
band accommodates a larger number of mobile users particularly in densely
populated areas. The coverage area of 1800 MHz networks is often smaller,
and therefore dual band phones are used, able to roam between either net-
work. ETSI has also published GSM-400 and GSM-800 speciﬁcations, with
the former suited to large geographic area coverage, and can therefore be
used in conjunction with higher frequency band networks in sparsely popu-
lated regions. Comparable to GSM, DCS-1800 (Digital LPC Cellular System)
is used in the UK. It operates in the uplink radio band between 1710 MHz and
1785 MHz and can be assumed to provide a user data rate of 9.6 kbps, and
exhibits a 250 km/hour speed threshold on the mobile station.
GSM Network Operation
1. When a mobile phone is switched on, it registers its presence with the
nearest MSC that is then informed of the location of the mobile user.
2. If the user is outside the geographical area of the home MSC, the nearest
MSC will implement a registration procedure. This procedure uses the home
MSC to acquire information about the mobile device. This information is
held by the home MSC in a database called the home location register
(HLR) that holds mapping information necessary so calls can be made
to the user from the PSTN (Public Switched Telephone Network). The
local MSC duplicates part of this information in the VLR (Visitor Location
Register) for as long as the caller is in the MSC area.
3. Normally one HLR and one VLR is associated with each MSC that provides
switching, and a gateway to other mobile and ﬁxed networks.
4. Mobile devices have SIM chips holding user identiﬁcation and conﬁgura-
tion data. SIM chips permits an authorisation procedure to be implemented
between MSCs and EIRs (Equipment Identiﬁcation Register). The EIR has
a black list of barred equipment, a grey list of faulty equipment or for
devices that are registered for no services, and a white list for registered
users and their service subscriptions.
142

GUI
5. When either voice or data trafﬁc originates at the subscriber terminal, it
goes over the air interface to the BTS, from where it goes to the BSC.
GUI (Graphical User Interface – ‘gooey’)
A user interface consisting
of icons, usually facilitating interaction via a mouse, resulting in minimal key-
board use. Sometimes referred to as graphical front-end. The most widespread
commercial examples include those of the Microsoft Windows continuum,
though others exist in the form Apple System, OS/2 Warp, and X Windows.
Originally when the Windows concept was originated at Xerox PARC (Palo
Alto Research Center), the UI was called a WIMP (Windows, Icons Mouse
and Pointer) environment.
143


H
Hacking
An illegal intrusion into a system where its services, programs
and data are used without authority, and may involve:
• Eavesdropping or snifﬁng where the hacker taps into a connection
• Brute force factoring of a public key in a cryptosystem
• Dictionary attacks.
(See Brute Force, cryptosystem, RSA, public key encryption, asymmetric and
Dictionary attack.)
Handset
A mobile phone/device.
(See 2.5G, 3G, and GPRS.)
Hard disk
A magnetic mass storage device consisting of ﬁxed disks.
Removable versions are available but most are ﬁxed. Storage capacities are
increasing all the time. The usefulness of a stand-alone PC is greatly enhanced
following the installation of a magnetic hard disk drive. This presents a
practical solution to re-writable mass storage for the present, yielding data
capacities many orders of magnitude greater than can be held on ﬂoppy disk.
All hard disks must be paired with an appropriate controller, with which they
must be 100 percent compatible. Popular commercial variants include IDE,
E-IDE or ATA-2, SCSI, SCSI-2, Fast Wide SCSI, and Ultra SCSI. There are
basically three ways in which a controller may be supported. One, it is included
on the motherboard itself. Two, it is combined with a hard drive in the form
of a hard card where the complete assembly is plugged into an expansion
slot. Three, it represents a single card which plugs into an expansion slot.
Controllers capable of accepting multiple devices provide an economical path
to vast data storage capacity in future. An inexpensive array of drives may
be built up, thus lowering the considerable cost of a single high capacity
drive bought at the outset. Where a number of drives in an array exhibit
comparatively lengthy access times, it may be more practical to replace them
with a single large disk, or several larger ones. More expensive controllers
145

Hard disk controller
are often expandable in terms of additional daughter boards. For example,
SCSI daughter boards can increase the number of drives in standard multiples
of seven. Such controllers can easily yield tens of GBytes using inexpensive
drives. Some controllers are also capable of mirroring, i.e. writing the same
data to two disk drives simultaneously, thus making the data more secure.
Controller technology and performance has advanced considerably in recent
years, giving rise to an array of commercial devices ranging from scant MFM
implementations to caching variants comprising on-board processors. The
main thrust of advancement bases itself on the need to expand data capacities,
lower access times, and increase data transfer rates. In addition, the emergence
of multiple device controllers reveals a secondary aim. Cache controllers speed
up read/write operations by using on-board RAM as an intermediate data store
between disk and system memory. Based upon which data is requested most
often, a caching algorithm estimates which portions of hard disk should reside
in on-board RAM. The ingenuity of this technique simply takes advantage
of the inescapable fact that a small percentage of disk data is rewritten and
accessed most frequently. The decision making process regarding which data
should reside in RAM may suggest that they are ‘intelligent controllers’. Cache
controllers are the most expensive of all variants, and will outperform standard
implementations. It is most often these types of controllers that are able to
support increasing multiples of drives through the addition of daughter boards.
High performance cache controllers can offer access times as low as a fraction
of one ms.
(See RAID.)
Hard disk controller
A device that interfaces a hard disk with a computer.
Numerous commercial variants exist including IDE, E-IDE, SCSI, SCSI-2,
Fast Wide SCSI, and Ultra SCSI.
(See Hard disk, RAID and SCSI.)
Hardware event queue
A Windows buffer used to store keyboard and
mouse events.
Hash
An element that reduces the number of possible values using a
hashing function such as the Secure Hashing Algorithm (SHA-1).
Hash signature
A hash signature is generated by scrambling data blocks
sequentially, and produces a unique value for a given message or a ﬁle’s
contents. The signature:
• Uses a hash function to create a hash value from a ﬁle
• Concatenates a user’s secret key with the ﬁle
• Creates a hash ﬁle that may be sent to the receiver who may decrypt the
ﬁle with a copy of the secret key.
146

Hierarchy
HDSL (High bit rate DSL)
A data transmission line that uses two pairs
of copper wire as its medium. It offers T1 data speeds of up to 1.544 Mbps.
(See ADSL.)
HDTV (High Deﬁnition Television)
An emerging television broadcast
technology that produces superior quality images using advanced high resolu-
tion digital video technologies like MPEG-2.
(See MPEG-2)
Help system
An on-line information system that provides guidance on
software usage through hypertext, hypermedia or multimedia. Such systems
are usually context sensitive where information regarding a current program
operation may be produced immediately. Windows Help systems are essen-
tially hypermedia applications. They may be authored using a word processor
that is able to produce standard RTF (Rich Text Format) ﬁles together with a
Help compiler such as that supplied with Borland programming tools. Numer-
ous other Help compilers exist.
Hertz
A unit representing the number of cycles or pulses per second. The
Alternating Current (AC) supply in the UK is distributed at 50 Hz or cycles
per second.
Heuristic
An if . . . then rule that may exhibit weighting in the form of
conﬁdence factors.
Hexadecimal
A base 16 counting system that is used widely in computing.
Four binary digits represented by a single number or letter: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, F.
HFS (Hierarchical File System.)
The Mac OS Standard ﬁle-system.
HFS+ (Hierarchical File System Plus.)
A Mac OS Extended ﬁle system
that supports long ﬁle names, and Unicode ﬁle/directory names, and improved
efﬁciency on large disks.
Hierarchical
A hypertext structure in which objects are only accessible
through a parent object. Hierarchical or tree structures are well known and
are normally represented using unidirectional links. Strict hierarchy demands
that objects are only accessible through a parent. Compromised hierarchy,
however, is less formal, permitting links to bypass children objects.
Hierarchy
An inverted tree with the highest level component as its root.
Examples of hierarchies include:
147

High-level language
• Class diagram where the root class is parent to subclasses.
• Hypertext structures.
(See Class.)
High-level language
(See HLL.)
Hit
1. An event when a Web site is visited by a user. 2. In terms of
processor cache memory, hit rate is the percentage of memory requests that
may be satisﬁed by the cache memory.
HLL (High Level Language)
A programming language consisting of
easily-remembered commands, constructs and statements. OOP (Object Ori-
ented Programming) languages and visual programming languages are highly
evolved HLLs.
(See C++, Java and Visual Basic.)
HLR (Home Location Register)
(See 2G.)
Home page
A highest level page in the hierarchy of Web pages at a Web
site. It has a URL such as www.homepage.com. A home page may consist
of a single page or a number of linked pages. It may include links to other
sites, graphics, sound bites, video, an e-mail address, and various forms for
user feedback; it may also include a counter that records the number of hits
or times it is visited.
(See ActiveX, Java, HTTP, DHTML, HTML, Visual InterDev, Web.)
Host
A computer or network running a particular application or service.
Host name
A name designated to a network device that permits it to be
addressed without using its full IP address. The Internet Request for Comments
(RFC) No. 1178 provides guidelines for naming hosts. Using host names,
there is a requirement to perform translations between host names and their
respective IP addresses, using a lookup ﬁle containing host names and related
IP addresses, or the Domain Network Service (DNS).
(See IP address and TCP/IP address.)
Host-Based Processing
An architecture where a host computer is con-
nected to dumb terminals. Typically the terminals do not have GUIs such
as Windows, but are text-based. They are sometimes termed green screens,
because many earlier terminals had screens bearing green phosphor. The
terminals are said to be dumb, because they lack processing capabilities. They
148

HTML (HyperText Markup Language)
merely accept user commands, pass requests to the host, and receive infor-
mation from the host. Many host-based processing architectures are being
renovated, or migrated to client/server architectures. A coexistence strategy is
also being adopted, using mainframe and client/server based architectures to
form collective IT solutions.
(See Application Renovation, Client/Server and Mainframe.)
HotDog Pro
A Web site development tool.
(See CGI, Web Server and HTML)
HotJava
A Web Browser produced by Sun Microsystems. It does not
enjoy the popularity of Netscape Navigator or Microsoft Internet Explorer,
but is nonetheless equally sophisticated.
(See Browser.)
Hotmail (MS)
A Internet e-mail service.
HP Fremont
(See Fremont.)
HP-UX
A Unix operating system variant.
HTML (HyperText Markup Language)
A standard language consisting
of formatting commands and statements that may be used to create Web pages.
HTML may be used to include hyperlinks leading to Web pages, frames or
sites, and many other functions including visitor counters. HTML has its roots
in SGML, and is the standard language of the World Wide Web. When the
Web was ﬁrst introduced, almost all Web sites depended heavily on HTML.
Today, however, HTML is almost a framework used to hang other components
such as:
• ActiveX controls
• Java applets
• JScript programs
• VBScript programs.
The HTML syntax is similar to old word processor formatting languages
such as LaTex and even that which was included in the Borland Sprint
word processor. The Web Browser interprets the HTML ﬁrst by reading
the tags:
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<BODY>
</BODY>
</HEAD>
</HTML>
149

HTML 3.2
These basic tags form the basis of all HTML listings, and encapsulate such
entities as VBScript code, JScript code, ActiveX Controls, and Java applets.
Such components are enclosed between the <BODY> tags.
(See DHTML and Web.)
HTML 3.2
‘The HyperText Markup Language (HTML) is a simple markup
language used to create hypertext documents that are portable from one plat-
form to another.’ World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)(Raggett, 1997).
HTML 3.2 replaced HTML 2.0 (RFC 1866) and is a variation of SGML
Standard Generalized Markup Language. (ISO 8879), and we now have
HTML 4.0.
Raggett, D. (1997). HTML 3.2 Reference Speciﬁcation W3C Recommenda-
tion 14-Jan-1997.
Raggett, D., Le Hors, A., Jacobs, I. (1998). HTML 4.0 Speciﬁcation W3C
Recommendation, revised on 24-Apr-1998.
(See HTML.)
HTML Help
An on-line Help development tool from Microsoft.
HTML Template
A template ﬁle that a Web server uses to display infor-
mation. The information may originate from a query submitted to a database.
(See HTML.)
HTML validator
A testing program used to validate HTML documents
at various levels, including 2.0, 3.2 and future versions of HTML as speciﬁed
by the W3C.
HTML2WML conversion
Real-time or batch conversion of HTML to
WML.
HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol)
A standard protocol that allows
Web browsers to communicate with Web servers. The transport protocol is
provided by TCP.
(See HTML, Web and TCP.)
HTTP connection
A connection to a HTTP server.
HTTP server
A Web server that may connect with client systems and
with back-end applications and data.
(See Server.)
HTTP ACCEPT
A CGI variable that holds the ‘Accept:’ headers from
the client.
150

Hypermedia
HTTP COOKIE
A CGI variable that holds the contents of ‘Cookie:’
headers from the client.
HTTP FROM
A CGI variable that holds the contents of the ‘From:’
header from the client that may be the client’s:
• Correct e-mail address if not withheld
• Incorrect e-mail address which is simply false, or entered in error.
HTTP REFERER
A CGI variable that holds the contents of the ‘Ref-
erer:’ header from the client, containing a URL.
HTTP USER AGENT
A CGI variable that holds the contents of the
‘User-Agent:’ header from the client, containing the Browser’s name.
Hybrid (CD-ROM/DVD-ROM)
A CD-ROM or DVD-ROM which pos-
ses hyperlinks to Web pages, as well as having its own data and media ﬁles.
For example, MPEG-2 video might be stored on the DVD-ROM for improved
video quality, while test, graphics and other less dynamic content may be
stored on the Web.
(See CD-ROM and DVD.)
Hyperlink
A link in a hypertext-based navigational scheme that permits
the user to browse from once document to another, or from one Web site to
the next.
Hypermedia
An extension of the hypertext concept where text is com-
bined with images. The terms hypermedia and multimedia are often regarded
interchangeable but they are not. In French media circles the ludicrous and
ridiculously extravagant term hypermediatisation was coined in 1991. It was
used to describe the immediacy with which news began to be transmitted,
brought about by satellite broadcasting technology. With time normally required
by the reporter to prepare an informed report sacriﬁced, the concept of resulting
often confused, reports became known as hypermediatisation. Available to Mac-
intosh users through HyperCard since 1987, hypermedia is a relatively mature
area of multimedia. HyperCard for the Apple Macintosh may be considered as
the earliest commercially successful hypermedia authoring tool that combined
text, graphics, animated sequences and sound. It made the Macintosh an effec-
tive personal computer for multimedia. A plethora of hypermedia authoring
tools has since emerged, including ToolBook for the Microsoft Windows envi-
ronment on the IBM PC and compatible machines. Hypermedia applications
developed using such tools can be thought of as interactive books that combine
images, text and sound.
151

Hypertext
Hypertext
A term coined in the 1960s by Ted Nelson to describe the
concept of linking textual information and presenting it in a non-linear fashion
so it can be navigated and browsed. The Web is synonymous with hypertext.
Just as modern multimedia led to a re-evaluation of the way we communicate
information in the 1980s and 1990s, hypertext had a similar impact in the
1960s. In a few cases, the birth of what is now known as hypertext also
had a similar effect in the 1940s. The rationale behind the development of
hypertext was a simple one: to optimise the processes of writing, storing
textual information, and accessing that information. It improves accessibility
of stored information by eliminating the need to follow rigorous set sequences.
It allows the user to reference masses of related material through the pursuit
of ad hoc paths. Advantages of this are easily understood when considering
traditional methods. A word unknown to the reader of a book ﬁrst leads
to the index being searched. Failing this, the reader naturally attempts to
ﬁnd reference to the word in another book. The many references required to
research a subject or satisfy curiosity is time consuming. With information
linked, indexed and stored on computer, hypertext expedites this process, and
gives users the opportunity to take regular excursions to satisfy references.
It also makes information available that would not otherwise occur to the
casual reader. The word car, for instance, might be linked to numerous options
such as: combustion engine, Henry J. Ford, Detroit, Rolls-Royce, Catalytic
Converter, and a whole host of relevant texts. Hypertext is equally useful when
writing or simply arranging gathered information. An appropriate hypertext
tool, may be used to implant and manifest links between related items of text
automatically.
(See Multimedia and Web.)
152

I
IBM VisualAge Enterprise Suite V3.0
This is an e-business application
developers and traditional mainframe developers solution, and includes:
• VisualAge for JavaV4.0 Enterprise Ed.
• WebSphere Studio Professional Ed., V4.0
• VisualAge Generator Developer, V4.5
• VisualAge COBOL V3.0
• VisualAge PL/I, V2.1
• Versata Studio Client V5.1 (a product of Versata Inc., an IBM Business
Partner).
iBook
An Apple laptop computer that supports the Mac OS X.
(See Apple.)
ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names)
An organisation
created in October, 1998 that controls allocations of Internet entities such as
domain names and IP addresses. It developed the Shared Registry System,
which is a domain name registration system for competitive registrars in the
.com, .net, and .org domains. ICANN also accredits registrars that register
domain names using a shared, central registry. (See http://www.icann.org.)
Idempotency
An attribute of a message that sees repetition yield a con-
stant result.
IDL (Interface Deﬁnition Language)
A language that may map to others
and is neutral in terms of providing interfaces and operations to applications
written in compliant languages. Examples include CORBA IDL that is used
widely to create middleware implementations.
IDL to C++ language mapping
A mapping that equates IDL to the
C++ equivalent.
153

Idl2java
Idl2java
A compiler which converts IDL programs into Java.
IEEE1394
(See Firewire.)
IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force)
An international standards
organisation dedicated to the maintenance, ratiﬁcation and publication of
Internet related technologies.
IIOP (Internet Inter-ORB Protocol)
A standard speciﬁcation for trans-
mitting GIOP messages over TCP/IP networks such as the Internet.
(See GIOP.)
Impact statement
A document that outlines and describes the effects of
introducing a new technology or solution.
i-MODE (Japan always-on mobile phone)
A mobile applications ser-
vice standard that provides 2G network users with i-mode handsets to access
i-Mode Web sites. I-Mode was introduced in Japan by NTT DoCoMo and is
used primarily in 2G PDC networks, but 3G handsets in Japan retain I-Mode
functionality. I-Mode is an alternative to WAP, or to be more precise, an
equivalent to WAP over GPRS, and features packet data and packet volume
charging. I-Mode is used to access Internet sites using a scripting language
based on HTML and is very successful in Japan. I-Mode is essentially a pre-
cursor to 2.5G and 3G services, and offers many of the advantages of GPRS
2.5G, but at the same time it uses inexpensive, and established robust 2G
networks. There are no teething problems therefore, and it is proven in the
ﬁeld, unlike many of the newer services such as GPRS/2.5G services that
experienced rather less demand than was initially predicted.
When compared with WAP, we see I-Mode winning a technical battle in the
perspective of 2G networks. However, WAP over GPRS is a rather different
proposal, with WAP being a little more attractive – but there is the overhead
of GPRS handsets and GPRS contracts. Generally the momentum gained when
3G is rolled out more completely, should consign these technologies to history.
Why? Because they are essentially 2G narrow-bandwidth services and are
without the display that is required to deploy and deliver 3G services including
multimedia etc.
Essentially both WAP and I-Mode are solutions for 2G networks, and they
remedy bottlenecks that are redundant in 3G networks and services, and much
of their infrastructure will be no longer required. I-Mode could still provide a
cost-effective North American solution to deploying mobile Internet services in
the mass market telecommunications sector. The notion that everyone has the
means or the desire to buy and to own leading edge products, that are normally
154

Information property list
the preserve of executives and high-level decision makers, is an erroneous one.
Trailing edge proven technologies like I-Mode could conceivably win North
American interest particularly when considering the slow down of the US
economy (2001) and with emerging evidence that American mobile users are
beginning to decline the opportunity to purchase the very latest technology
such as 3G handsets for example.
I-Mode services maybe ofﬁcial and NTT DoCoMo approved, or unofﬁcial.
The former appear on the i-menu, whereas the latter are accessed by entering
their URL or by sending bookmarks to phones using e-mail. Ofﬁcial sites are
of many genres (See http://www.nttdocomo.co.jp/i/corp/teikyou.html). I-Mode
displays may be monochrome or 256-level greyscale, and may have animated
GIFs measuring from 96 × 108 pixels to 120 × 130 pixels. i-Mode phones and
microbrowsers are optimised for Japanese, so wrapping is rather difﬁcult as it
occurs at the lines’ end and may occur in the middle of a word. POP3 e-mail
may be read using i-Mode, and e-mail may be forwarded to an i-Mode e-mail
address using the phone number followed by @docomo.ne.jp. Messages may
be up to 250 (double-byte) Japanese characters or 500 Latin characters, and
received attachments are deleted.
Imported Style Sheet
A style sheet that can be imported to (combined
with) another sheet, combining:
• main sheet that applies to the whole site
• partial sheets that apply to speciﬁc documents.
Form:
<LINK REL=STYLESHEET HREF="main.css" TYPE
="text/css">
<STYLE TYPE="text=css">
<!--
@import url(http://www.botto.com/fast.css);
@import url(http://www.botto.com/fast.css);
.... other statements
-->
</STYLE>
Impression (web page (advertisement) counting)
An instance when an
advertising banner is displayed on a Web page. Click-through is the action of
clicking on a displayed banner, and click-through rate (CTR) is calculated as:
CTR% = (Click-throughs/impressions)∗100
Indeterminate
A Boolean ﬂoating condition that is neither yes or no.
Information property list
A conﬁguration information ﬁle (Info.plist) for
bundles, and is used in Cocoa and GNUStep development environments.
155

ING Barings
ING Barings
(See Barings.)
Inheritance
A feature of OOP languages that sees superclasses pass meth-
ods and data (or instance variables) to subclasses.
Inline style
An attached style that affects one element and is speciﬁed in
the start tag as a value of the STYLE attribute:
<P STYLE="text-indent: 14pt">Indented
paragraph</P>
Inner class
A class that is local to a given block of Java code.
instance
An object created or instantiated at run time and which adheres
to the appropriate class deﬁnition.
Instance variable
A data entity that may be inherited by objects using an
OOP language such as Objective-C.
Instantiate
A process where an object is built using an OOP language.
Instant Messenger (MS)
A program/service that allows the transmission
of text messages that may be responded to immediately.
Intangible asset
An asset that is not physical.
Intelligent AML
An anti money laundering solution that uses software
intelligence.
Intelligent business solution
A business solution that can make intelli-
gent decisions without human intervention. The decisions may lead to alerts
informing human users, rather than leading to an automatic or preprogrammed
action or response.
Interactive Television
A form of television broadcasting where the user
is presented with a non-linear medium, and is able to select content using on-
screen options to control what screened matter is shown. Depending on the
implementation the viewer may be able to select camera angles, and replay
selected footage and scenes. Interactive television services may offer TV shop-
ping services also, and Internet related facilities that include e-mail.
Interchange
A banker’s interchange exchanges data and money between
banks to which it is connected, and which are managed by such organisations
as Visa and Mastercard.
156

Internet telephony
internationalisation
The implementation or modiﬁcation of software so
as to localise it.
Internet
A network of computer networks based on the TCP/IP protocol
and that has the World Wide Web as its foundation.
Internet analyst
An analyst specialising in Internet services.
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
A publisher of speciﬁ-
cations of Internet protocols such as TCP/IP. Further information may be
obtained at www.ietf.cnri.reston.va.us.
Internet investor
An investor specialising in Internet related businesses.
Internet telephony
A method of making telephone calls using packet
switched IP networks. In 1997, low-cost Internet telephony began to change the
face of telcos, Internet Service Providers (ISPs), and corporations; the largely
unregulated Internet became interwoven with telephony. For the ﬁrst time
ISPs could mine revenue rich long-distance and international calls businesses,
which were once the preserve of telcos like BT and Mercury. Corporations and
government departments may also ‘toll bypass’ the telcos by using Internet
telephony over their own networks such as intranets, and signiﬁcantly reduce
their operating costs in the process. Similarly, since VocalTec launched the
Internet Phone in 1995, growing numbers of ISP subscribers have been making
long distance and international calls for the cost of a local phone call.
Access technology
ISP
ISP
Client
Client
- PC
- Web Browser
- Internet telephony hw/sw
- MAC
- NC
Internet
or
IP Network
- analogue modem
- ISDN
- ATM
- ADSL
- cable modem
- GSM
Internet telephony
157

Interoperability
Internet telephony theoretically means that an ISP could become an interna-
tional telco. The domestic long distance calls business presents ISPs with one
opportunity to compete with telcos, as does the international calls business.
The technology is also being embedded into existing switched network, where
it will become transparent to the user. The successful proliferation of Internet
telephony also hinges on emerging internationally agreed standards, such as
H.323, which collectively will unify ISP’s services globally.
Interoperability
A software or hardware attribute that indicates compat-
ibility between products from different vendors, and is normally based on a
standard speciﬁcation.
Interpreted
A programming language where resulting programs are con-
verted into an executable form each time they are run. Java for example,
is interpreted at run-time from byte-codes that are the result of compilation.
Java then is both compiled and interpreted, but as it does not result in native
machine code in the case of execution using JVMs, it is often considered an
interpreted language.
Interpreter
A program that converts source code into runtime code each
time a program is executed.
Intranet
A TCP/IP network that is accessed by a user group that is usually
from the same company, and is based on Web-based technologies.
IP Address
A physical IP address consisting of 32 bits, which identiﬁes
networks and its connected computers. The syntax for such addresses con-
sists of four bytes each written in decimal form, and separated by a full
stop: 118.234.98.87
118.234.98.87
Class C
Class A, B and C addresses
Class B
Class A
Internet
Network
≤253 hosts
Network
≤65 536 hosts
Network
≤16 777 216 hosts
The three types of IP address include:
158

IPv6
IP Address Class A
A networks may have between 216 (65,536) and 224
(16.7 million) hosts.
0
9
32
Bits
0
netid
hostid
Class A address format
IP Address Class B
B networks may have between 28 (256) and 216
(65,536) hosts.
0
netid
hostid
0
17
32
Bits
Class B address format
1
IP Address Class C
C networks may have up to 253 hosts, and not 255
because two values are reserved.
0
1
netid
hostid
0
17
25
32
Bits
Class C address format
1
The addresses consists of a network address (netID) and a host address
(hostID). The leftmost digits represent the netID address. This is set to zero
when addressing hosts within the network.
(See Subnets.)
IP backbone
(See 2.5G and GPRS.)
IP multicast
An IP addressing system that is known as class D, and was
developed at Xerox PARC. A multicast packet addresses a multicast group
of nodes or hosts. The ﬁrst multicast tunnel was implemented at Stanford
University.
(See Mbone.)
IPv6 (Internet Protocol)
An advancement of the IP protocol that intro-
duces 128 bit addressing, and other improvements. The scaling of IPv4 32 bit
159

IRC
addressing to 128 bit is intended to accommodate future growth of the Internet,
in terms of the growing number of network addresses. IPv6 is also called IPng
(IP Next Generation), and is speciﬁed by the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). IPv6 supports addressing of the types:
• multicast, which connects a host to multiple addressed hosts
• unicast, which connects a host to a single other addressed host
• anycast, which connects a host to the nearest of multiple hosts.
(See IP addressing.)
IRC (Internet Relay Chat)
A means of communicating using text in
real-time across the Internet. The emergence of Internet Relay Chat or IRC
in the late eighties started a quiet revolution in the way people communi-
cated globally. Allowing users to chat in real time using text, it surfaced
as an ideal tool for spreading news updates, and particularly those about
regions of war or unrest – of which the Persian Gulf is remembered as one
of the ﬁrst.
Average users see IRC as a way of talking to people irrespective of their
geographical location, or joining debates with IRC users that might be in
different parts of the world. The debates take place in one of a number of
channels, which you can change on the ﬂy using an IRC client program.
IRC clients include mIRC, TeleCafe, Mirc, PIRCH, Visual IRC96, Secure
Communicator, WinTalk, and NetPopup. Most popular IRC client programs
are shareware or freeware, and can be downloaded from various ftp and Web
sites. Modern IRC clients like mIRC offer the user easy methods for navigating
through channels, for connecting with selected IRC servers, and for talking
with people in general.
The many networks of IRC servers include EFnet (Eris Free net), UnderNet,
DalNet, ChatNet, NewNet and IRCNet. Once connected to one of the IRC
networks, you can communicate with its users through the many channels it
provides. EFnet, IRCNet, UnderNet and DalNet have a global presence, and
you will ﬁnd their servers in many major cities.
Using most IRC clients the user is required to provide a nickname, the IRC
server to which to connect, an IP address, a local host name, and an email
address if the user wishes to be contacted. An alternative nickname may also
be provided, and is used should a ﬁrst nickname choice be in use on the
connected network.
Commercial IRC servers are rarely password protected. Many users advise
reading the message of the day (MOTD), which might provide useful updates
about the server. Having joined a channel, you might like to read the text
messages for a while just to get the feel of things. If someone asks a question
and you want to answer it, simply enter a reply and don’t forget to include the
person’s nickname. Alternatively you can ask a question yourself, or simply
160

IRC
say ‘hello all’ or something similar, in which case you might begin talking
with an IRC user that is known to you. If this leads to a one-to-one conver-
sation, using mIRC you can double-click the person’s nickname to produce a
private window in which only your text appear. It’s possible to set up multiple
conversations like this, which is quite a good idea when you consider the lags
in getting responses from user, and the times when users simply stop talking
to you – or so I’ve heard.
In regards to IRC etiquette, if you decide to be offensive in any way, and
you are caught by the operator, or reported by other users, the operator may
eject you instantly from the channel. The channel operators’ nicknames have
@ signs as preﬁxes. Serious offences will lead to you being banned from an
IRC server.
When connected to IRC networks, you can use IRC commands to perform
various tasks, such as joining, leaving and even creating channels. You don’t
have to know IRC commands, because most modern IRC clients provide
such functionality through a single click. If you want to get the most out of
IRC, however, it helps to be familiar with the more common IRC commands.
Equally, if you are a budding programmer and you want to write a IRC client
program of your own, you will certainly need to know IRC commands. IRC
commands begin with a forward slash ‘/’ and range from the simple such
as /help, which is used to get basic help information, to the /list #channel
command, which shows the topic, and the number of users, but does not show
hidden and private channels.
To join a listed channel you would type /join #channel−name, and to leave
it you would type /part #channel−name. The /join command can also be used
to create your own channel, by specifying a new channel name. If you create
your own channel, it is a good idea to use the /topic command to indicate
what the channel is about; you might type /topic #genealogy, for instance.
The topic will be shown when someone lists your channel, and will help
you get the channel participants you want. The /invite command allows you
to ask speciﬁed users to join you in conversation. For example, you would
type /invite edwinstreet #hottub if you wanted to talk to edwinstreet in the
hottub channel. You can also send private messages to other such IRC users
by typing /m nickname. To speak privately with another user, simply type
/query nickname, following which only the named user will see what you
type. Gaining the email addresses of channel participants can be obtained
using the /whois and /whowas commands, provided the users’ email addresses
have been included in their IRC client program. The command /whois #instant
will list the email addresses of users on channel #instant, while /who shows
the email addresses of all those connected with the IRC server. You can also
gain the email address of a speciﬁc user with the /whois nickname statement,
or the email addresses of all users using the /whois command. The /whowas
161

IrDA
command is used in a similar way to /whois, but produces the email addresses
of users that have recently signed off IRC.
IrDA (Infrared Data Association)
A wireless interface technology that
is able to drive compatible peripheral devices. It is supported by Windows,
and is integrated in numerous laptop computer designs.
ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network)
An access technology
introduced by the CCITT, which is able to support reasonably sophisticated
videoconferencing, and high-speed access to the Internet and other networks.
A BRI (Basic Rate Interface) ISDN line may have two 64 Kbits/sec B-channels
able to carry video, voice or data. ISDN uses PCM for encoding data in digital
form, for transmission.
Used in the Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) standard, PCM
involves creating a data stream consisting of 8 bit PCM blocks. The blocks
are created every 125 micro seconds. By interleaving the blocks with those
from other encoders, the result is time division multiplexing (TDM). In North
America ISDN typically interleaves data from 24 64 Kbits/sec sources or chan-
nels. This results in connections that provide 1.536 Mbits/sec. Although in
actual fact the connection has a bandwidth of 1.544 Mbits/sec, because each
channel’s frame has a marker bit ‘F’, adding 8 Kbytessec.
Europe sees ISDN typically interleave 30 64 Kbits/sec channels, giving
2,048 Mbits/sec. This and the 1.544 Mbits/sec connection are known as pri-
mary rate multiplexes. Further interleaving of primary rate multiplexes sees:
• 6, 45, 274 Mbits/sec in North America
• 8, 34, 139, and 560 Mbits/sec in Europe.
While analogue modem speeds increased steadily throughout the 1980s and early
1990s, the arrival of the Web placed greater demands on available bandwidth.
This encouraged telcos to provide ISDN services that were deﬁned by the CCITT
in 1971, and published in 1984 in the Red Book. ISDN was based on PCM (Pulse
Code Modulation) that was conceived by A. H. Reeves, and experimented with
in the Second World War, and was used in American telecommunications in the
1960s so as to increase network capacity. In 1986, a pre-ISDN service named
Victoria was offered by Paciﬁc Bell in Danville, California, offering RS232C
ports that were conﬁgurable from 50 bits/second to 9.6 Kbits/second. In the same
year, ofﬁcial ISDN systems were introduced in Oak Brook, Illinois, and by
1988 some forty similar pilot schemes were installed. ISDN digital networks
eventually developed into B-ISDN where multiple lines could be used to provide
data rates in increments of 64 Kbits/sec, and videoconferencing and high-speed
Internet access were made possible. B-ISDN implementations could even be
used to implement the lower data rates of 1.544 Mbits/second offered by modern
T1 digital links that arrived some time later.
(See Access technology.)
162

Issuer bank
ISO/TC 154
A technical committee that addresses documents and data
elements in administration, business and industry.
ISO9736
A standard set of UN/EDIFACT syntax rules.
ISP (Internet Services Provider)
A company that provides users with
access to the Internet and may offer a variety of access technologies. ISPs
may time charge users, or they may offer ﬁxed charges that may be monthly,
for example.
Issuer bank
A bank that provides credit to its customers usually through
credit cards.
163


J
JAE Java Application Environment
A source code release of the JDK.
(See JDK.)
JAR
A Java Archive ﬁle format used for concatenating ﬁles, which have
the .jar extension.
(See JAR File Format.)
JAR ﬁle format
A platform independent ﬁle format that may be used to
store applets and their components including images, sounds, resource ﬁles,
and class ﬁles. JAR ﬁles can be used to download Java related data more efﬁ-
ciently using HTTP, and offers support for compression and digital signatures.
Java
A general purpose, high level language (HLL) which is:
• not platform or operating-system sensitive, yielding ‘write-once-run-any-
where’ code
• object-oriented
• general purpose
• multi-threaded
• class-based.
The resulting compiled bytecode may be run on Windows 3.x, Windows NT,
Windows 95/98, Macintosh environments, UNIX, et al. OS independence is
a key characteristic of Java1, making it suitable for deployment of applets,
where client OSs are of a heterogeneous nature. Web-based Java applets:
• are interpreted by Java-enabled browsers
• may access code libraries on the client machine
• may download class libraries from the server.
Development tools for Java include:
• the Java Development Kit JDK
• Microsoft J++ that is included in Microsoft Visual Studio
165

Java applet
• VisualAge for Java
• Java Servlet Development Kit.
The Java language semantics, and high-level instructions are similar to C and
C++. It is considered a static programming language2, but is likely to be
given a dynamic functionality through appropriate development environments
and compilers. Compilation of Java source code yields in a bytecoded instruc-
tion set and binary format3. Java may also be used to develop client-side
and server-side applications, perhaps using the CORBA-based Notiﬁcation
Services as its middleware or glue. Such Java code may be generated auto-
matically from IDL ﬁles using an IDL2JAVA compiler.
References:
1. The Java Language Speciﬁcation, Sun Microsystems, 1996
2. Dylan Reference Manual, Apple Computer, 1995
3. Java Virtual Machine Speciﬁcation, Addison-Wesley, 1996
(See other Java.)
Java applet
A program created using the Java programming language, and
typically deployed over the Web. It resides on the server side, and is downloaded
to a Java enabled Web Browser. It is then interpreted and run. The Browser
must feature the Java Virtual Machine that is a software-based processor.
(See Java.)
Java Application Environment (JAE)
A source code release of the JDK.
Java array
A matrix of entities of the same type that may be simple
or composite. The matrix or array may be multidimensional, and is declared
using square brackets ([]).
int meters[];
char[] table;
long transform[][];
The size of an array is not speciﬁed at its declaration.
JavaBeans
A standard component architecture offering beans that can be
used to build applets, servlets and applications. The components are referred to
as Beans, and compliant development tools provide access to the beans using
a toolbox. Visual programming plays an important role when architecting a
Beans-based program; the developer simply selects Beans and modiﬁes their
appearance, behaviour and interactions with other Beans. JavaBeans compat-
ible development tools include:
• JavaSoft JavaBeans Development Kit (BDK)
• Lotus Development BeanMachine
• IBM VisualAge for Java
166

Java data type
• SunSoft Java Workshop
• Borland JBuilder
• Asymetrix SuperCede
• Sybase PowerJ
• Symantec Visual Cafe.
JavaBeans-ActiveX Bridge
A Microsoft OCX control that permits the
integration of Java Beans as if they were ActiveX controls.
(See www.splash.javasoft.com/beans/bridge/)
JavaBeans Development Kit (BDK)
A JavaSoft BDK aimed at Bean
and tool developers, and not applications developers.
Java Blend
A database application development tool that is an environ-
ment for combining Java objects with enterprise databases. Applications may
be developed by coding in Java, and resulting objects may be mapped to
databases, and vice versa. It does not require knowledge of SQL. Java Blend
was codeveloped by The Baan Company and Sun Microsystems.
(See Java.)
Java Card
A smart card implementation that uses Java technology. The
Java Card speciﬁcations can also be applied to devices that have:
• 16 KBytes ROM
• 8 KBytes EEPROM
• 256 Bytes RAM.
(See Java.)
Java casting types
A process of converting one data type into another.
Casting is often necessary when a function returns a type different than the
type you need to perform an operation. The int returned by the standard input
stream (System.in) is cast to a char type using the statement:
char k = (char)System.in.read();
Java Comments and whitespace
A textual comment, and whitespace
consists of spaces, tabs and linefeeds.
/* multiple line comment */
// a single line comment
/** a multiple-line comment that may be used with the
javadoc tool to create documentation**/
Java data type
A means of deﬁning a storage method for information,
such as the storage of variables in memory. The following statement declares
a variable, a variable type, and identiﬁer:
Type Identifier [, Identifier];
167

Java development tool
The statement:
• allocates memory to a variable type Type
• names the Type ‘Identifier’
• uses the bracketed identiﬁer to indicate that multiple declarations of the
same type may be made.
Java data types may be:
• simple, which include integer, ﬂoating-point, Boolean, and character
• composite, which are based on simple types, and include strings, arrays,
classes and interfaces.
Java development tool
A tool/environment that allows programmers to
create Java applets, Java programs, JavaBeans, and possibly Java Servlets.
Java Electronic Commerce Framework
A point-of-sale (POS) applica-
tion framework.
(See Java.)
Java ﬂoating-point data types
A data type that may represent fractional
numbers which can be the:
• ﬂoat type, allocated a 32-bit single-precision number
• double type, allocated a 64-bit double-precision number.
Such data types are implemented using the statements:
float altitude;
double angle, OpenRoad;
Java ﬂoating-point literals
A means of storing and processing fractional
numbers expressed in decimal (i.e. 200.76) or in scientiﬁc notation (2.00.76e2).
Floating-point literals default to the double type that is a 64-bit value. The ‘f’
or ‘F’ sufﬁx harnesses the 32-bit value.
JavaHelp
A software product that allows the creation of on-line Help for
Java applets, applications, OSs and devices. It can also be used to deploy
on-line Help over the Web and intranets. JavaHelp is:
• written using the Java language
• implemented using JFC components
• platform independent
• browser independent
• supported by browsers that comply with the Java Runtime Environment.
Java identiﬁer
A Java token that stores names, which are applied to
variables, methods, and classes.
168

Java lexical translation
Java integer data types
A means of representing signed integer numbers,
including:
• byte (8 bit)
• short (16 bit)
• int (32 bit)
• long (64 bit).
Integer variables are declared thus:
int x;
short; scale
long lumin, light;
byte alpha, beta, gamma;
Java integer literals
A literal may be:
• decimal (base 10)
• hexadecimal (base 16) that have the ‘OX’ preﬁx
• octal that have the ‘0’ preﬁx.
By default, integer literals are stored in the int type that has a 32-bit value.
They may be stored in the double type that has a 64-bit value, using the ‘l’
or ‘L’ sufﬁx.
(See Java Literal.)
Java keywords
A meaningful vocabulary of entities that perform speciﬁc
functions and include:
abstract
double
int
super
boolean
else
interface
switch
break
extend
long
synchronized
byte
false
native
this
byvalue
final
new
threadsafe
case
finally
null
throw
catch
float
package
transient
char
for
private
true
class
goto
protected
try
const
if
public
void
continue
implements
return
while
default
import
short
Java lexical translation
A process by which Java source code1 is con-
verted into Java tokens. It is implemented by the lexical analyser facet of the
compiler that:
• translates Unicode escapes into Unicode characters, allowing the Java listing
to be represented using ASCII characters
• generates a stream of input characters and line terminators
• generates Java input elements, or Java tokens that are terminal symbols.
169

Java literal
Reference:
1. The Java Language Speciﬁcation, Sun Microsystems, 1996
(See Java.)
Java literal
An element that maintains a constant value and may be:
• numeric
• integer
• ﬂoating point
• Boolean
• characters
• strings.
Character literals refer to a single Unicode character. Multiple-character strings
that are implemented as objects are also literals.
JavaMail
An API used to build Java-based mail and messaging applica-
tions.
Java Management API (JMAPI)
A library of objects and methods used
for the development of network, and service management solutions targeted
at heterogeneous networks.
(See Java.)
Java Media and Communication APIs, including 2D, 3D, and Java
Telephony
A Sun Microsystems’ product family that allows developers
to develop interactive multimedia applications for the Web.
(See Java.)
Java Naming and Directory Interface (JNDI)
A connectivity API that
provides an interface with enterprise, heterogeneous naming and directory
services. It is a JavaSoft API, and a Java Standard Extension.
JavaOS
A compact operating system dedicated to running Java programs/
applets. The JavaOS family includes:
• JavaOS for Network Computers (NCs), which is described as a standalone
Java Application Platform for NCs
• JavaOS for Appliances, which is intended for communications devices
• JavaOS for Consumers, which is aimed at consumer electronics devices.
Java package
A set of Java classes that address speciﬁc functions where,
for instance, java.io addresses input and output functions, and java.net
addresses Internet and network operations.
170

JavaScript(TM)
JavaPC
A software solution for migrating PCs to Java platforms. JDK 1.1
compliant Java applications can be stored locally or on a network, and may
be run on DOS and Windows 3.x platforms.
JavaScript(TM)
An object-orientated scripting language optimised for
the Web. Using JavaScript, Web pages/HTML documents can be given:
• dynamic content such as animations
• integrated Java applets and ActiveX controls
• interactive content
• data entry forms.
Microsoft’s implementation of JavaScript is JScript. The rationale behind
JScript is echoed by VBScript: it is intended as a quick method of creating and
tailoring applications. Unlike JScript, VBScript is not an OOP language. Like
other objects, JavaScript objects have properties and methods, and include the:
• window, which is at the top of the HTML document’s object hierarchy
• frame, which is a window
• location, which stores URL information
• document, which stores document characteristics such as its URL and title
• form, which stores form characteristics
• text and textarea, which store text information
• checkbox, which is standard Windows UI object
• radio, which refers to a single UI radio button
• select, which is an array of option objects
• button, which stores button information
• password, which is a text-entry box that disguises keyboard entries using
asterisks
• navigator, which stores a visitor’s version number of Netscape Navigator
• string, which provides methods for string manipulation
• date, which is dedicated to calendar date information
• math, which facilitates common constants and calculations
• image, which indicates image information on the current page
• array, which is dedicated to arrays.
JScript listings are integrated in HTML code by enclosing them between the
following tags:
<SCRIPT LANGUAGE ="JavaScript">
<SCRIPT>
Development environments and applications that support JScript are numer-
ous, and include the Microsoft ActiveX Control Pad which also supports
VBScript.
(See VB Basic.)
171

JavaScript(TM)
Comments
Single and multiple line comments may be included using the syntax:
// A single line comment
/* Multiple lines comment
require this syntax */
JScript operators
++ increment
−decrement
* multiplication
/ divide
% modulus
+ addition
−subtraction
<< shift left
>> shift right
> greater than
<= less than or equal to
>= greater than or equal to
== equal to
! = not equal to
&& logical AND
! logical NOT
|| logical OR
ˆ bitwise
| bitwise OR
& bitwise AND
FOR
The for statement has three optional expressions:
for( initial.Expression; condition; update.Expression) {
statement
statement
statement
}
• initial.Expression initializes the counter variable that may be a new variable
declared with var
• condition expression is evaluated on each pass through the loop. If the condition
is true, the loop statements are executed
• update.Expression is used to increment the counter variable.
WHILE
A statement used to implement a conditional loop, based on a true or
false validation:
while (condition) {
statement
statement
statement
}
172

JavaSpaces(TM) write method
Break
A break statement stops for or while loops, and diverts program execution
to the line following the loop statements.
for. . . in
A for. . .in statement executes the statement block for each object property:
for (variable in object) {
statement
statement
}
function
A statement which allows you to create a named JScript function together
with parameters. The return statement may be used to return a value. Nested func-
tions are not supported.
function name ([parameter] [...,parameter]) {
statements...
}
if. . . else
A conditional statement that offers one of two conclusions.
if (condition) {
statement
statement
} [else {
statement
statement
}]
return
This is used to Specify a returned value from a function.
var
The var statement is used to declare a variable that may be local or global.
var variableName [ =value] [..., variableName [ =value]]
while
Repeats a loop while an expression is true.
while (condition) {
statements...
}
with
Declares a default object as the focus of a set of statements.
with (object) {
statement
statement
}
(See CGI.)
JavaSpaces(TM) write method
A JavaSpaces method that is used to
write entries to spaces. The following code segment uses the write method
to copy a Creditcard requirement to a space:
173

JavaSpaces(TM) write method
public void writeCreditcard(CarCreditcard Creditcard) {
Try {
space.write(Creditcard, null, Lease.FOREVER);
}
catch (Exception e) {
e.printStackTrace();
}
}
The write method as deﬁned in the JavaSpaces interface is of the form:
Lease write(Entry e, Transaction txn, long lease)
throws RemoteException, TransactionException;
An entry is manipulated using the write method that may use the arguments
transaction and lease time. If given a null value the transaction is a singular
operation and is detached from other transactions. The lease time argument
simply speciﬁes the entry’s longevity in the new space. When the lease expires
the space removes it, but if a Lease.FOREVER value is used the entry exists
in the space indeﬁnitely, or until it is removed by a transaction process or
operation. The lease time may also be expressed in milli seconds like the
three minute lease shown below:
Long time = 1000 * 60 * 3; // three minute lease
Lease lease = space.write(entry, null, time);
Leases can also be renewed using the renew method:
void renew(long time)
, ,
The time value is added to the lease time remaining. The renew method can
raise the exceptions: LeaseDeniedException, UnknownLeaseException
and RemoteException. The former is raised should the space be unable
to renew the lease that may be caused by lack of storage resources. The
UnknownLeaseException is thrown if the entry or object is unknown to the
space, perhaps because its lease has already expired. In real world scenarios
the use of Lease.FOREVER is considered an uneconomical use of resources.
The intelligent solution to leasing is to use Lease.ANY which leaves it up to
the space to decide when expiry occurs. But when building JavaSpaces ser-
vices the use of Lease.FOREVER may compress the development life cycle,
so it can reduce the probability of thrown exceptions. The write method also
throws two types of exceptions including RemoteException and Trans-
actionException. The former is raised when a communication breakdown
occurs between the source process and the remote space, or when an exception
occurs in the remote space while an entry is written to it. The RemoteExcep-
tion returns the detail ﬁeld that holds the exception type. If the space is
174

JavaSpaces
unable to grant a lease, a RemoteException is thrown. A TransactionEx-
ception is thrown when the transaction is invalid or cannot be rolled forward
or committed.
Java separator
A means of categorising Java source code that directs the
compiler appropriately, and includes:
{} ; , :
JavaSoft(TM)
A company formed by Sun Microsystems in 1995 and
maker of Java language products and technologies that include Jini.
JavaSpaces
A SunSoft technology that provides a means of writing, read-
ing and transferring objects or entries between spaces. The JavaSpace interface
deﬁnes methods to read or copy entries from a space, and to take or copy
entries from a space while removing them from spaces also. Locating entries
in spaces is carried out using associative lookup, and a template is used to
match entry contents. For example, you may use a template like:
CarCreditcard anyCreditcardTemplate = new
CarCreditcard();
AnyCreditcardTemplate.name = null;
AnyCreditcardTemplate.cost = null;
The null ﬁelds operate like wildcards and any Creditcard entry will be matched
regardless of its name or cost. Null may also be used for the template so all
entries in a space are matched. The match may be narrowed merely by adding
values and name strings like:
AnyCreditcardTemplate.name = "Shell";
The JavaSpaces interface has two read methods:
Entry read(Entry tmpl, Transaction txn, long timeout)
And,
Entry readIfExists(Entry tmpl, Transaction txn, long
timeout)
Both require three parameters: a template, transaction and a timeout value that
may be expressed in milli seconds. When a matching entry is found, a copy
of it is returned, or it is merely read shall we say. Where multiple matches are
found the space returns a single arbitrary entry. This clearly must be borne in
mind when developing JavaSpaces services. The Read method waits for the
timeout if no matching entries are found in a space, or until a matching entry
is found. If no matching entry is found, a null value is returned by the read
method. The Long.MAX−VALUE may be used as a timeout value, causing
the read operation to block until a matching entry is found. Alternatively using
175

Java string literals
the JavaSpaces.NO−WAIT value for the timeout causes the read operation to
return immediately. The readIfExists method is non-blocking, and returns
immediately when no matching entry is found, irrespective of the timeout
parameter value. The timeout parameter is relevant only when the read oper-
ation takes place under a transaction. So with a null transaction the timeout
value is equivalent to NO−WAIT. Both read operations may throw the:
InterruptedException when the thread implementing the read oper-
ation is interrupted.
RemoteException when a failure occurs on the network or in the remote
space.
TransactionException when the supplied transaction is invalid.
UnusableEntryException when an entry retrieved cannot be deserial-
ized.
The take method deﬁned in the JavaSpaces interface is of the same form as
the read operation:
Entry take(Entry tmpl, Transaction txn, long timeout)
The take method removes entries from spaces provided no exception is thrown.
The aforementioned exceptions for read and readIfExists may also be
thrown by the take method. These include InterruptedException, Remote-
Exception, TransactionException, and UnusableEntryException.
Java string literals
A string, or number of characters, within a pair of
double quotation marks. String literals invoke an instance of the String class
that is assigned the character string.
Java Studio1.0
A development environment that does not require Java
coding on a line-by-line basis. It harnesses the JavaBeans object architec-
ture, and is typically used to build Web applications. It is a product of Sun
Microsystems.
(See Java.)
Java swing
A set of interfaces and components that permit the easy cre-
ation of GUI components, which include menus, dialogues and toolbars, and
includes the items JsplitPane and Jtree.
Java to IDL language mapping
A mapping that equates the Java to the
IDL equivalent.
Java tokens
A meaningful element of a Java program when compiled.
The ﬁve categories of token include:
• identiﬁers
• keywords
176

JDBC
• literals
• operators
• separators.
Tokens are compiled into Java bytecode, which can be interpreted by a Java
Virtual Machine.
Java Unicode
A predominant character set with which Java source code
is represented, and is:
• 16 bit, which gives up to 216 or 65,536 possible characters
• used exclusively by Windows NT at the system level
• a worldwide standard.
In Java, three lexical translations1 convert a raw unicode character stream into
a sequence of Java tokens
Reference:
1. The Java Language Speciﬁcation, Sun Microsystems, 1996
Java(TM) Electronic Commerce Framework
A POS (Point-of-sale) ap-
plication framework.
Java(TM) Remote Method Invocation (RMI)
A technology used in Jini
and designed by Ann Wollwrath of SunSoft that permits object to object
communications where the methods invoked may be on a remote applica-
tion object.
JavaWorld
An on-line magazine dedicated to Java.
(See www.javaworld.com.)
Java.net
A package that has classes designed for networks, and includes
the URL class that allows remote objects to be downloaded, and can be used
to read and write streams to and from the object.
java.rmi.RMISecurityManager
(See RMI Security.)
Jaz drive
A removable storage device manufactured by Iomega. Jaz disks
offer 1 GByte data storage capacity.
JBuilder
A Java based development software suite from Inprise.
JDBC (Java Database Connectivity)
A Java package that allows Java
programs to interact with compliant databases, and also includes a bridge to
provide backward compatibility with ODBC databases.
177

JDK
JDK (Java Development Kit)
Sun Microsystems’ development tool for
creating Java applets and applications. It is freely available from JavaSoft
(www.javasoft.com), and includes:
• appletviewer for viewing Java source code listings
• jar for compressing an packaging applications
• java for executing applications
• javadoc for documenting Java programs
• javac for compiling Java programs.
Jetsend
A wireless connection technology for home appliances.
Jini
A SunSoft standard for distributing services over local and remote
networks, which can be applied to implement self-conﬁguring tier 0 devices
sometimes called smart devices that include cell phones, DVD drives, palm
PCs and organisers. The connection between a Jini device and a Jini ser-
vice takes place using the TCP/IP transport protocol, and other Jini protocols
include Discovery that is based on UDP. Jini networks comprise lookup ser-
vices that act as directories containing the network’s registered services. A
client may receive a proxy object from these services that is downloaded to
a JVM, and may also use UIs speciﬁc to services. Applications of Jini are
varied and exist at every tier including tier 3 where transaction processing can
be carried out, and may be applied to devices ranging from servers to simple
household appliances as simple as a light switch with a single input and no
JVM of its own. Docking stations are also possible where Jini clients share a
JVM. Mobile Jini applications can include smart devices able to connect with
remote Jini services in the home or in the ofﬁce.
(See JavaSpaces, Jini and jini.org)
Jini client
A client that provides access to one or more Jini services.
Jini Community
A community at jini.org dedicated to the development
of Jini, its framework, applications, services and marketplaces.
The Jini Community Summit
An annual meeting of members of the Jini
Community that takes place each year in Aspen Colorado.
Jini docking bay
A docking bay that has a JVM that may be shared by
multiple docked devices.
(See Jini.)
Jini Multicast Response Service
A transparent connection that occurs
between Jini devices and services, and communities, and relies upon simply
communicating messages and protocols. It is the intention of this section to
178

Jini Nested Transactions
provide an explanation of the protocols and communications that occur between
new Jini entities and the network lookup services. Jini has protocols to:
• Discover lookup services on LANs which may be in your ofﬁce or in your
home, or even installed in a hotel room.
• Broadcast the presence of lookup services.
• Forge communications with a lookup service using WANs.
A new entity uses the multicast request protocol to ﬁnd lookup services, and
then uses the multicast announcement protocol to receive multicast lookup
announcements. This communication requires that the requesting entity has
a multicast request client, and a multicast response server that listens to
the lookup services. Both may be run on a single JVM implementation.
The lookup service has a listening multicast request server, and a multi-
cast response client that responds to requesting entities by providing them
with a proxy that is used to converse with the lookup service. The multicast
request service uses the transport layer of the network protocol so lookup
services may push their information to a requesting host. The actual pro-
tocol used is a version of UDP (User Datagram Protocol), and a multicast
discovery packet has a maximum 512-byte payload. It may contain architec-
ture neutral parameters and should be simple to decode. The packets form
a contiguous stream like that from a java.io.DataOutputStream to a
java.io.ByteArrayOutputStream object.
Jini Nested Transactions
A series of multiple transactions using Jini.
At times, a transaction requires the implementation of subtransactions for its
successful completion. These nested transactions provide a logical hierarchy
where a parent transaction is dependent on a nested transaction. Nested transac-
tions are implemented using TransactionManagers that use the Nestable-
TransactionManager interface:
package net.jini.core.transaction.server;
import net.jini.core.transaction.*;
import net.jini.core.lease.LeaseDeniedException;
import java.rmi.RemoteException;
/**
* The interface used for managers of the two-phase
commit protocol for
* nestable transactions.
All nestable transactions
must have a
* transaction manager that runs this protocol.
*
* @see NestableServerTransaction
* @see TransactionParticipant
*/
179

Jini Nested Transactions
public interface NestableTransactionManager extends
TransactionManager {
/**
* Begin a nested transaction, with the specified
transaction as parent.
*
* @param parentMgr the manager of the parent
transaction
* @param parentID the id of the parent transaction
* @param lease the requested lease time for the
transaction
*/
TransactionManager.Created create(NestableTransac-
tionManager parentMgr,
long parentID, long lease)
throws UnknownTransactionException, CannotJoin-
Exception, LeaseDeniedException,
RemoteException;
/**
* Promote the listed participants into the
specified transaction.
* This method is for use by the manager of a sub-
transaction when the
* subtransaction commits.
At this point, all par-
ticipants of the
* subtransaction must become participants in the
parent transaction.
* Prior to this point, the subtransaction’s manager
was a participant
* of the parent transaction, but after a successful
promotion it need
* no longer be one (if it was not itself a partici-
pant of the
* subtransaction), and so it may specify itself as
a participant to
* drop from the transaction.
Otherwise, partici-
pants should not be
* dropped out of transactions.
For each promoted
participant, the
* participant’s crash count is stored in the cor-
responding element of
* the crashCounts array.
*
* @param id the id of the parent transaction
* @param parts the participants being promoted to
180

Jini transaction creation
the parent
* @param crashCounts the crash counts of the par-
ticipants
* @param drop the manager to drop out, if any
*
* @throws CrashCountException the crash count of
some (at least one)
* participant is different from the crash count the
manager already
* knows about for that participant
*
* @see TransactionManager#join
*/
void promote(long id, TransactionParticipant[]
parts,
long[] crashCounts, TransactionParticipant
drop)
throws UnknownTransactionException,
CannotJoinException, CrashCountException,
RemoteException;
}
When a nested transaction is created, the originating manager joins the
parent transaction using the join method when the managers are different. The
create method may raise the UnknownTransactionException if the parent
transaction manger does not recognize the transaction because of an incorrect
ID, or has become inactive, or has been discarded by the manager.
Jini smart device
A Jini enabled device that usually has its own JVM
and is able to consume Jini services.
(See Jini.)
Jini transaction creation
A process where a Jini transaction is created.
To create a transaction it is necessary for the client to use a lookup service (or
a similar directory services metaphor) in order to reference a Transaction-
Manager object. A new transaction may be initiated using the create()
method and by specifying a leaseFor period in milliseconds. The leaseFor
duration is adequate for the transaction to complete, and the Transaction-
Manager may forbid the lease request by throwing the LeaseDeniedExcep-
tion. Expiration of a lease before a Transaction- Participant’s vote
with a commit or abort leads the TransactionManager to abort the transac-
tion. Constants provide the currency of the described communications between
TransactionParticipants and TransactionManagers and are deﬁned in
the TransactionConstants interface:
181

Jini transaction join
package net.jini.core.transaction.server;
/** Constants common to transaction managers and
participants. */
public interface TransactionConstants {
/** Transaction is currently active */
final int ACTIVE = 1;
/** Transaction is determining if it may be com-
mitted */
final int VOTING = 2;
/** Transaction has been prepared but not yet
committed */
final int PREPARED = 3;
/** Transaction has been prepared with nothing to
commit */
final int NOTCHANGED = 4;
/** Transaction has been committed */
final int COMMITTED = 5;
/** Transaction has been aborted */
final int ABORTED = 6;
}
Jini transaction join
A process where a participant joins a transaction. To
join a transaction, a participant invokes the join method held by the transaction
manager using an object implementation of the TransactionParticipant
interface. The TransactionManager uses the object to communicate with the
TransactionParticipant. If the join method results in the RemoteEx-
ception being thrown, the TransactionParticipant relays the same (or
another exception) to its client. The join method has a crash count parameter
that holds the TransactionParticipant’s storage version that contains the
transaction state. The crash count is changed following each loss or corruption
of its storage. When a TransactionManager receives a join request it reads the
crash count to determine if the TransactionParticipant is already joined.
If the crash count is the same as that passed in the original join, the join method
is not executed. If it is different, however, the TransactionManager causes
the transaction to abort by throwing the CrashCountException.
Jini transactionserver
A two-phase commit using Jini. The two-phase
commit protocol is implemented using the primary types:
1. TransactionManager that creates and coordinates transactions.
2. NestableTransactionManager that accommodates nested transactions
or sub-transactions.
3. TransactionParticipant that allows transactions to be joined by par-
ticipants.
182

Jini(TM) API
The two-phase commit protocol coordinates the changes made to system resour-
ces that result from transactions. It tests for their successful implementation,
in which case they are committed. If not, and any one fails, they are each
rolled back. In transaction processing (TP) this is left to a transaction coordina-
tor whose function is integrated in the TransactionManager using Jini. The
TransactionManager is key to the two-phase commit protocol. This requires
that all TransactionParticipants vote in order to indicate their state. The
vote may be prepared (or ready to commit), not changed (or read only), or
aborted (when it is necessary to abort the transaction). Having received infor-
mation of the readiness to commit through a prepared vote, the Transaction-
Manager signals TransactionParticipants to roll forward and commit the
changes resulting from the transaction. TransactionParticipants that vote
aborted are signaled to roll back by the TransactionManager.
Jini(TM) API
Jini is made of numerous Jini packages that combine to
make the collective API that implements the many required interfaces. These
include the methods and exceptions that make light work of developing Jini
applications and include the shown TransactionManager interface.
package net.jini.core.transaction.server;
import net.jini.core.transaction.*;
import net.jini.core.lease.Lease;
import net.jini.core.lease.LeaseDeniedException;
import java.rmi.Remote;
import java.rmi.RemoteException;
public interface TransactionManager
extends Remote, TransactionConstants {
/** Class that holds return values from create
methods. */
public static class Created implements java.io.Seri-
alizable {
static final long serialVersionUID = -4233846033
773471113L;
public final long id;
public final Lease lease;
public Created(long id, Lease lease) {
this.id = id; this.lease = lease;
}
}
Created create(long lease) throws LeaseDeniedExcep-
tion, RemoteException;
void join(long id, TransactionParticipant part, long
183

JIT compiler for Java
crashCount)
throws UnknownTransactionException, CannotJoin-
Exception, CrashCountException, Remote-
Exception;
int getState(long id) throws UnknownTransaction-
Exception, RemoteException;
void commit(long id)
throws UnknownTransactionException, Cannot-
CommitException, RemoteException;
void commit(long id, long waitFor)
throws UnknownTransactionException, Cannot-
CommitException, TimeoutExpiredException,
RemoteException;
void abort(long id)
throws UnknownTransactionException, CannotAbort-
Exception, RemoteException;
void abort(long id, long waitFor)
throws UnknownTransactionException, CannotAbort-
Exception, TimeoutExpiredException,
RemoteException;
}
(See Jini.)
JIT compiler for Java (Just in time compiler for Java)
A compiler
which converts OS-independent Java bytecode and optimises it for execution
on the target OS. The conversion naturally takes place on the client side.
JIT debugging
A method of detecting bugs in a running program, and
responding by running an appropriate debugging process.
Jobs, Steve
A co-founder of Apple Computer, who later founded NeXT.
His most signiﬁcant achievements are those at the early years of Apple Com-
puter, an era when a clutch of American companies largely run and owned by
college drop outs (including Bill Gates) revolutionised the computer industry
by designing affordable microcomputers and accompanying software. Steve
Jobs and Steve Wozniak revolutionised the world of computing by mass pro-
ducing one of the world’s most affordable PCs known simply as the Apple,
and later the Apple II. It was designed by Steve Wozniak, whose dream was
always to own a computer. This was a dream that he almost single handedly
made reality for himself and for millions of people around the world.
(See Apple Computer.)
184

JVM
Join
A process of combining records from different tables/ﬁles in an rela-
tional database management system (RDBMS).
JPEG (Joint Photographics Experts Group)
An internationally agreed
standard for still-image compression and decompression that was devised by
the JPEG – a specialist group set up by the ISO and CCITT. It is a symmet-
rical algorithm in that the processes required for compression mirror those
of decompression. The processes include forward and reverse DCTs (Direct
Cosine Transformations). It can be used to compress 8 bit, 16 bit and 24 bit
graphics. Motion-JPEG (M-JPEG) video uses individual frames compressed
according to the JPEG algorithm, giving full frame updates as opposed to
the predominantly partial frame updates of standard MPEG video. The JPEG
standard compression scheme for still photographic quality images began
development in 1986. Compression and encoding techniques were evaluated
during 1987 and 1988, until eventually the components of the symmetrical
compression cycle were agreed, with DCT (Direct Cosine Transform) proving
a central theme of the JPEG design.
(See DCT.)
Jump
A moment in a running program when execution is diverted from
one point to another. The jump may be conditional, where it will occur because
of a given event, or variable value. An unconditional jump does not require
such preconditions.
Just-in-time (JIT) compiler
A Java runtime environment which is encap-
sulated by the Java Developer Kit and permits redistribution of the runtime
environment. JRE consists of the JVM, core classes, and miscellaneous ﬁles.
JVM (Java Virtual Machine)
A software solution that yields an envi-
ronment for running Java applets. Browsers such as Netscape Navigator and
Microsoft Internet Explorer feature Java Virtual Machines. JVMs may be run
on clients such as desktop and notebook systems or even consumer appliances
so they connect with Jini networks and consume compliant services.
(See JavaPC.)
185


K
Kaband
A range of frequencies between 18 GHz to 30 GHz.
Kannel
An open source WAP gateway.
(See www.kannel.org.)
Katakana
A character set used in a Japanese phonetic alphabet.
KB
(See Kilo Byte.)
K-band
A range of frequencies between 10 GHz to 12 GHz.
Kbps (Kilo bits per second)
A unit of data transfer that equates to
1,000 bits/second.
KBps (Kilo Bytes per second)
A unit of data transfer that equates to
1,000 bytes/second.
KBS (Knowledge-Based System)
An alternative name for an expert sys-
tem that includes a knowledge base of rules or heuristics, each comprising
fact(s) and conclusion(s), i.e. IF disk drive light off THEN check ribbon
cable. Such conclusions, and deductions may be weighted appropriately. The
rule-base is chained by an inference engine that chains:
• backwards, comparing an inputted question with conclusions in the rule-
base, and may compare subsequently located facts with conclusions of
other rules
• forwards, comparing facts.
A KBS can offer informed decision making skills, the effectiveness of which
is a function of the accuracy and comprehensiveness of its rule- or knowledge-
base. A knowledge engineer is responsible for generating rule-base. Numerous
KBS applications exist, including medicine, business, stock market, mainte-
nance, etc. Web-based KBS solutions exist. KBS can offer informed decision
187

Kermit
making skills, the effectiveness of which is a function of accuracy and compre-
hensiveness of rule- or knowledge-base. Knowledge engineers are responsible
for generating rule-base – proven to be complex and arduous process. Numer-
ous applications include medicine, business, stock market, maintenance, etc.
Kermit
An ﬁle transfer protocol that is asynchronous.
Kernel
A part of an operating system environment. The Windows kernel is
responsible for a number of tasks including memory management and dynamic
linking.
Kernel Driver
A driver which interacts with an internal or external device.
Kernel32.DLL
A DLL included in Windows 3.1 and Windows 95/98.
(See DLL.)
Key
A means of making encrypted data unique.
key
An arbitrary value that locates a datum in a data structure.
Key ﬁeld
A key ﬁeld is included in a database in order to prevent the
duplication of contained ﬁeld values, and to expedite information retrieval.
Key ﬁelds are also used to link tables or ﬁles in relational databases. Where it
is necessary to repeat values in a key ﬁeld, additional ﬁelds are keyed. These
are termed multi-ﬁeld keys.
KHz (Kilo Hertz)
A unit of frequency that equates to 1,000 cycles per
second.
Kilobyte (or Kbytes, or K)
A unit of memory which has 1,024 bytes.
Occasionally disk drive manufacturers equate KBytes to 1,000 bytes in accor-
dance with the metric interpretation of Kilo. It is derived from a 10-bit address
bus, or 10-bit pointer register, thus giving access to 210 (1,024) memory loca-
tions.
Kilostream
A digital service provided by BT that requires the customer
to have a Network Terminating Unit (NTU). It provides data rates of 2.4 Kbps,
4.8 Kbps, 9.6 Kbps, 48 Kbps, and 64 Kbps.
Kiosk Application
A multimedia application intended to interface with
the general public. The multimedia system may or may not be housed in a
physical kiosk. Such applications might provide maps, tourist information,
point-of-information, point-of-sale etc.
188

Knowledge Management
Knowledge base
1. An information database that is accessible via the
Microsoft Web site. 2. A set of rules that determines the functionality of an
expert system. The rules may be simple If. . .THEN rules.
(See KBS.)
Knowledge engineer
A person responsible for programming an expert
system.
(See KBS.)
Knowledge Management
A process that:
• identiﬁes an organisation’s intellectual assets
• creates new knowledge for competitive advantage
• imparts corporate information accessible
• imparts best practices
• harnesses IT such as corporate networks, groupware and intranets.
189


L
L Band
A section of the electromagnetic spectrum that ranges from 1.53
to 1.66 GHz, and is applied in satellite and microwave communications.
LAN (Local Area Network)
A number of computers connected physi-
cally or wirelessly so users can share directories, applications, services, and
resources such as printers and fax/modems. LANs are commonly used to con-
nect all computers in a department, while Wide Area Networks (WANs) may
be used to connect multiple sites. LAN data transfer rates over approximate
speeds between 10 and 100 Mbps, though speeds up to 1000 Mbps are possible.
There are a number of internationally agreed standards by which computers
forming a LAN are connected. Network topologies include:
• star, where computers are connected using a centralised hub
• ring, where computers are connected in a chain; this is the chosen method
for small networks that are perhaps peer-to-peer conﬁgurations which might
be based on Windows 98/NT. LAN standards include Ethernet, Token Ring
and occasionally Fibber Channel (FC). The latter may be used to implement
FC arbitrated loops.
(See 10Base, Active Web, Client/server, Ethernet, Optic Fibre, Inactive Web,
Master Slave and Server.)
Laser diode
A diode assembly able to lase at a ﬁxed wavelength; with
the aid of a lens it can become a read head.
(See LED.)
LCD Liquid Crystal Display
A form of display measuring a few milli-
metres in depth. Available in monochrome and colour, LCDs are used in a
wide variety of appliances including pocket televisions, notebook computers,
PDAs, cellular phones, calculators, and portable CD-ROM readers/electronic
books. Modern notebooks tend to use TFT and DSTN display technology. The
former provides improved image deﬁnition.
(See LED and Notebook.)
191

Lease
Lease
A time period assigned to an object, data element or service that
dictates longevity. Services that register on a network may be assigned a lease,
while objects in a JavaSpaces service may also be assigned leases placing time
limits on their availability.
LED (Light Emitting Diode)
A semiconductor/optronic device, which
emits visible light when excited electrically. It may provide a basis for:
• display technology
• laser light sources for ﬁbre optic lightwave communications
• read heads for CD-ROM and DVD drives.
Radiative recombination
Conduction
band
Forbidden band
Valence
band
Photons
Excited electrons
Direct bandgap
Indirect bandgap
Holes
Photons
They are used in all types of consumer electronics and computers, as power
indicators and alphanumeric displays. Advantages over conventional ﬁlament
bulbs include, near-inﬁnite life span, incredible durability, reliability, physi-
cally robust, easy to manufacture in different colours, low power consumption
and inexpensive. LEDs emit optical radiation, and the 800 nm (wavelength)
emission is seen as red. Dividing the speed of light c (3 × 108 metres/second)
by the wavelength (λ) of an (800 nm) LED’s emission, results in its fre-
quency f :
f = c/λ
f = (3 * 10^8)/(8.00 * 10^-7)
f = 3.75 * 10^14 Hz
The emission from an LED is commonly deﬁned in terms of the external
stimulation of electrons. Electrons exist in bands that surround a nucleus. The
outer or valence band may share its electrons with other atoms that collectively
192

LIFO
form molecules. The valence band’s electrons are stimulated to higher energy
state called the conduction band. This condition occurs when electrons are:
• passed through a pn junction diode
• stimulated by a high voltage
• stimulated by light.
The difference that exists between the valence and the conduction bands is
described as the forbidden gab. The type of semiconductor determines the
behaviour of the bandgap, which may be:
• Indirect, such as silicon, where electrons may occupy intermediate levels
as they pass from the conduction band to the valence band.
• Direct, where electrons move directly through the forbidden gap, and pro-
vide the best results.
Photon emission takes place as electrons are displaced from the conduction
band, and united with holes in the valence band. The resulting emission of
light from a LED might be referred to as pn junction electroluminescence
or recombination radiation. The latter refers to the combination of electrons
with holes.
The resulting wavelength λ (in micrometers) is calculated thus:
λ = hc/E
where,
• h is Planck’s constant (6.63 × 10−34 joule-seconds)
• c is the speed of light (3 × 1014 micrometers per second)
• E is energy difference between the valence and conduction bands.
Legacy
A system, application or operating system (OS) that is of a past
generation, and is usually based on mainframe technology. It may nonethe-
less be integrated into a modern IT implementation, and coexist with modern
client/server architectures.
(See Client/server.)
Level
1. A deﬁned RAID architecture. (See RAID.) 2. High- and low-
levels describe macro and micro features, respectively. In terms of program-
ming languages, low-level languages relate most closely to machine code,
such as assembly languages, for instance. High level languages are those that
are a considerable distance from the machine language (in terms of compila-
tion processes), and include C++ and Visual Basic. 3. A US deﬁned series
of security grades. (See Security.)
LIFO (Last In First Out)
A type of queue. The order in which items are
regurgitated opposes that in which they are deposited; the last item placed in
193

LIM memory
the LIFO queue is the ﬁrst to be retrieved. It may be used to store the return
addresses, when a subroutine is called. In this guise, it is called a stack.
(See FIFO and Queue.)
LIM memory (Lotus Intel Microsoft)
An alternative name for EMS
(Expanded Memory Speciﬁcation), this is a method of addressing memory in
a PC architecture. Introduced by Lotus, Intel and Microsoft (LIM) in 1984,
it was used in Windows 1.x to cache DOS applications. The speciﬁcation
has evolved and numerous different versions are available. In the early days,
many PCs were ﬁtted with EMS compliant memory cards. However, grow-
ing extended memory (XMS) on motherboards and their EMS compliance
drove EMS memory cards into obsolescence. Expanded memory is accessed
by reading 16 K pages from EMS into the memory area between 640 K and
1 Mb Ram. A device driver such as EMM386 responds to EMS requests.
Line speed
A data transmission rate over media that may be physical or
wireless. The unit measurement is typically in Kbps or Mbps.
Linear medium
A medium that does not permit user-interaction, in order
to control its sequence. Conventional broadcast television is a linear medium.
A non-linear medium, such as the Web, provides the user with the ability to
control its sequence.
(See Multimedia and Web.)
Lingo
An OOP-based multimedia authoring language that was developed
by MacroMedia, and is a most intuitive language even to non-programmers.
It may be used in conjunction with Macromedia Director and Macromedia
Authorware Professional. Lingo’s functionality, syntax and structure are com-
parable to those of OpenScript which is a proprietary language included with
certain versions of Asymetrix ToolBook. It has become the industry’s chosen
language for authoring multimedia titles. Using Lingo, Director movies may
be interwoven with interactivity, by coding handlers that respond to events.
Messages that result from such events can be deﬁned in the program code.
Lingo events
Director is driven by four key event categories that are associ-
ated with:
• Frame
• Keyboard
• Mouse
• Movie.
Lingo program form
on eventOfSomeSort
go to frame 15
end
This simple script operates thus: if the speciﬁed event occurs, the play head is moved
to frame 15.
194

Link
Lingo messages
Events invoke the messages:
mouseDown
mouseUp
-- are sent when the mouse button is either
pressed or released
keyDown
keyUp
-- are sent when is either pressed or released
enterFrame
exitFrame
-- are sent when the playback head passes over
frames
startMovie
stopMovie
-- are sent when the movie either starts or
stops
idle
-- is sent during dormant states
timeOut
-- is sent after a specified period following a
previous action
Additional messages may be deﬁned.
Lingo If. . .then form
on keyDown
if the key = ESCAPE then
alert "Cue previous video clip"
beep
else
alert "Escape?"
end if
end keyDown
Further Reading
Roberts, Jason. Director Demystiﬁed, Berkeley, CA, Peachpit Press, 1995
Thompson, John and Sam Gottlieb, MacroMedia Director Lingo Workshop,
Indianapolis, IN, Hayden, 1995
Callery, Michael, Learning Lingo, Programming with Macromedia Director,
Addison Wesley, 1996
(See Multimedia authoring tool, Object, OpenScript, www.asymetrix.com and
www.macromedia.com.)
Link
1. A process by which the object (.OBJ) ﬁles are linked with libraries
that include functions, procedures and classes. (See Compiler and DLL.) 2. A
means of connecting related information in a hypertext model for information
storage and retrieval. Hence user-interaction may be given context. They
195

Linux
provide the user with a means of touring non-linear paths through information.
Such links of association are taken to limits that are imposed by the design’s
levels of granularity. Nodes, representing text or images, are linked to provide
a potentially inﬁnite number of meaningful paths. For example, a single node
representing a linear structure, such as an article, might be linked to numerous
other articles and images. Links can naturally exist at a number of levels,
either to link complete documents (macro features), or to reference words
or phrases (microfeatures) within documents, or complete documents or Web
sites that are identiﬁed by their URLs 3. A means by which tables/ﬁles may be
connected in a relational database management system (RBMS). In the case
of a multi-table form within a relational database, such links can refer to how
master tables and detail tables are associated as follows:
• One-to-one: each master record is linked to only one detail record at any
given time.
• One-to-many: each master record is linked to a group of detail records.
• Many-to-one: a number of master records may be linked to a single detail
record.
• Many-to-many: each master record is one of a group that may be matched
to one of a group of detail records.
Such RDBMSes make possible multiple table changes and updates using a
single form as a data entry interface. (See Data warehouse, Database and
Relational database.) 4. A communications path between devices that may be
processors, as is the case in MPP designs. (See MPP.)
Linux
An operating system based on Unix, which includes Unix com-
mands and concepts. The Linux repository is the CVS (Concurrent Versioning
System) that permits multiple users to work on the same ﬁles in a collaborative
team environment. Files may be checked out and returned to the repository
where their contents can be merged with other versions of the same ﬁle. For
Windows systems access, to the CVS is provided by WinCVS, or alternatively
a Telnet and ftp session may be established between the Windows system and
the system hosting the CVS. Consider a scenario where you want to write
ﬁles from a Windows system to the CVS:
Establish a Telnet session with the network system (such as lin3) holding
the CVS. This requires Telnet software on the Windows machine, where the
command used would logically following the pattern:
Telnet lin3
Respond the prompts:
username:
password:
196

Literary Machines
Open a DOS window and change to the directory holding the ﬁle(s) you
wish to write to the CVS. To do this use the standard cd and cd/ commands.
Establish an ftp session with the network system (such as lin3) holding the
CVS. Again this requires software on the Windows system. Typically, you
would type in a DOS window:
ftp lin7
In the DOS window, change to the directory on lin3 where the ﬁles are
to be copied. By default Linux is now primed for an Ascii transfer, but if
the ﬁles are to be read using an intranet, and are perhaps PDFs, they will be
corrupt, and the intranet will not work for local and for remote workers. A
binary transfer is therefore necessary, and this is achieved simply by typing
‘binary’. Copy the ﬁle(s) by typing:
put
Or
mput outerwall. *
Type:
cvs commit
Finally in the Telnet window type:
cvs update
Linux ﬁrewall
A ﬁrewall created using the Linux operating system and
Linux modules.
(See Firewall and Linux.)
Liquid asset
An asset shown on a balance sheet that may be realised in
terms of currency in a short period of time.
List box
A windows component that may be assumed to provide a means
of selecting ﬁles. Where the number of ﬁles exceeds a certain ﬁgure, a vertical
scroll bar is provided in order to assist in the process of their selection.
List server
A facility and e-mail address that forwards e-mail messages
to a list of registered users.
Literary Machines
A book written by Theodore Nelson that put forward
his hypertext concept, its methodologies, its data storage models, and its appli-
cations. Theodore Nelson is also remembered for his Xanadu project which
to some is the conceptual birth of the Web. To others the conceptual birth
of the Web and of the Internet is accredited to Vannevar Bush through what
197

Liv Zempel
he described as Memex. Both Xanadu and Memex were perceived as uniﬁed
information storage architectures that could be accessed through speciﬁc tech-
nologies. Through his writings that include ‘As We May Think’, Vannevar
Bush predicted the miniaturisation of information storage media.
(See Bush, Vannevar, and Xanadu.)
Liv Zempel
A data compression algorithm.
(See Compression.)
Load balancing
1. A method of distributing the workload across pro-
cesses and system resources, in an effort to optimise performance. It is usually
applied dynamically in OO distributed systems. (See Distributed processing.)
2. A method of distributing the workload in an MPP architecture, so processors
are as close to the heightened states of operation as is possible. It is carried out
dynamically, and may be referred to as dynamic load balancing. (See MPP)
Local bus
A method of connecting video cards, hard disk controllers and
other devices more directly to the processor’s data bus, thus overcoming the
data transfer bottleneck of ISA. Theoretically, local bus technology should per-
mit the accommodation of expansion cards running generally at clock speeds
equal to that of the processor’s external data bus. Local bus standards have
emerged including VL-bus and Intel’s PCI (Peripheral Component Intercon-
nect). PCI generally performs better than VL-bus.
Local class
A class that is local to a given block of Java code.
Local glue
A collection of entities that unite client components, so they
may operate collaboratively. OLE, OpenDoc, ActiveX, JavaBeans components
require local glues so their running operations may be coordinated. These
common OO component architectures use different local glues, where:
• OLE uses ODL (Object Deﬁnition Language)
• ActiveX uses COM
• OpenDoc uses CORBA IDL (Interface Deﬁnition Language)
• JavaBeans uses a subset of the Java programming language.
(See ActiveX, Glue, JavaBeans, OLE, and OpenDoc.)
localisation
The implementation of a software product or service so it can
be used in a speciﬁc region.
Logical client/server model
A process of connecting to, and disconnect-
ing from a computer, network, remote server, Internet service provider, or
Internet service. A login name is required, as might be a password.
(See Firewall and Security.)
198

Lotus Notes
Login and Log off
A model that sees the interaction of components and
programs where messages are typically used to request services and data.
Software components may act as:
• servers, providing client components with data
• clients that request data from servers
• server and clients.
Typically, it is a distributed OO software architecture platformed on a physical
client/sever system.
(See Client/server.)
Lomem
Lowest user memory address in system.
Look-and-feel
A term which broadly describes the user interface, or pre-
sentation element of an application.
(See Application.)
Lookup service
A directory that stores links or objects relating to avail-
able or registered network services.
Loop
1. A repetition of code in a program. The loop is normally condi-
tional, and rarely unconditional. 2. A series of video frames that is repeated.
Loose coupling
(See Coupling.)
Loss
1. A level of attenuation that a signal is subjected to while passing
through media which may be physical or wireless. Optic ﬁbber signal losses are
caused by impurities in the silica core, and by ﬁbber couplings. 2. A measure
of the number of lost telephone calls or connections due to congestion.
Lossless compression
A compression technique which does not rely on
the omission of pixel information from a video or image ﬁle. Authentic lossless
compression should result in video or image quality that is equal to that pro-
vided by the uncompressed ﬁles. However, it may be assumed that attainable
compression ratios are lower than those of lossy compression algorithms.
(See DCT, JPEG and MPEG.)
Lotus Domino
A server component used in an Lotus’ integrated messag-
ing, collaboration and Web application software.
Lotus Notes
A Groupware implementation, and remembered as the ﬁrst
commercially successful variant. An evolving solution, it provides network
199

Low-level language
services such as e-mail and document publishing, and provides easy migration
of resulting Notes applications to the Web.
(See Groupware.)
Low-level language
A programming language that provides access to the
low-level elements of a computer such as memory locations and processor
registers. Assembly language is considered to be a low-level language. Assem-
bly languages are indigenous to the processor type. The language consists of
mnemonics that replace, and translate into, hexadecimal processor instructions.
200

M
Macintosh
(See Apple Macintosh.)
Macro
A short program or series of instructions. Macros are useful for
automating processes, or for performing tasks that would otherwise take a
great deal of time to implement. Typically macros are written when the user
interface is restrictive for a given task, or for particular usage habits. They
are also written when there is no predeﬁned macro that will perform a desired
task. Sometimes certain predeﬁned macros may be improved upon or edited
to perform different tasks. Previously sophisticated word processors such as
Microsoft Word and Word Pro had indigenous macro languages, as some do
today Standard macro languages include Visual Basic for applications.
(See VBScript and Visual Basic.)
Macro level
Links which exist at the macro level relate comparatively
large documents or ‘chunks’. They are said to exist at a high level, forming
part of the chunk-based model of hypertext and hypermedia.
Macromedia SoundEdit
A wave ﬁle recorder and editor.
Mailing list
An electronic forum using e-mail to exchange information.
Main thread
A process’ principle thread that may accompany others.
Mainframe
A powerful computer that typically offers centralised process-
ing, serving a number of connected dumb terminals. In terms of its positive
characteristics, a modern mainframe may:
• process data at speeds beyond those attainable on desktop systems, and
those based on conventional 32 bit and 64 bit processors which might be
CISC or RISC.
• provide long-term archiving of data
• be a massively parallel processing (MPP) architecture, where processes are
run concurrently, offering efﬁcient scaleable processing
201

Makeﬁle
• offer industrial strength operation through robust operating systems and
applications
• provide easy diagnosis of faults as they are isolated to the network or to the
mainframe itself – though the mainframe with all its electronics and mass
storage remains a complex fault diagnosis domain
• provide effective migration paths to client/server architectures
• prove a more durable IT solution in terms of longevity, because mainframe
technology advances more slowly than microcomputer technology.
Key disadvantages of mainframe computers revolve around:
• high initial cost
• high cost of ownership brought about comparatively high maintenance and
servicing bills
• fault tolerance is at a low threshold, because a mainframe fault may ren-
der an entire IT solution inoperable. However, the fault-tolerance of the
connected mass storage (which may be shared) might be high
• the dumb terminals are typically green-screen, but there is scope for reno-
vation (See Application Renovation)
• mainframe languages tend to be old-fashioned, like COBOL, though this is
a changing situation.
Makeﬁle
In the context of Apple Cocoa and GNUStep, a makeﬁle holds
class and implementation ﬁles, and other ﬁles, so as to build applications.
Mapi (Messaging Application Program Interface)
A standard that per-
mits e-mail messages to be sent from any application. Originally developed
by Microsoft, it is a DLL containing C functions, and allows developers to
exploit Windows messaging. Calls to the DLL may allow applications to be
given e-mail functions.
Marketing
A process that enables the enterprise or vendor to locate and
to reveal potential buyers of a product or service.
(See Mass market.)
Marquee
A message scrolled across Web pages that may be a promotion,
advertisement, announcement, etc.
(See ActiveX.)
Mass market
A large market sometimes referred to as the critical mass,
which usually includes the lower strata of society or the working class. Mass
market products are mass produced often in tens of thousands, hundreds of
thousands, and even millions in the case of everyday items such as food
and clothing.
202

MCIS Mail
Mass storage device
A device used to store data. May be assumed to be
either magnetic, optical or magneto-optical.
(See CD-ROM, DVD, Hard disk and RAID.)
Master/Slave Processing
An architecture where a master computer is
connected to slave (intelligent) computers that are connected to dumb ter-
minals. Processing is distributed from the master computer, which may be
assumed to be a mainframe, to the slave systems.
(See Client/server.)
Mbone (Multi-cast backbone)
A virtual infrastructure for delivering
multi-cast packets over the Internet. It is composed of tunnels, and provides
limited bandwidth, but enough for audio/video data. A restriction mechanism
integrated in MBONE routers or mrouters drops packets over tunnels
where a predeﬁned threshold rate is exceeded. Mrouters forward multi-cast
packets to speciﬁed destinations. The MBone topology maps are available at
www.cs.berkeley.edu:
(See IP Multi-cast, and www.cs.berkeley.edu.)
MCIS (Microsoft Commercial Internet System)
An evolving suite of
servers used to architect Web solutions. The servers are Windows NT com-
pliant, and include:
• Address Book
• Chat
• Content Replicator
• Internet Locator
• MCIS Mail
• MCIS News
• Membership
• Merchant Server
• Personalisation.
(See Address Book, Chat, Content Replicator, MCIS Mail, MCIS News, Mem-
bership, Merchant Server.)
MCIS Mail
A Windows NT-based server that may be used to implement
mailboxes across multiple Web sites. DPA (Distributed Password Authentica-
tion) and SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) are supported. Email protocol support
includes:
• POP3 (Post Ofﬁce Protocol)
• SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol)
• MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions).
(See DPA. MIME, POP3, SMTP and SSL.)
203

MCIS News
MCIS News
A Windows NT-based server that is part of the MCIS, and
supports electronic conferencing and newsgroups. It supports the NNTP (Net-
work News Transport Protocol) together with its extensions.
(See MCIS.)
M-commerce
An e-business concept and transaction mechanism that is
platformed and hosted using a wireless application service.
(See 2G, 2.5G and 3G.)
Media Player
A Windows program able to play a variety of different
media ﬁles. With the appropriate driver selected and installed using the Control
Panel it can be used to play various different media types including:
• CD-DA.
• Midi ﬁles.
• Wave (.WAV) ﬁles.
• Video ﬁles.
When launched it shows controls common with typical audio/visual appli-
ances, including Play, Pause, Stop and Eject. Finer control over playing various
media ﬁles and tracks is provided by a horizontal scroll bar.
(See Video and Wave audio.)
Megabyte (MBytes, MB)
A Megabyte (MByte or MB) equates to
1,024 KBytes. Sometimes it is wrongly referred to as 1,000 KBytes as is
the case when some manufacturers specify hard disk data storage capacities.
Derived from 20 address lines resulting in 220 (1,048,576) memory addresses.
Member class
A member of an enclosing class, and is deﬁned using the
static modiﬁer.
Membership
A Windows NT-based server that is part of the MCIS, and
allows visitors to become members of your site.
(See MCIS.)
Memex
An information and storage system concept that was put forward
in the 1940s by the visionary Vannevar Bush, Science Advisor to President
Roosevelt and administrator of the wartime Manhattan Project. He believed
that all published information should be made available through access points,
and clearly set out the advantages of association through links. Calling the
system Memex, and describing it as a sort of private ﬁle and library, he
thought that some kind of workstation would be used with user-interaction
accommodated through mechanical levers. If there were errors in his vision,
it was a total underestimation of the sheer quantity of information that would
be published in future, and an overestimation of the technology of the day,
204

Merchant Server
i.e. microﬁlm, facsimile and telegraph. It was Bush’s misfortune to live in
the era of valves. The solid state transistor had yet to be invented, and it was
some thirty years before the ﬁrst reasonably sophisticated microprocessor was
made commercially available. As such, Memex remained in the minds of a
select few. (See Hypertext, Multimedia, Web and Xanadu.)
Memory protection
A system where one process is prevented from access-
ing the reserved memory of another process.
Memory-mapped ﬁles
A physical ﬁle that is mapped to memory.
Merchant
An entity that accepts payment for goods or services using
physical or electronic payment transaction technologies.
Merchant Account
A contract between an e-business and a Processing
Bank or Independent Sales Organization (ISP) for the clearing and settlement
of credit card transactions.
Merchant Account Provider (MAP)
A company that provides Merchant
Accounts, and EMS is an examples
Merchant Server
A Windows NT-based server that is part of the MCIS,
and permits the construction of virtual shopping sites. (See e-commerce
and MCIS.) The server consists of a:
• Controller that is used to deﬁne language, currency, date and other precon-
ﬁgurable parameters.
• Router that is an ISAPI (Internet Service Application Programming Inter-
face) DLL. This routes requests from the client to relevant parts of the Store
server, and routes responses to those requests back to the client browser.
• Store Server that is the system’s backbone, and functions to implement tasks
such as order requests, and to interact with the backend database.
Merchant Server may be used to implement sites that allow customers to:
• peruse product databases
• purchase items using a shopping cart metaphor
• receive e-mail conﬁrmation of orders placed.
Merchant Server permits the vendor to:
• query customer details, and purchase habits
• conduct promotions
• conduct marketing campaigns
• create membership accounts using IDs and passwords
• offer membership discounts
• integrate ActiveX, OLE and COM components into the server
205

Merchant services
• use ODBC compliant databases
• secure credit card transactions using the SET (Secure Electronics Transfer)
protocol together with Verifone’s vPOS application.
(See Server.)
Merchant services
A bank department that processes information for
Merchants.
(See Merchant.)
Message
1. An object responds to messages that stimulate objects to res-
pond in some way. Using Objective-C a message is sent to an object (or
receiver) using the expression:
[receiver message name];
where receiver is the object, and message−name is the message or method
name that is to be invoked – and may be referred to as a method selector.
To invoke the display method of the mySquare object:
[mySquare display];
Labels describing arguments precede colons:
[myRect setWidth:20.0 height:22.0];
Messages with a variable number of arguments:
[receiver makeList:list,argOne,argTwo,argThree];
(See Object and Objective-C.) 2. A request sent from one object or component
to another, commonly used in OO systems. The message will be of a standard
or proprietary format, with address information, and appropriate data. The
messages might require an acknowledge message, before the originating com-
ponent may continue processing. OO client/server architectures use messages
and underlying protocols as their collective glues. (See Glue.)
Message authentication
A process or usually sub-process that veriﬁes
that a message is received from the appropriate or legal sender.
Message wrapper
A top-level data structure that conveys information to
message recipients.
Meta data
A term used to describe data that indicates the information
types and subjects. The data may be stored in an information storage and
retrieval system. In the context of the Web, metadata such as indexes and
URLs are gathered and stored by search engine implementations. This provides
clients with the ability to search and retrieve documents form the Web.
(See Search engine.)
206

Microsoft DirectX SDK
Method
An operation or procedure that objects may execute in response
to a message. Methods may be deﬁned in a set of APIs and they may deﬁne
objects’ behaviours in terms of how they respond to an expected event such
as a mouse click, and to other stimuli. Other events might be the reception of
messages from other objects, and the underlying methods might interpret them,
and initiate an appropriate response. The response might be an acknowledge
message, or a return value such as the contents of a variable.
(See Message and Objective-C.)
MHz (Mega Hertz)
A measurement that equates to one million cycles
or pulses per second. It is commonly used to describe the clock speed of
computers, thus providing indication of speed of operation. A 50 MHz machine
will therefore yield 50 million clock cycles per second, and a single clock cycle
will have a duration of 1/50,000,000 secs.
MicroJava
A processor from Sun Microsystems that is optimised for the
Java programming language. It is used in network devices, telecommunications
hardware and consumer games.
(See Java and Sun Microelectronics.)
Micropayment
A small payment and transaction of perhaps between 1 F
and 50 F.
Microsoft
A large software producer and vendor that was founded jointly
by Bill Gates and Paul Allen. Microsoft is a leading computer software com-
pany targeting mainly the PC platform. Its best known products are Windows,
Microsoft Ofﬁce, the MS-DOS operating system etc. It also produces multi-
media titles, and has recently extended its operations to the Internet through
the Microsoft Network (MSN), and numerous related ventures.
Microsoft ActiveX SDK
An SDK dedicated to the creation of ActiveX
controls, compatible with Visual C++ 4.2 (or higher).
(See ActiveX.)
Microsoft Commercial Internet System
(See MCIS.)
Microsoft Design-Time Control SDK
An SDK that is used to create
Design-Time ActiveX Controls, that as their name suggests, is active only dur-
ing design. Resulting controls may be used with FrontPage, InterDev, Visual
C++, Visual Basic, etc.
(See FrontPage, Visual InterDev and SDK.)
Microsoft DirectX SDK
A toolset that is used to develop multimedia
elements, and includes:
• Direct3D for three-dimensional graphics
• DirectDraw for 2-D graphics
207

Microsoft Forms 2.0 ActiveX Control
• DirectInput for connectivity to input devices such as joysticks
• DirectSound for exploiting sound card/software capabilities
• DirectPlay for connecting to remote applications.
Microsoft Forms 2.0 ActiveX Control
A suite of ActiveX Controls in-
cluded in Visual Basic Control Edition.
(See Visual Basic Control Edition.)
Microsoft IIS (Microsoft Internet Information Server)
(See MCIS.)
Microsoft. NET
(See. NET)
Microsoft Index Server
1. A search engine that may be used to ﬁnd
information on a Web site. It is included with Microsoft IIS, as is the Crystal
Reports reporting engine. (See Crystal Reports and IIS.) 2. A Web server used
with Microsoft Windows NT operating system, and bundled with Microsoft
Windows NT Server. (See Web server.)
Microsoft Internet Client SDK
A comprehensive set of tools, compo-
nents and utilities for ICPs, Internet developers and Web authors.
Microsoft Internet News
A technology that allows Web Browser users
to subscribe to newsgroups, submit messages, and read messages. Microsoft
Internet News is invoked from Internet Explorer by selecting Read News on
the Go menu. (See Newsgroup.)
Microsoft MDK (Multimedia Developers Kit)
A collection of tools that
may be used to develop sophisticated multimedia titles.
Microsoft NetShow
A streaming technology server that may be integrated
into a Web site/application. Its inclusion results in the ability to serve client
Browsers with streaming audio, video and multimedia. Web site and Web
application developers may integrate it into IIS-based Web application solu-
tions.
(See ASF, IIS, Multimedia and Streaming.)
Microsoft NetShow Theater Server
A streaming MPEG video media
server that extends Windows NT Server NetShow Services, to deliver higher
quality video, including:
• MPEG1 and MPEG2 video streams from 500 Kbps to 8 Mbps
• scalability up to thousands of video streams
• a distributed, fault-tolerant PC architecture for mission-critical applications.
(See Streaming media and MPEG.)
208

Microsoft SQL Server
Microsoft Ofﬁce
An integrated software package that features the:
• Word processor
• Excel spreadsheet
• Access database
• Outlook contact management program
• PowerPoint presentation program.
• Publisher desktop publishing program (in later editions only)
(See Application, Microsoft, and Windows.)
Microsoft Proxy Server
A server implementation that may be used to
deliver Internet access across an enterprise. The Internet Service Manager is
used to manage the Proxy Server, as well as Chat and Mail servers. The
Microsoft Proxy Server:
• is compatible with Intel and Risc platforms
• uses caching algorithms to optimise access to LAN data
• includes an Auto-dial features that connects the user with the ISP, if the
user’s requested data does not reside in the cache
• assign users with access rights to speciﬁed Web sites.
(See Server.)
Microsoft SDK for Java
A superset of the JDK, it includes Microsoft
class libraries, JIT compiler, and the Microsoft Virtual Machine for Java.
(See Java.)
Microsoft SQL
Server
A
relational database management system
(RDBMS) that provides multi- and concurrent-user access to enterprise data.
The Microsoft SQL Server’s utilities include the:
• SQL Enterprise Manager, which provides management features
• SQL Service Manager, which provides start and stop functions
• Interactive SQL for Windows, which permits sessions with multiple SQL
servers
• SQL Security Manager, which provides access to security features
• SQL Setup, which may be used to upgrade MS SQL Server, as well as to
change default settings
• SQL Client Conﬁguration Utility, which is used to manage SQL Server
client software conﬁgurations
• SQL Performance Monitor, which offers performance readings
• SQL Server Web Assistant, which permits the generation of Web pages that
use SQL Server data
• SQL Trace, which is used to track SQL Server user habits.
(See Server.)
209

Microsoft Transaction Server
Microsoft Transaction Server
A transaction manager. A Microsoft solu-
tion for integrating transaction processing in Web applications. Its component
architecture includes the:
• Transaction Server Explorer, which is used for administration and manage-
ment purposes
• Transaction Server Executive, which is a DLL providing functions used by
the application’s server components.
• ActiveX Server Components, which is used to deploy ActiveX server
components
• Server Process, which hosts the application’s components
• ODBC Resource Dispenser, which manages database connectivity
• Shared Property Manager, which gives access to a Web application’s
properties
• Microsoft Distributed Transaction Coordinator, which coordinates transac-
tions, and is integrated in Microsoft SQL Server 6.5
Other transaction managers include CICs and Encina.
(See Server and ACID.)
Microsoft Video for Windows (VfW)
A video playback, capture and
editing program suite. It includes the VidCap video capture program, VidEdit
video editing program, BitEdit 8 bit graphics editor, and PalEdit 8 bit colour
palette editor. Compression algorithms such as MPEG, Microsoft RLE (Run
Length Encoding) and Microsoft Video 1 help reduce video ﬁle sizes by vary-
ing amounts. The size and quality of resultant video ﬁles can be controlled
using compressors through the adjustment of compression settings. Resultant
video may be added to applications through OLE (Object Linking and Embed-
ding). It supports the AVI (Audio Video Interleaved) format and features a
number of compressors including Microsoft 1, Microsoft RLE and Intel Indeo.
(See Video.)
Microsoft Visual Basic
(See Visual Basic.)
Microsoft Web Wizard SDK
A tool that can be used to create Wizards
that may be used to build Web sites using tools like FrontPage and Visual
InterDev. Tools created using Design-Time Control SDK may be used with
the Web Wizard.
Microsoft Windows
An industry standard operating system and graph-
ical user interface (GUI) for the PC. It uses the windows metaphor as a
means to contain documents and applications. Up until late 1995, when Win-
dows 95 appeared, its foundation was considered to be Program Manager, a
main window that contained program group windows. The group windows
210

MIDI
contain selectable icons of related applications. Windows 95 offers a replace-
ment for Program Manager by way of Task bar. By default it underscores all
applications, providing buttons to select open applications, and it anchors the
all-important start button which invokes the start menu. This bears options that
lead to programs as well as to submenus that replace the group windows of
Program Manager. Once invoked the menu system can be navigated by drag-
ging the mouse rather than by clicking menu items, and programs are opened
through a single mouse click. Application menu systems echo its operation.
(See Visual Basic.)
Microsoft Windows CE (Compact Edition.)
A version of the Windows
OS designed for palmtops, organisers and other small-scale system solutions
including those targeting the consumer market. It also supports UPnP.
Microwave radio
Short wavelength radio waves that have a frequency
above 1,000 MHz or 1 GHz.
Middleware
1. A software implementation or glue that exists between
the client and the server. It makes the network protocols and other server
workings transparent to the client. Middleware implementations include those
based on the OMG’s CORBA-based Notiﬁcation Service that supports push
and pull style communications of an asynchronous nature. There is no real-time
synchronisation between client (consumer) and server (supplier) applications,
rather the client may invoke operations even when a supplier application or
complete server is occupied. Both consumers and suppliers invoke operations
in the API that includes modules or ﬁles written in the CORBA Interface
Deﬁnition Language that is loosely based on C++. Within the ﬁles are deﬁned
interfaces, operations (or methods), exceptions, and certain error codes. The
key conduit in such implementations is the event channel, and all (See Glue
and Notiﬁcation Service.) 2. Database middleware connects client applications
with back-end applications, and consists of:
• an application programming interface (API)
• network and database translators.
(See Glue.)
MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface)
An industry standard ﬁle
format and speciﬁcation for producing and playing electronic music using
computers and compatible devices such as Midi keyboards and Midi guitar
interfaces. It covers hardware, cables, connectors, and data protocols (MIDI
messages) and ﬁle formats. The single most signiﬁcant advantage of Midi
is the compactness of resultant so-called Midi song ﬁles. These consume a
fraction of the data capacity required by digitised waveform audio such as
.WAV ﬁles. A one-hour stereo Midi ﬁle may consume around half a MByte.
211

MIME
Even using compression techniques, an equivalent. WAV ﬁle would consume
literally hundreds of MBytes.
MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions)
A standard speciﬁ-
cation which permits e-mail messages to include multimedia elements. It
supports:
• Ascii alternatives such as foreign language character sets
• images
• multiple objects
• audio
• video
• postscript.
Included in served ﬁles is a MIME code that has a type and subtype, denoting
the media included. Types of media such as HTML and GIF may obviously
be displayed by any Browser. Others require helper programs, and include
MPEG video. MIME was developed by Nathaniel Bernstein of Bellcore, and
by Ned Freed of Innosoft.
(See E-mail.)
Mirror site
An Internet site that duplicates the functionality of another
site. Mirror sites help provide an improved service for users by lowering usage
demands on individual sites.
Mirroring
A function of hard disk controller that writes data to more than
one disk drive simultaneously.
M-JPEG (Motion-Joint Photographics Experts Group)
A type of
video that uses individual frames compressed according to the JPEG algorithm.
It gives full frame updates as opposed to the predominantly partial frame
updates of MPEG-1 video. M-JPEG video, therefore, provides random access
points and lends itself to non-linear editing. In this respect it is more ﬂexible
on playback because applications can simply show any frozen frame of an M-
JPEG sequence or play any selected frames of a sequence either backwards
or forwards. Another advantage of M-JPEG is that it may be compressed into
other formats, including MPEG-1/2. A principal disadvantage of M-JPEG,
however, is its comparatively low overall compression ratio.
(See MPEG-1 and MPEG-2.)
MMX Technology
A set of extensions (or additional instructions) that
gives a processor improved multimedia performance. The Intel Pentium and
Pentium II processors have MMX Technology that consists of 57 instructions.
The addition of MMX results in dramatic performance gains in video and 3-D
graphics. MPEG refused to adopt the whole of Intel’s now obsolete DVI (Digi-
tal Video Interactive) technology as a video standard. allegedly causing Intel to
abandon its initial plans for an Intel processor with built-in DVI functionality.
212

Modem
Intel once announced that it would integrate the functionality of its i750 DVI
chipset into a general-purpose processor design. However, the year of 1995 saw
Intel unveil its MMX Technology, which is not an acronym, but a trademark.
MMX delivers performance gains to multimedia-, graphics- and video-related
applications ranging from 3-D animation programs to videoconferencing. The
array of multimedia-related standards, such as those of the MPEG continuum
and those that have yet to emerge, ﬁt within the open framework that is MMX
Technology. This gives ISVs the freedom to adopt current, emerging and even
proprietary compression standards. MMX Technology delivers improved matrix
manipulation through some 57 new instructions and gives higher levels of con-
currency through Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD). Fred Pollack, an
Intel Fellow (1997), once stated, ‘Preliminary tests have shown performance
beneﬁts between 50 and 400 percent, depending upon the application.’
(See DCT, MPEG and Pentium.)
Mobile data application
An application that is deployed over a mobile
network and is accessible using mobile handsets such as WAP, 2.5G and 3G
phones and palms.
(See 2G, 2.5G and 3G.)
Mobile network
A network that provides wireless communications and
access to wireless applications and services. Key mobile networks include
GSM (Global System for Mobile Communications), PCN (Personal Communi-
cations Network) or DCS-1800, and 3G UMTSs (Universal Mobile Telephone
Service). These have displaced the earlier networks like AMPS, and currently
account for the vast majority of wireless data and voice trafﬁc. Then, there
are mobile satellite networks like Teledesic, Globalstar and Odyssey.
(See 2G, 2.5G and 3G.)
Modal
A term used to describe interaction where the user moves
between different modes of program operation. The multimedia authoring tool
Asymetrix ToolBook is modal, in that the user switches between Read and
Design modes.
(See OpenScript and ToolBook.)
Modem (Modulator/demodulator)
A hardware device used for modulat-
ing and demodulating data normally received and transmitted over voice-grade
communications systems. It may be an:
• internal modem that consists of an expansion card that plugs into the expan-
sion bus.
• external modem connects with the serial port of a computer. It typically
measures about 15 cm∗10 cm∗2.5 cm.
• external PCMCIA (Personal Computer Memory Card International Associ-
ation) modem that is little bigger than a credit card.
213

Moderator
A 56.6 Kbps standard analogue modem exceeds the proven bandwidth limit
calculated using Shannon’s theorem. The higher speed is achieved using PCM,
and a digital link between the telephone company and the ISP. 56.6 Kbps
modems are asymmetrical, offering wider downstream bandwidths, thus down-
loading times are shorter than those of uploading. The ITU has attempted to
amalgamate the two industry standards:
• X2
• K56ﬂex
The resulting V.90 standard was speciﬁed provisionally and ﬁnally released
in 1998.
(See 56.6 kbps and Shannon’s theorem.)
Moderator
A person that checks all contributions to newsgroups before
posting them.
MOLAP
An OLAP implementation that supports Multidimensional Data-
base Management Systems (MDBMS), which may be assumed to use propri-
etary data storage techniques.
(See Data warehouse, DBMS, OLAP and RDBMS.)
Money laundering
An illegal activity that sees money enter an economy
without it being declared to Customs, Inland Revenue, IRS or other national
tax collecting body. This money is sometimes referred to as the black econ-
omy where earnings may be obtained through larceny or through other illegal
activities.
(See AML.)
Monitor
A display device used with computers, multimedia and digital
video playback systems. Desktop systems may be assumed to include CRT
(Cathode Ray Tube) displays, but increasingly ﬂat-screen TFT displays are
being used. Notebooks and other portable systems may be assumed to integrate
LCD (Liquid Crystal Displays), TFT or DSTN display technology. Principal
technical factors that dictate a monitor’s speciﬁcation are its:
• screen size
• supported resolutions
• non-interlaced and interlaced screen refresh rates (in the case of CRT-
based designs
• supported number of colours, which is irrelevant with CRT-based designs.
Moore, Gordon
A founder of the Intel Corporation.
Morphing
An animation technique where one image is evolved into
another. Its full name is polymorphic tweening. Numerous commercial
morphing programs exist. Using such programs, the ﬁrst step in the creation
214

Motherboard
of a morphing animation might involve loading two bitmaps. The animation
program can then be used to produce an animation which merges one of
the bitmaps into the other. Modern morphing programs for Windows are
able to create animations in the .AVI format so providing full compatibility
with all fully speciﬁed presentation programs and multimedia authoring tools.
Morphing animation effects provide a means of enhancing the appeal of many
multimedia presentations and applications.
Mosaic
A Browser developed at the National Center for Supercomputing
Applications at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Distributed
under a licensing agreement with Spyglass, Inc. Contains security software
licensed from RSA Data Security Inc. Portions of this software are based in
part on the work of the Independent JPEG Group. Contains SOCKS client
software licensed from Hummingbird Communications Ltd.
Motherboard
A principal electronic assembly within a computer. It holds
the processor, RAM (Random Access Memory), external memory cache, expan-
sion bus, and any co-processors that might be included. It may also include
additional subsystems such as a hard disk controller, video controller and even
sound facility. Many designs have old-fashioned ISA (Industry Standard Archi-
tecture) expansion slots which are used to connect expansion cards such as hard
disk controllers and graphic cards. ISA was introduced by IBM in the 1980s
to accompany the Intel 80286 processor which was used in the IBM PC AT.
The bus is 16 lines or bits wide and runs at a relatively slow clock speed
of below 10 MHz. The ISA bus was not redeveloped by IBM to run faster,
instead it introduced the now obsolete MCA (Micro Channel Architecture) bus,
a 32-bit variant included in the IBM PS/2 range of systems launched in mid
1987. The PS/2 launch is a milestone in the history of video in the PC envi-
ronment because it marked the beginning of the VGA (Video Graphics Array)
standard through which the PC ﬁnally had been given reasonably advanced
colour graphics through an analogue port. The MCA bus requires compatible
expansion cards whether they be graphics cards, video capture cards, CD-ROM
controllers, or hard disk controllers. Such is the inseparability of the terms MCA
and PS/2, compatible expansion cards are advertised as PS/2 cards. In the late
1980s, around the same time that MCA was launched, nine major PC manufac-
turers – referred to as the ‘gang of nine’ – joined forces to develop the EISA
(Extended Industry Standard Architecture) bus. A 32 bit bus, several high end
PCs use the EISA bus, for which highly speciﬁed expansion cards exist. The
real key to opening up the expansion bus and tapping into the clock speeds of
the processor’s external data bus, however, came through the arrival of so-called
local bus slots and ancillaries. Local bus standards emerged in the early 1990s
through the VESA (Video and Electronics Standards Association), and so-called
VLB (Vesa Local Bus) expansion slots are now common. Usually they accom-
pany ISA slots but may also accompany PCI slots. A VLB graphics card will
215

MOTO
offer better performance than a comparable ISA variant, and so widen the PC
video bandwidth attainable. An alternative to VLB slots has emerged through
Intel’s PCI (Peripheral Component Interconnect) bus which offers slightly bet-
ter performance than VLB. Generally, either local bus standard will sufﬁce in
making a system faster and better equipped for video playback, capture and
editing. Certain motherboards feature ISA, VLB and PCI slots. To help speed
up the processor a so-called memory cache is provided. This can either be inter-
nal, forming part of the actual processor, or external where it is included on the
motherboard. External cache memory is of a static design and does not require
the cyclic refreshment that normal dynamic RAM does. In future it is possible
that external memory caches might be replaced by using interleaved system
memory composed of static and dynamic RAM.
MOTO (Mail Order/Telephone Order)
A transaction that emanates from
a card-not-present scenario, and may take place using voice communications
or most often using an e-commerce Web site.
Mouse
A hand-held input device. By dragging it on a ﬂat surface it pro-
vides a means of moving a screen pointer/cursor in both x and y directions. It
is typically connected to the serial port, but may also be wireless. It typically
includes two or three push buttons that are used to make selections either
by pressing a button once (or single clicking) or by pressing a button twice
in succession (or double-clicking). The mouse is also used for dragging (or
moving) objects from one point to another, or for resizing windows by drag-
ging their borders. Dragging is carried out by holding down the left mouse
button above an object or window border, and then moving the mouse appro-
priately. Modern notebook systems use mechanism-free touchpads instead of
the traditional mouse.
MP3
A compressed stream of digital audio created according to level
3 of the MPEG-1 audio/video speciﬁcation that dates back to 1990. It is a
popular format for distributing audio using the World Wide Web, and numerous
MP3 Web sites exist from which such audio may be downloaded free of
charge. An MP3 player application such as WinAmp or even a consumer
appliance may be used to play resulting ﬁles, and they may be recorded or
created using an appropriate MP3 recorder. MP3 ﬁle quality is determined
by the:
• Source recording quality
• Source format (which may be analogue cassette, CD, DAT etc.)
• Source playback device
• Sample rate (which may be 11.025 KHz, 22 KHz or 44.1 KHz.)
• Sample size (which may be 4 bit, 8 bit or 16 bit.)
(See MPEG.)
216

MPEG-1
MP3 audio (MPEG level 3 audio)
(See MP3.)
MPEG-1 (Moving Picture Experts Group Algorithm)
An internation-
ally agreed digital video compression standard. It is used widely for local
playback, and for streaming multimedia over the Internet, and other IP and
multimedia networks. (See MPEG-2.) The early days of digital video were
plagued by the problem of just how digital video data should be compressed,
thus illuminating the need for international standards for the digital storage
and retrieval of video data. Sponsored by the then ISO (International Standards
Organisation) and CCITT (Committ´ee Consultitif International T´el´egraphique
et T´el´ephonique), the Motion Picture Experts Group (MPEG) was given the task
of developing a standard coding technique for moving pictures and associated
audio. The group was separated into six specialist sub-groups including Video
Group, Audio Group, Systems Group, VLSI Group, Subjective Tests Group and
DSM (Digital Storage Media) Group. The ﬁrst phase of MPEG work (MPEG-1)
covered DSMs with up to 1.5 Mbits/sec transfer rates, for storage and retrieval,
advanced Videotex and Teletext, and telecommunications. The second phase
(MPEG2) of work addressed DSMs with up to 10 Mbits/sec transfer rates for
digital television broadcasting and telecommunications networks. This phase
would cling to the existing CCIR 601 digital video resolution, with audio transfer
rates up to 128 Kbits/sec. MPEG1 was ﬁnally agreed, developed and announced
as long ago as December 1991. MPEG participants included leaders in: computer
manufacture (Apple Computer, DEC, IBM, Sun and Commodore); consumer
electronics; audio visual equipment manufacture; professional equipment man-
ufacture; telecom equipment manufacture; broadcasting; telecommunications;
and VLSI manufacture. University and research establishments also played an
important role. It provided a basis for the development of Video CD which
was speciﬁed publicly by Philips in late 1993. This is an interchangeable for-
mat that may be played using both PCs ﬁtted with an appropriate MPEG video
cards and compatible CD-ROM drives, as well as Philips CD-I players ﬁtted
with Digital Video cartridges. Its development is constant to accommodate the
increasing data transfer rates of both DSMs and other video distribution trans-
ports. MPEG-1 compression is optimised for DSMs with data transfer rates
of up to 1.5 Mbits/sec. MPEG-2 accommodates DSMs and video distribution
transports capable of supporting higher data transfer rates of up 10 Mbits/sec.
MPEG-4 video compression is designed to transmit video over standard tele-
phone lines. An MPEG video stream generally consists of three frame types:
• intra
• predicted
• bi-directional.
Central to MPEG encoding is the use of reference or intra (I) frames, which
are complete frames and exist intermittently in an MPEG video sequence. The
video information sandwiched between intra frames consists of that which does
217

MPEG-1
not exist in the intra frames. Information that is found to exist in the intra
frames is discarded or ‘lossed’. Intra frames can act as key frames when edit-
ing or playing MPEG video as they consist of a complete frame. Generally
compressed MPEG video is difﬁcult owing to the paucity of authentic access
points. However, editable MPEG ﬁles do exist, one of which is backed by
Microsoft. Additionally, an MPEG video stream composed entirely of I frames
lends itself to non-linear editing. The quality of MPEG video depends on a
number of factors ranging from the source video recording quality to the use of
important MPEG parameters that affect the overall compression ratio achieved.
Contrary to popular belief, the logical operations that provide a basis for obtain-
ing high quality MPEG video are by no means the preserve of expensive video
production bureaux. Equipped with a reasonably speciﬁed PC and a basic under-
standing of MPEG video, there is nothing to stop you producing good quality
White Book-compatible video on your desktop. Probably the most obvious ele-
ments that inﬂuence MPEG video quality include the analogue or digital source
recording, the video source recording format, and the video source device speci-
ﬁcation. It may be assumed that the higher resolution S-VHS format will provide
slightly better results than VHS, but there will not be a dramatic improvement
in resolution because the MPEG SIF is standardised at 352-by-288 pixels for
PAL. If you are also digitising the sound track of the source video recording,
then you will probably obtain the best results with camcorders and VCRs that
offer hi-ﬁquality stereo sound. When capturing a video ﬁle so it may eventu-
ally be compressed, it is important to choose an appropriate capture frame rate,
capture frame size and image depth. The capture frame rate should be set for 25
frames/second for PAL and 30 frames/second for NTSC. Frame rates that differ
from these will cause the MPEG video sequence to run at the wrong speed, and
it will not be White Book compliant. The capture frame size should correspond
with the MPEG-1 SIF which is 352-by-288 pixels for PAL and 352-by-240
pixels for NTSC. Authentic MPEG requires a truecolour image depth of 24 bits
per pixel giving a total of over 16.7 millions colours which are generated by
combining 256 shades of red, green and blue. The quality of captured audio
that is used as an input audio stream obviously depends upon the sample size,
recording frequency and whether mono or stereo is chosen. You can assume that
your wave audio recorder or video capture program will provide sampling rates
of 11 KHz, 22 KHz and 44.1 KHz, and samples sizes of 8 bit and 16 bit. While
higher sampling rates and larger sample sizes yield improved audio quality,
the resultant audio stream can consume an unacceptably large portion of the
available MPEG-1 bandwidth. With regard to careful adjustment of the MPEG
compression parameters there is not much you can do if the MPEG encoding
software provides no control over them. If it does, then it may be assumed that
a greater number of I frames can improve the quality slightly, though this will
introduce an overhead in terms of lowering the compression ratio.
(See MPEG-2.)
218

MPP
MPEG-2 (Moving Pictures Experts Group)
An improved version of
MPEG-1 video compression, supported by DVD technology. It was devel-
oped for media and networks able to deliver 10 Mbits/second data transfer
rates. MPEG-1 was developed for narrow-bandwidth media, such as the orig-
inal single-speed CD drive variants that offered average data transfer rates
of approximately 150 Kbytes/sec or 1.2 Mbts/sec. MPEG-2 video may con-
tain considerably more audio and video information than MPEG-1. The most
noticeable improvement is the higher playback screen resolutions that are pos-
sible, making possible D1 or CCIR 601 quality. DCT is key to MPEG-2, as
it is to MPEG-1 and JPEG (or even M-JPEG). As is the case with MPEG-1,
MPEG-2 requires decoding solutions, which may be hardware-based, such as
set-top boxes (STBs), or equivalent hardware implementations integrated in
computers. Applications of MPEG-2 video include Video-on-demand, mul-
timedia, videoconferencing, etc. It may also be stored and delivered using
DVD variants.
Further reading
Information Technology – Generic Coding of Moving Pictures and Associated
Audio. ISO/IEC 13818.
(See D1 and DCT.)
MPEG frames
An MPEG video sequence consists of partial frames in the
form of Predicted (P) frames and Bi-directional (B) frames, and full frames
or Intra (I) frames. I frames are compressed in a similar way to JPEG (Joint
Photographic Experts Group) images and do not rely on image data from
other frames. They exist intermittently, perhaps between 9 and 30 frames,
and provide non-linear entry points. Increasing the frequency of I frames
provides a greater number of valid entry points, but the compression ratio
of the overall ﬁle diminishes proportionately. Realistically, the compression
ratios achieved using MPEG may be assumed to be around 50 : 1. Higher
compression ratios lead to an unacceptable loss of quality, and it is wise to
forget that 200 : 1 ratio which MPEG is supposedly capable of producing.
Normally this is achieved through a pretreatment process which dramatically
reduces the number of frame pixels. I frames and the following P and B frames
are termed Groups of Pictures (GOPs), and the occurrence of each frame might
be predeﬁned through the careful adjustment of MPEG parameters prior to
encoding. However, this ﬁne level of control over compression parameters
may not be provided by low cost MPEG encoding programs.
MPP (Massively Parallel Processing)
A computer that has multiple pro-
cessors that may operate independently and concurrently, as well as interact
with one another through interprocess communications. The strict deﬁnition
of MPP is a system that offers scalability where resulting processor gains
219

MPP
increase in multiples that equate to the processing power of single unit pro-
cessor. For example, the collective processing power of an MPP system with n
processors, should increase by x MIPs per added processor(s). The processors
may have their own memory and I/O capabilities, and constitute complete
computers, or use shared memory. The processors also exhibit channels of
interconnection between other processors. These connections constitute the
network, and its bandwidth naturally inﬂuences the collective processor power
of the system. The network is not to be confused with external, industry stan-
dard networks such as IP and Ethernet. An MPP network is internal, with the
rationale of optimising system performance by permitting the processors to
communicate as quickly as possible. Typical network topologies include ring,
two-dimensional mesh, three-dimensional mesh, and hypercube. The resulting
MPP interconnection network may be speciﬁed in terms of its:
• link bandwidth, or the rate at which data may be sent via a direct link, and
is a function of clock speed, and data bus width.
• switching latency that might be deﬁned as the period between a processor
data request and the reception of that request. This is a function of clock
speed, the network topology, and the physical location of the serving pro-
cessor in the network; the farther away it is, then the switching latency
is extended.
The processing power of an MPP may be measured in:
• millions of ﬂoating point operations per second (MFLOPs)
• billions of FLOPS (Giga FLOPs or GFLOPs)
• trillions of FLOPS (Tera FLOPs or TFLOPs) – in future
• millions of instructions per second (MIPs)
• SPECmarks.
The optimum processing yield depends on distributing processes evenly across
the processor array, matrix or network. Program algorithms may perform this
function of dynamic load balancing that is carried out in real time. A com-
mon denominator in current networks, is that not all processors are connected
directly. MPP architectures are divided between:
• Multiple Instruction Multiple Data (MIMD)
• Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD).
MIMD architectures feature memory which may be:
• distributed
• or shared.
The SIMD architecture has a single controller driving multiple slave processors,
each with independent storage. The distributed memory DM MIMD architecture
has a multiplicity of such processors, and controllers, too. An MPP architecture
variant may be explained in terms of its electronic storage, controller(s) and
220

MSDN
Processor
T1
MPP DM-MIMD architecture
T2
T5
T4
Tn
T3
Controller
Memory
Network
processor(s). Leading MPP manufacturers include Cray, Thinking Machines,
Intel and nCube.
Concurrent programming languages include Occam which has its origins
in Inmos (UK) where it was developed as part of the Transputer parallel
processor. Java is the ﬁrst mainstream programming language that supports
the parallel programming model. Languages that are optimised for parallel
processing systems offer authentic concurrency. One of the earliest transputer-
based supercomputers was developed by Meiko though the Computing Sur-
face. This was used in the development of DVI, and modern transputer-based
implementations are used as Video-on-demand servers. Among the advantages
of such parallel processing systems is scalability, where, for example, grow-
ing numbers of subscribers to a Vod service may be accommodated through
additional processors, and even complete servers.
(See NUMA, SMP and Transputer.)
MReply
An e-mail autoresponder, with added features including the abil-
ity to send multiple messages to recipients on a mailing list.
MRO (Maintenance, repair and operations.)
The supply of products
and services used in the upkeep of plant, buildings and other assets. It is
estimated that MRO requires 7% of an enterprise’s expenditure and equates to:
• 60–90% of purchased items
• 65% of accounts payable and invoice matching
• 80% of purchase orders
• 90% of shipping and receiving functions.
MSDN (Microsoft Developer Network)
A Web site targeting developers
using Microsoft tools and technologies. Hyperlinks to the site are also included
on hybrid CD-ROM discs included with the Microsoft Visual Studio.
(See www.msdn.com.)
221

MSN
MSN (Microsoft Network)
A superset of the Web, providing additional
services. Its four main category headings are:
• Communicate
• Essentials
• OnStage
• Find.
MTBF (Mean time between failures)
An average period time that indi-
cates the frequency at which a device, component, subsystem or complete
system will fail.
(See MTTR and Reliability.)
MTTR (Mean time to Restore)
An average period required to return a
failed system to its fully operational state.
(See MTBF and Reliability.)
Multi ﬁeld key
(See Key ﬁeld.)
Multi-cast
A packet that is addressed to multiple addresses/recipients.
Multi-homing
A server with more than one address. For example, one
address may be used to connect with hosts within a ﬁrewall, and another may
be used to connect with hosts outside a ﬁrewall.
(See Firewall.)
Multimedia
A broad term which may be applied to a system or process
which embodies and combines various different media. Modern (digital) mul-
timedia may comprise computer animations, text, still images, digital audio,
synthesised sound, digital video and interactivity. Combining still and moving
images, sound, audio, text and interactivity, multimedia has initially culmi-
nated in a re-evaluation media. Unlike linear, non-interactive media such as
broadcast television, it provides users with a choice of numerous meaningful
paths. The underlying technology has spawned offshoots, of which the most
notable will be video-telecommunications and videoconferencing. Distribution
media disc-based multimedia include Compact Disc – Read Only Memory
(CD-ROM) and. Earlier, and less known, distribution media include Com-
pact Disc Interactive (CDI), and CD-ROM XA (Extended Architecture) discs.
The 12 cm-diameter CD-ROM and CD-I discs typically support up to about
660 Mbytes data storage capacity. A single-sided, single-layer DVD-ROM disc
supports 4.7 Gbytes, and supports MPEG-2 video playback. Increasingly, how-
ever, multimedia networks are being used, and the most signiﬁcant of these
is the ubiquitous Internet.
(See Hypertext and Web.)
222

Multimedia presentation
Multimedia authoring tool
A software tool intended for the development
of multimedia. Many require no programming skills.
(See Authorware and ToolBook.)
Multimedia development team
A team given the task of designing and
developing a multimedia application. It may consist of experts in all disciplines
required to generate the multimedia title, including:
• producer/director, to enforce an appropriate degree of creative control and
oversee amalgamation of media types
• project manager, to ensure budget and schedule are observed and adhered to
• high-level language programmers, to design retrieval system, or to write
other routines
• multimedia author, to implement interactive design
• content provider/advisor who possesses expertise in the material/information
to be communicated
• associate producer
• project planner
• interface designer
• animation director
•
writer
• art director
• lead programmer
• quality Assurance (QA) manager
• sound designer
• audio visual (A-V) designer
• 3-D modeler
• video editor
• graphic designers/computer graphics artists, to produce original artwork
• sound engineers for recording etc.
• studio technician(s)
• various production staff
• Web site/Internet developer(s).
How many of the aforementioned experts should be included, depends upon
the complexity of the material and upon what percentage, if any, of the pro-
duction process is contracted out.
Multimedia presentation
A multi-media based presentation that might
combine audio, midi, video, text, animations and graphics. It might be pre-
sented on a desktop or even notebook computer using their attached displays,
or it might be presented using an LCD projector. The most popular multimedia
presentation program is Microsoft PowerPoint, included with Microsoft Ofﬁce.
Multimedia authoring tools such as ToolBook, IconAuthor and Authorware
may also be used, but these are not dedicated to the production of presentations.
223

Multimedia presentation
Authoring an interactive multimedia presentation
When creating a multimedia
presentation the aim of the author is to communicate information as effectively as
possible. The media types required to do this depend upon the intended audience.
It is true to say that a presentation to customers in a bank may be more effective if
interesting animations, video and sound tracks are included. A multimedia presenta-
tion to ﬁnanciers and investors, on the other hand, may require a greater proportion
of text and charts giving factual information. However, it could be argued that
multimedia with video, animations and effects is a persuasive medium, irrespective
of the audience. You must have heard or read that over used statement that people
remember 10% of what they read, 20% of what they hear, 30% of what they see and
70% of what they see and hear. There is disagreement generally about the factual
accuracy of this much repeated statement, although that people do, in fact, remember
a great deal more that they see and hear is agreed widely. Your job as a multimedia
author is to create a presentation that will be memorable for the right reasons, and
leave the audience with a clear understanding of the information you are conveying.
But you have to be subtle; you cannot hammer home important points by repeating
salient points over and over. Remember you are not brieﬁng a platoon or detach-
ment of soldiers for an important mission. Do not author a presentation that is an
obvious attempt to brainwash people. Equally do not fall for that elementary error of
turning up the volume too high. Ear piercing wave audio or Midi music is unlikely
to have the desired effect. And be sure not to arrange loud speakers so as to be right
next to certain people in the audience. Keep all load speakers at least ﬁve metres
away from members of the audience. This raises the matter of seating arrangements.
Ensure that you leave the name of each member of your audience in an appropriate
seating position. For example, important members should be seated more centrally,
and closer forward, so they have a direct view of the screen and yourself, and where
they may beneﬁt from a good stereophonic and perhaps surround sound effect. Less
important members should be seated at the periphery of the room or auditorium.
Returning to the content of the actual presentation, it is important to create an appro-
priate blend of media types. Achieving the right balance should not be too difﬁcult
if you simply bear in mind that too much of any one may cloud the messages and
information you are trying to put across. The opposite to over working certain media
types can also have a negative effect. A dull presentation without animation, video,
or interesting music might bore people and leave them desperate to leave, making
the whole presentation an instantly forgettable experience.
Text in presentations
Almost all Windows presentation programs use TrueType
fonts. There are a wide variety of these available and you can normally buy inex-
pensive collections of them. Choosing appropriate fonts to use in your presentation
does not require the expertise of print designer, but simple common sense – in
most instances. Basically the fonts you choose should be legible and suit the nature
of the presentation. Straightforward legibility is obtained by choosing the correct font
and point size. Fonts that resemble ornate writing styles with fancy serifs should be
avoided; although you may ﬁnd that you can get away with using them for the ﬁrst
letter of a word, or as a drop capital. Generally fonts with a symmetrical geometric
appearance are more legible than others. Particularly good examples include families
of Arial, Helvetica, Futura or Futurist. With regard to type styles used, you might
ﬁnd it useful to bolden or italicise certain portions of text purely to highlight salient
224

Multimedia presentation
points. Although take care with italics as this can reduce legibility. In terms of the
suitability of the fonts used, common sense should tell you which ones to use. For
example, a traditional Times Roman is a font with credibility and should be used
perhaps for more formal presentations possibly to an audience of investors, or board
members. Generally you can mix different fonts on the same screen, but do bear
in mind that there are limits – if you are conventional that is. If you are unconven-
tional, you can mix as many fonts as you please, though we are not recommending
that you do this. Text foreground and background colours are also important and
should be chosen in terms of the suitability. A closer investigation into colour will
indicate the reactions that different colours evoke in people. However, once again
common sense may play an important role with your choice of colours.
Graphics
The numerous different methods of obtaining digital images include:
• scanning photographs and illustrations
• using a digital camera
• using a stills video camera
• using a video frame grabber
• using photographs processed onto Photo CD
• using royalty free collections of clip art and clip photos
• drawing them using a graphics program
• capturing a frame from a captured video sequence
• capturing charts from databases, spreadsheets and graphing programs
• photographic library.
The graphics you include may function simply to improve the look of your presen-
tation, or to perform a function like a chart to illustrate sales ﬁgures or whatever.
With regard to using photographic images these should be relevant and not included
simply because you found a good one in a royalty free collection that vaguely
relates to the subject of your presentation. The cheapest method of obtaining origi-
nal photographs is to use Photo CD, although how good an image you achieve rather
depends upon how good a photographer you are, as well as on camera quality. A
compact camera will not going to give the same results as a professional medium
format camera like a Hasselblad. If you require a good quality photograph and your
budget does not run to hiring a professional photographer consider hiring an auto-
mated medium format camera – this will give excellent results and will be almost
as easy to use as an automatic 35 mm camera.
Graphics in presentations
Graphics ﬁles come in numerous different formats
including PCX, Compuserve GIF, Windows BMP and so. Some of these are more
efﬁcient than others, offering a more compact means of storing pictures. Perhaps
the best known image ﬁle format for storing compressed still images is JPEG (Joint
Photographics and Experts Group). Which image ﬁle formats you use may depend
upon the graphic import ﬁlters in you presentation program. For example if it won’t
import JPEG ﬁles then you will have to work in another ﬁle format. Although numer-
ous software programs are available that convert image ﬁle formats, including the
shareware program PaintShop Pro, and the conventionally marketed program HiJaak
Pro. Ideally you should choose an image ﬁle format that requires comparatively
small ﬁle sizes, and short loading times. The image depth you choose can be a
225

Multimedia presentation
function of your presentation platform which must have the appropriate graphics
card. Many authors ﬁnd an image depth of 8-bit per pixel and resultant 256-colour
graphic images perfectly acceptable. Which image depth used can also depend on
the graphics themselves; if they are cartoon-like images, then there may be little
point in opting for an image depth greater than 8 bits. Photographic images on the
other hand are different, and to obtain realistic images you may need 16-bit 65 K
colour images, or even 24-bit 16.7 million colour images. Needless to say ﬁle sizes
grow in proportion to the image depth chosen; a 16-bit ﬁle of an image will be twice
the size of the same image stored with an 8-bit depth. When including a number
of different images in a presentation, you may have to create a common optimum
palette using the presentation program itself or another graphics program. This is to
avoid any problems you might encounter with palette switching.
Sound choice
Sound in the form of dialogue, music and effects can mean the
difference between a good and bad presentation. Music is not to be underestimated;
its mood changing characteristics can be persuasive with even the hardest business
people. The sound you include may take the form of Midi songs, wave audio, or CD
audio. The advantages and disadvantages of these have been discussed previously,
but we shall run through the basics once again. Wave audio is ideal for record-
ing dialogue. Its technical quality is important, and 8-bit wave audio recorded at a
low sampling rate will be inferior to 16-bit CD-quality audio recorded at 44.1 KHz.
Although the quality of script and spoken voice are not be overlooked either. Midi
is useful for music only. The single most signiﬁcant advantage of Midi is the com-
pactness of resultant so-called Midi song ﬁles. These consume a fraction of the data
capacity required by digitised waveform audio such as. WAV ﬁles. However, the.
WAV ﬁle representation ﬁle is authentic, it is not composed from a rigidly deﬁned
set of sounds as you would ﬁnd in Midi ﬁles. For example, a Midi representation of
a recital of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony would be basic and understandably syn-
thetic, though sound cards that use actual samples of musical instruments are a great
improvement those that use synthesiser chips only. A wave ﬁle on the other hand
could be used to record the actual performance of, say, the London Philharmonic
playing Beethoven’s Ninth. Using 16-bit samples at a rate of 44.1 KHz a wave ﬁle
can produce a CD quality recording. However, and it’s a signiﬁcant ‘however’, Midi
ﬁles can be edited using various Midi applications. Also, you can speed up or slow
down Midi ﬁles to sync them with animations. For many multimedia authors, the
process of composing a Midi sequence is something best left to Midi professionals.
Midi song producers will compose original sound tracks to suit your multimedia
title or presentation. Though this approach will lead to professional quality Midi
songs, the cost can be high. And it is hardly something you would do if authoring
an in-house multimedia title. A cheaper alternative is provided by collections of clip
music Midi ﬁles that are in the public domain and can be used without payment of
royalties to their owners. The many companies that produce collections of such clip
music include large companies like Voyetra and Twelve Tone Systems. There are
many other companies that produce clip-music collections. Check with computer
magazines such as Windows Sources (McGraw-Hill) and with CD-ROM dealers
for information about clip music. CD audio may be used if you ﬁnd an interesting
royalty free clip music track. Using many presentation programs you can play CD
tracks or even a section of a track using MCI commands. There are numerous other
226

Multimedia presentation
media devices that can be controlled using MCI commands. Such MCI compatible
devices may well provide an alternative to using CD.
Animations and effects
Produced correctly animations and effects can make a
presentation a little more interesting. The animations can be aesthetic or functional
perhaps adding motion to a graph or chart. Popular programs that allow you to
generate animation include Autodesk Animator and 3D Studio. Resultant .FLI or
.FLC can be imported into most presentation programs and if you have Video for
Windows you can convert them into the .AVI format. Actually producing an anima-
tion can be time-consuming, depending upon the type of animation you want. Bear
in mind that in most cities you will ﬁnd animation production companies, though
you will need an appropriate budget to cover the cost of such production.
Video
Easily the most persuasive of all the multimedia types, video can transform
a presentation into an inﬁnitely more engaging communication medium. Although
PMPSV might be inadequate for some presentations. You may prefer to use FMFSV
such as MPEG-1 and MPEG-2 video.
(See MPEG.)
Video in presentations
Often video is stored on hard disk usually in the .AVI
format. .AVI ﬁles can be created using Video for Windows together with an appro-
priate video capture board. All full-featured modern PC multimedia presentation
programs can integrate .AVI ﬁles. Storing video in this manner can make presenting
your multimedia production easier because there is need for nothing more than an
MPC2 for playback. (See MPEG.) Video quality is a function of the:
• Compression techniques, where MPEG-2 can be assumed to deliver the best
results
• quality of analogue/digital video source
• quality of analogue/digital video source device
• video capture board used
• graphics card used in the presentation platform
• video capture technique used: step-frame capture can result in better video quality
than real-time video capture
• hard disk speed
• depth of video data
• processor speed
• size of external cache
The second method is to use something like an MCI compatible videodisc player
and a video overlay card.
The script
The script you write should convey all the messages you want to put
across. A good approach is to begin by writing down the text you wish to display
in each frame of your presentation. Remember if your audience is to read the text it
must be displayed using an appropriate font size. Although it probably goes without
saying that you should reinforce the text messages by repeating them verbally. Again
this can be done by you or the presenter, or using recorded wave audio. The script
you write is the gateway to completing your complete presentation. It will provide
you with ideas as to where and when various different media types need to be
227

Multimedia producer
included. More important, it provides the general sequence of events and gives you
the basis for a storyboard. Say, for example, we wanted to create a presentation
advertising a special price holiday package to Australia that you might want to
target members of the public. It is a holiday package aimed at young professionals
in the 18–30 age group. Because of this it needs to be up market while including
features that may turn on young people. These features might include pop music of
various sorts, lots of synthesiser sounds, a punchy dialogue, and interesting video
and animations. The script might look something like this, where the bold text is
the actual text that will appear in each frame of the presentation and the remaining
text is dialogue recorded in the form of 16-bit wave audio which, if appropriate,
can be distributed among your audience as hand-out notes.
(See Multimedia.)
Multimedia producer
An individual given the task of captaining the pro-
duction of multimedia applications/titles. Typically he/she will:
• liase with investors, if he/she is not the sole investor in the project
• often have control over the hiring of personnel, ranging from directors to
programmers and multimedia production staff that might include camera
operators and even sound engineers
• be responsible for optimising the application of a given budget
• be responsible for originating marketable project ideas
• understand the technical issues that control the quality of a multimedia
application
• direct personnel effectively, perhaps toward the use of contracted services
and sources of multimedia or Web content
• receive praise or criticism for the complete project.
Multimedia production
A process of gathering media ﬁles for inclusion
in a multimedia application. Multimedia production embodies the implemen-
tation of all tasks necessary to attain (in appropriate format) audio and visual
materials required. The following components are typical of the production
process. The end result should be a collection of usable digital ﬁles that may
be included in an application. It may involve the following processes:
• Capturing video using an appropriate video capture program and capture
card.
• Editing digital video using a video editing program such as Adobe Premier
or Microsoft VidEdit supplied with Microsoft Video for Windows.
• Editing 8 bit video/graphics colour using a palette editor.
• Compressing video according to preselected parameters that are appropriate
to the bandwidth of the target platform.
• Recording digital wave audio using a sound card/sound feature together
with wave audio recording software.
• Editing wave audio ﬁles.
• Compressing wave audio ﬁles.
228

Multimedia streaming
• Obtaining still images by scanning, using a still video camera, or using
Photo CD.
• Compressing graphics ﬁles and/or converting them into the appropriate
ﬁle formats.
• Digitising text using a scanner.
• Marking up text ﬁles using a language such as HTML (HyperText Markup
Language).
• Creating Web pages.
• Creating Java applets.
(See ActiveX, Multimedia, Multimedia authoring, OOP, Java, JScript, Visual
Basic, VBScript.)
Multimedia streaming
A real-time delivery and playback of multimedia
that may be local or remote. Typically, it takes place over the Web or Internet,
and requires a server and client. Web applications include real-time monitoring
or surveillance of remote locations, WebTV and video playback.
(See ASF, Multimedia, Streaming and Video.)
Multimedia system/appliance
Web
Streaming
multimedia
technologies
Hypertext
navigation
Access
technology
Monitor
or television
Multimedia
network
technologies
Access
technology
CD-ROM or
DVD-ROM drive
Computer
- I/O devices
- mass storage
- sound card
- graphics card
  etc.
Video
decompression
solution
(such as MPEG-1/2)
Streaming
audio/video
player
User interface
- remote control
- mouse
- speech recognition
- keyboard
229

Multimedia system/appliance
Multimedia system/appliance
A device capable of playing multimedia
titles. Examples include MPC-3, DVD-ROM-based PCs and Apple Macin-
tosh computers. A multimedia appliance includes:
• a modem and Web browser.
• an interface to access technology such as 2.5G or 3G mobile network.
• an operating system such as Windows CE, PalmOSWindows 95/NT, Mod-
ular Windows, OS/2, or Mac OS.
• a CD drive variant such as CD-ROM or DVD-ROM drive
• a sound synthesiser able to play and record wave audio with a sampling
rate of 44.1 KHz.
• a stereo ampliﬁer with accompanying speakers, or self-powered speakers,
or simply a pair of headphones.
• a video decoder.
(See MPC-3.)
Multiple Inheritance
A concept where subclasses inherit methods and
data from more than one superclass. It deﬁnes a class of object, which inherits
attributes and behaviour from multiple superclasses.
(See C++, Inheritance and OOP.)
Multiplexing
1. A process by which an MPEG video stream is mixed
with an MPEG audio stream to form an MPEG system stream. (See MPEG
and Video capture.) 2. A process by which multiple signals may be com-
municated along a single transmission path that may be serial or parallel.
The Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) standard uses multiplexing
involves creating a data stream consisting of 8 bit PCM blocks. The blocks are
created every 125 micro seconds. By interleaving the blocks with those from
other encoders, the result is time division multiplexing (TDM). In North Amer-
ica, ISDN typically interleaves data from 24 64 Kbits/sec sources or channels.
This results in connections that provide 1.536 Mbits/sec. Although in actual
fact the connection has a bandwidth of 1.544 Mbits/sec, because each chan-
nel’s frame has a marker bit ‘F’, adding 8 Kbytes/sec. Europe sees ISDN that
typically interleave 30 64 Kbits/sec channels, giving 2.048 Mbits/sec. This and
the 1.544 Mbits/sec connection are known as primary rate multiplexes. Further
interleaving of primary rate multiplexes sees:
• 6, 45, 274 Mbits/sec in North America
• 8, 34, 139, and 560 Mbits/sec in Europe.
PCM was conceived in 1937 by Alec Reeves, but was not applied widely for
many years.
Multisync monitor
A monitor that may synchronise itself with various
incoming signals. There are many technical implementations of the ‘multisync
monitor’, the simplest of which will automatically synchronise with perhaps
230

My Computer
two or three vertical frequencies. The term multisync was coined by NEC
that it registered. Professional versions are able to automatically synchronise
with a range of horizontal and vertical frequencies. This is called the scanning
range, and the greater it is, the greater the number of acceptable signal sources.
Yet higher speciﬁcation monitors economise on scan range, thus concentrating
on the narrow band of professional graphic controllers beginning with VGA.
Such monitors may be considered non-proprietary.
Multi-tasking
A concurrent execution of multiple processes.
Multi-threading
A process by which multiple processes within the same
application are executed concurrently, or what is perceived to be concurrently.
My Computer
An icon/feature on the Windows Desktop that provides
access to practically the whole feature array of Windows 98/2000. It may
be considered as the highest level window, in a hierarchical context. Double-
clicking the My Computer icon
results in the My Computer window
that may be used to:
• open important folders such as the Control Panel
• generally access features
• browse, and work with ﬁles on mass storage devices that are ﬁxed or
removable.
Back and
Forward
browse
buttons
Folders
Mass
storage
devices
Cut, Copy and
Paste tools
Undo previous actions
Delete selected item
Invoke properties menu
Select an appropriate 
view
(See Windows.)
231


N
Nanosecond
A billionth of a metre.
NAPSTER
A on-line audio ﬁle resource.
NC (Network Computer)
A computer designed for connection to the
Internet or to an IP network. The subsequent rationalisation of hardware results
in low system costs, and reduced costs of ownership. Base case NCs are
not fully speciﬁed standalone, multimedia devices. They do, however, offer
streaming multimedia functionality that plug-ins and ActiveX controls may
provide to the client.
NCSA Mosaic
A Browser that was developed at the National Center
for Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, and is distributed under a licensing agreement with Spyglass, Inc.
It contains security software licensed from RSA Data Security Inc. Portions of
this software are based in part on the work of the Independent JPEG Group.
It also contains SOCKS client software licensed from Hummingbird Commu-
nications Ltd.
NDIS (Network Driver Interface Speciﬁcation)
A standard speciﬁca-
tion for network interface cards (NICs). It provides functions collectively
referred to as a wrapper that may be used by TCP/IP protocol drivers. It
was developed by Microsoft and 3-COM. Its implementations for Windows
may be assumed to be proprietary.
(See NIC.)
Nelson, Theodore
The inventor of the term hypertext, and a dedicated
hypertext evangelist. He also began project Xanadu that echoed the function-
ality of the Web.
(See Hypertext and Xanadu.)
233

Nested
Nested
1. Nested transaction: a technique that sees the integration of sub-
transactions within transactions. The subtransactions are said to be nested.
(See Transaction and Server.) 2. Nest loop: a loop in a computer program that
is encapsulated within another. (See Java.)
Nested top-level class
A static member of an enclosing top-level class.
Net
An alternative shorthand name for the Internet or The Net.
(See Internet and Web.)
Netiquette
A form of etiquette that addresses the Internet. It is a set of
rules that may called ‘acceptable use policies’ (AUP).
Netizen
1. A person that uses the Internet as an interface with society.
2. An active user engaged in Internet growth.
NetMeeting
A Microsoft technology that permits a multiplicity of
communication and information exchange types over the Internet and
over compatible IP networks such as intranets. The communications types
supported include:
• Internet telephony
• Whiteboards
• Application sharing
• File transfer
•
Chat
• Multiple participant conferences.
(See IRC, Whiteboard and Videoconferencing.)
NetMeeting SDK (Software Development Kit)
An software suite that
can be used to integrate conferencing features into applications.
(See API.)
NetPC
A PC speciﬁcation designed for network systems.
(See NC.)
Netscape
A company founded by Marc Andreeson, who developed its
initial ﬂagship product, the Netscape Navigator Web browser. The company
continues to produce Internet software for users and for developers, including
the Netscape Communicator.
(See Netscape Communicator and Netscape Navigator.)
Netscape Navigator
A Web browser produced by Netscape. Its function-
ality is improved through the addition of plug-ins. Plug-ins for streaming audio
234

Neural net
and video are available. Like many other browsers, Navigator may be used to
send email messages, but it is not an email application. A bookmarks window
assists users to list and revisit Web sites that are of interest. Images that are
shown in the client area may be saved to disk by right-clicking on them.
(See Browser and Web.)
Netware
A network operating system (NOS).
Network
1. A physical or wireless entity that unites computer systems.
(See Client/server, Internet, LAN and Web.) 2. A physical entity which inter-
connects processors in an MPP. (See MPP.) 3. A interconnecting scheme for
neural networks. (See Neural network.) 4. A collection of hosts, servers and
user systems that are interconnected. (See LAN.).
Network computing
A broad term denoting the use of systems that are
connected to physical networks.
(See Internet, LAN and NC.)
Network interface card
An device used to connect a system to a net-
work. It may be one (or even more) of a number of standard and proprietary
variants, including:
• Ethernet
• Token Ring
• ISDN interface
• Fibre channel interface (arbitrated loop)
• Modem (such as an analogue or cable variant).
(See Ethernet and Fibre channel.)
The Network Is The Computer.
A much-publicised vision of Sun
Microsystems Inc. that was formed in 1982.
Neural net
A network of neurons, which function as processing units. Part
of the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), their implementation is an attempt
to reconstruct the operation of the human brain, which has some ten thou-
sand million neurons. The neuron connections have weights, which determine
network behaviour. Given an example, the weights may be learned. Neural
network variants include the:
• perceptron.
• multilayer perceptron.
The perceptron neuron was proposed in 1962 by Frank Rosenblatt, a signiﬁ-
cant ﬁgure in the development of synthetic neural networks. A computational
neuron has input connections, each of which may have a different weight.
235

Newsgroup
Output
Computational neuron
w1
w2
w3
w4
w5
i5
i4
i3
i2
i1
The neuron is preprogrammed with a threshold value, which if equaled or
exceeded by the total weight of inputs, will respond accordingly. Typically
the response is to output a speciﬁc value. They differ from multiple input
logic gates (such as AND, NAND, OR or NOR) in that the inputs may not
be one of two logical values. The inputs i are assigned the weights w, and a
positive output is yielded should a predeﬁned threshold t be exceeded:
if i1w1 + i2w2 + 13w3... +inwn > t,
then output =1
else
output =0
Further reading
Cawsey, Alison. The Essence of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Prentice Hall, 1998
(See KBS.)
Newsgroup
A discussion forum concept where participants post messages
on what is essentially a bulletin board.
NFS (Network File System)
An NFS server allows users to share ﬁles
on other hosts.
NIC (Network Interface Card)
NN
(See Neural Net.)
NNTP (Network News Transfer Protocol)
A protocol for transferring
Usenet news between servers, clients and a central server.
(See Usenet.)
Non-interlaced
A mode of CRT-based monitor/display operation in which
the screen image is generated by scanning all lines in a single scan ﬁeld. The
rate at which all lines are scanned is termed the refresh rate or the vertical scan
rate. The frequency that lines are scanned is termed the horizontal frequency.
236

NUMA
Non-linear medium
A medium whose sequence may be controlled by the
user or viewer; interactive television and the Web are non-linear media.
Non-preemptive multitasking
A type of multitasking in which the
operating system does not interrupt applications. It is less seamless than
preemptive multitasking in that a reasonable degree of concurrency is not
achieved. Windows 3.1 (and earlier) and Windows for Workgroups 3.1x offer
non-preemptive multi-tasking.
Notebook
A portable computer with a footprint about the size of an A4
page. A sub-notebook is slightly smaller.
Notiﬁcation Services
An extension to the OMG Event Service that deﬁnes
interfaces and operations for transmitting events between client and server
applications.
(See CORBA Notiﬁcation Service.)
Novell
A corporation which markets and sells Internetworking products.
Its ﬂagship product is Netware.
(See Novell Netware.)
Novell Netware
A network operating system that is optimised for serv-
ing information to a large number of users. It caches data read from servers
in RAM.
NS
message (Notiﬁcation Services)
(See CORBA-based Notiﬁcation
Service (NS)
NT (New Technology)
A 32 bit version of Windows that features an extra
layer to prevent general protection faults and unrecoverable application errors.
n-tier client/server architecture
A client/server architecture that sees
multiple divisions of application logic and data. The divisions are distributed
across four or more systems, which represents the number of tiers (n).
(See Application and Client/server.)
NUMA (Non-Uniform Memory Architecture)
A variation of the SMP
system architecture that attempts to solve the bottleneck of using a single
shared bus to interconnect processors. Instead a number of internal buses
are introduced, thus promoting processor scalability. NUMA systems have
modules called quads, which include processors, memory and I/O devices
that share an internal bus. Quads interconnect via a main bus. The NUMA
architecture permits processors to access:
• local and external caches
• local and external memory.
237

NYSE
Processor
Processor
Processor
Processor
Cache
Cache
Internal bus
Local
memory
Bridging device
Q1
NUMA 'Quad-based architecture'
Q2
Q3
Q4
Remote cache
Interconnecting bus
Cache
Cache
Its non-uniform characteristic hinges on the varying access time, between
local and remote memory access. Though NUMA is architecturally superior
to SMP, it is not classiﬁable as an MPP system.
(See MPP and SMP.)
NYSE (New York Stock Exchange)
The US stock exchange.
238

O
Oak
An original name for the Java programming language that was devel-
oped largely under the Green project that commenced in December 1990 at
Sun Microsystems.
(See Java.)
OBI
Open Buying on the Internet. A protocol aimed at the standardisation
of e-commerce on the Internet.
Object
An object is an entity in a running OO program, which provides
a link between data and methods that read and operate on that data. An object
is stimulated by messages that are sent to it, and its responses to messages are
deﬁned by its repertoire of methods.
(See Object, Objective-C, Java, C++, C#, Message and .NET.)
Object-based
(See OOP, C++ and Java.)
Object factory
Not to be confused with ‘factory object’, an object factory
is sometimes used to describe software publishers that offer objects such as
ActiveX controls, Java applets, JavaBeans, Plug-ins, or OLE objects. (See
ActiveX, OLE, Java and Plug-in.)
Object implementation
A coded solution that dictates an object’s
behaviour and response to events. The code represents the object’s methods.
(See OOP.)
Object interface
An object’s outer layer that intercepts messages, and
directs them appropriately. The layer is sometimes referred to as a shell. It is
the ﬁrst entity which an inbound message meets. The message may then be
processed internally by the object’s methods.
(See Object and OO.)
239

Objective-C
Objective-C
An authentic object-oriented programming language that is
based on ANSI C, and adds constructs for classes, messages and inheri-
tance. The language supports polymorphism and dynamic binding where the
runtime system determines what code is executed based on an object type.
Objective-C is intuitive for C programmers and for OOP programmers using
Java. It executes faster than Java because it is compiled like C, and the
Objective-C OO extensions are compiled to C calls to the Objective-C runtime
library (libobjc). Objective-C programs have the main function:
#include <stdio.h>
int main (void)
{
printf ("Hello my friend\n");
return 0;
}
The example is also a C program as it holds none of the Objective-C con-
structs.
Objective-C messages
An object responds to messages that stimulate
objects to respond in some way. Using Objective-C, a message is sent to
an object (or receiver) using the expression:
[receiver message name];
• receiver is the object
• message name is the message or method name that is to be invoked – and
may be referred to as a method selector.
To invoke the display method of the mySquare object:
[mySquare display];
Labels describing arguments precede colons:
[myRect setWidth:20.0 height:22.0];
Messages with a variable number of arguments:
[receiver makeList:list,argOne,argTwo,argThree];
Object-oriented
(See OOP, C++ and Java.)
Object-Oriented Database Management System
(See OODBMC.)
Object-oriented language
(See OOP, C++ and Java.)
Object-oriented programming
(See OOP, C++ and Java.)
240

OLAP
Object-oriented programming language
(See OOP, C++ and Java.)
Object-oriented UI
(See OOUI.)
Object schema
A structure that deﬁnes the interactions and relationship
of objects in an OO system.
(See OO.)
Object scraping
A method of mapping data from a server to objects. The
objects are used to perform transactions or other types of processing. It may
be applied in an application renovation solution.
(See Application renovation and Screen scraping.)
OCR
A program that converts scanned text into text ﬁles.
OCX
A control or object that was a forerunner to ActiveX. OCX controls
can be integrated into compatible applications, yielding functionality gains
that may take the form of complete applications such as grammar checkers.
OCX controls can be written using Visual C++.
(See C++ and ActiveX.)
ODBC (Open Database Connectivity)
An internationally agreed stan-
dard, covering database connectivity. Most modern databases offer ODBC
compliance.
(See DBMS.)
ODBC 3.0 SDK
A set of tools, libraries and headers that can be used to
integrate ODBC 3.0 connectivity access in Web sites.
(See Data warehouse and ODBC.)
OLAP (On-Line Analytical Processing)
A data analysis technique used
predominantly in the client/server computing environment. It is a decision-
making support technique that can be applied to interrogate data from disparate
sources. Resulting data may also be analysed. OLAP implementations may be
assumed to embody multidimensional data analysis techniques, and integrate:
• an OLAP GUI for user communication
• OLAP analytical processing logic
• OLAP data processing logic.
OLAP empowers users to generate query data in order to answer complex
questions based on what-if scenarios, or on current and historical data. It is
an advancement of the primitive querying techniques harnessed in RDBMS
designs. These include Borland (now Inprise) QBE, and even query languages
such as the industry standard SQL.
(See Data warehouse, MOLAP and ROLAP.)
241

OLE
OLE (Object Linking and Embedding)
An object architecture. It is
a method by which one application may be linked with, or embedded into
another. An OLE server application is the underlying source of an OLE client
application. Objects may be video, wave audio, speech synthesis, Midi ﬁles,
graphics or text. The objects may be shown in the client OLE document or
application as an icon, and may be launched by double clicking that icon.
OLE can be used to embed Windows Media Player into client applications so
as to add voice or video annotations to documents. Using OLE1 compliant
applications the process of embedding an object is more intensive than that
associated with OLE2 applications. Object embedding is made easier using
OLE2 compliant applications, because objects can simply be dragged from
one application to another. An increasing number of Window applications are
OLE2 compliant.
(See ActiveX.)
OLE client (Object Linking and Embedding client)
An application
which has an embedded object or application from an OLE server application.
(See Object and Visual Basic.)
OLE DB SDK
A Microsoft database access speciﬁcation that bases itself
on OLE and COM object architectures. It complies with SQL and non-
SQL databases.
(See Database, ODBC and ODBC 3.0 SDK.)
OLE server (Object Linking and Embedding server)
An application
which provides an object for an OLE client application, providing a means of
running that object from within the client application.
(See Object and Visual Basic.)
OMG (Object Management Group)
(See www.omg.com.)
OMG Notiﬁcation Service (NS)
An extension to the OMG Event Ser-
vice that deﬁnes interfaces and operations for transmitting events between
client and server applications. In OMG terminology such connected entities are
termed consumers and suppliers, and in some NS implementations the terms
are interchangeable with consumers/receivers and publishers. The OMG NS is
a defacto industry standard messaging architecture, and a mainstay for many
client/server implementations which adhere to the push and pull models as a
means of driving information-on-demand. It enhances the OMG Event Service
by allowing:
• clients to specify received events by ﬁltering proxies in a channel
• event transmission in the form of structured data types, adding to the Anys
and Typed-events of the OMG Event Service
242

OO User Interface
• deﬁned operations (or methods) to provide out parameters to suppliers, thus
informing them of event types required by consumers on a channel, and
providing information about usage habits (See CORBA NS operations.)
• event types offered by suppliers to an event channel to be discovered by
consumers of that channel so that consumers may subscribe to new event
types as they become available
• quality of service (QoS) properties to be set for individual channels, prox-
ies, or structured events (Relevant CORBA operations include set qos
and get qos.)
• optional event type repositories that facilitate ﬁlter constraints by end-users,
and make available information about the structured events ﬂowing through
the channel.
The NS is based on a series of CORBA IDL (Interface Deﬁnition Language)
modules that deﬁne operations and interfaces that may be used by consumers
and suppliers that connect over a client/server environment, and include:
• CosNotiﬁcation (See CosNotiﬁcation)
• CosNotifyFilter
• CosNotifyComm
• CosNotifyChannelAdmin.
(See OMG and www.omg.com.)
On-line advertising
Advertising that takes place on the World Wide Web,
and takes the form of advertising banners which may be placed on many major
sites for a fee.
On-line banking services
A banking service that is platformed on the
World Wide Web or other network.
On-line brokerage services
A brokerage service that is platformed on the
World Wide Web or other network.
Online state
A state in which a computer or peripheral can perform its
intended purpose. For example, a printer may print when it is online, and it
is possible to communicate with a remote computer when it is online.
OO (Object-Oriented)
A preﬁx used in object-oriented systems, soft-
ware and development tools.
(See Object, OOP, ActiveX, Java, JavaBeans, and C++.)
OO User Interface
A user interface that uses the object model as its
underlying interface components. They are typically graphical user interfaces
(GUIs or ‘gooey’). The Apple Macintosh is remembered as one of the ﬁrst
systems to feature a commercially successful OO UI, followed by NextStep,
243

OODBMS
which was founded by Apple Computer’s co-founder, Steve Jobs. This was
followed by the Microsoft Windows and IBM OS/2 OSs that featured OO user
interfaces.
(See ActiveX, C++, Java, Object, OO, Windows and UI Builder.)
OODBMS (Object-Oriented Database Management System.)
A data-
base used to store, and to retrieve complete objects including their code and
data. Stored objects may be categorised and stored in compound structures
or objects. OODBMSs are characterised by their ability to:
• store complex objects
• be renovated or updated without radical renovation of data table structures
associated with RDBMS implementations
• be extensible, providing a means of deﬁning new data types
• support OO methodologies and concepts, including encapsulation, where
objects’ inner workings are hidden, and inheritance, where objects may be
granted the methods and data of other objects. Multiple inheritance may
also be supported where subclasses inherit methods and data from more
than one superclasses.
(See OO, OOP DBMS and Data warehouse.)
OODL (Object-Orientated Dynamic Language)
A programming lan-
guage that is both object-orientated and dynamic.
(See Dynamic and OOP.)
OOL (Object-Oriented Language)
A programming language that ad-
heres to the object-oriented programming model.
(See C++, Java, and OOP.)
OOP (Object-oriented programming)
A modular programming app-
roach that depends upon reusable objects. OOP programming tools include
Inprise Delphi, Optima++ and PowerSoft PowerBuilder. OOP languages
include C++, Java and Visual Basic. In the real world we unconsciously
place objects in classes. We know, for example, that cars, holiday chalets and
computers are from different classes, but each time we see a car we do not
ask ourselves: which class does a car belong to? Or why is it different from a
holiday chalet? We know that it is a member of the class vehicle because we
have learned how it behaves, and that behaviour, with all its methods, is in
our mind. We do not have to learn or consider an objects’ behaviour each time
we come in contact with it. For example, you know that you cannot drive the
holiday chalet because of its behaviour, and the class to which it belongs. You
know these things without having to, repeatedly, decide that a holiday chalet
244

OpenScript
cannot be driven because it has no wheels, no axle, no engine and so on.
Object-oriented programs are much the same. Classes of objects are carefully
deﬁned. Hierarchies form another important part of classes where, once again,
like in the real world, classes are subdivided into further classes. This helps
distinguish between, say, a sports car and a jeep. The jeep would be a member
of the class OffRoadVehicles which is a member of the class, Cars, which
in turn is a member of the class, Vehicles. This additional information tells
us that a sports car cannot be driven up a steep muddy slope, etc. Everything
in the real world is a member of a class, of which there are an inﬁnite number.
Some Windows databases come with a number of in-built methods to choose
from. These cover standard activities such as opening tables and forms, and
even opening the Help window. This type of database building is achieved
through a so-called ‘pick and build’ interface. The OOP model embraces:
• data hiding
• encapsulation
• reuse
• polymorphism.
OOP languages include:
• Java
• C++
• Smalltalk
• Visual Basic.
(See Objective-C, C++, Data hiding, Encapsulation, Java, Polymorphism and
Smalltalk)
OOUI (Object-oriented user interface.)
(See OO user interface.)
Open Buying on the Internet
A protocol aimed at the standardisation of
e-commerce on the Internet.
OpenDoc
A standard object or component architecture initially aimed
at the creation of compound documents. It is not as widespread as OLE or
Microsoft ActiveX component technology.
(See ActiveX, Compound document, OLE, and JavaBeans.)
Open loop
A relationship that sees cardholders and Merchants maintained
by different banks.
OpenScript
A programming language included in many versions of
Asymetrix ToolBook. It ﬁts into the same programming language category
as Lingo, but is dedicated to the ToolBook environment, and is not used
as widely. ToolBook operates in two basic modes: Author level and Reader
level. The Author level mode provides access to ToolBook’s drawing and
245

scripts
programming tools. It lets you create books, create and modify page objects,
and program in OpenScript. The Reader level mode provides all necessary
features to run ToolBook applications, but does not provide access to the
development tools. It lets users:
• navigate through pages, and add pages
• type, edit and format text in ﬁelds
• print
• run OpenScript programs.
To deny users from changing ToolBook applications you can use the runtime
version of ToolBook. While authoring an application you can switch between
Author level and Reader level instantly in order to test applications under
development. You toggle between Reader and Author levels either by selecting
Reader or Author from the Edit menu, or by pressing F3.
scripts
A typical OpenScript is shown below. It plays a Midi ﬁle and shows
a page of a video ﬁle in a stage. Take for example the script for page 1 which is
shown below:
to handle enterPage
mmOpen clip "intro"
mmShow clip "intro" in stage "intro"
mmPlay clip "music"
end
Like all the scripts associated with page objects this event handler is activated
by simply opening, or moving to, the page number. The second line simply
opens the video clip stored as “intro” in the Clip Manager. With the “intro”
clip open the third line shows the ﬁrst page, or a current page, of the “intro”
video ﬁle. Finally, the fourth line plays a Midi ﬁle clip stored as “music” in
the Clip Manager. All the page scripts operate in the same way, except they
have extra statements to close Midi ﬁle clips. The button script below simply
closes a Midi ﬁle clip that is played by the page script, and plays the video
ﬁle in the stage. This requires just two lines of code using the mmClose and
mmPlay commands:
to handle buttonClick
mmClose clip "music"
mmPlay clip "intro" in stage "intro"
end
The script below illustrates a Pause button. It requires an additional IF..THEN
structure to determine whether or not the video clip is playing. This has to
be included because an attempt to pause a clip that is not playing causes an
application to crash.
246

Optic ﬁbre
to handle buttonClick
if mmStatus of clip "intro" = "playing" then
mmPause clip "intro"
end if
end
The status of any clip may be obtained using the mmStatus command.
(See Lingo, ToolBook and Authorware Professional.)
Open Source
Software whose source is freely available for modiﬁcation
and redistribution.
(See www.opensource.org. and www.gnustep.org.)
Open-to-buy
An item of information on a credit card that is the difference
between the line-of-credit and the balance owed by the card holder.
Open Transport
A communications architecture for implementing net-
work protocols and other communication features on computers running the
Mac OS.
Operating system (OS)
A generic term used to describe the software
elements that manage system resources and so provide an interface between
the user and the system, as well as between software and the system. The
shell, user-interface or front-end is sensitive to a number of user-commands.
Popular operating systems include Windows 98/NT, OS/2 Warp, MS-DOS,
DR-DOS, OS/2 and Unix.
(See Windows.)
Operation
A term which is interchangeable with method, as used in lan-
guages such as C++ and Java.
(See CORBA-based Notiﬁcation Service, C++ and Java.)
OPIE (One-Time Passwords in Everything)
(See OTP.)
Optic ﬁbre
A silica-based ﬁbre that can propagate a light signal while
inducing minimal losses. Light propagation is driven by total internal reﬂec-
tion. This is made possible using a core ﬁbre and surrounding cladding of
different refractive indexes. The light source must emit light into the cable
at the critical angle in order to achieve total internal reﬂection. Applica-
tions include:
• lightwave communications
• ﬂex sensing in gloves and bodysuits, which are used in VR.
247

Optic ﬁbre
Acceptance
cone
Laser
N1
N2
Refractive index
Optical fibre −monomode/single mode
Numerical aperture:
NA
(N1)2 − (N2)2
=
Optical fibre
Meridional ray
(passing through
the core's axis)
Total internal
reflection
Impurity
losses
Cladding
Silica core
Signal
Numerous different types of optic ﬁbre exist, including graded and step-index.
A step index is one in which the core silica is of one refractive index and its
coating silica is of another index. A graded ﬁbre consists of a core ﬁbre that
is coated with a number of grades of silica of differing refractive index. The
advantages of optic ﬁbre include:
• light and easy to install.
• immunity to electrical and reasonable levels of electromagnetic interference.
• exceptionally wide bandwidth when compared to electrical conductors.
• cost effective.
The operation relies upon total internal reﬂection, given by reﬂecting injected
rays in the cladding. The core and the cladding, therefore, have a different
refractive index. The angle at which rays are injected into a ﬁbre is critical,
in order to achieve total internal reﬂection, and to propagate the ray appro-
priately. The numerical aperture (NA) of a ﬁbre is a measure of the size of
its acceptance cone, or the range of angles at which rays must be injected.
Propagated rays may be:
• meridional, which repeatedly intersect the core’s axis
• skew, which spiral through the core without ever intersecting the axis. Their
launch angle tends to be greater than that of meridional rays.
The light source must be an LED or laser device, which lases at an appro-
priate wavelength. A multimode step-index ﬁbre may have a core diameter
248

OSI
of between 125 and 500 micrometers, and an NA of the order of 0.15 to 0.4.
They are able to propagate a substantial amount of emitted light from an LED.
Injected light is dispersed into many thousands of paths called modes.
Oracle
A database development environment, produced by a company of
the same name.
Oracle Media Objects
An object-based multimedia authoring tool.
Orange Book
A set of security standards developed by the United States
Department of Defense, and formally named the Trusted Computer Standards
Evaluation Criteria.
(See Security.)
OS/2 (Operating System/2)
A PC operating system. Launched in mid-
1987 to coincide with the release of the IBM PS/2 family of computers, it is a
multitasking operating system able to run applications simultaneously, and is
downwardly compatible with DOS. OS/2 is used in conjunction with Presenta-
tion Manager, a GUI. Relaunched in 1992 by IBM under the name OS/2 2.0,
it is now a relatively successful 32-bit operating system. It is also able to
run Microsoft Windows applications in either real of standard modes. The
release of OS/2 2.1 in mid 1993 saw the inclusion of multimedia extensions
that compare with those of Windows.
OSGi (Open Standard Gateway Interface)
A standard for residen-
tial networks.
OSI (Open System Interconnection)
A seven-layer industry standard
reference model that is applied extensively to client/server architectures, and
was introduced in 1984 by the ISO (International Standards Organisation).
It provides a standard infrastructure for the applications, glues and commu-
nications required of modern client/server implementations. The seven lay-
ers include:
• Application, which encompasses client- and server-side programs, such as
e-mail clients and browsers at the front-end.
• Presentation, which is the formatting layer, delivering such operations as
protocol conversion and compression. A typical application sees clients’
SQL requests converted to a format that complies with the SQL server.
• Session, which permits a conversation between programs, objects or pro-
cesses.
• Transport, which provides error detection and correction operations for com-
municated data, and adds a transport-layer ID.
249

OSPF
• Network, which operates to break down transmitted data into packets (with
sequence numbers), and to reassemble them into a readable message on
reception. It may be assumed to route packets to an appropriate node.
• Data-link, which receives packets from the network layer, and adds control
information to their headers and trailing regions. The resulting frames are
passed to the physical layer when appropriate access is detected.
• Physical, which converts frames into binary data so that it may be transmit-
ted, and returns this data to frames upon reception at its intended destination.
(See Application, Client-server and Glue.)
OSPF (Open Shortest Path First)
A protocol used in routers.
OTP (One-Time Password)
A password protection security policy to
prevent illegal access. In many instances it does not prevent hackers from mon-
itoring the network and gaining access to information. OTP variants include:
• Wietse Venema’s LogDaemon
• BellCore’s S/KEY Version 1.0
• BellCore’s Commercial S/KEY Version 2.0
• United States Research Laboratory’s (NRL) One Time Passwords in Every-
thing (OPIE).
(See Encryption.)
250

P
P2P (peer to peer)
A peer to peer network permits all connected com-
puters to act as a server or as a client.
Package
A set of Java classes that address speciﬁc functions where,
for instance, java.io addresses input and output functions, and java.net
addresses Internet and network operations.
Packet
(See Packet Switched Network.)
Packet ﬁltering
A method used to promote network security, where pack-
ets are ﬁltered according to predeﬁned criteria. Packet ﬁltering is possible using
screening routers and security gateways.
(See Screening router and Security gateway.)
Packet switched network
A data transmission and reception technique
where data streams are divided into packets coded with origination and desti-
nation information. The packets may be interleaved with different data trans-
missions. For instance, the packets that may be providing a two-way audio
communication link in IP telephony, might be interleaved with other streams
such as videoconferencing data. Packets may follow dissimilar routes over a
network, and are directed over what are perceived as the quickest and least
congested routes. If available routes or logical channels are congested, then
packets are buffered before transmission. The buffer is a FIFO (ﬁrst in ﬁrst out)
storage, where the ﬁrst packet placed in the buffer is the ﬁrst to be retrieved and
transmitted when the appropriate virtual channel is available. The X.25 proto-
col standard dictates that a packet may contain between three and 4100 octets
or bytes. (See X.25.) Up to 4,095 logical channels might be accommodated
on a single physical link (1997). The logical channel followed by a packet is
determined by its header information. There is also error correction, where the
receiver might request that a particular packet is re-transmitted. The original
packet switching standard for public data networks is CCITT X.25 (See X.25).
251

PaintShop Pro
This is a multi-tiered recommendation embodying everything from physical
connectors to data formatting and code conversion. Packet switching is rather
like the logistics involved in shipping a motor car part by part. The disassem-
bled parts are sent, and assembled at the factory of destination. Equally if a
part is damaged, the factory will request that it is sent again. The packets may
have one of two identities:
• Multi-cast packets (or items of transmitted information) can be delivered to
more than one destination.
• Unicast packets that have one destination only.
a1
a2
b1
b2
c1
Packet switching buffer
c2
c1
a1
b1
c2
b2
a2
a2
b2
c2
b1
a1
c1
Packet
switch
system
(PSS)
Buffer
Packet switched networks (that use IP) are currently displacing switched net-
works in the telecommunications industry, and drive the growing use of IP
telephony. The comparative advantages of IP telephony include reduced costs,
and reduced cost of ownership, for telcos and corporations running IP com-
patible networks such as intranets. The reduced costs are largely brought by
the fact that IP and Internet trafﬁc is unregulated. Corporations and govern-
ment departments may experience savings in the cost of voice trafﬁc that
might reach as much as 80 percent. Flexibility is also an advantage because
IP telephony makes better use of bandwidth. For example, Australian telecom-
munications giant, Telstra, introduced the virtual second line in the late 1990s.
This allows subscribers to its ISP (Telstra Big Pond) to receive incoming calls
while connected to the Internet.
(See Internet telephony.)
PaintShop Pro
A popular graphics capture, and editing program. It has
numerous special effects.
Palette
An item of colour information accompanying 8 bit digital video
sequences, and images.
252

Pascal
Palette Editor
A program used to edit the palette of 8 bit graphics or
video. Palette editors such as Microsoft PalEdit are used to alter the colour
characteristics of 8 bit video sequences. They are also useful for building
palettes that work with a number of different 8 bit video ﬁles. The importance
of this relates to switching between two or more different 8 bit sequences on
screen that contain different palettes that can result in a ﬂicker. The degree
to which the ﬂicker occurs depends upon the difference that separates the
palettes, as well as upon the general video and graphics speed of the playback
system. Building a common palette is easiest if you run multiple instances of
the palette editor, provided the program has this capability, or where it is able
to open multiple palettes.
Palette switching
An instant when a colour palette is switched from one to
another. Palette switching occurs most often when 8 bit video is cut from one
sequence to another which has a different colour palette, or when one 8 bit still
image is cut to another which has a different palette. Palette switching can result
in a brief screen ﬂicker. The screen ﬂicker may be eliminated using a common
palette for all bitmaps (images) and video clips. A common palette can easily be
achieved using a palette optimiser, or using an editing program such as PalEdit.
Palmtop
A small scale portable PC that runs a streamlined operating
system such as Windows CE.
PAN (Payment Account Number)
A number on the front of payment
cards.
PARC (Palo Alto Research Centre)
A research establishment founded in
1970 by Xerox. It is the birth place of many multi-media associated technolo-
gies and concepts including laser printing, local area networks, the graphical
user interface (GUI), and object orientated programming (OOP). The GUI
system integrated into the Apple Macintosh launched in 1984 was a direct
result of Apple’s Steve Jobs visiting PARC. During his visit he saw a GUI
platformed on PARC’s Alto system.
(See Windows.)
Parser
A function of a compiler, interpreter, or translator that attaches
semantics to tokens which are generated by the lexical analyzer.
(See Java.)
Pascal
A high-level, general purpose programming language used in Inprise
Delphi. The original implementation was developed in the mid 1960s by Prof.
Niklaus Wirth of Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule, Zurich. A structured
language, it was one of the main advancements in computer programming
253

Passport
languages to follow Algol 60. The most popular and successful implementation
of Pascal was Turbo Pascal from Borland (now called Inprise).
(See Basic, C++, Java and Visual Basic.)
Passport (Microsoft)
.NET Passport uses the Kerberos distributed secu-
rity protocol that is a proven industry standard and is also used by Microsoft
Windows2000 and XP. Kerberos authenticates client requests and distributes
tickets or temporary encryption keys:
1. The user clicks on the .NET Passport sign-in scarab, and enters a sign-in
name and password.
2. A request is made to .NET Passport for a ‘ticket-granting-ticket’ (TGT).
3. If appropriate .NET Passport grants the TGT that may be cached.
4. The client presents the TGT to .NET Passport or ‘ticket granting server’
(TGS), and request is made for a session ticket.
5. .NET Passport uses TGTs to verify clients and to validate tickets, and
then returns a session ticket and session key to the requested .NET My
Services service.
6. The client or Web site sends the session ticket to the .NET My Services
service.
Password
A series of alphanumeric characters uses to protect a system
against unauthorised access. Using TCP/IP, the password ﬁle, /etc/password, is
used to prevent unauthorised access. Servers like Apache, NCSA and Netscape
integrate facilities for authenticating users that do not require programming.
The principle ﬁles are the access ﬁle (.htaaccess), and the password ﬁle
(.htpasswd) that is stored in a secure directory on the server and listed below:
#!/usr/bin/perl
$passfile = "/disk/mysite.com/ood/.htpasswd";
require "ctime.pl";
$method=$ENV{"REQUEST METHOD"};
$type=$ENV{"CONTENT TYPE"};
%input values=&break input;
$username=&normalize query($input values{"username"});
$password=&normalize query($input values{"password"});
open(PWFILE,"+< $passfile") || &croak("Can’t open
$passfile: $!");
$salt=reverse time;
seek(PWFILE,0,2);
print PWFILE $username,":",crypt($password,$salt),"\n";
close (PWFILE);
&croak ("All done");
exit;
254

Password
sub break input {
local ($i);
read(STDIN,$input,$ENV{‘CONTENT LENGTH’});
@form names = split(‘&’,$input);
foreach $i(@form names) {
($html name,$html value) = split(‘=’,$i);
$input values{$html name} = $html value;
}
return %input values;
}
sub croak {
local($msg)=@ ;
&print header("System Error");
print $msg;
&print footer;
}
sub print header {
local($title) = @;
print "Content-type: text/html\n\n";
print "<HTML>\n<HEAD>\n<TITLE>$title</TITLE>\n";
print "</HEAD>\n<BODY>\n<H1>$title</H1>\n";
}
sub print footer {
print "</BODY>\n</HTML>\n";
}
sub normalize query {
local($value) = @ ;
$value =~ tr/+/ /;
$value =~ s/%([a-fA-F0-9][a-fA-F0-9])/
pack("C",hex($1))/eg;
return $value;
}
The access ﬁle (.htaccess) holds the following:
AuthUserFile/disk02/.htpasswd that points to the ﬁle containing user
names and passwords.
AuthGroupFile/dev/null that points to groups of names – though this is
unusual in a Web context.
AuthName Name goes here that speciﬁes the realm.
AuthType Basic that speciﬁes the user authentication system.
<Limit GET> that speciﬁes the server method that may also be POST
or PUT.
Require valid-user that ensures only valid users access the implementation.
Using HTML the passwd.cgi program is integrated as follows:
255

Path
<BODY>
<H1>Input Password</H1>
<FORM ACTION=http://,botto.com/cgi-bin/passwd.cgi"
METHOD=post>
User name: <INPUT TYPE="text" NAME="username"><P>
Password; <INPUT TYPE="text" NAME="password"><P>
<INPUT TYPE="Submit">
</FORM>
</BODY>
(See Security.)
Path
A series of characters used for authorisation purposes, which provide
access to appropriate services, applications and hardware.
Path/trail
1. A path through a series of links in hypertext, hypermedia
or multimedia material. 2. A statement which points through the hierarchy of
directories to a ﬁle or folder, and may take the form:
C:\jini1−1\source\examples\,
and are often included in autoexec.bat ﬁles so the user need not type the path
of a ﬁle or program in order to run it.
PATH−INFO
A CGI variable that holds the URL’s sufﬁx or that data
which follows the script’s name.
Pattern language
A vocabulary of entities which deﬁnes the problems
and the forces that drive them, as well as the actions that may be taken to
obtain acceptable solutions. The language can exist in many domains and
sciences and can even be the basis of a new science or technology or simply
provide the decision-making frameworks and rules and changes to a business
community or organisation. Christopher Alexander, the founding father of
pattern languages, invented three key concepts:
1. ‘Quality Without a Name’: an essence held by living things giving qualities
such as freedom, wholeness, completeness, comfort, harmony, habitability
and durability.
2. ‘The Gate’: an entity which provides access to the quality.
3. ‘Timeless Way’: a ﬂow of patterns through the gate that ultimately evolves
and shapes a design or entity. (See Design Pattern).
Payload
A user data capacity of a packet, block, cell or frame that forms
part of a protocol.
Payment gateway
A gateway that translates SET messages to and from
standard bank ﬁnancial data formats.
Pay-to-view
An e-commerce site that is created to sell content rather than
tangible goods, and may vary from a virtual publication to a TV broadcasting
256

PCM
facility or on-line juke-box. Implementing such sites requires password access
to selected areas, and forms for gathering credit card or bankcard details.
PC Card
(See PCMCIA.)
PCI
A local bus implementation that permits the addition of expansion
cards to a system. Such cards typically include graphics controllers, internal
modems and sound cards. Local bus technology provides high performance
communications between such devices and the system processor and memory.
It does this by providing a data path width and operating clock speed that is
more closely matched to the internal and external data bus of the processor.
While PCI has become the industry’s chosen local bus standard, Vesa Local
Bus (VLB) is also used. Non-local bus variants include:
• IBM’s 8-bit XT bus
• IBM’s 16-bit ISA (Industry Standard Architecture) or AT (Advanced Tech-
nology) bus
• IBM’s MCA (Microchannel Architecture)
• EISA (Enhanced Industry Standard Architecture).
PCM (Pulse Code Modulation)
A method of encoding data in digital
form, for transmission over a network, or for storage on DSM. Used in the
Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) standard, multiplexing involves
creating a data stream consisting of 8 bit PCM blocks. The blocks are created
every 125 micro seconds. By interleaving the blocks with those from other
encoders, the result is time division multiplexing (TDM). In North Amer-
ica ISDN typically interleaves data from 24 64 Kbits/sec sources or channels.
This results in connections that provide 1.536 Mbits/sec. Although in actual
fact the connection has a bandwidth of 1.544 Mbits/sec, because each chan-
nel’s frame has a marker bit ‘F’, adding 8 Kbytes/sec. Europe sees ISDN that
typically interleave 30 64 Kbits/sec channels, giving 2.048 Mbits/sec. This and
the 1.544 Mbits/sec connection are known as primary rate multiplexes. Further
interleaving of primary rate multiplexes sees:
• 6, 45, 274 Mbits/sec in North America
• 8, 34, 139, and 560 Mbits/sec in Europe.
PCM was conceived in 1937 by Alec Reeves, but was not applied widely for
many years.
Sampling
Using ISDN, an 3.4 KHz analogue signal is sampled at 8 KHz. The
sampling rate is less than twice the bandwidth of the analogue signal, in accordance
with Nyquist’s sampling theorem, and prevents aliasing. A sampling frequency in a
multiple of 4 KHz was used because the existing networks used 4 KHz carriers, and
would cause audible interference in the form of whistles.
Coding
The amplitude of each sample is measured, and encoded using 12 bit
values that give ±2,048 possible values.
257

PCMCIA
Compression
The 12 bit samples are reduced to eight bits using logarithmic com-
pression, which may be:
• ‘mu-law’ in North America
• A-law in Europe.
Compression standards permit the system to be embedded anywhere in an ana-
logue network.
(See ATM, ISDN and T1.)
Further reading
CCITT Recommendation G.711. Pulse Code Modulation (PCM) of voice fre-
quencies.
PCMCIA (Personal Computer Memory Card International Association)
A slot that connects with almost credit card-size peripheral devices, which may
be modems, NICs, interfaces to CD-ROM drives, hard disks etc. The original
PCMCIA was designed for memory cartridges only, but in September 1991
the PCMCIA Type II (PCMCIA 2.0) speciﬁcation was launched facilitating
hard disks and modem/facsimile devices.
PCX
A bitmap ﬁle format developed by ZSoft, and features RLE com-
pression.
PDA (Personal Digital Assistant)
A portable device that may serve a
number functions including that of an e-mail client, Web browser and organ-
iser.
Peer-to-peer network
A network that permits each network user to access
the directories and the peripheral devices associated with any connected com-
puter. When computers are linked together so that they can share the resources
of one or more computers, a network is formed. You can build a peer-to-peer
network using Windows 95/98, simply by adding Ethernet cards to connected
systems. Another type of local area networks (LAN) is the server-based vari-
ant that permits users to access and share information stored on a powerful
computer commonly termed a server.
PEM (Privacy Enhanced Mail)
An encryption standard for e-mail that
was created by the IETF.
Pentium
A ﬁfth generation Intel processor, and successor to the 486DX
family of processors. Currently the Pentium with MMX Technology is the de
facto Intel ﬁfth generation processor. MMX Technology is the registered trade
name for Intel’s additional instructions that lend themselves to multimedia.
They drive performance gains through such applications as speech recognition,
video, and 3-D graphics. The clock speed of the Intel Pentium processor has
increased steadily, and currently there are 200 MHz, 233 MHz, and 266 MHz
258

Perl
versions. The more modern Intel Pentium II processor offers yet higher
performance.
(See MMX and Pentium II.)
Pentium II
An Intel processor that integrates MMX Technology as stan-
dard.
(See MMX and Pentium.)
Pentium Pro
A sixth generation Intel PC processor that integrates SMP
design features. It is used for servers, and for workstation class PCs.
(See Pentium and SMP.)
Perl (Practical Extraction and Report Language)
A programming lan-
guage for processing text. It was developed by Larry Wall who once joked
that Perl stood for ‘Pathologically Eclectic Rubbish Lister’. He describes Perl
as: ‘. . . an interpreted language optimized for scanning arbitrary text ﬁles,
extracting information from those text ﬁles, and printing reports based on that
information. It’s also a good language for many system management tasks.
The language is intended to be practical (easy to use, efﬁcient, complete) rather
than beautiful (tiny, elegant, minimal). It combines (in the author’s opinion,
anyway) some of the best features of C, sed, awk, and sh, so people familiar
with those languages should have little difﬁculty with it. (Language histo-
rians will also note some vestiges of csh, Pascal, and even BASIC-PLUS.)
Expression syntax corresponds quite closely to C expression syntax . . ..’
Perl variables
Scalar variables are assigned single data values that may be integer,
ﬂoating point or string:
$transform=25;
$response="You did not enter the correct patient
symptoms.";
Numeric variables are incremented using the syntax:
$transform=$transform+1;
or,
$transform++;
Numeric variables are decremented using the syntax:
$transform--;
Subroutines are named using the syntax:
&subroutine;
Perl arrays
An array of scalars is deﬁned using the syntax:
@trans(2,4,5);
@forward (7,8,9);
259

Personal Web Server
The number ‘4’ in the deﬁned three-element array is addressed thus:
$tate=@trans(1);
Arrays may be combined using the syntax:
@combine=(@trans, @forward);
The deﬁnition of array variables is accompanied by the generation of scalar variables
(of the same name) that have the @# preﬁx. These store the array size, or more
precisely the sequence number of their ﬁnal element. The array size need not be
deﬁned, and it is legal to insert elements into an array at whatever point, thus:
@transform = (10,25,35,55);
$transform[25] = 7;
An associative array of scalars may be assigned to a variable (with the "%" pre-
ﬁx) thus:
%transform =("x",100,"y",20,"z",20);
This equates transform to the element strings "x", "y", and "z", whose values are
100, 20 and 20.
Subroutines
Subroutines begin with the word sub and its code or block is con-
tained within opening and closing braces, this:
sub transform every {
$tate=@trans(1);
}
(See CGI.)
Personal Web Server
(See PWS.)
PGP (Pretty Good Privacy)
An asymmetric cryptosystem that is in the
public domain, and was invented by Phil Zimmerman. It is used along with
RSA by SET (Secure Electronic Transactions) for security and authentication
services.
(See SET, Ciphertest, Plaintext, Encryption algorithm, SET, Brute Force, cryp-
tosystem, RSA, public key encryption, asymmetric, Transposition and Dictio-
nary attack.)
PHP
A server side scripting language. PHP was originally written by
Rasmus Lerdorf in late 1994, and soon became PHP/FI 2.0, and eventually
PHP 3.0. PHP code was developed so as it could be embedded in HTML.
Much of PHP’s syntax originates from C, and some of it comes from Perl,
C++ and Java.
Physical address
An address represented as a hexadecimal number, which
can be used to address a device such as a memory chip or even a UART. For
instance, by signalling the devices CS (Chip Select), it is then possible to
260

POI
write an address to a memory chip, so as to read stored data. The addresses
themselves may be of various lengths including 8 bit, 16 bit, 32 bit, 64 bit,
128 bit, etc.
PicoJava
A Chipset from Sun Microelectronics that is optimised for the
Java programming language. It is used in cellular phones, and computer periph-
erals.
(See Java and Sun Microelectronics.)
PIN (Personal Identiﬁcation Number)
A number assigned to an ATM
cardholder.
Ping
A name for ICMP (Internet Control Message Protocol) Reply/Echo.
It is also used to describe programs that use ICMP. ICMP is used to test the
reliability and connection speed to a remote host. The reply to such a test is
called a pong.
Pipe
A network communication channel that provides a means of trans-
ferring packets between local or wide destinations. Pipes have addressable
names and may be used to send and receive data (that is typically assembled
into packets) to and from a central computer over a WAN.
Plaintext
An input into an encryption algorithm or cipher, which becomes
ciphertext. When ciphertext is processed by a decryption algorithm it is retur-
ned to plaintext.
(See Encryption algorithm, SET, Brute Force, cryptosystem, RSA, public key
encryption, asymmetrical, Transposition and Dictionary attack.)
Plug-in
A module that adds functionality to an application. In the case of
a browser, a plug-in might take the form of a video playback feature. Numer-
ous plug-ins are available for the Netscape Navigator browser. An alternative
technology to Microsoft’s ActiveX Controls, plug-ins tend to be a feature of
browsers. ActiveX Controls are applied more broadly and cut through bound-
aries that separate many different software sectors, including client-side and
server-side component architectures. The plug-in architecture adds processing
capabilities to the client Browser, and displaces logic from the server side.
(See Active Desktop, Active Document, Active Server, ActiveX, and Netscape
Navigator)
PnP (Plug-and-Play)
A hardware speciﬁcation that ensures easier instal-
lation using Windows 95/NT. PnP hardware devices can be detected and
installed by Windows 95/NT.
POI (Point Of Information)
A means of exhibiting products elec-
tronically through the Internet or other medium such as CD-ROM or
DVD-ROM. Traditionally, consumer education has consisted of publishing
261

Polymorphism
product brochures, advertising, allowing the potential customer to peruse in
a shop or showroom, and product demonstrations. These generally accepted
ways in which the consumer chooses an appropriate product may be aided or
replaced using multimedia in a point-of-information (POI) guise. POI termi-
nals present the customer with the ability to browse through product ranges,
or experience just those items that ﬁt a user-deﬁned proﬁle. POI can be a pow-
erful marketing and advertising tool providing the means to display products.
The beneﬁts are clear: it gives an opportunity to promote products in a medium
that cannot be rivalled by (current) television advertising. It also allows small
and medium-sized companies to promote products on terms that only large
companies and corporations could previously afford. Furthermore, if products
can be demonstrated adequately through multimedia, the need to exhibit them
physically becomes unnecessary and so ﬂoor space may be saved. Research
also indicates that users of POI terminals spend more money than those shop-
pers using conventional means. Finally, the possibility of fewer sales staff
is raised. With the growing number of multimedia systems in the home and
with the falling price of disc replication, POI may be distributed free like
junk mail. In the computer industry, there is also the possibility of distribut-
ing short advertisements/demonstrations containing video sequences on ﬂoppy
disk. Museums of various kinds throughout the world have installed POI ter-
minals. These give visitors the opportunity to follow user-deﬁned guided tours.
Such an approach also allows visitors to experience interesting items which
might otherwise be catalogued and hidden away from public view. Many other
areas such as careers advice, geographic information systems, surrogate travel
(brochures) are also possible through POI.
Polymorphism
1. A concept where two or more objects may respond
differently to the same message; for example, client objects may respond
differently from a message from a server object. (See Objective-C.) 2. An
object-oriented concept where an entity has many forms. For example, a func-
tion call may be used to apply an object in different ways. The object might
be a button, whose various forms include different methods that determine its
response to mouse clicks. Polymorphism allows messages to stimulate context-
sensitive processing. For instance, the message might be interpreted by one
of a number of methods in a single object.
(See C++, Java and OOP.)
POP3 (Post Ofﬁce Protocol)
A protocol for sending and receiving
e-mail. Compliant e-mail applications are called POP3 agents.
Port
1. A channel through which a computer communicates/drives a peri-
pheral device. Standard PCs include Centronics parallel ports, and serial ports
(that are often referred to as COM ports). Typically parallel ports are used to
connect with such peripheral as printers, mass storage devices and scanners.
262

Precedence
Serial ports are often used to connect with external modems. Other ports
include FireWire and USB (Universal Serial Bus). 2. A method of translating
a program from one platform to another, or from one language into another.
3. A port number used by a server.
port
1. A number that selects a receiver for incoming packets. 2. A
number that selects the sender of outgoing packets.
POS (Point Of Sale)
1. An automated credit card or bankcard transac-
tion. 2. A method of selling products or services from e-commerce Web sites,
or even multimedia booths.
POSIX (Portable Operating System Interface)
An operating system
interface agreed by the ISO/IEC, IEEE, and The Open Group.
POST method
(See CGI.)
PostScript
A standard formatting language used to store and print docu-
ments. Many commercial printers and reprographics bureaux are able to accept
ﬁles in the PostScript format, from which they are able to print, or produce
ﬁlms. The language itself is the property of Adobe. PostScript printers are
more expensive than others mainly because Adobe require licence fees.
PowerBook
A range of notebooks manufactured by Apple Computer.
Such notebooks can operate as DOS, Windows and Windows NT using emu-
lation software.
PowerPC
A processor architecture designed for Microsoft and Apple
OS compatibility. The technology is integrated in Apple desktop and note-
book systems.
PowerPoint
A presentation program that is marketed and sold by
Microsoft. It may also be used as a drawing package, and is included in
the Microsoft Ofﬁce integrated package.
PowerPoint Animation Player
A Microsoft animation player that may
be added to Web pages.
(See ActiveX Control.)
PPP (Point to Point Protocol)
A standard protocol used with standard
access technologies such as POTS and ISDN. Such connections to ISPs see it
used with the IP protocol.
(See SLIP.)
Precedence
In C++, arithmetic operators have a precedence value. These
indicate the order in which such operators are implemented that is signiﬁcant
with expressions such as:
dev = xx + yy * zz + yy;
263

preemption
Control over such arithmetic operations is obtained by using parentheses, i.e.:
dev = (xx + yy) * zz;
Parentheses may be nested.
(See C++.)
preemption
A term used to describe the moment a running task is inter-
rupted.
Preemptive multi-tasking
A type of multi-tasking in which the operat-
ing system interrupts applications running concurrently. It is more seamless
than non-preemptive multi-tasking in that a higher degree of concurrency is
achieved. Windows 95 and OS/2 Warp embody preemptive multi-tasking.
preemptive multi-tasking
A preﬁx that deﬁnes an operating system able
to interrupt a running task so as to run another task.
Pretty Good Privacy
(See PGP)
Private key encryption
An encryption model that requires the sender
and the receiver of encrypted matter to use a single password key. The size
of the key (in bits such as 56 bit etc) is a function of the encryption tech-
niques harnessed.
(See Encryption.)
process
A term used to describe a running program that may have a virtual
address space, threads, and ﬁle descriptors.
Process Flow
A diagram which shows the processes included in a system
architecture. It shows how the processes, and their leaf processes, interrelate
and interact with entities that might be data or program modules.
Processing fees
A fee charges by Acquirers and Merchants for using inter-
change networks or for using Merchant Account services.
Processing power
A measure of a system’s processing performance, and
may be measured in:
• millions of ﬂoating point operations per second (MFLOP)
• giga FLOPs or billions of FLOPs (GFLOPs)
• terra FLOPS or trillions of FLOPs (TFLOPs)
• the rate at which instructions are executed in millions of instructions per
second (MIPs)
• SPECmarks
• whetstones
• dhrystones.
264

Properties
Processor
A device that embodies the functionality of a CPU (Central
Processing Unit). The familiar Intel PC processor continuum broadly equates
to: 4004, 8088, 80286, 80386DX, 80836SX, 80486DX, 80486SX, 80486DX2,
Pentium, Pentium Pro. The generic PC processor continuum is a little more
complex with companies such as AMD (Advanced Micro Devices) and Cyrix
producing reverse-engineered, and often enhanced, Intel compatible processors.
Product catalogs
A catalog that may be print or electronic and describes
a product or service range, and is essentially a POI (Point of Information).
Programmer
A broad term used to describe a person engaged in
developing
computer
programs.
Programmers
tend
to
specialise.
For
example, applications programmers might specialise in the development
of
ﬁnancial
systems,
RDBMSs
(Relational
Databases
Management
Systems) or client/server applications. RDBMS programmers might use
programs/development tools such as Paradox for Windows, dBase, FoxPro,
Microsoft SQL Server, DataEase for Windows and Compsoft Equinox. High
level language (HLL) might specialise in C++ or Java, or Visual Basic. Low-
level language (LLL) programmers, or machine code programmers, or software
engineers, work at the machine code level. They generally program using
assembly languages which are indigenous to different processors.
(See C++, Java, and Object.)
Programming tool
An item of software used to develop software.
Project planning
A process of planning a project so its component parts
are completed on time. The compilation of a design, development and produc-
tion schedule is essential for the efﬁcient use of studio time, or for providing
a completion date. As with costing, estimation may play a role, the accuracy
of which will increase with greater experience. A reasonable starting point for
accurate scheduling is a design network, within which the frequency of targets
or milestones depends upon ﬁneness of granularity. A low-level approach will
yield a more accurate basis upon which to build a precise schedule, where
each stage may be allocated a precise period of time. The real function of a
design network, however, is to illuminate a critical path, highlighting those
stages whose target dates, if exceeded, set back the entire project. Equally,
less important stages manifest themselves. For example, it might be found that
certain production processes running in parallel with application development
can overshoot target dates without setting back the completion date.
Properties
A set of attributes associated with an entity that may be a
simple font or window, or a complex container which has an embedded appli-
cation.
265

Property list
Property list
A data list that has element types, including arrays, dictio-
naries, and strings.
Proposal
A business proposal holds information describing a service or
product which is to be sold. It may include sections headed: impact statement,
cost, payment schedule, delivery date, guarantees, etc.
Proprietary
A preﬁx denoting non-standard hardware or software.
Protocol
A format used to transmit and to receive data. Examples of
industry standard protocols include IP, Ethernet, SMTP, HTTP, etc. Each
protocol is optimised for the information it is intended to carry, and for the
network over which it is to used. A protocol often consists of:
• an information ﬁeld for data
• the destination address
• error detection and correction codes
• originating address.
All of this information is held together in a single unit that might be a packet,
cell or frame. In IP networks, such as the Internet and intranets, they are
called packets, but it is just a new name; really they are all the same thing.
The packets are assembled at the point of transmission, and sent over various
different paths to their destination. Once received they are checked for errors,
and then appropriately assembled. Network protocols are analogous of the
Royal Mail: the packets are comparable to envelopes, and they have destination
and originating addresses etc.
(See TCP/IP.)
Proxy object
An object that may be passed to a client so as to provide
access to remote object via an interface. Jini devices consumer Jini services
in this matter, where a proxy object is passed to a JVM.
Proxy Server
A intermediate server on the communications path between
server applications and data entities, and the client systems and software.
Pseudo-conversational communication
A communication regime bet-
ween two software components or objects that exists only for the duration
of interaction.
PSTN (Public Switched Telephone Network)
A voice-grade, public tele-
phone network.
(See Packet Switched network.)
Pthreads
A POSIX threads package.
266

Python
Public domain CGI script
A script that is freely available from a Web
site and requires no payment.
(See www.eff.org.)
Public key
(See Cryptography.)
Public key encryption
An encryption technique that requires both private
and public keys. A public key is used to encrypt sent data.
(See Encryption.)
Publishing Medium
A medium that may be used to publish information.
The Internet, CD-ROM and DVD-ROM are publishing media.
Pure transaction
A transaction that occurs under control and where all
shared access to resources is coordinated.
(See Transaction.)
Push technology
A technology with which a user is served requested
Web-sourced information. It is sometimes referred to as the push model.
PWS (Personal Web Server
A downsized implementation of IIS, bun-
dled with Microsoft FrontPage. It can be used to:
• test Web applications
• build intranets.
Python
An OO programming language which is not widespread.
267


Q
QBE (Query By Example)
A proprietary database querying method intro-
duced by Borland through the Paradox RDBMS. It involves completing forms,
and using arithmetic operators, to interrogate tables. It offers users the basic
functionality of SQL, but is not a language.
(See SQL.)
Quad
A processor module incorporated in a Non-Uniform Memory Archi-
tecture (NUMA).
(See NUMA.)
Quality of Service (QoS)
1. A set of attributes that determine the reli-
ability and performance of a given service that may be a real-time event
channel in an OMG NS middleware implementation, or a complete network
service. Factors that typically inﬂuence QoS are numerous and include soft-
ware attributes that may be given values such as the maximum number of
channels supported, or the time out values, or leases that objects hold. Col-
lective system elements that include network coupling, read/write latency,
protocols, protocol translation, NICs, networks, servers and clients also deter-
mine QoS values. 2. A QoS allocated to the user of a mobile network, which
determines bandwidth and prioritisation. A GPRS QoS, for example, will allo-
cate the user a speciﬁc data rate. (See Reliability.)
Query
A question that may be implemented in code such as SQL, or
by completing a query table that is presented to a database which returns an
appropriate result.
QUERY STRING
A CGI variable that holds the “query” part of an
HTTP GET request that is the URL’s sufﬁx portion following ?.
269

Queue
Queue
A contiguous series of memory locations utilised as a temporary
storage area. It is a FIFO (ﬁrst in, ﬁrst out) system in that the order in which
items are dispensed is the same as the order in which they were deposited.
QuickTime
A video compression standard. It appeared in advance of the
Microsoft Video for Windows (AVI) video standard. QuickTime ﬁles can be
converted into Video for Windows (VfW) format using a utility supplied
with VfW.
(See AVI.)
QuoteChar()
In the JDK 1.0 this can be used to specify a character that
delimits strings.
270

R
RAD tool (Rapid Application Development tool)
A development tool
that expedites application development. Its identity hinges on a number of
identifying features that may include:
• authentic Object Oriented Programming (OOP)
• visual programming methodologies
• industry standard component architectures such as ActiveX or JavaBeans
• useful program libraries
• features that are appropriate to the collaborative team development envi-
ronment. These may include security features that can be used to provide
team members with access rights to objects so they may be developed.
(See ActiveX, C++, Java and Visual Basic.)
Radio button
A group of buttons where only one may be selected at a
time. For example, using HTML you may add radio buttons using the fol-
lowing form that merely displays four radio buttons labelled £30, £40, £50
and £60.:
<FORM> NAME ="Customer" ACTION ="http://botto.com/
cgibin/form/cgi METHOD =get>
<INPUT TYPE ="radio" NAME ="rad" VALUE ="1">
£30
<INPUT TYPE ="radio" NAME ="rad" VALUE ="2">
£40
<INPUT TYPE ="radio" NAME ="rad" VALUE ="3">
£50
<INPUT TYPE ="radio" NAME ="rad" VALUE ="4">
£60
</FORM>
Radio frequency
A frequency used in wireless communications and by
the air interfaces between mobile networks and the user.
271

RAID
MSS
Downlink
USA
Japan
Europe
1800 MHz
1900 MHz
2000 MHz
2100 MHz
2200 MHz
PCS
Uplink
PCS
Downlink
PHS
IMT-2000
Uplink
IMT-2000
Uplink
GSM
1800
IMT-2000 Uplink
DECT
IMT-2000 TDD
MSS Uplink
IMT-2000 TDD
IMT-2000
Downlink
Common Spectrum Usage
RAID (Redundant Array of Independent Disks)
A mass storage device
that has many individual disks. Identifying features of RAID may include:
• high levels of fault tolerance
• scalability through the addition of hard disks
• hot-swappable disks, meaning they may be removed and replaced without
the need to power down the RAID
• redundant power supplies for improved fault tolerance
272

RAID
• shared mass storage, serving disparate computers/networks
• heterogeneous characteristics, where they may be integrated into environ-
ments comprising multiple OSs
• high speed interfaces such as Fibre Channel and Ultra SCSI.
The RAID speciﬁcation originated from UC Berkeley in 1987, and was named
Redundant Array of ‘Inexpensive’ Disks. The aims of the Berkeley group
were threefold:
• improve fault tolerance of mass storage
• reduce mass storage costs
• improve mass storage performance.
Realising the inescapable fact that no single mass storage system could be
optimised in all three of the aforementioned areas, the group deﬁned what were
to become a number of industry standard solutions. Achieving its objectives to
varying degrees, the Berkeley group deﬁnes a series of RAID levels employing
several tried and tested data storage techniques. One of these was mirroring
where data is written to, and read from, pairs of disks concurrently in order to
deliver fault tolerance. Modern RAID systems may be speciﬁed in terms of:
• maximum data storage capacity that is typically in the GByte range for a
single RAID unit, and is in the TByte range for multiple connected units
• average access time measured in milli seconds (ms)
• average and burst data transfer rates
• cache size
• interface type
• multiplicity of host types that may be connected
• OS compatibility.
RAID performance has obvious effects, and high performance echoes perfor-
mance gains that are felt locally and remotely. The ﬁve levels of RAID deﬁned
by the Berkeley group include:
• Level 0, which that stripes data across multiple disks, but provides no error
correction or redundancy.
• Level 1, which that uses duplexing or mirroring, where data is written
concurrently to pairs of independent disks, promoting a high degree of
fault tolerance.
• Level 2, which that stores and reads data by dividing it into bits, and stor-
ing them on different drives – otherwise known as striping. It also stores
ECC codes on dedicated disks.
• Level 3, which that divides data into blocks, storing them on different inde-
pendent disks. One additional disk contains parity data.
• Level 4, which stripes data blocks across multiple disks. One additional
disk contains parity data.
273

RAM
• Level 5, which that stripes data blocks across multiple disks, while parity
data is stored multiple disks.
Other RAID conﬁgurations include Level 6 and Level 7, neither of which
were devised by the Berkeley group. Level 7 offers improved fault tolerance,
and is patented by Storage Computer Corporation.
(See Hard disk.)
RAM (Random-access memory)
A form of rewritable, electronic mem-
ory that may be dynamic (requiring electrical refreshing) or static. Access
times for data are assumed to be equal using RAM.
RAS (Remote Access Services)
A RAS feature/program permits you to
dial-in to remote networks and to ISPs. Windows NT features RAS compli-
ance.
RDBMS (Relational Database Management System)
(See DBMS.)
RealAudio
A streaming audio technology for deploying real-time audio
over the Web.
(See Streaming.)
RealNetworks
A software publisher engaged in the manufacture of media
players that include RealPlayer, RealPlayer G2 and RealPlayer Plus.
(See RealPlayer.)
RealPlayer
A media player that is able to deliver streaming audio and
video, as well as play local media ﬁles. It provides options to connect to
streaming media sites including those associated with radio and broadcasting.
(See Streaming media.)
Real time
1. A program or system that responds to user interaction, in-
stantly. 2. A program or system which captures and/or compresses data at
the rate it actually occurs. For example, a live satellite broadcast link is in
real time.
Real-time compression
A technique where an uncompressed video stream
is compressed while it is played at full speed.
Real-time video capture
A video capture technique where a source video
recording is digitised and stored as it is played at full speed.
(See Video Capture.)
Record
A row in a database table, or a collection of ﬁelds that contain
ﬁeld values.
274

Relational database
Recursion
A property of a programming language that enables procedures
to be called by their own code. Such compliant languages are termed recursive.
(See C++.)
Red Book Audio
An industry term used to describe the ofﬁcial Compact
Disc-Digital Audio (CD-DA) speciﬁcation that deﬁnes the common or garden
audio CD.
Redirected URL
A page, or URL, which converts one URL into another.
(See URL.)
Referring site
A site that offers links to other sites.
Referrer log
A log that tracks the user’s visited pages.
Refresh rate
A measurement of the rate at which all lines on a CRT-based
monitor are scanned. It is quoted in Hz.
(See Monitor.)
Relational database
An information storage and retrieval application.
Using a relational database, information is stored in records that are divided
into ﬁelds of different types including text, numeric, date, graphic, and even
BLOB (Binary Large OBject). The records are stored in tables or ﬁles. Records
from one ﬁle may be linked to records stored in a separate ﬁle or table. Codd’s
standard text about relational databases published in the 1960s speciﬁed differ-
ent types of relational links. Types of link include one-to-one, one-to-many,
and many-to-many. There are many commercial examples of the relational
database that base their design on the original writings of Codd. Relational
databases are formally referred to as RDBMSs (Relational Database Manage-
ment Systems) whereas ﬂat-ﬁle databases are termed simply DBMSs (Database
Management Systems). Commercial examples of software products that permit
the development of RDBMSs include Borland Paradox for Windows, dBase,
Microsoft Access, Ingress, and Compsoft Equinox.
All fully speciﬁed RDBMS development tools include an indigenous program-
ming language. For instance, Paradox for Windows has ObjectPAL (Paradox
Application Language) which is a visual programming language. Important
relational database features include:
ODBC1 or 2 (Open Database Connectivity) compliance
Maximum table or ﬁle size
Speed of operation
BLOB (Binary Large OBject) support permits the storage of ﬁeld values that
include executables and digital video ﬁles.
(See Data warehouse, DBMS and OODBMS.)
275

Reliability
Reliability
A measure of the period of down-time that a system will
endure. It may be expressed as a percentage value, indicating the portion of
time that the system will be fully or even partially operational. Such a mea-
sure of availability (A) may be applied to devices, components, subsystems,
systems, networks, etc. Availability may be calculated using the:
• MTTF (Mean time to restore), which is the average time period required to
return a failed system to its fully operational state.
• MTBF (Mean time between failures), which is the average time period
that indicates the frequency at which a device, component, subsystem or
complete system will fail.
Availability (A) = MTBF/(MTBF + MTTR)
Collective Availability (Ac) of a complete system is equated to the product of
the availability for each individual component. For example:
Availability (Ac) = Clients (Au) * Server (As)
* Network (An) *...* Router (Ar)
Remote
An application or data entity that is not local, and is not on the
user’s machine in a permanent form.
(See 3-tier.)
Remote Method Invocation (RMI) over Internet Inter-Orb Protocol
(See RMI over IIOP.)
REMOTE ADDRESS
A CGI variable that holds the client’s or proxy’s
IP address from where the request is being made.
REMOTE HOST
A CGI variable that holds the hostname of the client or
proxy making the request, or its IP address only when NO DNS HOSTNAMES
is deﬁned in the conﬁg.h ﬁle.
Removable medium
A medium that may be removed from the com-
puter. Examples include ﬂoppy disk, CD-ROM disc, DVD disc and Iomega
Zip disks.
(See CD-ROM and DVD.)
Requester path
A uni-directional path from the client to the server that
supports GET requests, and may deliver to the server such information as
the client’s:
• domain
• e-mail
• user agent denoting the Browser type
• variables such as a list of ﬁle types with which the Browser is compatible.
276

Risk exposure
The requester path naturally coexists with the uni-directional path from the
server to the client which may deliver:
• Web pages
• streaming media
•
etc.
(See CGI and CGI environment variables.)
Resolution
A measurement of the concentration of dots or pixels in a
digital image. In display technology, resolution is speciﬁed in terms of screen
dimensions expressed in pixels, and the dot-pitch expressed as the distance
between displayable pixels. Typical display resolutions of commercially
available monitor include 640-by-480 pixels, 800-by-600 pixels, 1,024-by-
768 pixels, 1,280-by-1,024 pixels, and 1,600-by-1,200 pixels. In terms of
printer technology, resolution is expressed in terms of the number of dots
per inch (dpi). Generally, low-cost laser printers produce output composed
of 300dpi. More expensive variants offer 600dpi and 1,200dpi resolutions.
(See Monitor.)
Restore
A method by which a maximised or minimised application or
document window is returned to its previous size and position.
Retained window
A window that has a buffer for screen pixel values of
sections that are not shown on the screen.
Revenue stream
A source from where an enterprise derives some, or all,
of its turnover.
Reverse engineer
A process that begins by studying the inputs and outputs
of a system or devices, and progresses to design and implementation, which
echoes the same input and output characteristics.
Reverse engineer ER diagram
A process of beginning with a database,
and then arriving at an ER diagram representation.
Rhapsody
An operating system built around OpenStep technology which
was developed by NeXT Software.
Risk exposure (RE)
A product of risk probability (RP) and risk
cost (RC):
RE =RP * RC
• RP is the probability of attempted attacks on a system leading to a secu-
rity breach
• RC is the estimated cost of a particular (or average) security breach.
(See Firewall and Security.)
277

RLC
RLC (Run Length Coding)
A lossless compression process. It may be
used in conjunction with DCT and forms part of the JPEG algorithm.
RMI over IIOP
An implementation of RMI that can be used to develop
CORBA compliant distributed applications, but using the Java programming
language. It was developed jointly by Sun and by IBM. It does not require
an IDL of its own, and allows the transmission of serialisable Java objects
between communicating applications, and uses IIOP as a communications
protocol that may glue applications running on the Java platform to C++ and
to SmallTalk and to any CORBA compliant program.
(See IDL, IIOP, Java and RMI.)
RMI Security
A security perimeter for RMI reliant applications. Down-
loading entities and classes dynamically reveals the obvious need for security
that typically approximate all those things that security gateways are designed
to address, such as the ﬁltering of unwanted ActiveX controls, Cookies,
Applets and Plug-ins. In order to prevent the downloading of potentially hostile
code the standard SecurityManager is installed, and prevents the download
of entities of all their program elements – including classes and stubs – not
found in those folders deﬁned by the local classpath. It is effective in many
applications though some may require additional ﬂexibility, or the ability to
conﬁgure the security policies as you would using a security gateway. RMI has
another security manager called java.rmi.RMISecurityManager that may
be used to implant a security policy that gives certain permissions depending
on the code’s origins. The security manager also operates on local code and
may render certain functions inoperable as they try to connect with remote
URLs, so a policy ﬁle must remedy this block. More information about RMI
security is available on the Web, and particularly at jini.org and at the Sun
general site.
ROLAP (Relational On-line Analytical Processing)
A data analysis
environment using RDBMS data structures and query language implemen-
tations and techniques.
(See OLAP and Data warehouse.)
Root class
A class in object oriented programming that is at the root of the
class hierarchy and which may be shown using a class diagram. This means
it does not inherit from superclasses, but has only subclasses.
(See Class, OO, Object and Objective-C.)
Route
1. Noun: A path taken by a packet or message which leads from a
sending device to a receiving device. The path might involve the interaction
with software components which may form part of an OO distributed system.
278

RSA One-way function
2. Verb: An action taken in order to send or forward a packet or message to
a receiving device, or even software component.
(See Screening router.)
Router
A device which receives and routes messages between network
systems, or between complete networks. The messages may be packets, cells
or frames, depending on the protocol used.
(See Protocol, Frame relay, Packet switched network Screening router.)
Routing
An action which sees a packet, cell or frame, allocated a path.
(See Protocol, Frame relay, Packet switched network Router, and Screen-
ing router.)
RS232
A standard from the Electronic Industries Association (EIA) for
the serial transmission of data over relatively short distances, but greater than
those internal to most computer systems. Standard representation of digital
data, using TTL for example, is limited in terms of transmission distance.
To overcome this, signal strength is broadly increased. RS232 represents an
industry standard for achieving this, increase transmission distance, and give
interchangeability of computer peripherals.
RSA
(See Cryptography.)
RSA
A public-key or asymmetric cryptosystem or algorithm developed
by MIT professors Ronald L. Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard M. Adleman
in 1977. It is used by numerous e-commerce site developers and e-commerce
product vendors. Its aim is to make difﬁcult the derivation of the private key
from the public key using a one-way function. For example, if the public
key is a known function of x, f (x) it may be made theoretically difﬁcult to
determine the unknown x that is the private key. The same cannot be said
of the reverse, where x is known and f (x) is unknown, particularly in the
case of factorising. This was illustrated in 1977 when RSA-129, a 129-digit
integer, was published by Martin Gardner in Scientiﬁc American. He laid
down the gauntlet, challenging readers to factorise it, for which they would
receive a small cash prize. Not until March 1994 was it factorised by Atkins
et al, using the resources of some 1600 computers and the quadratic sieve
factoring method that has been superseded by the more economical general
number ﬁeld sieve.
(See Cryptography and Brute Force, RSA Factoring and RSA.)
RSA One-way function
The so-called one-way function is appropriately
effective when attempting to factorise the product of two large primes. Using
RSA, this is implemented as follows:
279

RTP
1. Two prime numbers are selected: p and q
2. Calculate their product n, or the public modulus
3. Another chosen number e < n
4. e is relatively prime with (p −1)(q −1)
5. e and (p −1)(q −1), therefore, have only 1 as their common factor
6. Calculate d = e−1 mod[(p −1)(q −1)]
7. e is the public exponent
8. d is the private exponent
9. The public key is the pair, (n,e)
10. The private key is the pair, (n,d)
The chosen prime numbers p and q may be kept with the private key, or
destroyed. Using PGP, p and q are retained in encrypted form and help expe-
dite operations through the Chinese Remainder Theorem. The reverse process
is difﬁcult, thus obtaining the private key (n,d) from the public key (n,e) is
deemed secure Factorising n would result in p and q, leading to the private
key (n,d). The encryption process involves:
dividing the target message into blocks smaller than n
modular exponentiation: c = me mod n
Decryption or the inverse is driven by: m = cd mod n
RTP (Real-time Transport Protocol)
A protocol that supports real-time
audio/video communications.
(See ASF.)
Rule-based
A software solution that relies upon rules or heuristics for
decision making.
(See AML.)
280

S
SAA (Systems Application Architecture)
A strategy initiated by IBM
for enterprise computing, which deﬁnes the three layers:
• Common User Access
• Common Programming Interface
• Common Communications Support.
Sample
A digital value derived from an analogue source.
(See ADC and ISDN.)
Sales Ledger
A listing of sales that may include the date of sale, the
product description, the product code, the net cost, and the total cost including
a breakdown of sales taxes and shipping charges, and other miscellaneous
charges that may include that of storage.
Sampling rate (or frequency)
A frequency at which an incoming ana-
logue signal is digitised. The sampling rate of an ADC inﬂuences the effec-
tiveness of conversion.
SAP R/3
A client server development environment, which is the successor
to SAP R/2. The transition was a response to the shift from the two-tier
client/server model to the three-tier client/server model. The product is used
globally, and came to prominence through its application in German industry,
notably the automotive sector.
(See Client/server, Three-tier client/server and Two-tier client/server.)
Satellite system
A medium or communications technique which uses
orbiting satellites ﬁtted with microwave antennas. These provide line-of sight
communications with microwave antennas at earth stations. Applications are
used extensively in telecommunications, and in television broadcasting. Geo-
stationary satellites orbit above the equator, revolving in unison with the earth,
hence they are stationary relative to the earth’s rotation. The concept was
originated by science-ﬁction writer, Arthur C. Clark.
281

Scanner
Scanner
A device used to digitise printed material such as photographs.
With optical character recognition (OCR) software, a scanner may be used to
convert text into machine readable form. Types of scanner include:
• Hand-held scanners typically offer a scanning width of around 10 cm. Oper-
ation involves passing the scanner over images to be digitised.
• Flat-bed scanners are the most popular. Paper handling is comparable to
that of a photocopier. Flat-bed variants can allow complete A4 or A3
pages to be scanned, and are ideal for digitising manuscripts, together
with illustrations. If digitisation of a signiﬁcant amount of material forms
part of development, then a ﬂat-bed scanner is essential. Conversion of
text into a computer readable format requires optical character recognition
(OCR) software.
• Sheet-fed scanners are easier to use than hand-held scanners. Paper handling
approximates that of fax machine where motorised rollers simply pass sheets
over the scanning array. A principal disadvantage is that bound publication
pages have to be removed before they may be scanned.
• Drum scanners are very highly speciﬁed and tend to be used by commercial
printers and bureaux. They offer very high resolutions that provide true
photographic-quality images.
• Slide scanners enable the production of images using 35 mm slides alone.
Scanners may be greyscale or colour. The simplest greyscale variants will
produce 8 bit images so generating images with 256 (28) grey scales. More
sophisticated colour versions may generate colour images using 24 bits per
pixel so producing 16.7 million (224) colours. Image depths of 30 bits, 32 bits
or 36 bits may also be supported. Most scanners come complete with scanning
software, picture editing programs and OCR (Optical Character Recognition)
software. Such software may be essential in the production stage of multime-
dia, and also in electronic publishing when transcribing older texts into digital
form. Drivers supplied with a scanner do much for compatibility with various
software packages. For example, a standard Twain driver will allow the scan-
ner to be used with Twain compliant programs like HiJack Pro. Equally HP
Scanjet drivers are allowing the device to understand HP protocols.
Schema
A database architecture showing tables, indexes, rules, and links.
An ER diagram may be considered a schema.
SCM (See Supply Chain Management.)
Screen refresh rate
(See Refresh rate.)
Screen scraper
A client/server software component or function that
removes or ‘scrapes’ display information from requested data and formats
282

SCSI
it so it may be displayed by the client system. It can also do the same for
outgoing trafﬁc from the terminal or client system.
(See Client/server and client/server.)
Screened subnets
A subnet which restricts TCP/IP trafﬁc from entering
a secured network. The screening function may be implemented by screen-
ing routers.
(See Firewall, Screening router and Security gateway.)
Screening router
A router variant able to screen packets that match a
predeﬁned criteria, including the:
• source address
• destination address
• protocol type.
(See Firewall, Packet ﬁltering and Security.)
Script
A series of instructions that can be interpreted by a program, and
are sometimes referred to as macros. Scripts can sometimes be generated
through menu selections or by writing code.
(See VBScript and Perl.)
SCRIPT NAME
A CGI variable that holds the name and path of the CGI
script being executed.
Script-based authoring tool
A multimedia authoring system/environment
which requires coded program sequences or scripts. They are generally difﬁcult
to use for non-programmers.
Scripting
A scripting language such as VBScript or JScript may also be
perceived as a glue, as may be HTML.
(See JScript and VBScript.)
Scroll bar
A user-interface component that is used to scroll an image of
text that is too large to be shown in the display area. Horizontal and vertical
scroll bars are available.
SCSI (Small Computer System Interface)
A universal and internation-
ally agreed interface standard backed by ANSI (American National Standards
Institute), intended to provide interchangeability between peripherals and com-
puter systems from different manufacturers. Apple Computer has long since
realised the importance of SCSI ﬁtting Macintosh machines with appropriate
controllers. The SCSI continuum approximates:
• SCSI-1
• SCSI-2
283

SDK
• Wide SCSI
• Fast Wide SCSI
• Ultra SCSI.
(See Firewire and Fibre channel.)
SDK (Software Development Kit)
A library of functions that can be
used to implement speciﬁc solutions. Microsoft SDKs are numerous, and
include those associated with:
• ActiveX
• Java
• NetMeeting
• Design-Time Control
• Active Template Library
• OLE DB.
SDRAM (Static Dynamic RAM)
A type of random access memory
(RAM) that offers a comparatively short access time. Such access time is
measured in nano seconds (nS), or billionths of a second.
Search engine
1. A site used to retrieve documents from the World Wide
Web that operates using gathered and evolving indexes stored locally. The
indexes are not common to all search engines, though they share a standard
format which dictates that the document’s:
• heading is enclosed by HTML <TITLE> tags
• description consists of the 200 characters that follow the <BODY> tag, or the
matter enclosed by <META> tags.
The interface permits the entry of search words and phrases that may include
logical operators. Popular search engines include AltaVista, Yahoo and HotBot.
Web sites/pages
Web browser
Web page URLs
and Web page
content
Search string
Search engine
- Search engine
   such as AltaVista
- Index data
- URLs
284

Second generation language
A HTML tag may be used to enclose descriptive meta data that can be
used by search engines as an alternative to the 200 characters that follow
the <BODY> tag.
<HEAD>
<TITLE>Francis Botto home page</TITLE>
<META name="description" content="IT Research">
</HEAD>
Francis Botto
IT Research
The <META> tag may also be used to add keywords of up to 1,000 characters
to Web page, and may be retrieved through appropriate search phrases, i.e.:
<META name="keywords" content="Multimedia, MPEG, DVD">
A HTML tag that encloses the Web page title is used as meta data by popular
search engines when retrieving Web documents, displaying it as the docu-
ment’s title. Such data is collected by search engines periodically, but may
remain transparent if your ISP uses a robots.txt ﬁle to stop web robots from
indexing Web pages. It is possible to determine if a server has a robots.txt
ﬁle by entering the Web page’s URL (including its domain name and domain
category) and including robots.txt as a sufﬁx:
• http://www.FrancisBotto.com/robots.txt
Sending Web page URLs to search engines may cause them to be categorised
as available via additional search words and phrases, other than those contained
in the Web pages themselves. (See <TITLE> and HTML.) 2. A feature that
permits a Web site to be searched.
(See <META>, <TITLE> and HTML.)
Search string
A single word, phrase, sentence (or a number of words,
phrases, sentences) for which a document or number of documents are
searched. A search engine or retrieval system retrieves documents (or
document details) based on the search string. Search engines and retrieval
systems support wild cards and logical operators. For instance, if it were
necessary to ﬁnd documents containing the name Van Gogh along with the
city Amsterdam, using logical operators you would use the phrase ‘Van Gogh’
AND Amsterdam.
(See Search engine.)
Second generation language
A programming language where instruc-
tions are represented by concise mnemonics. The language is said to be a
285

Secure Mail
second generation language. Such ‘assembly languages’ are indigenous to pro-
cessors. Often the terms assembly language and machine code are regarded
interchangeable.
Secure Mail
An e-mail that is suitably encrypted.
(See Cryptosystem and RSA.)
Secure Systems
A system that has cryptosystems integrated into its
design.
(See Cryptosystem and RSA.)
Secure transaction
A transaction that is made secure using cryptography.
Security
A method of restricting access to applications, data and systems
to their intended users.
The term may include automated virus checks on incoming documents, and
on executable code such as Java applets and ActiveX controls using security
gateways. Firewall technology is key to Web security, as is data encryption and
password protection. Security is paramount to organisations deploying corpo-
rate data, and for companies running e-commerce Web sites (such as Amazon,
for example). Security standards include those developed by the United States
Department of Defense, and named the Trusted Computer Standards Eval-
uation Criteria, which are otherwise known as the Orange Book. This was
introduced in 1985, and was originally aimed at mainframe and mini comput-
ers for many years. It is also applicable to databases and to networks, through
the Trusted Database Interpretation, and the Trusted Network Interpretation.
The Orange Book is a multi-tier set of guidelines, including:
• Level D1, which is the lowest level of security, rendering the system
untrusted.
• Level C1, which is a discretionary security protection system, requiring a
login name and password, and access rights are allocated.
• Level C2, which includes Level D1 and Level C1 security, and integrates
additional security features. For instance, this level requires the system’s
relevant events be audited.
• Level B1, or Labelled Security Protection, which provides tiered security.
Compliance sees object permissions that may not be changed by ﬁle owners.
• Level B2, or Structured Protection, requires the labeling of all objects.
• Level B3, or Security Domains level, which requires terminal connections
via a trusted path.
• Level A, or Veriﬁed Design level, is the highest Orange book security level.
(See Security gateway, Encryption, Firewall, Packet ﬁltering, Risk exposure,
Screening router, SET and Web site security.)
286

Semantic Visual Caf´e
Security boundary
Also known as security perimeters, such boundaries
encapsulate systems, software, objects, etc. They may be implemented in soft-
ware, hardware using ﬁrewalls, passwords, encryption, and the assignment of
dongles to users. Boundaries exist at a number of different levels including:
• Physical, which covers tangible resources such as systems
• Application, which cover access rights to applications
• Data, which covers access and editing rights to data
• System, which dictates who may log on to a network or system.
(See Firewall.)
Security gateway
A security layer that fortiﬁes a network against hostile
virus attacks, by screening incoming executables and data. The executables
might be Java applets, ActiveX controls or plug-ins. Each of these represents a
potential threat, not just in terms of viruses, but in terms of what they may do
to client-side documents, ﬁles and even system ﬁles such as those concerned
with the initialisation of Windows variants. For instance, an ActiveX control
might take control of a client’s Word documents, performing operations on
them, such as convert them to HTML, and then possibly abstract them, for
display or even processing on a remote Web site. For many security man-
agers, this is unacceptable behaviour. Additionally, the unregulated Internet
means that virtually anyone can deploy applications that can potentially dam-
age clients. It is desirable, therefore, to attempt to check and possibly screen
such inbound trafﬁc. Such a comparative centralisation of the anti-virus secu-
rity layer, makes redundant the need for standalone variants on clients, though
these may still be employed particularly if removable media are being used
for ﬁle transfer. Such a security gateway may:
• provide multiple OS support, such as Windows, DOS, Netware, though
many are conﬁned to Windows NT.
• support ActiveX, Java, cookies, plug-ins, JavaScript, JScript, VBScript and
various executables.
• check all Java classes on downloaded applets.
• provide intelligent ﬁltering features.
(See Firewall and Security.)
Security protocols
A protocol that integrates a cryptosystem.
(See SHTTP.)
Security proxy
A Web proxy that integrates security features that are used
to authenticate connections to servers.
(See Firewall, Security and Web proxy.)
Semantic Visual Caf´e
A visual programming development tool.
(See Visual Basic.)
287

Semaphore
Semaphore
A communications method, involving physical signaling,
which was invented by the French in 1792. Even today the semaphore principle
is applied in programming, where ﬂags may be used to relay certain states and
events. In computer terms, Semaphore may be applied to coordinate processes.
Sequential prose
A continuous stream of linear text.
(See Hypertext and Nelson, Theodore.)
Serial port
An input/output port through which data is transmitted and
received sequentially. RS232 is a standard serial port used to transmit serial
digital information over modest distances to connect communication devices
and other serial peripherals to computers. The PC COM (COMmunications)
ports are serial ports.
(See Firewire and USB.)
Server
1. A Web server may be considered as the software implementa-
tion that serves HTML pages, etc. Commercial examples include:
• Microsoft IIS
• Apache server
(See Web.) 2. A transaction server is allocated the task of transaction pro-
cessing (TP), and often invokes the application logic necessary to perform
database interactions and manipulations. The process(es) invoked directly or
indirectly by the client are collectively referred to as the transaction. Transac-
tion servers may include UI logic, driving the client UI, relegating the client
device to little more than a dumb terminal. Typically, mainframe based trans-
action systems might adhere to this model. Alternatively, the UI logic, or
presentation may be distributed to the client. The server consists of a TP
monitor that performs transaction management and resource management.
Transaction management ensures the so-called ACID properties of transac-
tions. These include Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation and Durability. ACID
property compliance is achieved through the two-phase commit protocol. (See
ACID and Two-phase commit.) Resource management is intended to optimise
the use of resources that include memory, mass storage and processing. It
may also be involved with load balancing between resources and between the
software processes that may be threads. (See MPP.) 3. An entity that serves
clients. The services provided might include the implementation of processes
and the distribution of data, and may be categorised under:
• Fax, where the server provide fax reception and transmission facilities for
connected client systems.
• Database, in the client/server conﬁguration in which SQL requests from the
clients perform the necessary data requests.
• Communications, which enable client systems to make remote connections
to external networks and servers.
288

Server application
• Print, where the server is dedicated to printing locally or remotely.
• File, where a centralised server, perhaps connected to RAID storage devices,
is utilised by clients to provide high-volume data storage, and high perfor-
mance disk access and data transfer rates.
• Transaction, where the server updates data which may form part of a sim-
ple client/server two-dimensional database, or warehouse data that may be
multidimensional (in data cubes) or even hyper-cubes.
(See Data warehouse and entries listed below.) 4. A Web server is the hardware
platform that supports one or Web sites. Traditionally, Web servers have been
based on the Unix or Windows NT OSs. 5. An intranet server may considered
in the same terms of a Web server, but with a security perimeter to prevent
public access. 6. A peer-to-peer server is a system on a network in which the
resources of any connected system may be shared. While any system on a peer-
to-peer network might be a server, typically the most highly speciﬁed system
performs as a server. 7. A ﬁle server provides centralised resources for network
users. 8. A database server provides centralised data storage. 9. An object or
application that serves an application or object with embedded or linked data.
The server might be OLE 2.0 compliant, or may conform to another com-
ponent architecture. (See ActiveX, Object and OLE.) 10. A CD-ROM server
dynamically distributes requested information from CD-ROM drives to LAN
users. If the maximum number of drives per server is exceeded, additional
servers are added. The incorporation of additional servers, prior to reach-
ing the network maximum of drives per server, leads to better service for
users. There are several commercially available CD-ROM network packages,
many of which are software orientated. 11. A video server is a hardware solu-
tion that provides the basis for a Video-on-Demand (VoD) service. It may
be implemented using MPP. Advantages of such parallel processing sys-
tems include scalability, where growing numbers of subscribers to a VoD
service may be accommodated through additional processors, and even com-
plete servers. (See MPP.) 12. A video, audio or multimedia server serves client
systems with streaming media. (See ASF, Streaming and e-commerce web site
development.) 13. A WAP server provides WAP applications to mobile users.
14. A 3G server provides 3G services to users. 15. A GPRS server provides
2.5G GPRS services to users.
Server application
A term used to describe a server-side application that
may drive, or provide services for client applications and systems. The latter
tier is the front-end, with which the user interacts. Between the back- and
front-end applications is middleware or glues which exist at a number of
levels. These may bind together and coordinate application logic, data and
presentation distributed across the back- and front-ends.
(See Application, Client/server, Front-end and Glues.)
289

Server crash
Server crash
A state where a Web server is rendered inoperable by a
hacker who has in some way overloaded the services it provides perhaps by:
• Subjecting the server to excessive e-mail trafﬁc
• Using a program that continually attempts to access content ﬁles.
(See Hacking, See Brute Force, cryptosystem, RSA, public key encryption,
asymmetrical and Dictionary attack.)
Server object
An object that runs on a server or at some location at tier 3.
(See 3-tier.)
SERVER NAME
A protocol that contains the name of the host on which
server is running.
SERVER PORT
A CGI variable that holds the port on which server
is running.
(See CGI variables.)
SERVER PROTOCOL
A CGI variable that contains the protocol ver-
sion.
SERVER SOFTWARE
A protocol that holds the name and perhaps ver-
sion of the server software.
Service
An entity that may be used to provide functions of some kind that
may be relevant to users, devices, applications or to other services that are
typically on a network. Jini services are an example, and may provide access
to communications applications, printers, remote residential networks, etc.
Servlet
A Java program that exists on the server-side and publishes services
which may be dynamic Web content to clients, and coexists with an HTTP
server. Servlets are compiled, support threading, and may be added to Web
sites using programs like JRun or a Java module for the Apache server. An
e-commerce site may use a servlet that is perhaps based on the HttpServlet
abstract class which provides support for handling requests from the client-side,
and responds to them accordingly. Servlets may be loaded either:
• when speciﬁed using a URL
• or when the Web server starts.
The Web server calls the servlet’s init method to begin, and the servlet
calls service, doGet, or doPost method requests to serve requests. When
unloaded the servlet may invoke the destroy method to release itself from
committed resources and to save state changes to a persistent state, and these
may be retrieved using the init method. When called the init method is
passed a ServletConfig object that holds conﬁguration information about
the particular Web server implementation including the initArgs parameter
290

SET Consortium
that is held in the servlet properties ﬁle, and is obtained by calling the con-
fig.getInitParameter("parameter") method. Servlets may also interact
with, and make use of, EJBs (Enterprise JavaBeans). A HTTP servlet may
handle requests and responses using its service method, and accepts the:
• HttpServletRequest object that holds the client’s sent headers and
streams.
• HttpServletResponse object that holds the servlet’s output stream
response.
SET (Secure Electronic Transactions)
A standard means of securing
payment transactions made to on-line merchants. Integrating cryptosystem
techniques, it is perceived as a credit card security system, and was initiated by
Visa and Microsoft. SET implementations are an amalgam of cryptosystems,
protocols, secure protocols and techniques.
(See SET and Cryptography.)
SET application
An application that uses the SET internationally agreed
technologies and methodologies.
(See SET.)
SET ASN.1 (Abstract Syntax Notation One)
A standard that deﬁnes the
encoding, transmission and encoding of data and objects that are architecture
neutral.
SET Baggage
A method of appending ciphered data to a SET message.
SET CDMF
Commercial Data Masking Facility. A ciphering technique
based on DES that is used to transfer messages between the Acquirer Payment
Gateway and the Cardholder in SET implementations.
SET Certiﬁcate Authority
A trusted party that manages the distribu-
tion of SET digital certiﬁcates, where layers of the Tree of Trust has the
representation of a digital certiﬁcate.
SET certiﬁcate chain
A group of digital certiﬁcates used to validate a
certiﬁcate in a chain.
SET certiﬁcate practice statement
A group of rules that determine the
suitability of certiﬁcates to particular applications and communities.
SET certiﬁcate renewal
An event that sees the renewal of a certiﬁcate
for continued transacting purposes.
SET Consortium
An international organisation that was formed when
Mastercard and Visa announced SET, whose initial objective was to create an
agreeable standard, and to consider STT and SEPP.
(See SET.)
291

SET digital certiﬁcate
SET digital certiﬁcate
A means of linking an entity’s identity with a
public key and carried out by a trusted party.
SET digital signature
A digital signature may be applied to an encrypted
message. A message digest is ciphered using the sender’s private key and then
appended to the message, resulting in a digital signature.
SET E-wallet
An element of a cardholder that creates the protocol and
assists in the acquiring and management of cardholder digital signatures.
(See Digital certiﬁcates and SET.)
SET Hash
An element that reduces the number of possible values using
a hashing function such as the Secure Hashing Algorithm (SHA-1).
SET Idempotency
An attribute of a message that sees repetition yield a
constant result.
SET message authentication
A process or usually sub-process that ver-
iﬁes that a message is received from the appropriate or legal sender.
SET message pair
Messages that implement the POS and certiﬁcate man-
agement in a SET implementation.
SET message wrapper
A top-level data structure that conveys informa-
tion to message recipients.
SET order inquiry
A pair of set messages used to check the status of
orders.
SET Out-of-Band
An activity that is not within the bounds of the SET
recommendations, guidelines and standards.
SET PKCS
Public Key Cryptography Standards. A set of public key
cryptography standards used by SET which include:
• RSA
• Difﬁe-Hellman key agreements
• Password based encryption
• Extended certiﬁcate syntax
• Cryptographic message syntax
• Private-key information syntax
• Certiﬁcation request syntax.
(See Cryptography.)
SGSN
(See 2.5G.)
292

Shopping cart
SHA-1
Secure Hashing Algorithm. A mechanism for reducing the number
of possible values.
Shannon’s theorem
A theorem that may be applied to give the maximum
data transfer limit over a given medium such as an access technology:
I = F log2(1 + S/N)
F = bandwidth
S/N = signal-to-noise ratio.
(See 56.6 Kbps, Access Technology and Modem.)
Shareware
A distribution channel that sees software initially provided
free of charge, and is usually made usable for a ﬁxed trial period, after which
a registration fee may or may not be required. On payment of the registration
fee, the software is supported by its vendors.
Shell
1. A means of entering commands using Unix and other similar
operating systems. Unix shell may be considered as performing a similar
task to the command line interpreter associated with DOS. 2. A term used
to describe the framework of an expert system. The shell is occupied by a
knowledge base that consists of IF. . .THEN rules that are used to solve entered
problems. The knowledge (or rule) base is interpreted by an inference engine.
Shockwave
A streaming multimedia technology that uses AfterBurner
compression. Its producers, Macromedia, also produce the popular Director
and Authorware programs. Essentially, the technology is used to deploy Direc-
tor movies over the Web, and can also be applied to applications that depend
on the Lingo multimedia authoring language. Web Browsers may be enabled
using a Shockwave plug-in.
(See Lingo and Streaming.)
Shopping basket
A metaphor used by e-commerce sites so customers
may accumulate products for purchase.
(See Shopping cart.)
Shopping cart
An element of an e-commerce site that permits items to be
collected and purchased at a virtual checkout. Typically items are written to
the client as cookies and their information is read by the e-commerce site when
the ﬁnal purchase is committed and the transaction is made. Another method
of implementing shopping carts involves the use of forms and hidden ﬁelds,
and remedies situations where the cookie function on the browser is turned off,
or when the browser does not support cookies. A number of shopping cart
implementations are available free, and one may be found at www.eff.org.
An alternative to using a shopping card might be to create an order form
293

S-HTTP
that is embedded in an HTML page using an appropriate scripting language
or you may prefer to rely on the forms and templates provided by a Web
development tool.
S-HTTP
A means of seamlessly integrating encryption into HTTP. It was
developed by Enterprise Integration Technologies, and supports RSA, DES,
triple DES and DESX.
(See Encryption.)
SIG
Special Interest Group.
Signature
A means of securing transmitted matter that includes e-mail
messages, and requires a Digital ID that may be purchased from many sources.
SIM (Subscriber Identiﬁcation Module.)
(See 2G.)
SIM chip
(See 2G.)
Site Server
A Microsoft solution for enhancing, deploying and managing
e-commerce Web sites.
SITPRO
Simpler Trade Procedures Board (U.K.)
SK8 (‘Skate’)
A multimedia authoring tool/environment developed by
Apple Computer.
Skeleton
A server-side program that accepts methods along with their
parameters, and performs the necessary state changes and invocations on rel-
evant remote objects.
SLIP (Serial Line Internet Protocol)
A protocol often used for serial
data transmission over media that include access technologies such as POTs.
(See PPP.)
Smalltalk
An OO programming language.
(See OOP.)
SmartCard
A credit-card size device that has an embedded processor
chip that can store digital certiﬁcates and an e-purse that is a stored cash
value for small purchases.
SMP (Symmetric Multi-Processing)
A system architecture comprising
multiple processors that share an interconnecting bus and memory. Such sys-
tems are applied as servers, and such processor designs as the Intel Pentium
Pro are optimised for SMP. SMP systems offer processor scalability, but not
in the precise processing increments associated with MPP systems. Unlike
294

SOAP
Cache
Shared bus
Shared
memory
Processor
P1
P2
P3
P5
Pn
SMP − simple architecture
MPP systems, limitless scalability is prohibited by the interconnecting bus
bandwidth that is shared.
(See MPP and NUMA.)
SMPTE
Society of Motion Picture & Television Engineers.
SMTP (Simple Mail Transport Protocol)
A protocol used to transmit
e-mail messages over the Internet, and across other compatible IP networks
(See TCP/IP.)
Snifﬁng
A term used to describe the use of a sniffer program to monitor
data trafﬁc to a network or server. It may be applied to gather illegal passwords
and IDs for ISP accounts, and passwords to mail accounts, and passwords to
remote systems.
(See Firewall.)
SNMP (Simple Network Management Protocol)
A protocol or set of
rules for the exchange of operational statistics over the Internet. Such statistics
may be Web server hits, or speciﬁc to routers that store the number of bytes,
packets, and errors transmitted and received on each interface (port).
SOAP
SOAP is an Internet protocol for XML Web services, and has a:
• Framework and content deﬁning envelope.
• Rule set for handling data types.
• A convention for RMI (remote procedure calls) and responses.
295

Socket
Socket
An interface that offers a peer-to-peer endpoint, and has a name
and an address. Datagram sockets interface with UDP, Stream sockets inter-
faces with the TCP protocol, and Raw sockets interface with protocol levels
which include the IP network layer. Berkeley sockets are the best known sock-
ets for TCP/IP stack communications and were introduced in 1981. They have
many variations, including the Microsoft WinSock API which is standardised
TCP/IP implementation for Windows.
socket
1. A ﬁle descriptor allocated using socket(2) – in a BSD
context. 2. A data structure allocated when a kernel’s socket(2) is called – in
a BSD context. 3. A socket may serve the same purpose as an IP port.
(See Port.)
Software Distribution
A method of delivering software to users. Software
distribution can be done by downloading from the Internet. Other distribution
media include ﬂoppy disk, CD-ROM and DVD-ROM. The ﬁrst commercial
CD-ROM software distribution disc from a major producer was Microsoft
Ofﬁce. Farallon Computing released lesser known programs on CD-ROM
prior to this, as did Microsoft itself. Also PC Sig released the world’s ﬁrst
shareware compilation on CD-ROM in the US. Used as a distribution medium,
DVD-ROM presents vendors with new opportunities: spare storage space may
be used for program demonstrations, program documentation, training material
and advertising using DVD (MPEG-2) video. Currently most leading software
producers distribute their programs on CD-ROM, but a swing to DVD-ROM
is imminent.
(See CD-ROM and DVD.)
Software key
A method for unlocking encrypted data. It allows the cus-
tomer to unlock the products purchased contained on a CD-ROM.
Sony Vaio
A popular family of notebook PCs from the Sony Corpo-
ration, each including the iLink connector which is synonym for FireWire
or IEEE1394.
Sound card
A plug-in card which permits wave audio recording, multi-
voice sound synthesis and speech synthesis
SoundBlaster
A range of sound cards produced by Creative Technology.
SOX (Schema for Object-Oriented XML)
A data description language
that uses the XML data model to produce XML documents. Commerce One
developed SOX to improve XML’s data abstraction capability by improving
communications with databases. SOX extends XML using:
• extensible set of data types
296

Sprite
• object-oriented concepts such as inheritance
• namespace enhancements
• embedded documentation support
• polymorphic content, which allows instances to use element types from
numerous schemas.
SOX enables developers to use XML/SOX processors to transform SOX docu-
ments into programming language code, XML DTDs, and into documentation.
(See xCBL.)
SPAM
A form of unsolicited e-mail: the Internet equivalent of junk mail.
The originators of such e-mail are termed Spammers, and known Spammers
may be ﬁltered using appropriate software.
Speech recognition
A technique by which a computer is able to recognise
speech and perform tasks. Modestly speciﬁed speech recognition programs
recognise a modest number of words. Commercial examples include Creative
VoiceAssist and Microsoft VoicePilot (included in Microsoft Windows Sound
System), both of which provide a means for operating Windows and Win-
dows applications using voice commands. More advanced speech recognition
systems are voice-independent, dictation systems, such as IBM ViaVoice, and
competing, successful products from Dragon Systems.
(See ViaVoice.)
Speech synthesis
A process of generating recognisable speech using dig-
ital data. Currently, most speech synthesis programs operate by combining
a predeﬁned set of phonemes. Such programs are sometimes called text-to-
speech convertors. Commercial examples include Creative TextAssist which
reads text, and ProofReader (supplied with Microsoft Windows Sound System)
that read monetary and numeric data. TextAssist is useful for proof reading
long documents in Windows applications. ProofReader is aimed at reading
data entered in real-time. Both tools serve to increase productivity. Other
commercial speech synthesis programs include Texto’LE that can be embed-
ded into documents as an OLE object. Occasionally, the vocabulary of speech
synthesis programs may be increased using a predeﬁned set of phonemes, or
sometimes it is necessary to add wave audio ﬁles.
spider
A Search Engine Robot that reads your webpages and metatags.
Split shipment
An instance where an order cannot be shipped fully, but
must be shipped in part at various stages.
Sprite
A screen image conﬁned to a limited number of pixels, often used
as ‘characters’ in computer games, and pointers in GUIs. Highly mobile, they
may be deﬁned by hardware or software.
297

SPX/IPX
SPX/IPX
A network protocol.
SQL (Standard Query Language)
A non-procedural language that is
used to manipulate data stored in a relational DBMS. Like other procedural
languages that include Prolog, it does not have a rigidly deﬁned series of
operations to perform a function. Some thirty commands are included in the
SQL speciﬁcation, of which a recent version is SQL-92. However, third-parties
have extended it to semi-proprietary variants. The language permits:
• the creation of table structures
• the entry, correction and deletion of data
• the databases to be queried, to satisfy perhaps data requests.
The SQL syntax is easily learnt and understood as it depends heavily on
English words and phrases. For example, creating a database requires the
statement:
CREATE DATABASE datawarehouse
Further reading
Date. C. J., A Guide to the SQL Standard, Addison Wesley, 1987. (This text
describes the original SQL standard.)
(See Data warehouse, C++, Java and OOP.)
Square mile
A ﬁnancial centre in the city of London.
SRAM (Static Random Access Memory)
A volatile form of electronic
memory which is not constantly refreshed. It therefore consumes less power.
SSL protocol (Secure Sockets Layer protocol)
A secure channel or pro-
tocol that is supported by the TCP transport protocol. It includes the higher
level protocol SSL Handshake Protocol that authenticates the client and server
devices, and allows them to decide upon an encryption algorithm and keys
before data reception or transmission commences. Its ability to allow high level
protocols to sit on top of it is perceived as an advantage. Used alone, SSL
is not perceived as a complete security solution, though it does present one
signiﬁcant security perimeter in the eyes of many security analysts. It ensures
a secure connection by authentication of peer’s connection and uses integrity
checks and hashing functions, to secure the channel between applications. It
was designed to prevent:
• Information forgery
• Eavesdropping or snifﬁng
• Data changes.
Private or symmetric key is the basis of the SSL’s cryptography, and it authen-
ticates a peer’s identity using asymmetric cryptography.
298

SSL-enabled Web Server
Client browser
SSL handshake
SSL Web server
1
client
hello
2
server
hello
3
client
master
key
4
client
finish
5
server
verify
6
server
finish
SLL’s ﬂaws are documented widely and include:
• When a browser connects with an SSL server, it receives a copy of its public
key wrapped in a certiﬁcate that the Browser sanctions by checking the
signature. The ﬂaw here is that the Browser lacks the means to authenticate
the signature, as no veriﬁcation is performed up the hierarchy because many
certiﬁcates used by SSL are root certiﬁcates.
• It consumes client and server processing resources.
• It has operational difﬁculties with proxies and ﬁlters.
• It has operational difﬁculties with existing cryptography tokens.
• Its key management tends to be expensive.
• Expertise to build, maintain and operate secure systems is in short sup-
ply (1999).
• It creates network trafﬁc when handshaking.
• The migration path from non-public key infrastructures is arduous.
• It requires Certiﬁcate Authority with appropriate policies.
• Its communication data does not compress and therefore steals network
bandwidth.
• It is subject to certain international import restrictions.
(See SSL, RSA and cryptography.)
SSL Web Server
A web server the supports the Secure Sockets Layer
protocol.
(See SET and SSL protocol.)
SSL-enabled Web Server
(See SSL Web Server.)
299

Stack
Stack
A contiguous series of memory locations utilised as a storage area.
It is a LIFO (Last In First Out) system because the order in which items are
dispensed opposes that in which they were deposited. A stack is sometimes
called a push-down store. It may be used to store the return addresses from
subroutines.
Start button
A button that provides single-click access to the main menu
system in Windows 95/NT. By default it appears at the bottom left of the
screen and is anchored to the Task bar which underlines all applications. The
menus that result from the Start button may be navigated by dragging the
mouse, and highlighted menu items may be run by clicking them once. The
Start button and Task bar were introduced into the Windows 95 design in
order to replace the Program Manager.
stickiness (of web sites)
The time spent at a site over a given period.
Store and forward agent
An object or event generator that uses an inter-
mediate object to relay notiﬁcation of events to objects or event listeners that
have expressed an interest in hearing them.
Streaming
1. Streaming audio. A method of playing audio while the audio
stream is being downloaded. Streaming audio plug-ins are available for popu-
lar browsers such as Netscape Navigator. Such plug-ins are useful for tuning
into radio broadcasting services on the Web. 2. Streaming video. A method of
playing video while the video stream is being downloaded. Streaming video
plug-ins are available for Netscape Navigator, while equivalent ActiveX con-
trols operate with Microsoft Internet Explorer.
(See ASF and Microsoft NetShow.)
Streaming media
A means of distributing audio, video and multimedia
in real-time over the Web or similar TCP/IP network such as an intranet.
Server
Browser
Internet
Request
Multimedia
stream
Streaming multimedia
(LAN
or
WAN)
Client
ActiveX
control
or Plug-in
Real-time
audio/video
decompression
and playback
Streaming
multimedia
server
Compressed
audio/video
Formats
- ASF
- VIV
- RMFF
- VXI
300

Stylesheet
Strong Cryptosystem
A cryptosystem that is considered safe from
attacks, and is difﬁcult to crack using known techniques.
(See SET, Brute Force, cryptosystem, RSA, public key encryption, asymmetric
and Dictionary attack.)
Structured programming
A programming model which consists of pro-
cedures or subroutines, and has no GOTO commands in order to direct pro-
gram execution unconditionally. All modern high-level languages may be
assumed to comply with structure programming. One of the ﬁrst implementa-
tions was structured BASIC that was launched in 1982 by Acorn Computer.
It was integrated into its Acorn BBC microcomputer design in the form of
a ROM-based Basic interpreter. One of the earliest structured programming
languages was Algol, which was evolved into Pascal.
(See Basic.)
Stub
A proxy object that is stored locally, and is usually downloaded, and
provides an interface with a remote object or service.
Stylesheet
An entity synonymous with template that imposes a presen-
tation style on content that may include objects, text strings, graphics, UI
components and hyperlinks.
External Style Sheet
A template/document/ﬁle containing style information that
may link with one of a number of HTML documents, permitting a site to be re-styled
by editing one ﬁle. They may be linked to a HTML document using the form:
<HEAD>
<LINK REL=STYLESHEET HREF="style.css" TYPE="text/css">
</HEAD>
Embedded style
A style attached to one speciﬁc document using the form:
<HEAD>
<STYLE TYPE="text/css">
<!--
P {text-indent: 14pt}
-->
</STYLE>
</HEAD>
Inline style
An attached style that affects one element and is speciﬁed in the start
tag as a value of the STYLE attribute:
<P STYLE="text-indent: 10pt">Indented paragraph</P>
Imported Style Sheet
A style sheet that can be imported to (combined with)
another sheet, combining:
• main sheet that applies to the whole site
• partial sheets that apply to speciﬁc documents.
301

Stylus
Form:
<LINK REL=STYLESHEET HREF="main.css" TYPE="text/css">
<STYLE TYPE="text=css">
<!--
@import url(http://www.botto.com/fast.css);
@import url(http://www.botto.com/fast.css);
.... other statements
-->
</STYLE>
Alternate Style Sheet
A stylesheet used to deﬁne an alternate style to those
declared as persistent and/or preferred. The persistent style is, of course, the default
style and may be overridden by the alternate style.
Stylus
A pen input device used to interact with, and write to, a computer
or appliance. The ﬁrst stylus was the light pen which was yielded by the
US Defense SAGE project, an early warning radar system based upon digital
graphics technology. A stylus might be used as a pen with a graphics tablet
or bit pad. The stylus is used widely in pen computing with everything from
notebook computers to PDAs. In pen computing the user simply writes directly
on the screen, and data entry using normal long hand is valid.
Subnet
A method of using an IP address so that a greater number of
networks may be addressed. IP addresses are designed to accommodate net-
works that can have between 253 and several million hosts. In many instances,
organisations wish to address a number of networks using a class C address.
By creating subnets using their IP address, they can link the separate networks
using a router. Subnets are created by dividing the last octet of an IP address.
The division involves reserving the most signiﬁcant bits of the octet to pro-
vide addressing information for subnets. This may yield one of the following
conﬁgurations:
2 subnets, each with 62 hosts
6 subnets, each with 30 hosts
14 subnets, each with 14 hosts
30 subnets, each with 6 hosts
62 subnets, each with 2 hosts.
(See IP address.)
Subnotebook
A portable computer that is smaller and lighter than con-
ventional A4-size notebook computers.
(See Notebook.)
Substitution
A cryptography technique that sees characters replaced by
other characters.
302

Supply Chain Management
(See Encryption algorithm, SET, Brute Force, cryptosystem, RSA, public key
encryption, asymmetrical, Transposition and Dictionary attack.)
Subsystem
A physical element of a PC. Subsystems include graphics card,
video capture cards, hard disks and sound cards.
(See Hard disk, Graphics card and Sound card.)
Sun Microelectronics
A division of Sun Microsystems, and manufacturer
of Chips that are optimised for the Java programming language, including:
• PicoJava chipset, used in cellular phones, and computer peripherals.
• MicroJava processor, used in network devices, telecommunications hard-
ware and consumer games.
• UltraJava, optimised for use in 3D graphics and multimedia-related com-
puting, much like Intel’s MMX Technology.
(See Java and MMX.)
Superclass
A class of objects that has subclasses which may inherit its
attributes and behaviour.
(See Inheritance.)
Supercomputer
An MPP architecture based on a network of parallel
processors.
(See MPP.)
Supply chain
A course or evolution that begins with raw materials and
ends with the sale of a ﬁnished product or service, and includes entities such
as buyers, manufacturers, distributors, suppliers and consumers. It is an e-
commerce company’s set of functions that may be internal or external, and
allows the value chain to produce products and deliver services to customers.
A supply chain includes information, communications and processes that bind
the link between the supplier and customer.
(See Supply Chain Management.)
Supply Chain Management (SCM)
A set of processes and sub-processes
that attempt to implement and optimise the functions, connected entities, and
interacting elements that are in a supply chain. It addresses a number of key
business areas and may be assumed to improve:
• enterprise performance
• corporate growth
• customer service
• order management
• demand planning
303

Surf
• warehouse distribution
• partnerships
• Y2K compliance
• cash-to-cash cycle
• supplier/supply base management
Supply Chain Management’s key processes, techniques, networks, channels
and infrastructures include:
• information networks
• EDI
• Internet/Web
• Distribution Resources Planning (DRP)
• distributed warehousing
• Drop ship
• multi-sourcing
• Integrated ERP
• Interprise
• supplier scheduling
• virtual corporation
(See Supply Chain.)
Surf
An alternative and popular term for browsing the Internet.
SWIFT
Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications.
Swing (See Java Swing)
Switched network
A telecommunications network that uses switches to
route calls from one telephone to the next. A switch matrix may be used to
allow intercommunication between connected terminals.
Symbolic constant
A symbolic constant has a name, and is assigned
an unchanging value. It may be used just like an integer constant. Sym-
bolic constants improve program maintenance and updating: a single change
may be made to a symbolic constant that might be used throughout a pro-
gram. A symbolic constant multiplier may be assigned the value 10 using the
C++ code:
#define multiplier 10
or,
const unsigned short int multiplier = 10
symbolic link
A link that permits multiple references to ﬁles and folders.
304

Symmetric Cryptosystem Operation
Symmetric cryptography
A cryptosystem where the processes of
encryption and decryption each require the use of a single key. Unless the
recipient of the encrypted data already knows the key, it may be left to the
sender to transmit its details over a secure channel.
Symmetric Cryptosystem Operation
A series of processes and sub-
processes that:
• converts plaintext into ciphertext using a cipher or encryption algorithm
• returns ciphertext to plaintext using a decryption algorithm.
Using a symmetric key and the transposition technique, the processes include
the following.
Encryption
Send the key, such as UNLOCK for example, to the recipient using
a secure channel. Arrange the key in a columnar fashion with numerals indicating
their alphabetical sequence:
U
6
N
4
L
3
O
5
C
1
K
2
Arrange the plaintext, such as ATTACK VESSEL in columns as shown below:
U
6
A
V
N
4
T
E
L
3
T
S
O
5
A
S
C
1
C
E
K
2
K
L
Create the ciphertext by writing the row values in sequence dictated by the numerical
value, i.e.:
CE
KL
TS
TE
AS
AV
Send the ciphertext to the recipient where a secure channel is optional.
Decryption
Again the key characters are assigned numerals indicating their alpha-
betical sequence:
U
6
N
4
L
3
O
5
C
1
K
2
305

Symmetric key cryptography
The decryption algorithm takes the ciphertext and, based on the numerical value, it
creates the plaintext:
U
6
A
V
N
4
T
E
L
3
T
S
O
5
A
S
C
1
C
E
K
2
K
L
(See SET, Ciphertest, Plaintext, Encryption algorithm, SET, Brute Force,
cryptosystem, RSA, public key encryption, asymmetric, Transposition and
Dictionary attack.)
Symmetric key cryptography
A cryptosystem that uses the same key to
encrypt and decrypt messages.
(See SET, Ciphertest, Plaintext, Encryption algorithm, SET, Brute Force, cryp-
tosystem, RSA, public key encryption, asymmetric, Transposition and Dictio-
nary attack.)
306

T
T1
An AT&T designation for a digital link with a bandwidth of 1.544 Mbps.
(See ATM, Frame relay and ISDN.)
T2
An AT&T designation for a digital link with a bandwidth of 6.312 Mbps.
(See ATM, Frame relay and ISDN.)
T3
An AT&T designation for a digital link with a bandwidth of
44.736 Mbps.
T50
An ITU-T designation for Ascii.
T90
An ITU-T designation for image coding that is used by Group 4
facsimile. This uses an ISDN 64 Kbps bearer channel.
Tangible asset
An asset that is physical and is normally listed in some
form on a company’s balance sheet.
Tape streamer
A magnetic tape storage device used to backup hard disk
data as a contingency measure against data loss or data corruption resulting
from system failure or an interruption of the power supply. Data recovery
simply involves copying the contents of the tape streamer to a functioning
hard disk.
Taskbar
A status bar used in Windows 98/NT that underlines all appli-
cations. It bears the Start button and illustrates all open applications that may
be minimised or maximised. By default the Taskbar also illustrates the time
of day. The Windows 95/98/NT user interface centres around the Taskbar,
which provides buttons to select open applications, and it anchors the Start
button that invokes the Start menu. The Start menu bears options that lead to
programs as well as to submenus. Once invoked, the menu system may be
navigated by dragging the mouse rather than by clicking on its menu items.
Programs are opened through a single mouse click.
(See Windows.)
307

TCP/IP
TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol)
A standard
network protocol used to transmit or route data from one IP address to the
next. Protocols which use TCP/IP include:
• HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol).
• HTTPS (HyperText Transfer Protocol Secure), which integrates cryptogra-
phy and forms the basis of a secure connection and secure site.
• SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol).
• FTP (File Transfer Protocol).
Unix servers provide numerous commands and daemons that relate to TCP/IP.
A standard set of protocols used in packet switched networks, it consists also
of standard and nonstandard ﬁles, utilities, and daemons. It interprets a stan-
dard set of commands. TCP/IP originated from DARPA and ARPANET, and
is one of the most established internationally agreed standard protocols. Occa-
sionally, however, it includes proprietary ﬁles and programs through speciﬁc
implementations which include that of Santa Cruz Operation (SCO). (See ATM
and Frame relay.)
TCP/IP Daemons
A daemon is a program or process dedicated to perform what
is usually a singular given function, such as sending mail. TCP/IP daemons include
those added by third-parties including SCO. The Daemons include:
• DNS (Domain Name Server), which is used to provide IP addresses for given
host names.
• SYSLOG (System Logger), which stores messages pertaining to various opera-
tional events including status, detected errors, and debugging.
• SNMP, which is an implementation of the Simple Network Management Protocol,
and is capable of receiving information from such compatible agents.
• INETD (Super Server), which monitors TCP/IP ports for incoming messages.
• BOOTP, which implements an Internet Boot Protocol server.
• ROUTE, which manages Internet routing tables, and is invoked when booted.
The netstat command is used to print the routing tables. Among other details, the
resulting listing shows gateways to networks.
• RARP (Reverse Address Resolution Protocol), which is able to provide a 32 bit
IP address in response to a 48 bit Ethernet address.
• LINE PRINTER, which accepts incoming print jobs, and queues them for remote
printing.
• SLINK, which links STREAMS modules and is included within Unix implemen-
tations that use STREAMS-TCP/IP.
• LDSOCKET, which initialises the System V STREAMS TCP/IP Berkeley inter-
face.
Conﬁguration
Interfaced devices are conﬁgured in terms of IP address, netmask,
and operational status using the command:
ifconfig
308

Template
Conﬁguration ﬁles include:
• /ETC/HOSTS, which provides a lookup table for ﬁnding IP addresses for host
names.
• /ETC/ETHERS, which provides a means of converting IP addresses into Ether-
net hardware addresses. An alternative conversion method is provided by ARP
(Address Resolution Protocol).
• /ETC/NETWORKS, which provides a lookup table for IP addresses and their
respective network names.
• /ETC/PROTOCOLS, which provides a list of DARPA Internet protocols.
• /ETC/SERVICES, which lists services that are currently available to the host.
• /ETC/INETD.CONF, which monitors a speciﬁed port, and invokes daemons
when required.
Network access ﬁles
Access ﬁles include:
• /ETC/HOSTS.EQUIV, which contains a list of trusted hosts, and is signiﬁcant to
system security. Each entry is trusted, in that users access their accounts without
a password.
• RHOSTS, which lists system and user names, and users are permitted to log in
using any name in the ﬁle /ETC/PASSWORD.
(See Operating System, Windows and e-business site development lifecycle.)
(See ARPANET, IP address and Security.)
(See IP address, Unix and Firewall.)
TDM (Time Division Multiplexing)
A technique by which several dif-
ferent signals may be transmitted concurrently over the same physical link.
Technical speciﬁcation
A document that speciﬁes the technical features
and capabilities of software, hardware, or appliance.
Television shopping
A application of television broadcasting where the
user purchases items that are usually shown and sometimes demonstrated
on screen.
Telnet
A means of accessing a remote computer, and then using it as if it
were a local system. A connectivity mechanism that permits a client system
with Internet access to operate a remote computer. The screen images shown
on the remote system are also seen on the remote user’s client system.
(See CVS.)
Telstra
A large Australian telecommunications company.
Template
An entity that determines the presentation of a document
including its page layout, typestyles, fonts and other content that may include
text, ﬁelds and tables.
309

Terminal
Terminal
A system which is interfaced with a system (such as a main-
frame computer). Typically it is dumb, meaning that it has no application logic
or data, but the mere presentation element of an application.
Terminal Server
A server that is used when a number of terminals are
connected to a host over a LAN. It therefore provides an indirect connection
with the host. Terminal data is assembled into packets that are sent over the
LAN. At the host the packets are converted into data streams. The terminals or
computers are connected to a terminal server and not directly to the network.
Windows NT Terminal Server does all computation and storage and passes
back screen updates to the client.
TFT
(See Monitor.)
Thin client
A system within a client/server architecture (such as that of
the Web) that features:
• presentation that is typically in the form of a Web browser
• a portion of the application logic.
Many systems connected to the Web may be described as thin clients. Thin
clients require less hardware resources, and are therefore cheaper to deploy
than fat clients.
(See Application, Client/server, Fat client and NC.)
Third generation language
A high level language such as Java, Pascal,
BASIC, C and C++.
(See C++, Java and Visual Basic.)
thread
A processing task/unit implemented by a processor. Within the
processor, the thread will have the processor resources associated with a nor-
mal running program, i.e. a program counter holding addresses of data and
code (operands), a set of registers, and a stack pointer which refers to return
addresses from subroutines.
thread-safe code
An item of codes that may safely be used by multi-
ple threads.
Thumb
An instance of thumbprint.
Thumbprint
A hash value that generates or veriﬁes digital signatures.
Tier 0
A device that offers connectivity to tier 1, and sometimes to
tier 2 also.
(See 3-tier.)
Tier 1
A client-side device or application that connects with tier 2.
(See 3-tier.)
310

Toolbar
Tier 2
A server-side device or application.
(See 3-tier.)
TIFF (Tag Image File Format)
An image ﬁle format maintained by the
Adobe Developers Association (ADA).
TMA (Telecommunications Managers Association)
A body whose
membership is composed largely of telecommunications managers. Each year
there is a TMA convention featuring state-of-the-art communications systems,
techniques and standards.
Token ring
An IBM-developed network protocol and speciﬁcation, ofﬁ-
cially named IEEE802.5.
(See LAN.)
Toolbar
An array of buttons that provide single-click access to features
and/or applications.
For example, the default Windows 98/2000 Toolbar that is on the right of the
Start button, offers single-click access to:
• Internet Explorer Browser
• Outlook Express
• Desktop
• Active channels.
Internet Explorer
Outlook Express
Desktop
View Channels
By right-clicking the Windows 98/2000 Taskbar, and then selecting Tool-
bars, it is possible to select alternatives to that of the default, Quick Launch
311

ToolBook
implementation. For instance, the Control Panel icons may be placed on the
Taskbar as illustrated below:
(See Windows, Windows Desktop and Active Desktop.)
ToolBook
A multimedia authoring tool for the PC, produced by Asymetrix
Corporation. Recognised as the brainchild of Microsoft’s co-founder Paul Allen,
and as one of the ﬁrst generic multimedia authoring tools, ToolBook is one of
those products that has earned a much-deserved place in contemporary com-
puting history. Its early implementations were used to create some of the ﬁrst
multimedia CD-ROM titles including Microsoft’s Multimedia Beethoven: The
Ninth Symphony. Since these memorable beginnings, Asymetrix’s ToolBook
has evolved into a formidable family of products aimed at the creation of CBT
(Computer Based Training) courses, of which ToolBook II Assistant is the latest
addition. Other members of the product range include ToolBook II Instruc-
tor, ToolBook II Librarian, and Designer’s Edge for ToolBook II. ToolBook II
Assistant version 6.0 can be used to create multimedia programs that may be
distributed using CD-ROM, ﬂoppy disk, intranets, and over the Internet. Aimed
squarely at trainers, teachers, instructional designers, and other similar profes-
sionals, it requires not even rudimentary programming skills. It does not possess
the Asymetrix OpenScript programming language that has become synonymous
with ToolBook. This is a welcomed departure for Asymetrix and allows Tool-
Book to compete with tools like Authorware Professional which has long since
been regarded as an environment that does not require programming. Those with
programming skills might be better served by ToolBook II Instructor, which also
includes the OpenScript programming language. This gives programmers bet-
ter control over resulting ToolBook applications by allowing them to deﬁne the
behaviour of objects more accurately. ToolBook II Librarian is designed to help
manage courseware deployed over the Internet and on corporate Intranets, by
providing administrators with feedback regarding student progress. Designer’s
Edge for ToolBook II is a productivity tool used in the pre-authoring stages of
development, and provides a walkthrough environment for developers, taking
them from analysis to evaluation during the instructional design process.
(See Authorware Professional.)
Top-down analysis
A design approach that begins at a high-level, and
progresses to low-level component parts.
(See Bottom-up analysis.)
Touchpad
An x-y input device consisting of a small touch sensitive pad
or surface. It is the chosen device for notebook systems.
312

Transaction processing ACID properties
TP (Transaction Processing) monitor
(See Server.)
TP-heavy server
A server that runs TP monitors.
(See Server.)
TP-lite server
A server that provides a portion of all the action required by
full transaction processing (TP) monitors. Typically, it will be able to commit
changes to, and roll-back, changes made to operational data, which is stored
in an appropriate database variant. It may be devoid of:
• transaction coordination of multiple programs
• resource management.
(See Server and Transaction.)
Trackball
An input device that is integrated in older notebook and sub-
notebook designs. Physically, it is a ball joint. The ball may be rotated using
ﬁngers, so providing a means of manipulating a screen pointer or cursor in X
and Y directions.
(See Touchpad.)
Transaction
A term used to describe the data exchange and data changes
which occur as the result of an interaction. The interaction might be the sub-
mission of an order form using a client Browser. A transaction server is
allocated the task of transaction processing (TP), and often invokes the appli-
cation logic necessary to perform database interactions and manipulations.
The process(es) invoked directly or indirectly by the client are collectively
referred to as the transaction. Transaction servers may include UI logic, driv-
ing the client UI, relegating the client device to little more than a dumb
terminal. Typically, mainframe based transaction systems might adhere to this
model. Alternatively, the UI logic, or presentation may be distributed to the
client. The server consists of a TP monitor that performs transaction manage-
ment and resource management. Transaction management ensures the so-called
ACID properties of transactions. These include Atomicity, Consistency, Iso-
lation and Durability. ACID property compliance is achieved through the
two-phase commit protocol. (See Jini, ACID and Two-phase commit.) Resource
management is intended to optimise the use of resources, which include
memory, mass storage and processing. It may also be involved with load
balancing between resources and between the software processes, which may
be threads.
Transaction coordinator
(See Two-phase commit protocol.)
Transaction management
(See Server.)
Transaction processing ACID properties
Atomicity, Consistency, Isola-
tion and Durability (ACID) properties deﬁne the real-world requirements for
transaction processing (TP) which are supported by Jini:
313

Transaction server
• Atomicity ensures that each transaction is a single workload unit. If any
subaction fails, the entire transaction is halted, and rolled back.
• Consistency ensures that the system is left in a stable state. If this is not
possible, the system is rolled back to the pre-transaction state.
• Isolation ensures that system state changes invoked by one running trans-
action do not inﬂuence another running transaction. The changes must only
affect other transactions, when they result from completed transactions.
• Durability guarantees the system state changes of a transaction are involatile,
and impervious to total or partial system failures.
Transaction server
A transaction server allocated the task of transaction
processing (TP).
(See ACID, Server, Two-phase commit and Transaction.)
transformation
(See 2D and 3D.)
Transposition
A cryptography technique that rearranges streams of char-
acters.
(See SET, Brute Force, cryptosystem, RSA, public key encryption, asymmetric
and Dictionary attack.)
Tree of Trust
A hierarchy speciﬁed by SET used for the management of
Digital Certiﬁcates including their:
• maintenance
• issuance
• currency.
(See SET and Certiﬁcate.)
Triple DES
An encryption technique based on a variation of the DES
encryption technique. One variation sees three DES encryptions using three
different keys.
(See DES.)
Trusted site
A Web site that is secure and safe, and includes a secure con-
nection. Netscape and Microsoft browsers have lists of Certiﬁcate Authorities.
To see the lists using Netscape:
1. Click the Security button on the toolbar.
2. Click the Signers link under Certiﬁcates.
Using Microsoft Explorer:
1. Click the View menu
2. Click Internet Options.
3. Select the Security tab.
314

Two-tier client/server
4. Click the Zone menu.
5. Select Trusted site zone.
6. Click the Add Sites button to add or remove sites.
(See Orange book, RSA, Encryption, Certiﬁcate, Security and SET.)
try block
A try block is a section of code that is responsible for exception
handling. Both Java and C++ support try blocks.
TTP (Trusted Third Party)
A site that is secure and reliable, and is
reliant on technologies and services such as SSL, SET, RSA, and digital
certiﬁcates.
Turn-key Application (also Turn-Key solution)
A complete solution
that is deployed, tested and made fully functional by its vendors, so the end-
user need only ‘turn the key’.
TV shopping
(See Television shopping.)
Two-phase commit
A method used in transaction processing that ensures
ACID properties. It coordinates the changes made to system resources that
result from transactions. It tests for their successful implementation, in which
case they are committed. If not, and any one fails, they are all rolled back. The
transaction coordinator is key to the two-phase commit protocol. This queries
all subordinates to verify that they are ready to commit. If the subordinates
have other subordinates, these must also be queried. When all subordinates are
ready to commit, the transaction coordinator records the information to protect
it against any interruption that might be caused by a system failure. Having
received information of the readiness to commit, the transaction coordinator
sends a commit command to its subordinates, and they do the same. Once the
transaction coordinator has received conﬁrmations from all subordinates, the
client may be sent a transaction complete message.
(See Server and ACID.)
Two-tier client/server
(See 2-tier.)
Typedef
A C++ command that permits mnemonics to be assigned to
the statements used to deﬁne variables. The following statement assigns the
word xxxx to the unsigned short int statement:
#include <filename>
typedef unsigned short int xxxx;
int main ()
{
xxxx coordinate;
// define coordinate as an unsigned short integer
variable
}
315

U
U
A chrominance component in a video signal that comprises colour infor-
mation.
UART (Universal Asynchronous Receive Transmit)
An electronic de-
vice used for serial communications.
UDF (Universal Disk Format)
A DVD disk ﬁle system.
UDP (User Datagram Protocol)
A protocol that is used widely in stream-
ing audio and video. Macromedia Shockwave Director 6.0 is among a number
of leading streaming server technologies that use UDP. It does not feature the
reliability of TCP, and is therefore appropriate for streaming media where inten-
sive error detection and correction is less important. Dropped packets, which
are those that do not reach their destination, are acceptable in streaming media.
UDP therefore, optimises performance and makes better use of available band-
width, because it does not insist on the retransmission of erroneous packets. (See
Streaming and ASF.) A low-level protocol, unlike Hypertext Transfer Protocol
(HTTP) which is considered an high-level protocol, UDP may be exploited
by multimedia streaming technologies, including ASF (Advanced Streaming
Format). ASF is a container format that offers compression and protocol inde-
pendence. (See ASF and TCP/IP.)
UFS
UNIX File System. A standard ﬁle-system used in UNIX, and in the
Mac OS X (where it is compatible with 4.4BSD UFS).
UI (User Interface)
A software module or program through which users
interact with one or more applications.
(See GUI, OOUI and Windows.)
UI builder
A development tool used to build user interfaces. Most mod-
ern UIs are OO. Resulting UIs may be text-based, or graphical as is common
today. The latter naturally require the use of GUI builders that provide a means
317

UltraJava
of implementing the presentation element, together with its interaction with
objects, applications and application logic. GUIs can be built using all modern
multimedia authoring tools that include Authorware, IconAuthor, and Tool-
Book. Programming tools such as Microsoft Visual Basic, and others included
with Microsoft Visual Studio, also have the capability to construct GUIs using
visual techniques. Such development tools, including GUI builders, feature
standard UI components or widgets that include buttons, sliders, drop-down
list boxes, scroll bars, dialogues, windows. Static GUI components might
include fonts, colours, textures, patterns, etc. The GUI will also contain con-
tainers which act as receptacles for objects or components, which might be
ActiveX or OLE objects. For example, using Visual Basic, a container may
be used to integrate OLE objects such as the Media Player, or any compatible
OLE object.
(See GUI, OOUI, Visual Basic and Windows.)
UltraJava
A chipset from Sun Microsystems which is optimised for the
Java programming language. Like Intel MMX Technology, it is application
speciﬁc, thus optimised for 3D graphics and multimedia-related computing,
including MPEG video playback. UltraJava is licensed to NEC, Samsung
Electronics, LG Semicon, and Mitsubishi.
(See Java, MMX and Sun Microelectronics.)
UMTS Universal Mobile Telephone Service
A mobile network provid-
ing global roaming, supplied by orbiting satellites that may integrate BTSs
(Base Transmitter Stations) and BTSs (Base Switching Centers). To create
this type of network, as many as 840 satellites may orbit at altitudes between
780 km and 1414 km to minimize signal transmission latency. It is 840 satel-
lites, in fact, that make up Teledesic whose Consortium is LED by Bill Gates.
Other mobile satellite services include Motorola’s Iridium (with 66 satellites),
Loran’s/Qualcom’s Globalstar (with 48 satellites) and TRW-Matra’s Odyssey
(with 10 satellites). These satellite mobile telephone systems offer data rates
of 4.8 Kbps to 9.6 Kbps but have the potential to deliver wireless higher
rates through other communications standards. They operate in the K-band
(10.9–36 GHz) and L-band (1.6–2.1 GHz), and provide a basis for UMTSs
(Universal Mobile Telephone Services). This means that a mobile device might
‘roam’ between terrestrial GSM-type services and satellite mobile telephone
networks depending upon geographical location or at the speed of travel.
Aeronautical and maritime telecommunications were catalysts in the devel-
opment and deployment of satellite mobile telephone services with the ﬁrst
maritime satellite launched in 1976. Called MARISAT it consisted of three
geostationary satellites and was used by the US Navy. This later evolved into
the INMARISAT (International Maritime Satellite Organization) that provides
public telecommunications services to airliners.
318

UMTS
UMTS Network Architecture
The shown UMTS network is essentially a GSM
Phase 2+ core network that is optimized for higher bit rates, and includes:
• mobile switching centre (MSC) and gateway MSC (GMSC) for circuit-switched
GSM networks.
• serving GPRS support node (SGSN) and a gateway GPRS support node (GGSN)
because GSM Phase 2+ accommodates GPRS packet data.
• GSM base station subsystems (BSSs).
• UMTS radio network subsystems (RNSs).
• A-interface between a base station controller (BSC) and a mobile switching cen-
tre (MSC).
• Iups between a BSC and SGSN, where the subscript uPS signiﬁes a packet
switch interface.
• Abis interface between a BTS and a BSC.
• interfaces between the RNC and MSC, SGSN and RNC of IuCS (circuit switched),
Iups and Iur, respectively.
The physical channels in UMTS transfer information across the radio interface. A
physical channel is deﬁned by its:
• code and carrier frequency in an FDD version
• code, carrier frequency and timeslot in TDD.
Operations of a UMTS transmitter at the physical layer
The transport channel
data from layer 2 and above are arranged in blocks depending on the type of data.
The blocks are cyclically redundancy coded (CRC) for error detection at the receiver.
The data is segmented into blocks and channel coding ensues. The coding may be
convolutional or turbo and sometimes channel coding is not used. Data is interleaved
to decrease the memory of the radio channel and thereby render the channel more
Gaussian-like. The interleaved data are then segmented into frames compatible with
the requirements of the UTRA interface. Rate matching is performed next. This uses
code-puncturing and call data repetition, where appropriate, so that after transport
channel multiplexing the data rate and is matched to the channel rate of the dedicated
physical channels. A second stage of bit FI interleaving is executed, and the data
are then mapped to the radio interface frame structure. Sufﬁce to say at this point
there are different types of physical channels, namely:
• pilot channels that provide a demodulation reference for other channels
• synchronisation channels that provide synchronisation to all UEs within a cell
• common channels that carry 0.2 information to and from any user equipment (UE)
• dedicated channels that carry information to and from speciﬁc UEs.
The physical layer procedures include:
• cell search for the initial synchronisation of a UE with a nearby cell
• cell reselection which involves a UE changing cells
• access procedure that allows a UE to initially access a cell
• power control to ensure of that a UE and a BS transmit at optimum power levels
• and handover, the mechanism that switches a serving cell to another cell during
a call.
319

Undo
UMTS Terrestrial Radio Interface
The UMTS terrestrial radio interface (UTRA)
frequency duplex (FDD) mode is the W-CDMA radio interface of the UMTS, and
is designated by the ITU as IMT DS. The UTRA FDD mode uses segment 3 for
up-link transmission, and segment 6 for down-link transmission. These segments are
Key
AuC – Authentication Centre
EIR – Equipment Identity Register
GGSN – Gateway GPRS Support Node
HLR – Home Location Register
MSC – Mobile Switching Centre
SGSN – Serving GPRS Support Node
VLR – Visitor Location Register
The nominal spacing between radio carriers is 5 MHz, with a channel raster of
0.2 MHz. This means that the carrier separation may be adjusted in steps of 0.2 MHz,
e.g. the carrier spacing may be 4.8 MHz. The carrier frequency is deﬁned by the
UTRA absolute radio frequency channel number (UARFCN). This number is deﬁned
over a frequency band from 0 to 3.7 GHz, and is the transmission frequency mul-
tiplexed by ﬁve. The UARFCN (Nu-uplink and Nd-downlink) will always be an
integer because of the raster frequency of 0.2 MHz. It cannot be assumed that radio
channels in the UTRA FDD are paired as in GSM.
(See 1G, 2G, 2.5G, 3G, GPRS and GSM.)
Undo
A feature provided by almost all fully speciﬁed programs. It simply
cancels the last editing operation.
Uniprocessor system
A system design based on a single processor. Such
serial systems might be referred to as von Neumann implementations.
(See MPP, NUMA and SMP.)
Universal resource locator
(See URL.)
Unix
A multi-tasking, multi-user operating system originally (OS) devel-
oped at Bell Laboratories for the creation of interdepartmental reports. It has
since evolved into numerous commercial variants including XENIX. Typically
Unix OS variants feature the X-Windows GUI.
(See X-Windows.)
Unix Daemon
(See TCP/IP.)
Unix grep ﬁlter
A ﬁlter that allows you to search ﬁles for speciﬁed text
strings.
320

User authentication
Uploading
A process of transferring ﬁles from a client system to a server.
Usually the transfer takes place using the FTP protocol.
UpnP (Universal Plug and Play)
A technology introduced in 1999 by
Microsoft as a response to SunSoft’s Jini technology, and features the same
discovery protocol technique used to locate registered services on networks.
(See Jini.)
UPS (Uninterruptable Power Supply)
A device which prevents data
loss following power supply failure or deviation.
URL (Universal Resource Locator)
An address of a service or Web site
or Web page, which can be used by the Web Browser to open speciﬁc sites and
pages. For, example, the Web page www.altavista.digital.com is a URL, and
may be opened. Additionally, the Browser permits such URLs to be stored in a
directory, which might be called Favorites, or something similar. The user may
then open frequently visited sites and pages, through one or two mouse clicks,
depending on the Browser used. The underlying HTTP protocol implements a
client/server connection for each URL which is opened by the client Browser.
It transmits and receives data, and carries the subsequent contents of an opened
URL. Typically, when a URL is opened, the ﬁrst procedure involves ﬁnding the
requested site or page on the Web. Having made an appropriate connection,
the Browser waits for a reply, and then downloads the ensuing page data.
Eventually, the HTTP breaks the connection with the remote server, where
the requested site or page resides. This break may be carried out manually by
selecting the stop button, or similarly named button.
(See HTTP and IP address.)
URL encoding
A serial interface for connecting peripheral devices.
USB (Universal Serial Bus)
A serial interface for connecting periph-
eral devices.
USENET
A worldwide discussion group service. It was originally designed
to carry local news between two universities in North Carolina. It allows people
to send messages or articles for other people to read.
User authentication
A process of identifying the user of a system or
program.
• The most common user authentication technique is based on tokens, such
as ID names, passwords and PIN numbers.
• User authentication can also be implemented using biometric data, which
may be a ﬁngerprint, thumbprint, or retina image.
(See Encryption, Firewall and Security.)
321

User block data
User block data
A CD-ROM Mode 1 block contains 2,048 Bytes of user
data.
(See CD-ROM.)
User communication
A rarely used term that describes the user’s inter-
action with a system or application.
User-communication device
A rarely used term that describes an input
device such as mouse, touchpad, trackball, or touch screen.
UUENCODE
A binary to text translator like BinHex. It was designed so
UNIX binaries could be transferred through text-only interfaces like e-mail.
322

V
V.1
A standard covering power levels for telephone networks.
V.21
A standard modem speed capable of transmitting and receiving data
at 300 bps.
V.32
A standard modem speed capable of transmitting and receiving data
at 9,600 bps.
V.32terbo
An upgrade to the V.32b is standard introduced by AT&T.
V.42
An international error correction standard for modem-based commu-
nications. MNP2-4 (Microcom Networking Protocol) and LAPM (Link Access
Procedure M) provide error correction.
V.90
An ofﬁcial designation for the 56.6 Kbps modem standard. 56.6 Kbps
= 56, 600 bps.
VAB (Value-Added Bank)
A ﬁnancial institution able to transmit elec-
tronic data between multiple trading partners.
Validating credit card numbers
A process of authorising a creditcard
transaction using a merchant bank. The numbers themselves may be validated
by processing their checksum digits, because all the credit card companies
adhere to a mod 10 check digit algorithm.
Variable
An entity that has a changing value.
(See C++ and Java.)
VAT (Value Added Tax)
A tax added to many purchases in the UK,
currently set at 17.5%, which requires VAT registered businesses to com-
plete quarterly returns that present the difference between the amount of VAT
charged and expended. The business has to pay the difference, or reclaim it
should the business have paid more VAT amounts than it received.
323

VB.NET
VB.NET (Visual Basic.NET)
(See .Net and Visual Basic.)
VBScript
A scripting language that is a subset of Visual Basic, and can
be used to deliver functionality gains to applications. VBScript may be used
to enhance Web pages through the addition of:
• event-driven objects
• ActiveX controls
• interactive content
• Java applets.
VBScript does not harness:
• OOP methodologies (1998)
• DLL calls (1998)
The VBScript syntax is similar to that of Visual Basic, and includes statements
for loops, events, procedures, functions, etc.
VBScript For . . . Next Loop
A means of repeating statements based on a true
or false condition
For pointer = first To last [Step step]
‘ statements
‘ statements
Next
VBScript While . . . Wend Loop
While condition
‘statements
‘statements
Wend
VBScript procedures
VBScript has Sub and Function procedures, and the
latter should be used to return values, (in accordance with deﬁnition of a function).
VBScript
The Sub procedure has the following form:
Sub Subroutine Name([parameter])
‘ statements
End Sub
VBScript Function
A function procedure is of the form:
Function FunctionName([parameter])
‘ statements;
End Function
(See Visual Basic.)
324

VidCap
VBXtras
An object factory that specialises in Visual Basic controls and
add-ons.
(See Object factory and www.vbxtras.com.)
Vendor Express
A U.S. Treasury program for making Federal govern-
ment vendor and commercial payments; it uses the CCD+, CTX and CTP
formats.
Verisign
VeriSign Inc (Nasdaq VRSN) is a provider of trusted service
technologies to e-business sites, Web sites, enterprises, and users. The com-
pany’s services include:
• Domain Name
• Digital certiﬁcate
• Payment services.
(See Certiﬁcate and www.verisign.com.)
Vertical market
A market that is limited in size and is therefore of a
specialist nature.
(See Marketing and Mass market.)
VGA (Video Graphics Array)
An IBM PC graphics controller standard
released in mid 1987 by IBM as part of its PS/2 range. Like all add-ins for
PCs, graphic controllers (adapter cards) plug directly into expansion slots.
(See Graphics card.)
ViaVoice
An IBM speech recognition program for desktop computers.
Speech recognition has been high on IBM’s agenda for over 25 years, and
is part of an on-going multi-million dollar research and development program
that yielded the VoiceType family of products. This high level of interest indi-
cates that speech recognition is a potential killer application. IBM’s research
program has also led indirectly to some pretty impressive offshoots, includ-
ing the DragonDictate program from speech recognition specialists Dragon
Systems. This company was founded by husband and wife James and Janet
Baker, whose combined experience includes research at IBM. DragonDictate
competes directly with the VoiceType packages, and with IBM’s latest offering
and the subject of this review, ViaVoice. The mentioned speech recognition
programs differ from voice-dependent programs like the Microsoft Windows
Sound System, which requires the user to train it to recognise each and
every word.
VidCap
A video capture program supplied with Video for Windows.
(See Video.)
325

Video capture
Video capture
A process of acquiring video in appropriate digital form,
which might be compressed or uncompressed. The video source recording
might be analogue or digital. The latter requires the video capture card to incor-
porate an appropriate input. The three general types of video capture include:
• The real-time video capture technique involves digitising the incoming video
source signal on the ﬂy, and the video source device is not stopped or paused
at any moment during capture.
• Automatic step-frame capture requires that the source device is stopped,
paused and even rewound to digitise a greater amount of the source record-
ing. It offers certain advantages namely it is possible to achieve a greater
number of colours (or greater image depth), higher capture frame rates, and
larger capture frame resolutions than would normally be possible using the
same video capture hardware and software conﬁguration to record video in
real time.
• Manual step-frame capture usually depends upon the operator clicking a
button on screen in order to capture selected video frames.
Before video capture can begin it is necessary to prime the capture program by
choosing a number of different options, including colour depth, video capture
frame rate, frame dimensions, audio sample frequency and audio sample size.
If capturing video using an eight bit colour depth (or 256 colours), and you
wish to use a colour palette (which is a predeﬁned set of colours), you also
have to paste an appropriate palette into the video capture program or open an
appropriate palette ﬁle. This, however, is a comparatively rare requirement. A
capture ﬁle has to be set up to optimise the rate at which digitised video can be
written to hard disk so improving video capture performance. If necessary, the
target hard disk should be defragmented so video data is written to a contigu-
ous series of blocks making, thus optimising the target hard disk performance.
Available colour depths using fully speciﬁed video capture card and capture
program partnerships include 8 bit, 16 bit and 24 bit. The 8 bit format gives
a maximum of 256 colours stored in the form of colour palette that can be
edited using programs such as PalEdit. 16 bit and 24 bit formats are described
as truecolour, giving a maximum of 65 K (216) and 16,777,216 (224) colours
respectively, and when using appropriately speciﬁed video capture hardware
and software they can produce impressive results. Using many video capture
systems the data throughput required to capture 16 bit and particularly 24 bit
video in real time, limits both the capture frame rate and frame size. One
solution to this problem is automatic step-frame capture where an MCI video
source device is operated automatically. The frame dimensions chosen hinge
largely on the speciﬁcation of the capture card, though the image depth cho-
sen is also inﬂuential as is the capture frame rate. Though the video frame
dimensions can be scaled using video editing programs and even multimedia
authoring tools, enlargement can result in a blocking effect as the individual
pixels are enlarged. However, certain graphics cards, particularly those that
326

Video capture card
enlarge Video for Windows video sequences, will apply a smoothing algorithm
during playback in an attempt to minimise the blocking effect. Video editing
techniques also can be used to increase the playback frame rate (through frame
duplication). Other digital video editing techniques and hardware/software fea-
tures of the playback system can help improve the quality of video playback.
However, capturing and compressing optimum quality digital video relevant
to the intended playback platform remains the most important process. There
are limitations in what can be achieved through digital video editing, and
through playback hardware that enhances digital video playback. The original
video sequence may be enhanced, even enlarged through duplication, but it
cannot be used to play video information present in the source recording that
it simply does not contain. Even though numerous algorithms can enhance
digital video, and numerous others will emerge, it is reasonable to assume
that if the video ﬁle does not contain a particular frame then that frame cannot
be played. The quality levels available using wave audio recorders together
with mainstream sound cards, also can be achieved through fully speciﬁed
Windows video capture programs. 8 bit or 16 bit sample sizes are available,
recorded at frequencies of 11.025 KHz, 22.05 KHz and 44.1 KHz in mono or
in stereo. The size of the sound track, which increases in relation to the record-
ing quality chosen, can be monitored by selecting the Statistics command (or
something similar on many video editing programs) using VidEdit.
Video capture card
A card used to capture and sometimes compress
motion video, converting it into digital form. The majority of video capture
cards sold are aimed at the production of video for the Windows environment,
and are often supplied with the full implementation of Video for Windows.
Important points to consider when purchasing a video capture card include:
• The image depths supported. All fully speciﬁed versions should support
8 bit, 16 bit and 24 bit colour depths.
• The maximum capture frame rate and capture frame resolution supported
at a given image depth.
• The video editing tool supplied with the package; examples include VidEdit,
Adobe Premier and Asymetrix Digital Video Producer.
• The video capture program supplied; this will normally be Microsoft VidCap
though other variants are available.
• Video sources supported; it can be assumed that all modern implementation
will support both PAL and NTSC.
• The video formats and compression schemes supported; these include Intel
Indeo, M-JPEG and MPEG.
• The sound feature capabilities; with the exception of Video Spigot all video
capture cards feature a built-in sound facility able to record sound tracks
of audio qualities that are equivalent to those available using an MPC-2
compliant sound card.
327

Video capture ﬁle
• The presence of a VL channel connector indicates that the card can be
connected to graphics cards that also feature VL channel connector. Occa-
sionally, such cards can be slightly less expensive, as well as be expendable
to incorporate additional functionality such M-JPEG video capture facility.
Manufacturers of mainstream video capture cards include Creative Labs, Fast
Electronics, Intel, VideoLogic, and Spea.
Video capture ﬁle
A capture ﬁle is set up prior to video capture to opti-
mise the rate at which digitised video can be written to hard disk. This
improves the quality level of captured video. If necessary, the target hard
disk should be defragmented so video data is written to a contiguous series of
blocks thus optimising the target hard disk performance. The speciﬁed size of
the capture ﬁle should be large enough to accommodate the video sequence
that is to be captured and stored. Though the capture program will usually
enlarge it automatically, the possibility of complete frames being omitted or
dropped during video capture is increased, as is the possibility that the capture
ﬁle will become fragmented.
(See Video capture.)
Video CD or White Book
A standard for storing MPEG1 video on sin-
gle density CD variant. It can be assumed to store approximately 74 minutes
of MPEG1 video. Discs are interchangeable between appropriately speciﬁed
PCs and appliances. It can be assumed that a Video CD, or a White Book
disc, can store around 74 minutes of MPEG1 video, the quality of which
may be equated to an analogue VHS video recording. A key advantage of
Video CD over analogue VHS video cassette is there is no incompatibil-
ity between PAL and NTSC recordings, so eradicating the need for separate
NTSC and PAL versions as is currently the case with VHS cassette video
distribution.
(See MPEG.)
Video editing
A process of editing a video ﬁle. Digital video ﬁles can be
edited using programs such as VidEdit, Adobe Premier, and Asymetrix Digital
Video Producer. Typical video editing operations include:
• Copying frames from point to another in a sequence.
• Moving/cutting frames from one point to another in a sequence.
• Copying frames from one sequence to another.
• Moving frames from one sequence to another.
• Deleting unwanted frames from a video sequence.
• Titling video sequences.
• Cropping video frames.
• Altering the playback speed in terms of frames per second.
• Fading colours.
328

Video editing
• Tinting colours.
• Changing colours.
The frame rate of a video sequence may be increased or decreased using
many video editors without loss of synchronisation between the video and
audio track. An increase in the frame rate results in the duplication of exist-
ing captured frames. For instance, increasing a frame rate from, say, 9 to
12 frames per second results in the duplication of the third, sixth, and ninth
frames. While lowering the frame rate from, 12 to 9 frames per second results
in the removal of the fourth, eighth and twelfth frames. The capture frame
dimensions also may be altered by cropping or resizing, though when enlarg-
ing or stretching a frame the resultant resolution can become poor as the pixels
are each expanded. ToolBook and other multimedia authoring tools can them-
selves be used to resize video sequences, so there is no need to do so at the
video editing stage. A video editing program will also permit you to paste
various different media ﬁles into a sequence, and depending upon its sophis-
tication you may have a choice of fades as one video clip is merged into
another. When cutting/copying and pasting between video sequences, video
editors able to open multiple video sequences or tracks can prove more con-
venient than using multiple instances of a program such as VidEdit. Using
all modern video editing programs you can edit the audio and video tracks
independently, perhaps in order to paste a wave audio ﬁle over an existing
substandard or unrequired sound track. Audio and video data tracks making up
a video sequence may drift out of synchronisation, particularly when editing
them individually. The synchronisation of video and audio can even go adrift
at the video capture stage. For video footage where the sound track is a con-
tinuous musical sequence which does not tie in exactly with video images, a
lack of synchronisation may make little difference. This is not the case, how-
ever, where spoken dialogue is lip-synched or where cuts to different scenes
result in different passages of music or sound tracks. In order to synchronise
data tracks, the editing program will normally permit the adjustment of the
video frame rate, or offset the audio track using an appropriate positive or
negative value. Both audio and video formats can be altered following cap-
ture using a fully speciﬁed, modern video editing program. The audio data
track can be altered in terms of the number of channels, sample size, and
sampling frequency. The video format depth can also be changed, perhaps to
reduce a 16 bit and 24 bit sequence to an 8 bit video sequence. More com-
plex editors also make titling possible, where text can be superimposed over
video sequences perhaps to add captions or credits. Control is given over the
font, type style and size, font colour as well as the position of the title or
text which exists for a predetermined range of frames. Some editors such as
Digital Video Producer and Adobe Premier permit ‘ﬁlm strip editing’ where
frames of a sequence are shown on screen in horizontal or vertical strips.
Often users ﬁnd that these provide a better overview of sequences and help in
329

Video for Windows
the editing process. Video editing programs can also accommodate multiple
open video sequences, so video data can be copied/moved from one to another
more easily. Without this ability it is often necessary to run multiple copies
of the editing program.
(See MPEG.)
Video for Windows
A video standard. Video for Windows (VfW) permits
video playback, capture and editing. Microsoft Video for Windows includes
the VidCap video capture program, VidEdit video editing program, BitEdit
8 bit graphics editor, and PalEdit 8 bit colour palette editor. VidEdit provides
a gateway to several video compression schemes, the variety of which depends
upon the video card you have. Compression algorithms such as Intel Indeo,
Microsoft RLE (Run Length Encoding) and Microsoft Video 1 can help reduce
video ﬁle sizes by varying amounts. The size and quality of resultant video
ﬁles can be controlled using compressors through the adjustment of compres-
sion settings. The resultant video can be added to applications through OLE
(Object Linking and Embedding). It supports the AVI (Audio Video Inter-
leaved) format and features a number of compressors including Microsoft 1,
Microsoft RLE and Intel Indeo.
(See MPEG and JPEG.)
Video on demand (VOD)
An e-commerce implementation that permits
customers to view selected purchased movies.
Video playback fps
The playback frame rate of a video sequence.
Video playback frame resolution
The frame resolution of a video
sequence.
Video server
A server that provides streaming or real-time video to con-
nected users.
(See Server.)
Videoconferencing
A process by which users in remote locations com-
municate in real time, both visually and verbally. Systems may be divided
into the categories of:
• desktop videoconferencing using conventional desktop or notebook com-
puters
• conference room videoconferencing, which typically include appropriately
large displays.
Desktop videoconferencing systems include a camera, microphone, video com-
pression/decompression hardware/software, and an interface device that con-
nects the system to an access technology. The interface device might be:
330

Virtual memory
• a conventional modem used to connect with an ISP or intranet server,
and thereafter use an Internet-based videoconferencing solution such as CU
See-Me
• a cable modem providing high-speed internet access via cable
• an ISDN interface, which provides connection to the Internet or appropriate
IP network
• a Network Interface Card (NIC) that connects to a LAN
• a wireless interface, which provides connection over GSM or other mobile
communications network.
Access technologies for videoconferencing include PSTN, ISDN, ADSL, cable,
GSM, ATM, T1 frame relay, and proprietary wireless technologies. Point-to-
point videoconferencing involves communication between two sites, while
multi-point videoconferencing involves interaction between more than two
sites. The latter might require a chairperson to conduct proceedings. Also, the
collective system might be voice activated, switching sites into a broadcasting
state when the respective participant begins speaking. Vendors of videocon-
ferencing solutions include Intel, PictureTel, Insoft and Creative Technology.
Internationally agreed standards relating to videoconferencing include H.320
and T.120. The former was introduced in 1990 and provides guidelines to
vendors and implementers that yield appropriate levels of compatibility.
(See ATM, Cable, Cable modem, ISP, ISDN, T1 and Video.)
Videotex
A service used to publish text and graphics over the PSTN. It
emerged from the BT Research Laboratories in 1970s, and was launched in the
form of Prestel in 1979. Videotex uses alpha-mosaic text and graphics. The
display is based on character blocks, which require 7 or 8 bits, and produced
from a look-up table or from a character generator. A videotex frame con-
sists of a matrix of such characters, consisting of 24 rows of 40 characters.
Typically the frame requires 960 bytes, and may be transmitted in around
6.5 seconds over PSTN. Using faster ISDN access technology, the transmis-
sion time is reduced.
ISDN D channel
Transmission time =(960*8)/16,000
=480mS
ISDN B channel
Transmission time =(960*8)/64,000
=120mS
(See DCT and MPEG.)
Virtual memory
A hard disk store used to hold data that would otherwise
be held in electronic memory.
331

Virtual processor
Virtual processor
A processor or bytecode processor used to execute
machine-independent languages such as Java. It is implemented in software
and may sometimes be referred to as a virtual machine. It is a design approach
used by such programming languages as Java, so they may be system and
OS independent. They may, therefore, be applied as applets in heterogeneous
environments such as the Web.
(See Java and VR.)
Virtual Reality
(See VR.)
Virtual shopping
An activity where the consumer purchases items from
intangible stores which are usually on the World Wide Web.
Virtual Shopping Cart
(See Shopping Cart.)
Virtual store
An intangible store that exists on the World Wide Web.
Virtual Web server
A Web server that is not physically implemented,
but rather it may exist with a number of other such virtual Web servers on the
same site. Virtual Web Servers can be created using Microsoft IIS, and they
may have a:
• domain
• TCP/IP address
• root directory.
Whether or not a Web server is virtual, is transparent to the user.
(See IIS, TCP/IP and Web Server.)
Virtual window shopping
An Internet equivalent to window shopping
that is a leisure activity for many.
(See On-line)
Virus
An entity that causes a program or operating system to function
incorrectly and may result in the loss or corruption of data.
VisiBroker
An ORB from Borland.
VisiBroker for C++
An ORB that forms the basis for middleware imple-
mentations.
VisiBroker for Java
An ORB that forms the basis for middleware imple-
mentations.
Visio
A Microsoft drawing package widely used in industry.
VisualAge (IBM)
An IBM initiative and family of software development
tools, languages and environments – and address 4GL.
332

Visual Basic
VisualAge for Java
This is a key part of the IBM Framework for e-
business, and accommodates the building of Java applications, Java applets,
servlets, and EJB (Enterprise JavaBeans) components.
VisualAge Generator, Version 4.0
This is a rapid application develop-
ment environment for e-business applications, and is integrated with VisualAge
for Java. It generates 4GL code and has visual development facilities. It can
be used to build:
• CICS, IMS, TXSeries, and OS/400 transactions, including Web transactions
• Java GUIs, applets, or servlets communicating with transaction programs
• Batch programs.
Visual Basic
A programming language and programming tool that may
be used to tackle a variety of different programming projects, including the
development of:
• ActiveX controls
• Client/server applications
• Mainstream business applications
• Utilities
• Multimedia-related programs such as media players
• Leisure programs.
Microsoft Visual Basic forms part of its Visual Studio package, and is also
available in standalone form. (1998) Editions of Microsoft Visual Basic are:
• The Standard Edition, which can be used to build 16 bit and 32 bit appli-
cations. The standard edition does not support ODBC databases or Visual
SourceSafe.
• The Professional Edition, which adds to the Standard Edition’s facilities
through such features as ODBC compliance
• The Enterprise Edition, which includes the features of the Standard and
Professional Editions, and also integrates Visual SourceSafe.
• The Control Edition is intended for building ActiveX Controls.
(See ODBC and Visual SourceSafe.) The following paragraphs show how
Microsoft Visual Basic can be used to develop a video player application,
which uses an OLE container, along with standard Windows UI objects. Draw-
ing the program’s controls is one of the ﬁrst stages of program development
when using MS Visual Basic. Consider an instance where we wanted to
develop the media player shown below.
1. It is necessary to draw:
• Directory list box
• A ﬁles list box
• A drive list box
• An OLE container.
333

Visual Basic
2. Go to the media type property box and select Video Clip as the media type.
3. Modify the properties of the page, by typing the name Video Player along-
side Caption.
4. In the File list properties box, type∗.AVI to ensure that only Windows AVI
compatible video ﬁles are listed.
5. Modify the OLE1 object properties so as AutoActivate is set to Manual, its
Class is ’aviﬁle’, and its SizeMode is 1 ‘Stretch’.
6. The ﬁnal and most important stage of the program is the addition of code to
the controls. The following lines should be added to the form and are executed
when the application is loaded through the Form, Load event.
Private Sub Form Load()
Drive1.Drive = App.Path
Dir1.Path = App.Path
End Sub
The code segment merely ensure that the drive an pathname default has the
same directory and drive as the VideoPlayer. So, if the video player application
was in C:\WINDOWS the program would start to look for AVI ﬁles on the C
drive in the \Windows directory. To make sure that the drive, directory and
ﬁle list boxes all refer to the same locations, add the following code segments
to the Dir1 and Drive1 controls.
Private Sub Dir1 Change()
File1.Path = Dir1.Path
End Sub
334

Visual Basic
Private Sub Drive1 Change()
Dir1.Path = Drive1.Drive
End Sub
This ensures that a change made in the drive list box is reﬂected in the directory
list box, and changes made therein are echoed by the ﬁle list box. Shown below
is the code segment assigned to the ﬁle list box is activated by a double-click
event. It ﬁrst declares a string variable in which to store the selected path and
ﬁlename using the statement Dim Video As String.
Private Sub File1 DblClick()
Dim Video As String
If Right(File1.Path, 1) = "\" Then
Video = File1.Path + File1
Else
Video = File1.Path + "\" + File1
End If
OLE1.CreateEmbed (Video)
OLE1.DoVerb
End Sub
The second thing that it does is determine whether or not the selected ﬁle is
in the root directory or in named directory. It does this by using the statement
that begins with the Right function. This returns the right-most character of
the pathname. If this is not a backslash ‘\’, then the selected ﬁle is identiﬁed
as residing in a directory in which case the statement Video = File1.Path &
‘\’ & File1.ﬁlename is implemented. This ensures that a backslash is inserted
between the path and the ﬁlename. It also assigns the complete path and ﬁle-
name to the string variable, Video. If the rightmost character of the pathname is
found to be a backslash, the statement Video = File1.Path & File1.ﬁlename is
executed, and assigns the ﬁle name to the string variable, Video. The contents
of the string variable, Video, are then used as a source document and embed-
ded in the OLE1 container control using the statement OLE1.CreateEmbed
Video. Finally the DoVerb method activates the embedded object in order to
play the selected video ﬁle. The OLE container control does not require cod-
ing, but it is important to adjust its properties as previously described. It is
important that you set its Class property to ‘aviﬁle’ and its SizeMode prop-
erty to 1 ‘Stretch’. The application can be run by pressing F5, or by using
the menus, or the appropriate toolbar icon. After testing and debugging, the
program can be saved as an executable ﬁle by clicking Save as EXE ﬁle on
the File menu. To add the VideoPlayer’s EXE ﬁle to the Start menus, right
click the taskbar and select Properties. Then select Start Menu Programs, and
click on the Add button. Click on the Browse button and locate the EXE ﬁle
for the Video Player program. Click on the Open button, and then click Next.
To complete the operation, select or create a folder, select Next, and then
335

Visual Basic
click Finish. OLE provides a quick method of including wave audio, Midi
ﬁles, animations and video, and helps shorten the software development life
cycle. There are many instances, when program users need to include their
own media ﬁles through OLE2 at runtime. Users may harness it to add voice
or video annotations, documents, et al. This can be achieved by including
Paste Special or Insert Object dialogue boxes in the program. The Paste Spe-
cial dialogue box is produced using the PasteSpecialDlg method. The Insert
Object dialogue box is produced using InsertObjectDlg method. This allows
the user to choose a compatible application or ﬁle type to insert in an OLE
container control. Whether an object is linked or embedded depends on the
OLETypeAllowed property of the OLE container control. When an object is
linked, the OLETypeAllowed property equates to 0-Linked, while it is set to
1-Embedded when an object is embedded. The listing below shows how a
button can be used to open the Insert Object dialogue box, and allow the user
to place an object in an OLE container control called OLE1.
Private Sub Command1 Click()
OLE1.InsertObjDlg
‘Produce the Insert Object dialogue box
End Sub
Embedded or linked objects in an OLE container control can be saved using
the SaveToFile method, which causes the placeholder and link to be saved.
Changes made to the linked object can be saved using the OLE server appli-
cation. When applied to embedded objects, the data is saved in its entirety.
The SaveToFile method can be used to write OLE 2.0 object data to ﬁles,
while the SaveToOle1File method saves objects in the OLE1.0 ﬁle format.
The listing below can be used to save embedded or linked object data.
Private Sub Command2 Click()
FileOLE=FreeFile
‘Assign a free file number to
‘FileOLE
Open "ONE.OLE" For Binary As #FileOLE
‘Open the file
OLE1.SaveToFile FileOLE
‘Save the object data in OLE
Close #FileOLE
‘Close file
End Sub
The subroutine ﬁrst determines a free ﬁle number. Then it opens that ﬁle, writes
the object data to it, and subsequently closes the ﬁle. The opening statement
FileOLE = FreeFile returns a legal ﬁle number that can be used by the Open
statement. It ensures that the FileOLE variable is assigned a ﬁle number that
is not currently in use. An argument can be added to Freeﬁle in the form of a
sufﬁx. The default argument ‘0’ used in this case returns a ﬁle number from
1 to 255. A ‘1’ argument returns a ﬁle number from 256 to 511. Freeﬁle can
336

Visual InterDev
be used to specify the number of the ﬁle to be opened with the ReadFromFile
method, or saved using SaveToFile or SaveToOleFile methods. It is dormant
at design time, and returns no value. The second statement Open “ONE.OLE”
For Binary As #FileOLE, opens the ﬁle that is deﬁned by the ﬁle number
assigned to the FileOLE variable. The statement OLE1.SaveToFile FileOLE,
writes the data within the OLE1 container control to the ﬁle speciﬁed by the
contents of the FileOLE variable. Finally with the object data saved, the ﬁle
is closed using the statement Close #FileOLE. As you would expect, the code
required to retrieve saved OLE data is markedly similar to that required to
write it. The listing below illustrates this:
Private Sub Command3 Click()
FileOLE=FreeFile
‘Assign a free file number
Open "ONE.OLE" For Binary As #FileOLE
‘Open the file
OLE1.ReadFromFile FileOLE
‘Read the object data from
‘the file
Close #FileOLE
‘Close the file
End Sub
The statement OLE1.ReadFromFile FileOLE reads object data from the ﬁle
and writes it into the OLE1 container control. Like the SaveToFile method,
the ReadFromFile method requires the ﬁle number of an open, binary ﬁle to
read object data.
Visual C++
A Microsoft C++ programming environment that may be
used to create:
• DLLs
• ActiveX controls
• 16-bit and 32-bit applications.
(See C++.)
Visual FoxPro
A Microsoft OOP database management system for
creating enterprise solutions. It is supplied with the Microsoft Visual Studio.
Visual InterDev
A Microsoft development tool that is used to create Web
and intranet applications. Brieﬂy it may be used to:
• access ODBC databases
• script client and server Web pages
• edit content ﬁles
• manage multiuser Web projects.
337

Visual Java++
The ﬁles of an InterDev application are stored on the Web server. Files are
accessed with Visual InterDev, using a local project ﬁle that points to the
server and to the relevant Web. InterDev lends itself to the team collabora-
tion environment because multiple developers can work simultaneously with
ﬁles (on the Web server on in a Web). The Web project includes the Web
ﬁles on the server, and the client-side, local project ﬁles. A Web Project File
is available or the creation of project ﬁles that point to relevant Webs and
Web servers. Visual InterDev is also supplied with the multimedia produc-
tion tools:
• Image Composer, which offers a sprite-based drawing environment. Each
imported image becomes a sprite. A number of effects and ﬁlters are avail-
able. Support is provided for plug-ins from Adobe and Kai. It supports
BMP, GIF and TIF formats.
• Music Producer is used to create MIDI sequences.
• Media Manager empowers Windows Explorer to view media ﬁles.
(See Multimedia Production, MIDI and WAV audio.)
Visual Java++
A Microsoft development environment for writing, com-
piling and debugging Java applications and applets. Visual J++ may be used
to integrate JDK packages into Java programs, and to create multithreaded
Internet and intranet applications. InterDev is included in Microsoft Visual-
Studio 97.
(See Java, JDK and JScript.)
Visual programming
A programming technique where the programmer
simply draws usually standard components on screen, and then attaches code
to them. The code segments can be written in a line-by-line fashion or selected
from a library. Many multimedia authoring tools, and modern development
tools, employ visual programming techniques at various levels.
(See Visual Basic.)
Visual SourceSafe
A useful Microsoft solution that lends itself to the
team collaboration environment. Once installed, this restricts editable ﬁles to
individual, authorised developers.
Visual Studio (Enterprise Edition)
A comprehensive suite of Microsoft
development tools that includes:
• Visual J++
• Visual C++
• Visual Basic
• Visual InterDev
• Visual FoxPro.
338

VR
It also includes numerous tools, extensive documentation, and the Microsoft
Developer Network (MSDN) on CD-ROM.
(See ActiveX, C++, Java, and Visual Basic.)
VLAN (Virtual Local Area Network)
A network where computers may
not be connected to the same physical LAN, rather they are connected on
different networks, and in remote locations. They can be conﬁgured using
software, and are immune to the physical location of the networked systems.
(See Ethernet, LAN and VPN.)
VLB (Vesa Local Bus)
A standard local bus that supports compatible
peripherals such as hard disk controllers, I/O cards and graphics cards. It is
internationally agreed and backed by VESA (Video and Electronics Standards
Association). It is used widely on PC designs, and gives better performance
than IBM’s original ISA (Industry Standard Architecture) expansion bus devel-
oped for the PC AT (Advanced Technology) in the early 1990s.
VOD server
A server that provides streams of video.
(See Server.)
VOD service provider
A company engaged in providing video on demand.
VOD usage habits
A proﬁle of users’ habits when using VOD services
indicating the most popular movies and the most popular viewing hours.
Voice recognition
(See Speech recognition and ViaVoice.)
Vortal
Vertical Industry Portal. A Web site that provides information and
resources for a particular ﬁeld of interest such as an industry.
VPL Inc.
A company founded in 1985 by Jaron Lanier, with the pur-
pose of serving the VR market. Its products include the DataGlove and the
EyePhone HMD. Other early products include RB1 (Reality Built for 1), a
single-user VR system. Its speciﬁcation was raised to RB2 (Reality Built
for 2), which could interface two users.
(See VR.)
VPN (Virtual Private Network)
A network that may be built using Inter-
net technologies, as opposed to private lines. VPNs may be LAN-to-LAN, or
even extranets, which include remote users that may be business partners or
even customers.
VR (Virtual Reality)
A non-linear medium that can extend to the concur-
rent communication of interactive 3-D images, sound, and numerous different
339

VR
variables that include 3-D movements and manipulations. Its key property is
that of a theoretically inﬁnite bandwidth. Users’ extracted movements typi-
cally include body, limb and digit movements, but can span from intricate
muscular contractions to intimate vessel expansions and retractions, and sur-
face movements of the skin to eye movements. Trends point to a yet more
sensitive interface able to reap every movement down to the blink of an eye,
the enlarging of a pupil, and even the displacement of a human hair. A ver-
batim image of the interfaced user is foreseeable. Jaron Lanier lays claim
to having coined the term. Users themselves may also be the recipients of
3-D movements, most notably in simulation applications. Subtler manipula-
tions may also be experienced. Variables, that are unidirectional include user
coordinates, pulse rate, heart beat rate, blood pressure and capacity. Variables
that may be bi-directional in nature include temperature and moisture. Other
more specialised variables include pressure, ﬂow, air ﬂow, acidity, luminance,
potential, mass, velocity/speed, acceleration, and directionality. Computer gen-
erated 3-D images compose full, or partial, virtual environments, as well as
perhaps complete or partial replications of interfaced users. The attainable
sophistication of the overall graphical environment is a function of the driv-
ing graphics engine, the software, and particularly transformation algorithms.
Features which determine complex virtual environments include requirements
for high speed graphic transformations, large sets of coordinates, high reso-
lution images, large numbers of independent 3-D graphic objects, complex
3-D objects with changeable behaviours, and high levels of chrominance.
Voice commands can replace and/or compliment tangible and even virtual
mechanisms for interaction and navigation. 3-D sound rendering also may be
included to maintain the perspectives of virtual sound sources. The tangible
VR platform provides the necessary mechanisms for navigation, browsing,
interaction, stimulation of sensory channels, and monitoring variables. At the
core of a standalone VR system is at least one appropriately speciﬁed computer
that might typically range from a single-processor based variant, to a multiple
microprocessor-based system based on a single shared data bus, to a complex
supercomputer architecture including multiple processors, such as transput-
ers as used by Division (Bristol, England) working in concurrence. Graph-
ics performance of the collective virtual engine and accompanying graphics
engine/controller, is key to determining overall complexity and effectiveness
of supported applications. Obvious VR applications may be revealed, or dis-
covered, by considering instances when interactive 3-D graphics/environments
have to be communicated and experienced. The experience may be intimate,
vague, or detached where the user need not be fully immersed, in which case
the HMD may be exchanged for something less intimate, or even a two-
dimensional display. Current applications include architectural visualisation,
scientiﬁc and engineering visualisation, civil and military simulators, surrogate
340

VR
travel, surgery (telepresence), point-of-information using realistic computer-
generated images or video overlay. Distant future applications include virtual
conferencing, three-dimensional multimedia authoring tools, and the simu-
lation of ergonomically effective working environments yielding the virtual
desktop. The visualisation tool market for desktop computers has mushroomed
in recent years giving professionals of various different kinds the ability to
experience, and experiment with structures, in three dimensions. The resul-
tant acceleration of understanding renders visualisation a useful instrument
for learning. The absorption of 3-D movements at various different levels,
and their replication in remote, and even multiple, sites is termed telepres-
ence. Related applications include instances where: human operatives may be
subject to hostile elements in the remote environment; human operatives can-
not physically exist due to the large or small scale of the remote environment;
the cost of physically implanting human operatives in the remote environ-
ment is reduced through telepresence; a single human operative must have a
concurrent presence in multiple remote environments; the presence of human
operatives must be shifted quickly between different multiple remote environ-
ments. Current real world applications include remote surgery and keyhole
surgery, while a plethora of others wait in the wings ranging from deep-sea
diving to the remote realisation of military roles. Conceivably, telepresence
will one day extend to VR-conferencing providing full interaction between
participating users; conference members or even a complete workforce could
be congregated from multiple locations. An almost mandatory stage in the
development of a multimedia application is the development of a storyboard,
which may also include the various implanted links that support its non-linear
paths. This preliminary design stage may be carried out using the multimedia
authoring tool itself, which is the case with Asymetrix ToolBook and many
others. This stage provides a prototype structure for testing the partial or
complete interactive design. Multimedia based on a complex hypertext model
that features a ﬁne level of granularity, may be difﬁcult to storyboard in two
dimensions; a single page, window or screen that forms part of a frame-based
multimedia application may contain a number of micro features that provide
navigational controls. The micro features may include active words/phrases,
image fragments, micons (motion icons) all of which will require the implan-
tation of links. Modern authoring tools offer visual programming techniques
where you ﬁrst draw screen objects such as buttons and then attach pro-
gram scripts to them so deﬁning their behaviour. Modern tools also provide
a number of commonly used, ready-made scripts that may be used to handle
events such as mouse clicks. Even if the authoring tool provides a means
of drawing the links using a graphical model of the application the under-
lying hypertext structure can remain difﬁcult to overview. This is largely
because the conventional computer monitor is restrictive and Creditcards a
tunnel vision that signiﬁcantly lengthens the design stage. Now consider a
341

VRML
3-D multimedia authoring tool; a virtual environment ergonomically designed
as a receptacle for the components of a multimedia application. It could be
a room of any shape or size, a sphere, or simply free space without visible
boundaries. Documents/frames with multiple media types could be pasted on
virtual walls and surfaces, or suspended in free space. Mixed media documents
could be cascaded or tiled as required, while the all important links could be
implanted graphically. Multimedia, hypermedia and hypertext authors famil-
iar with two dimensional environments will appreciate fully the advantages
of a third dimension: both the storyboard and interactive design are imple-
mented and overviewed more easily; while testing the interactive design and
debugging is made easier.
Further reading
Sutherland, Ivan, A Head-Mounted Three-Dimensional Display, Harvard Com-
putation Laboratory, Proceedings Fall Joint Computer Conference, Thomp-
son Books, 1968.
Larijani Casey, L. The Virtual Reality Primer, McGraw-Hill, 1993.
VRML (“Vermul”) (Virtual Reality Modeling Language)
A ﬁle for-
mat, and a language for creating and describing objects or nodes and their
behaviour. VRML extended the Open Inventor speciﬁcation to include cone,
cube and cylinder primitives, along with methods for embedding hyperlinks.
Applications of VRML include:
• multimedia presentations and titles
• leisure software
• virtual reality
• web pages.
Objects may be:
• static 3-D images
• static 2-D images
• audio
• multimedia
• embedded with hyperlinks.
VRML authoring tools or generators are widely available.
VRML nodes
Node properties have:
• a name that is dedicated to the class
• parameters that offer an object’s deﬁnition and have ﬁelds that contain dimen-
sions, etc.
VRML events
The nodes are event driven, and receive and send messages
such as:
eventIn
342

Vulnerabilities
that typically changes a property of the node, or
EventOut
that sends a message from an object that might have undergone change due to an
interaction with a message. Nodes interact using messages passed via ROUTE which
interconnects eventOut and an eventIn processes.
(See VRML.)
VRML ISO/IEC 14772
An ofﬁcial designation for the internationally
agreed VRML speciﬁcation.
V-standards
A set of recommendations that covers voice and data tele-
phony. Popular V-standards cover the following full-duplex modem speeds:
V.21
300 bps
V.22
1,200 bps
V.22bis
2,400 bps
V.32
9,600 bps
V.32bis
14,400 bps
V.34
28,800 bps
V.90
56,600 bps
(See Access technology and Modem.)
Vulnerabilities
A listing of comparative ﬂaws in a network’s defenses
against illegal access.
(See Firewall and Security.)
343

W
W3C (The World-Wide Web Consortium)
An organisation dedicated
to the standardisation of Internet related technologies such as HTML.
WAIS (Wide Area Information Systems)
A generic engine for main-
taining and searching databases and is frequently used by Internet information
searching services.
Wall street
The ﬁnancial epicentre of New York City.
WAN (Wide Area Network)
A network of computers and interconnected
LANs. Typically, a WAN is spread over a greater area than a LAN.
WAP (Wireless Applications Protocol)
A standard that permit mobile
WAP devices such as compliant mobile phones to access Internet information.
The accompanying architectural model consists of a WAP gateway that unites
the Mobile network (that is typically GSM) and the IP based Internet. A WAP
mobile phone or ‘user agent’ consists of a WAP browser, and interpreter able
to display WML scripts. The WAP protocol layers include the:
• (WAE) Wireless Application Environment
• (WDP) WAP Datagram Protocol
• (WSP) WAP Session Protocol
• (WTP) WAP Transport Protocol
• (WTLS) WAP Transport Layer Security.
(See WML.)
WAP gateway
(See WAP.)
WAP security
(See WAP.)
WASP (Wireless Application Services Provider)
A company that
specialises in implementating, deploying and sometimes hosting, wireless
applications.
(See 2G, 2.5G and 3G.)
345

WAV
WAV
A Microsoft standard ﬁle format for storing wave audio data. It can
be used to store 8 bit and 16 bit wave audio at sample rates of 11.025 KHz,
22.050 KHz and 44.1 KHz. WAV ﬁles are compatible with all fully-speciﬁed
multimedia presentation programs, and multimedia authoring tools. They are
also compatible with all modern Windows wave audio recorders and editors,
including Sound Recorder, Creative Wave Studio and QuickRecorder.
(See ASF, MPEG, Wave audio and Streaming.)
Wave audio
A term often used to describe digital audio recordings, usu-
ally made using an analogue signal provided by a source device. Such wave
audio may be distributed in real time over the Internet using streaming server
technologies, or it may be distributed using CD- and DVD-based variants. It
may provide content for CD-ROM, DVD or Web applications. Generally it
may be distributed and played back using any medium that is capable of sus-
taining an average data transfer rate appropriate to the recorded wave audio
quality level. Principal parameters which drive the quality of wave audio
recorded using PCM (Pulse Code Modulation) include the sampling frequency
and the sample size. The wave audio quality levels that may be achieved are
a function of the wave audio recording software and the sound facility on
the recording system. MPC2/3-compliant sound cards may be used to record
and play wave audio in mono and in stereo at sampling rates of 11.025 KHz,
22.05 KHz and 44.1 KHz, using 8 bit or 16 bit samples. Used with appropriate
software, highly speciﬁed sound cards offer higher sampling frequencies and
larger sample sizes. They can make DAT quality wave audio possible that
equates to 16 bit samples recorded at a frequency of 48 KHz. Simple calcula-
tions imply that one minute of uncompressed CD-quality wave audio, which
amounts to 10.08 Mb (10321.92 KBytes), requires a DSM capable of provid-
ing an average data transfer rate of around 172.032 KBytes/sec. Approximate
ﬁle sizes when recording one minute of 8 bit stereo wave audio at different
sampling rates are as follows:
11.025 KHz
1.25 Mb
22.050 KH
2.52 Mb
44.1 KHz
5.04 Mb
48 KHz
5.49 Mb
Approximate ﬁle sizes when recording one minute of 16 bit stereo wave audio
at different sampling rates are as follows:
11.025 KHz
2.52 Mb
22.050 KHz
5.04 Mb
44.1 KHz
10.08 Mb
48 KHz
10.98 Mb
346

Web cam
The memory capacity consumed by a sequence is a function of quality. If it
is necessary to calculate the exact memory/data capacity consumed, then the
following simple formula may be applied:
Memory capacity required (bits)
= Sequence duration (secs) * Sampling rate (Hz)
* bits per sample
For example, if an 8-bit sound digitiser with a sample rate of 11 KHz were
used to digitise a 15-second sequence, then:
Data capacity required (bits)
= 15 * 11,000 * 8
= 1,320,000 bits
= 165,000 Bytes
= 161.13 KBytes
Memory or disk data capacity required naturally increases linearly with
increased sample rates.
(See MPC-3 and Streaming audio.)
Web
A global hypertext-based structure that can be navigated and
browsed. It provides links to information sources and services that are termed
Web sites. Tim Berners-Lee is accredited with the Web’s invention, and
his initial work was carried out by Berners-Lee when he was a computer
scientist at the Swiss’ Center for Nuclear Research (CERN). Web is based
on the hypertext model for information storage and retrieval. URLs are key
to permitting the implantation of hypertext links and navigation schemes on
the Web. The initial model was static. It was released in 1992 by CERN. Its
origins are in hypertext, hypermedia and multimedia models and concepts.
(See Bernes-Lee, Tim, W3C and Web.)
Web analytics company
A company that is engaged in performance test-
ing and performance renovation of on-line and real-time information services
such as e-business sites. The company may provide automated solutions to
generate performance indicators and usage habits in the form of reports and
alerts. This information may be used for critical decision making. Visitor
behaviour is also studied by such companies.
Web cam
A Web site that features real time video broadcasting from
one or more locations. The screen updates, or the frame playback speeds,
vary according to the site implementation, and may be quoted as frames per
second, frames per minute, or even frames per hour. Generally Web cams
provide images of locations and people from around the world and serve as
347

Web-based company
entertainment, while more serious applications include CCTV-type applica-
tions, remote viewing of child care centres, etc. Web cams generally provide
non-linear broadcasting, while video-conferencing provides a bi-directional
communications.
(See MPEG.)
Web-based company
A company that uses the Web as its marketing and
selling channel. Historically, such e-commerce Web sites require CGI scripts
and programs in order to implement processing logic. Typically, forms posted
from the Browser are validated in terms of credit card details and so on, and
if accepted the customer’s order is placed in the database, and processed by
the vendor at an appropriate point in operations.
(See ASP, CGI, Perl and Transaction.)
WebBot
A name given to components included with Microsoft FrontPage.
They each have a speciﬁc functionality:
• Comment is used at Web documentation, which is only visible at design time
• Conﬁrmation echoes entered user data
• Include replaces the contents of a Web page with another
• Scheduled Include echoes the Include WebBot functionality, except it may
be scheduled for a future date
• Scheduled Image echoes the functionality of the Scheduled Include WebBot,
except it includes an image rather than Web page contents
• Search Component provides Web site search facilities
• Table of Contents generates a Web’s outline, together with its hyperlinks
• TimeStamp is used to display the date and time the Web page was last
updated.
(See ActiveX, FrontPage, Java and Plug-in.)
Webcasting
A process by which a Web server serves clients or users with
speciﬁc data or ﬁles. The user merely speciﬁes what is required. Webcasting
software includes Intermind Communicator and PointCast. Such a process
exists within the push model.
(See Application and Client/server)
Webmaster
An individual that manages and maintains a Web site. His/her
duties are numerous and include updating Web pages, adding new content,
removing old content, overlooking integrated security features and policies.
Web Page
A page that may be accessed via the Web. A Web page may
include links to other pages, 2-D and 3-D graphics, sound bites, video, an
e-mail address, and various forms for user feedback. Its underlying code or
348

Web Server
glue is HTML, which may be used for formatting, as well as for holding
together such components as ActiveX controls.
(See ActiveX and Web.)
Web Page Description
A stream of 200 characters that exists after <BODY>
tag on a Web page, and is retrieved by search engines as a description of
the document.
(See HTML, Search engine and Web page title.)
Web page title
A Web page’s title that is enclosed by HTML <TITLE>
tags. It is used as meta data by popular search engines when retrieving Web
documents, and displayed as the document’s title.
(See HTML, <TITLE>, Search engine and Web page description.)
Web phone
(See Internet telephony.)
Web proxy
An agent that may be perceived as existing between the
Browser and the Internet or intranet. Typically, they are used for caching
Web pages in order to improve performance, hence the term caching proxy.
(See Security proxy.)
Web Security
A method of securing Web applications and their associated
data from illegal unauthorised use. Securing Web applications and their data
typically involves:
• implementing a ﬁrewall, restricting access to selected Web applications
and data
• using client-side security features of Windows NT, and security programs
like Virtual Key
• restricting access to server-side data and components, which might include
CGI scripts and ISAPI ﬁlters
• monitoring system logs
• restricting user’s rights to upload ﬁles to server-side directories, to minimise
the possibility of virus infections
• adhering to SET guidelines
• designing a security regime, where users require membership to the com-
plete site or to selected components
• requiring site members to change their passwords
• granting users’ guest rights, where they may peruse demo Web applications
and data.
(See Encryption, Firewall, Security and SET.)
Web Server
An architecture which maintains the connection between the
server-side processing and data, with that of the client-side. The mainstay of
349

Web server security
one or more Web applications, the Web Server may also implement interactions
between users and server-side databases. User interaction via the browser
might be processed on the client side, or on the server side. ActiveX Controls
might form a basis for such client-side processing. The Web Server interprets
user requests, and implements speciﬁed tasks, such as:
• serving HTML pages that are interpreted by the browser
• downloading ﬁles
• downloading Java applets
• downloading ActiveX controls
• interacting with server-side databases.
Web servers include the Microsoft Personal Web Server, which may be used
for prototyping and for proving conceptual designs. With Microsoft IIS, Win-
dows NT is used as the Web server’s operating system.
(See IIS and MCIS.)
Web server security
A set of issues that relate to securing data trafﬁc
between servers and clients so legal usage is maintained.
(See Firewall and Security)
Web site
1. A physical server (or collection of such servers) and software
that supports the server-side applications and data of Web applications. Users
may connect with the physical or virtual Web servers contained therein, using
Web addresses such as www.server.com.au. Server-side components of Web
applications are numerous, including:
• software server components
• ActiveX controls
• Java applets
• Perl scripts.
2. A software solution that serves clients with a Web application. The appli-
cation contains a page, or number of pages, and has a Web address (i.e.
www.testsite.com.). Such sites may be created with numerous software pack-
ages. Microsoft Publisher 98, for instance, has numerous useful wizards that
guide you through the design of Web sites. The site’s interactive and media
content will reside physically on the Web server, and be distributed across:
• HTML code
• Scripting languages such as JScript and VBScript
• ActiveX controls
• Java applets.
(See Web Server, Active Web Server, Active Server, Active Desktop, Virtual Web
server and Server.)
350

Winamp
WebSphere-IBM
An IBM Internet software infrastructure and middleware
solution used to develop and deploy e-business applications. The core element
is the WebSphere Application Server powered by a single Javaengine:
• Standard Edition: transforms static Web sites’ Web content by introducing
servlets, JavaServer Pages, and XML.
• Advanced Edition: has an Enterprise Java Bean component server.
• Enterprise Edition: builds high-volume e-business applications, and uses
EJB and CORBA.
(See CORBA.)
Web TV
1. A Web site used in television broadcasting capacity. 2. An
Internet access appliance that connects with a television. It may take the form
of an STB (Set Top Box.)
(See Streaming video and Video.)
WEP Wired Equivalent Privacy
A security protocol speciﬁed in IEEE
Wireless Fidelity standard, and gives wireless local area networks (WLANs)
security and privacy. Data encryption secures inks between clients and access
points. Other security measures include password protection, end-to-end encry-
ption, virtual private networks (VPNs), and authentication.
What-if
A term commonly applied to hypothesising in a computer envi-
ronment. Using fully speciﬁed relational databases, it is possible to play
What-if by querying stored information. The querying process involves using
either standard SQL such as ANSI-92 SQL, OQL (Object-oriented Query Lan-
guage), or a proprietary querying language or feature such as Borland’s QBE
(Query By Example). Querying may be used to set up hypothetical situations
such as increasing a product price, for instance. The consequences can be
viewed almost immediately.
(See Data warehouse and OLAP.)
White Book
(See Video CD.)
White list
(See 2G.)
Wildcard
A shorthand for search strings. For example, Van Gogh AND
Amsterdam may be exchanged for Van ∗gh AND ?Amsterdam where ‘∗’
represents any series of characters and ‘?’ replaces any single character.
WIMP (Windows, Icons, Mouse and Pop-up menus)
A traditional term
for the GUI environment such as OS/2 Warp and Windows.
Winamp
An MP3 wave audio ﬁle player.
(See MP3.)
351

Windows
Windows
A GUI operating system and environment that has proved a
core software technology since circa 1990, and the chosen client side operat-
ing system for almost all client/server applications (including the World Wide
Web). Its roots are entrenched in research carried out at the Xerox Palo Alto
Research Center (PARC), and in the ﬁrst commercial multi-tasking GUI imple-
mented by Apple Computer for inclusion in the Apple Macintosh, launched
in 1984. Windows is the realisation of Bill Gates’ early vision of the com-
puter as a universal and invaluable support mechanism. Wherever you may
be, close by there is almost always a running copy of Windows. This means
that we must all use Windows, and preferably use it well. Don’t worry, it’s
not the nightmarish scenario of George Orwell’s novel 1984 where work-
ers are slaves to machines. Far from it, because Windows 98 actually frees
users. The most notable freedoms it gives are those of browsing the Internet,
and permitting users to make purchase through e-commerce Web sites. Users
can also publish documents on the largely unregulated World Wide Web, and
communicate in real time. Equally, Windows may be used to run day-to-day
applications that include word processors and spreadsheets, and even voice
operated dictation systems such as IBM ViaVoice. Windows is quite literally
a single gateway, through which everything is accessible. Combined with its
underlying and surrounding technologies, its impact greatly surpasses that of
any other operating system. For some time Microsoft has sought to make trans-
parent the boundary that separates the Windows Desktop from the Internet.
Windows 98 achieved this through the Active Desktop, where Active Channels
provide single-click access to Web sites. Windows 98 has pretty much every-
thing required to exploit all its target platforms and software applications, and
the technologies that surround us. No stone has been left unturned, through
the support for hardware devices from numerous manufacturers. Windows 98
is an operating system that has evolved over a number of years to become
a feature rich environment. It is increasingly difﬁcult to cite omissions from
new versions, and Windows 98 is no exception. The obvious absent features
and applications are the result of continuing pressure to steer Microsoft away
from monopolistic practices. Included in Windows 98 is an impressive array
of features, and where you begin and end with them, rather depends on what
you want to do. Equally, features that are important to one user, may not be
to another user. Generally, however, key features of Windows 98 include:
• Windows Explorer, which permits you to browse ﬁles, manage ﬁles and
disks, open applications, and to do a host of other operations.
• Windows Desktop, upon which are: Program icons, Active Channels, and
the Taskbar that also has toolbars.
• Active Desktop, which integrates the World Wide Web more tightly with
the Windows Desktop. So-called Active Channels may be placed on the
Desktop, and provide single-click access to Web sites, and the dynamic
reception of information. You may also add Active Channels of your own.
352

Windows
• Start button, which provides single-click access to Start menus. This is used
to open documents and applications.
• Taskbar, which anchors the Start button, and shows the time of day, and
buttons that are used to activate open applications. It also has icons that
are used to access various background applications such as Internet and
network connections. There are also toolbars that provide single-click access
to selected applications and features.
• Dial-up Networking (DUN), which provides access to remote networks, and
to ISPs.
• Internet connectivity and e-mail features, including the software required to
connect with Compuserve and other ISPs.
• File Allocation Table32 (FAT32) ﬁling system that is an advancement of
the FAT16 implementation.
The listed features, and a plethora of others, will be explained in this text.
It will be the aim of this book to reveal how they are best exploited, to get
things done quickly and effectively. (See FAT32.)
The founding father of the Windows concept is Douglas Engelbart, whose
work was built upon at Xerox PARC (Palo Alto Research Center). Microsoft’s
Bill Gates, and Apple Computer’s Steve Jobs, learned of the modern Windows
implementations that were developed at PARC. This yielded the graphical
user environment (GUI or ‘gooey’), included in the Apple Macintosh that
was launched in mid 1984. The success of the Apple Mac led Microsoft
to develop a competing GUI in the form of Windows. Work on Microsoft
Windows began in earnest, with Scott MacGregor from the PARC windows
initiative playing a key role. However, the early releases of Windows had little
impact in a world where the PC software market was dominated largely by
text-based DOS applications. Windows was ﬁnally accepted as the de facto PC
environment in the late 1980s, when version 3.0 was released. The Microsoft
Windows continuum approximates: Windows 3.0 that supported 16-bit instruc-
tions only, and featured the Program Manager that was used to organise
applications and to launch them. It also featured the File Manager that was
to be renamed the Windows Explorer through the launch of Windows 95. It
integrated no multimedia support, because Microsoft had yet to specify the
Multimedia PC-1 (MPC-1). At this time, PCs were little more than text-based
appliances that offered fairly crude graphics. Microsoft’s Multimedia Exten-
sions were launched in 1990, and could be added to Windows 3.0. These
included the Media Player that is used to play audio, midi and video ﬁles.
As such the Windows PC had become a multimedia enabled appliance. How-
ever, it continued to be devoid of network connectivity features, and was very
much a standalone implementation. Windows 3.1 that integrated the Multime-
dia extensions as standard. Windows 3.11 for Workgroups included support
for creating peer-to-peer Local Area Networks (LANs), in which connected
computers could share their resources with other connected systems. Windows
353

Windows 2000.
NT (New Technology) supported 32 bit instructions, and as is the case today,
was aimed at the corporate market. It’s key strength is improved robustness
when compared to Windows 3.1/3.11 and Windows 95/98. Windows 95 saw
the introduction of the Start menu and Taskbar that replaced the Program
Manager as a means of opening applications. It also supported 32 bit instruc-
tions, and was aimed at home and small ofﬁce users. Networking features
found in Windows 3.11 for Workgroups were also integrated in the design.
Windows 98 included new features such as the Active Desktop.
Windows 2000.
(See Windows GUI.)
Windows Desktop
A term used by Windows, providing numerous fea-
tures, including:
• Start button, which may be used to open applications and documents
• Taskbar, which anchors the Start button and shows the date, as well as other
important icons
• Program icons, which can be double-clicked to open applications
• Buttons for open applications, which are displayed on the Taskbar
• Time, which when double-clicked invokes the Date/Time Properties
• Channel bar, which provides single-click access to Web sites and informa-
tion services.
Time
Minimised applications
Start button
The application
window of the
Windows Explorer
Start menu
Desktop icons
Taskbar
Windows
Desktop
Active channels
Tray, which holds icons 
relating to background tasks 
such as dial-up networking
connections.
Toolbar,which provides single
click access to features and
applications, including the Active Channels.
354

Windows origins
The Taskbar also serves to display numerous icons, such as those associated
with connections to networks and to the Internet.
(See Windows.)
Windows Explorer
(See Explorer.)
Windows for Workgroups
(See Windows.)
Windows Help system
A Windows Help system that uses Hypertext-
based navigation.
Windows Media Player
A Windows program that is able to play audio,
video and Midi.
Windows NT Registry
A conﬁgurable set of parameters that allow Win-
dows NT to optimise resources for applications. The registry is stored in an
initialisation (INI) ﬁle, and is also used to register components including:
• ActiveX
• OLE
• DCOM
• COM.
The regsvr32 program is used to register such components.
Windows NT Server
A Microsoft 32 bit operating system that includes
the functionality of Windows NT Workstation, and an additional array of
server-orientated features. (Refer to the Microsoft Web site.)
Windows NT Workstation
A Microsoft 32 bit operating system that has
a graphical front-end. Windows NT Workstation is a complex OS, and suite
of integrated applications, and includes:
• Windows Explorer, which is used to browse local and remote ﬁles, open
ﬁles, and launch programs
• Start menu, which permits applications to be launched
• Desktop, upon which icons reside
• NotePad, which is a simple word processor
• Network connectivity functions
• Internet connectivity functions, but has no browser (1998)
• E-mail functions.
Windows origins
An industry standard graphical user interface (GUI)
and OS for the PC platform. Its origins are embedded in work carried out at
Xerox PARC (Pala Alto Research Center). In the mid 1980s Microsoft set
up the Interactive Systems Group (ISG), a team assigned with the task of
developing a GUI for the PC. Ex PARC researcher Scott MacGregor was a
355

Windows Sound Recorder
member of the Microsoft ISG. The founding father of the Windows concept,
however, is deemed to be Douglas Engelbart, who is also accredited with the
invention of the mouse. Windows 1.01 was shipped in November, 1985. It
was a success, but nothing like that of the Apple Macintosh GUI launched
over a year earlier. Windows 2.x was shipped in September 1987. Not until
May, 1990 when Microsoft began shipping version 3.0 did Windows become
a widespread success.
(See Microsoft.)
WindowsSoundRecorder
AWindowsprogramabletorecordwave audio.
WINS
Warehouse Information Network Standard.
Winsock
A Windows Application Programming Interface (API) that pro-
vides input/output operations for Web applications. Its implementation takes
the form of a DLL (Dynamic Link Library), and is an evolution of the Berke-
ley Unix sockets which provide interprocess communications both locally and
over networks.
WinZip
A batch ﬁle compression/decompression utility that may be used
for archiving, transmitting digital matter over narrow-bandwidth network and
access technologies such as analogue modems.
Wireless LAN
A LAN that uses RF (radio frequency) technology to
receive and transmit data over the air. IEEE 802.11 deﬁnes the standard and
internationally agreed components and protocols for a wireless LAN.
Wizard
A software feature that guides the users through the steps required
to perform a speciﬁc task. The task might be the addition of computer hardware
or programs.
WML (Wireless Markup Language)
A markup language used to create
WAP sites and applications that may be accessed by WAP phone users.
<? xml version=’1.0’?>
<! DOCTYPE wml PUBLIC "-//WAPFORUM//DTD WML 1.2//EN"
A WML document prologue that all WML scripts contain. In the shown example,
the ﬁrst line declares that the WML deck consists of XML statements. The second
line deﬁnes the document using the DTD (Document Type Deﬁnition) mnemonic
as adhering to the WAP Forum WML 1.2 speciﬁcation.
<tag attr = "wxyz"/>
A WML attribute that speciﬁes additional information about an element.
356

Wozniak, Steve
<tag/>
A WML structure that identiﬁes elements without content. (See WML and <tag>
content </tag>.)
<tag> content </tag>
A WML expression that speciﬁes elements holding content in the WML deck. These
may be:
• Tasks performed in response to events
• Character entities
• Card delimiters.
Workﬂow management
A broad term used to deﬁne the coordination of
processes necessary to implement a given task, or given set of tasks.
WorldPay WorldAccount
A service for micropayments where the user
deposits a small amount using a credit or debit card, that can be spent at
WorldAccount Payment sites.
World Wide Web (WWW)
The Web is a global hypertext-based struc-
ture that may be navigated and browsed. It provides links to information
sources and services that are termed Web sites. Tim Berners-Lee is accred-
ited with the Web’s invention, and is currently the Director of W3C (World
Wide Web Consortium). Berners-Lee carried out the initial work when he was
a computer scientist at the Swiss’ Centre for Nuclear Research (CERN). A
key facet of the Internet, the Web is based on the hypertext model for infor-
mation storage and retrieval. Universal Resource Locators (URLs) or Web
addresses are key to permitting the implantation of hypertext links and nav-
igation schemes on the Web. It can support mixed media including video.
It was released in 1992 by CERN. Its origins are in hypertext, hypermedia
and multimedia models and concepts. A Web page may include links to other
pages, 2-D and 3-D graphics, sound bites, video, an e-mail address, and var-
ious forms for user feedback. Its underlying code or glue is HTML, which
may be used for formatting, as well as for holding together such components
as ActiveX controls.
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)
A publisher of speciﬁcations
of web technologies that include HTTP, HTML and CGI. Further information
may be obtained at www.w3c.org.
Wozniak, Steve
A technologist and co-founder of Apple Computer, and
responsible for the design of the early Apple microcomputer. His most sig-
niﬁcant achievements are those at the early years of Apple Computer, an era
when a clutch of American companies largely run and owned by college drop
outs (including Bill Gates) revolutionised the computer industry by designing
357

Wrappering
affordable microcomputers and accompanying software. Steve Wozniak, and
Steve Jobs revolutionised the world of computing by mass producing one of
the world’s most affordable PCs known simply as the Apple, and later the
Apple II. It was designed by Steve Wozniak, whose dream was always to
own a computer, once saying ‘I don’t care if I live in the smallest house, just
so long as I have my very own computer.’ This was a dream that he almost
single handedly made reality for himself and for millions of people around
the world.
(See Apple Computer.)
Wrappering
A process used to migrate a conventional program structure
to that of an object. The program is renovated in terms of the addition of an
object interface. Thereafter, it can be stimulated as any other object.
(See Object.)
WWW
(See Web.)
www.netcraft.co.uk/
A Web site that may be visited to gain information
about Web servers.
WYSIWYG (What-you-see-is-what-you-get)
A term applied to a pro-
gram which is capable of generating on screen exactly what will be printed.
358

X
X3
An ANSI Committee dedicated to Information Processing Systems.
X9
An ANSI Committee dedicated to Financial Services.
X12
An ANSI designation and committee dedicated to EDI.
X.25
A standard set of protocols for packet-switched networks, introduced
by the CCITT, but now comes under ITU-T. It covers the protocols between
DTE (data terminal equipment) and DCE (data circuit terminating equipment).
X.25 were developed in the 1970’s, when data transfer rate requirements
were slow in comparison to today’s. High-speed data transmission using the
X.25 protocol is possible, but increasingly modern communications networks
integrate frame relay. The X.25 error-correction is accommodated using a scal-
able acknowledgement window that may typically include seven packets. This
means that the sending device must wait for an acknowledgement for each
group of seven packets. The maximum packet size is deﬁned as 256 Bytes,
so the transmitting device may send n × 256 Bytes of data before receiving
an acknowledgement that veriﬁes data reception. The error correction that
is integrated into X.25 is robust because earlier networks were unreliable.
Today’s digital networks are much more reliable; thus there is an opportunity
to develop far more efﬁcient protocols. These need not include the intensive
error detection and correction of previous packet switched protocols. Frame
relay is one such relatively contemporary protocol designed for modern com-
munications networks.
(See ATM, Frame relay and ISDN.)
X.509
An internationally agreed standard for digital certiﬁcates desig-
nated by the CCITT. SET speciﬁes a modiﬁed X.509 implementation for
payment cards.
(See SET.)
X/OS
A Unix variant developed by Olivetti.
359

XA
XA
1. A standard protocol that is used to coordinate transactions. 2. A
shorthand term for CD-ROM XA (Compact Disc-Read Only Memory eXtended
Architecture). Published by Microsoft, Philips and Sony in March 1988, XA
permits a near-CD-I title to be delivered using a conventional desktop computer
with installed CD-ROM drive and XA decoder. Initially, it appeared for the PC
and was seen as a response to Intel’s DVI (Digital Video Interactive) digital
video compression. It brought CD-I level B and level C audio quality to the PC:
Level B audio is equivalent to a high quality stereo FM broadcast transmitted
under optimum conditions. An entire CD-I disc gives a maximum of four hours
B-Level stereo playback. Technically level B audio is an 8 bit recording digi-
tised at a sampling frequency of 37.7 KHz. Level C audio equates to an AM
radio broadcast transmitted under optimum conditions. A whole disc could
yield over 16 hours playing time. It is also termed mid ﬁquality. It equates
to a 4 bit ADPCM wave audio recording sampled at 37.7 KHz. (See CD-ROM
and DVD.)
Xanadu
A uniﬁed repository of literature and information, invented by
Theodore Nelson. It was conceived before the Web, and abstracts much of the
thinking embedded in the work of Vannevar Bush, and his momentous article,
‘As We May Think.’ Conceptually, Xanadu was the Web. And if Vannevar
Bush and Ted Nelson were responsible for putting forward the concept of the
Web, then Tim Berners-Lee must be considered its architect.
(See Web.)
xCBL (XML Common Business Library)
A set of XML business doc-
uments and components distributed by XML.org and other relevant organ-
isations. These sites allow users to use the component library to construct
documents. xCBL provides interoperability between applications and is made
available as a set of SOX schemas.
(See www.xcbl.org.)
XDSL (Digital Subscriber Line)
A digital access technology that pro-
vides sufﬁcient bandwidth for multiple virtual lines over a single physical
telephone connection to accommodate, for example, concurrent Internet access
and voice/fax communications. Supporting data transfer rates that approach
2 Mbps, xDSL applications include video on demand, and interactive video
and data communications, and because it may use twisted pair (or telephone
lines) as its medium its deployment is cost effective.
(See Access technology and ADSL.)
XENIX
A Unix variant developed by Microsoft.
Xeon
A shorthand term for the Pentium II Xeon processor, originally
aimed at Workstations and servers.
(See Pentium II.)
360

XMS
Xerox PARC (Palo Alto Research Center)
A research establishment
founded in 1970 by Xerox. It is the birth place of many multimedia-associated
technologies and concepts including laser printing, local area networks, the
graphical user interface (GUI), and object orientated programming (OOP).
The GUI system integrated into the Apple Macintosh launched in 1984 was a
direct result of Apple’s Steve Jobs visiting PARC. During his visit he saw the
GUI platformed on PARC’s Alto system. The same may be said of Microsoft’s
Bill Gates and the Windows OS.
XHTML (eXtensible Hypertext Markup Language)
A redesigned ver-
sion of HTML 4.01 that offers an XML vocabulary.
XHTML Basic
A rationalised version of XHTML.
Xing Technology Corporation
A company engaged in the development
of MPEG encoding and editing products, and audio and video compression
in general. Its headquarters are in Arroyo Grande, US. Products include the
XingCD, which may be used to compress video according to MPEG-1 com-
pression algorithm, and XingSound, which may be used to produce and edit
MPEG-1 audio streams.
(See MPEG., Streaming video and Video.)
XingCD
A software product from Xing (Arroyo Grande, US) capable of
compressing video according to the MPEG-1 compression algorithm. Used
without an MPEG-1 player, it is able to play MPEG video without sound.
XingSound
A software product from Xing (Arroyo Grande, US) useful
for compressing wave audio according to the MPEG-1 audio compression
standard. It can record and compress audio from an analogue source in real
time. It can also be used to perform standard editing operations on MPEG-1
wave audio ﬁles, including cut, copy and paste.
XLink (XML Linking Language)
A markup language that offers com-
prehensive linking features and integrates part of other hypertext features
including HyTime and SGML.
XML (eXtensible Markup Language)
An open standard markup lan-
guage proposed by the W3C in December 1997. It is ‘a data format for
structured document interchange on the Web’. It is comparable to HTML
and is also a variation of SGML.
XMS (eXtended Memory Speciﬁcation)
A software speciﬁcation that
provides access beyond the 1Mb boundary of PC architecture machines. Access
to extended memory is provided by an appropriate driver in the CONFIG.SYS
ﬁle that may be assumed to be HIMEM.SYS.
361

XNET
XNET
An interprocessor communications scheme used by the MasPar
MP-1 SIMD processor. It addresses processors as a two-dimensional net-
work topology.
(See MPP.)
XPATH (XML Path Language)
A common syntax and semantics for
functionality shared between Xpointer and XSL Transformations (XSLT), and
is used to provide addressing to XML documents which it models as a tree of
nodes. Xpath expressions may yield an object type that can be:
• node-set (or set of nodes)
• boolean (true or false)
• number (that is a ﬂoating-point number)
• string (or sequence of UCS characters).
(See Xpointer.)
XPointer
A language expression that gives speciﬁc references to XML
document content. An XPointer expression may search a document’s structure
based on criteria that include properties such as element types, attribute values,
character content, and sequence. Xpointers can:
• address into XML documents
• be used over the Internet
• be integrated in URLs.
(See XML.)
Xpress
A shorthand name for the QuarkXpress desktop publishing
package.
XSL (eXtensible Stylesheet Language)
A language used to create style-
sheets that describe XML data ﬁles in terms of the style, page format and
pagination, for electronic media like windows and Browsers or printed matter.
An XSL stylesheet processor generates XML source from the XML document
and the XSL stylesheet by:
• tree transformation, which constructs a result tree using the XML source tree
• formatting to produce a formatted presentation using the result tree.
XSL is based on Cascading Style Sheets (CSS2) and on the Document Style
Semantics and Speciﬁcation Language (DSSSL), and has many of CSS’ for-
matting objects.
(See CSS.)
XSLT (eXtensible Stylesheet Language Transformations)
A part of the
XSL language that transforms XML documents into other XML documents.
The XSL Transformations (XSLT) Version 1.0 was published in October, 1999
362

X-Y input device
as a W3C Proposed Recommendation. XSLT accommodates XSL related
transformation types that are expressed as a well-formed XML document,
which complies with Namespaces in XML Recommendation. A transforma-
tion describes rules for transforming a source tree into a result tree, and is
achieved by associating patterns with templates:
• patterns are matched against source tree elements
• templates are instantiated to build the result tree.
(See XSL.)
X-standards
A series of evolving recommendations covering data net-
works. Among the most signiﬁcant X standard is X.25.
XT
A shorthand term used to describe the IBM PC XT. And early desk-
top computer design produced in the very early 1980’s. Its speciﬁcation is
now defunct.
X-Windows
A GUI often used with almost all Unix OSs, and was devel-
oped at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), who surrendered it to the
public domain. X-Windows implementations include Motif and OpenLook.
X-Y input device
An input device that measures input movement in two
dimensions only.
363

Y
Y
1. A horizontal dimension of a coordinate in a 2- or 3-dimensional vec-
tor coordinate representation. The value may be absolute, measured from the
origin [0, 0] or relative such as [X0 + X1, Y0 + Y1]. A 2-D computer image
or animation might be stored and generated using absolute or relative coor-
dinates that include X (horizontal) and Y (vertical) dimensions. Authentic
2-D animations depend upon matrix multiplication where sets of coordi-
nates are multiplied by a transformation matrix. 2-D vectors [X, Y] might
be exchanged for homogeneous vector coordinates [X, Y, H]. The homoge-
neous dimension (H) is added to accommodate a three-row transformation
matrix, so increasing the number of possible 2-D transformations. (See 3-D.)
2. A luminance component of video signal.
Y2K (Year 2000)
A term used to describe the so-called year 2000. The
lead up to the end of the millennium saw numerous IT systems being reno-
vated to accommodate the need for date stamping using the year 2000 and its
increments. Many non-compliant Y2K IT systems were created decades ago,
when little consideration was given to the future.
Yahoo
An immensely successful Web site featuring multiple information
sources, services and search engine facilities.
Y-axis
A horizontal axis on a graph or drawing.
Y-dimension
A horizontal measurement that might be absolute or relative,
in a 2-D or 3-D coordinate.
(See 2-D and 3-D.)
Yellow Alarm
An alarm state that forms part of the T1 circuit speciﬁca-
tion. (See T1.) The Yellow Alarm is activated by:
• the receipt of a Red Alarm signal
• severe burst trafﬁc.
365

Yellow page service
Yellow page service
A directory service for a Web site or suite of services
running on a network or server.
Yield
A measure of the amount that an investment such as an ordinary
share generates.
YMODEM
A protocol that supports data transfer using 1,024 Byte
blocks, and is also referred to as XMODEM 1K.
YMODEM G
A protocol that transmits a complete ﬁle before an
acknowledge signal is received. It is intended for modem devices that have
built-in error detection and correction.
366

Z
Z
1. A dimension of depth in a 3-D image or animation. A 3-D computer
image or animation stored and generated using absolute or relative coordinates
that include X (horizontal), Y (vertical) and Z (depth) dimensions. It may be:
• an absolute measurement from the origin
• a relative measurement from another coordinate.
Standard ﬁle formats and standard languages for developing 3-D animations
for multimedia and virtual reality (VR) have emerged. The VRML (Virtual
Reality Modeling Language) is suitable for the development of 3-D World
Wide Web (WWW) pages. 3-D engines that may be used to generate 3-D
animations include:
• Microsoft Direct3D
• Apple QuickDraw3D
• Silicon Graphics OpenGL.
Authentic 3-D animations depend upon matrix multiplication where sets of
coordinates are multiplied by a transformation matrix. 3-D vectors, or ordinary
3-D coordinates, [X, Y, Z], are exchanged for homogeneous vector coordinates
[X, Y, Z, H]. The homogeneous dimension (H) is added to accommodate a
four-row transformation matrix, so increasing the number of possible 3-D
transformations. The transformation of homogeneous coordinates is given by:
[X Y Z H] = [x y z 1]T
The resulting transformed coordinates may be normalised to become ordinary
coordinates:
[x∗y∗z∗1] = [X/H Y/H Z/H 1]
2. A measurement of impedance. Connected electronic devices typically have
an input and output impedance. By matching these using the maximum
power transfer theorem, an optimum electronic/electrical connection may be
367

Z80
made. 3. The dimension (n) in which a processor exists in an MPP network
conﬁgured as a cube or hypercube.
Z80
An ANSI Committee dedicated to Ophthalmics.
Z80 (Zylog 80.)
An early processor from Zylog.
ZAP
A process of eradicating data or applications from a system.
Zero beat
A state where two frequencies are the same.
ZIF socket (Zero Insertion Force socket)
A type of socket commonly
found on motherboards that permits the safe and easy removal and replacement
of processors. The socket is ﬁtted with a lever which is used to lock the
processor in place and release it. ZIF sockets are also available for DIL (Dual
In Line) devices such as ROM (Read Only Memory) chips.
Ziff-Davis
A large corporation engaged in the computer book and com-
puter magazine publishing sectors.
ZIP
1. A ﬁle format from PKware that is used for batch ﬁle compression.
WinZip is an application that can be used to zip and unzip such compressed
ﬁles. 2. A removable storage device manufactured by Iomega. Its removable
discs store 100 MBytes of data.
ZOG
A hypertext system developed at Carnegie-Mellon University in
the 1970s. Among other applications it was used for teleconferencing and
CBT. It is best known for its role on the USS Carl Vinson where it is used
as a shipwide information and management system. Incorporating graphics, the
Knowledge Management System (KMS) became the commercial face of ZOG.
Zoom
A feature on many graphics and video editing programs that permits
the user to enlarge a frame or image. All Windows applications feature such
a control which may typically be invoked from the View menu. The user may
be presented with zoom-in values, such as 75%, 100%, 125%, 150%, etc, or
a value may be speciﬁed. Alternatively scale ratios may be selected such as
2 : 1, 3 : 1, 4 : 1, etc., which may be used to zoom in and out.
ZX80
An early Sinclair microcomputer.
368

