
Digital Shift

Digital Shift
The Cultural Logic of Punctuation
Jeff Scheible
University of Minnesota Press
Minneapolis
London

A version of chapter 2 was previously published as “Within, Aside, and Too Much: On Parentheticality across Media,”
American Literature 85, no. 4 (Winter 2013): 689–717, copyright 2013, republished by permission of the publisher,
Duke University Press, www.dukeupress.edu. A portion of chapter 3 originally appeared in “Longing to Connect:
Cinema’s Year of OS Romance,” Film Quarterly 68, no. 1 (Fall 2014): 22–31, copyright 2014 by The Regents of the
University of California; all rights reserved.
Copyright 2015 by the Regents of the University of Minnesota
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written
permission of the publisher.
Published by the University of Minnesota Press
111 Third Avenue South, Suite 290
Minneapolis, MN 55401–2520
http://www.upress.umn.edu
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Scheible, Jeff.
Digital shift : the cultural logic of punctuation / Jeff Scheible.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4529-4437-1
1. Mass media—Technological innovations. 2. Mass media—Social aspects. 3. Mass media and culture. I. Title.
P96.T42S34 2015
411—dc23
2014028191
The University of Minnesota is an equal-opportunity educator and employer.

Contents
Acknowledgments
Introduction: Textual Shift and the Cultural Logic of Punctuation
1. Connecting the Dots: Periodizing the Digital 41
2. Within, Aside, and Too Much: On Parentheticality across Media
3. # Logic
Coda: Canceling the Semiotic Square
Notes
Index

Acknowledgments
One of the more exciting aspects of writing this book is that it prompted many people who
heard about it to send resources, ideas, and anecdotes related to punctuation from popular
culture to media theory my way. Research and writing have in this sense felt rewardingly
collaborative. I am indebted to the many friends, colleagues, and mentors I was privileged
to meet at UC Santa Barbara. Edward Branigan, Nicole Starosielski, and Dan Reynolds
have generously given their time and thought to read drafts of this manuscript and offer
incisive, inspiring feedback. Constance Penley, Janet Walker, and Alan Liu have been
smart, challenging, and supportive readers of my work, too. Other friends, readers, and
teachers who have helped shape this project include Joshua Neves, Bishnupriya Ghosh,
Bhaskar Sarkar, Lisa Parks, Peter Bloom, Charles Wolfe, Regina Longo, Megan
Fernandes, Rita Raley, Allison Schifani, Kevin Kearney, Athena Tan, Meredith Bak, Chris
Dzialo, Rahul Mukherjee, Maria Corrigan, Anastasia Hill, and Hye Jean Chung.
My interest in punctuation emerged during my years working as a copy editor, then
managing editor, of Camera Obscura. My rotating tasks included printing drafts of
articles, marking them up with grammatical and spelling corrections, and writing editorial
inquiries to authors. The marks I made often used punctuation as shorthand, suggesting
ways in which these typographical symbols are semiotic codes we use to facilitate
communication and consolidate complex commands. On other occasions my marks more
literally corrected punctuation usages — adding em dashes where authors did not know
they belonged, inserting parenthetical page references, shortening sentences by
substituting semicolons with periods, and so on. I developed a sensitivity to the topic of
punctuation by working with writing on such a detail-oriented level. It is natural to
overlook punctuation, but the more time I spent editing, the more I became intrigued by
the ways it structures our thought and can open out onto thinking about not only language
but about history, habits, personalities, style, visual culture, graphic design, rules, and,
perhaps most appealing to me, breaking rules. I worked closely with many people I admire
while there: Constance Penley, Patricia White, Amelie Hastie, Lynne Joyrich, Sharon
Willis, Andrea Fontenot, Athena Tan, and Ryan Bowles.
A wider community of colleagues and audiences has given feedback to drafts of
chapters and conference presentations that has directly and indirectly worked its way into
the following pages. Thanks to Wendy Chun, Patricia White, James Hodge, Zach Meltzer,
Brian Jacobson, and engaged audiences at UCSB, Concordia University, SUNY Purchase,
University of Aberdeen, University of Chicago, SCMS meetings in Seattle and New
Orleans, and the Visible Evidence XX Conference in Stockholm. Thanks also to Mara
Mills for putting me in touch with George Kupczak from the AT&T Archives and to
George for sharing Bell Labs documents with me. My relatively speedy completion of this
manuscript would not have been possible without a generous Banting Postdoctoral
Fellowship that granted me research time in Concordia University’s Mel Hoppenheim
School of Cinema, which Martin Lefebvre and Haidee Wasson were instrumental in
helping me secure. While there, Juan Llamas-Rodriguez offered excellent research
assistance in final stages. My writing in Montreal was bolstered by a new community of

scholars and friends, including Tom Waugh, Marc Steinberg, Yuriko Furuhata, Michelle
Cho, Luca Caminati, Masha Salazkina, and Katie Russell. Jocelyn Braddock, Matt Kaelin,
Marc Boucai, Amy Robinson, the Blocks, Mathieu Leroux, and Sally Heller have offered
perspective, stimulation, distractions, and care when they were needed.
It has been a pleasure to work with University of Minnesota Press, and I of course am
also indebted to Danielle Kasprzak and the anonymous readers for the Press, who offered
valuable feedback.

Introduction
Textual Shift and the Cultural Logic of Punctuation
The Equal Sign Takes Over Facebook
Every day in 2013, over a million Facebook users in the United States updated their
profile pictures. On March 26, 2013, however, 2.7 million (120 percent) more users than
usual changed them. The overwhelming majority of the new images that accounted for
this spike were variations of the same basic design: a pink equal sign on a red backdrop.
This trend was due to the Human Rights Campaign’s (HRC’s) newly colored logo (now
red and pink rather than their previous blue-and-yellow equal sign) to support marriage
equality for homosexual Americans in the context of the Supreme Court’s hearing cases
that week regarding California’s Proposition 8 and the Defense of Marriage Act,
legislation that denied rights to gays in the United States. This swarm of pink-and-red
pictures of symbols in squares represents a distinctly digital form of media activism whose
usefulness and meanings are probably less obvious and more complicated than we might
think at first. Like all popular Internet phenomena, this image generated a wave of
responses and variations: from a pink “greater than” sign replacing the equal sign as a
queer critique of heteronormativity by the activist organization Against Equality to an
image of television’s Southern cooking icon Paula Deen edited sitting atop the image, with
text reading “It’s like two sticks of butter, y’all.” Nearly all popular news websites in the
week following the phenomenon compiled slide shows of their favorite variations.
Texts, as humanists know, exist in contexts. What might we discern about the context of
this visual text, a pink equal sign in a red square, that millions of people adopted as their
online avatar? How do we understand the significance of its politics? How does it relate to
the Supreme Court hearings that occurred in conjunction with it? What picture does this
image of the equal sign paint of American media and society in our digital twenty-first
century? In what set of conditions does it make sense as a cultural phenomenon?
While the flood of pictures generated some expected criticism of the effort for having
few practical political consequences — a critique lodged in terms for phenomena to which
this could be said to belong, like slacktivism or clicktivism — the unprecedented number
of changes made visible the massive public support for marriage equality. It undoubtedly
serves as a strong visual statement about the popularity of the cause of gay rights among
mainstream sentiments. In response to the mass picture change, an article published on the
blog of Visual AIDS suggests,

Figures 1a, 1b, 1c, 1d. HRC’s Facebook equal sign profile pictures and variations
Photoshop activism may seem like a silly thing, creating an image,
being part of a picture-based conversation. But one of the numerous
lessons we can gleam [sic] from ongoing AIDS activism, is that
expression matters. It is not the be all and end all, but art helps
interrupt a conversation, create new ways of thinking, provides a way
to heal while acting up, and broadcasts dissent when words are not
enough.
The authors also quote Djuna Barnes: “An image is a stop the mind makes between
uncertainties.”
Between these and indeed probably other uncertainties, it is easy to take the
contemporary phenomenon of the mass picture change for granted and as obvious, but
what if we reflect on it as strange and unnatural, as if we are historians or cultural critics
from the future looking back or societies of the past looking forward: How did we get
here? I would like to pause, then, on something that not many observers have discussed in
relation to this widely circulated and altered image: its actual content. It contains one
simple typographical mark: an equal sign.
1
2

The equal sign, while not technically punctuation, is nevertheless like punctuation in
that it is a single typographical mark that helps us make sense of the relationship between
the two terms it comes between. It is what we might think of as loose punctuation as
opposed to strict punctuation. In the digital mediascape, traditional conceptualizations of
the parameters of punctuation as a category of typographic symbols no longer seem
adequate to characterize the range of signification practices at play in textual exchanges.
As I will argue more extensively at the end of this book in relation to the hashtag,
identifying such a mark as punctuation, when it has not traditionally been used in writing
as punctuation, productively alerts us to shifts in the ways language and image relate to
each other via contemporary textual practices. Perhaps the most illustrative and familiar
example of this is writing emoticons, where iconic compositions of punctuation integrated
within textual exchanges call attention to new configurations and alliances between
language and image within social practices, mirroring and standing in for a broader shift
that has occurred with the emergence of digital media cultures. To understand how we
have arrived here, for now we can think of loose punctuation like the equal sign and strict
punctuation like the period and parenthesis together as belonging to a larger set of
typographical marks that function with other typographical marks and units of language to
signal a set of semantic and aesthetic relations. If not yet, hopefully by the end of this
book, my readers will be comfortable with this expansive view of punctuation, convinced
of this shift and how it helps us understand media, textuality, and aesthetics in the digital
age.
Since its emergence in the mathematical context in which it was introduced in the
sixteenth century, the equal sign is supposed to fall between two different terms, indicating
that between them there is a relationship of equality, and thus of interchangeability and
identicalness. But what does it mean when, here, the symbol stands by and for itself,
isolated as a logo for a political media campaign? Furthermore, to what extent does its
widespread circulation and reappropriation depend on the text being removed from its
general contextual signifying practices and isolated?
Kant usefully implies in his Prolegomena that the equal sign is not as neutral as its users
might like us to believe. He writes,
It might at first be thought that the proposition 7 + 5 = 12 is a mere
analytic judgment, following from the concept of seven and five,
according to the principle of contradiction. But on closer examination
it appears that the concept of the sum of 7 + 5 contains merely their
union in a single number, without its being at all thought what the
particular number is that unites them. The concept of twelve is by no
means thought by merely thinking of the combination of seven and
five; and, analyze this possible sum as we may, we shall not discover
twelve in the concept. We must go beyond these concepts by calling to
our aid some intuition corresponding to one of them, i.e., either our
five fingers or five points… . Hence our concept is really amplified by
the proposition 7 + 5 = 12, and we add to the first concept a second
one not thought in it. Arithmetical judgments are therefore synthetic,

and the more plainly according as we take larger numbers; for in such
cases it is clear that, however closely we analyze our concepts without
calling intuition to our aid, we can never find the sum by such mere
analysis.
In other words, the equal sign does not just neutrally identify a relationship, it serves to
make meaning, directing our thought to a relationship of equality between two terms that
we do not a priori associate with each other — whether between the ideas of 5 + 7 and 12
or what this image wants to forge an association between, rights to heterosexual marriage
and rights to homosexual marriage. To recall a more recent statement about the sign,
consider, “2 + 2 = 5 (The Lukewarm),” the opening track of the band Radiohead’s 2003
Hail to the Thief album. Anticipating the album’s thematic focus on dishonesty, the song
exposes the symbol’s conceit, confronting us with the equal sign’s power to signify our
false hopes in fact and neutrality directly and effectively by presenting us with an incorrect
equation, and hence the sign’s construction of meaning.
When the equal sign is isolated and is able to activate political signification processes, it
indicates that we are in a particular textual regime, one where inscriptions that are not
words are nevertheless able to be semantic, sufficient, and communicative. One specific
way to understand this textual condition is in its correspondence to what Naomi Klein
describes as the newly emergent role of the logo in the 1980s and companies’ “race toward
weightlessness,” aiming to maximize the circulation of powerful images and minimize the
creation of actual material products with its reliance on labor.  Klein explains, “This
scaling-up of the logo’s role has been so dramatic that it has become a change in
substance. Over the past decade and a half, logos have grown so dominant that they have
essentially transformed the clothing on which they appear into empty carriers for the
brands they represent.” Referring to high-end apparel company Lacoste’s logo, she
concludes, “The metaphorical alligator, in other words, has risen up and swallowed the
literal shirt.” This shift resonates with Jean Baudrillard’s thoughts about postmodernity’s
secessions of simulacra, where a primary, material realm is subsumed by a secondary,
immaterial, image-based economy of exchange.
To my mind, the power and spread of the Human Rights Campaign’s modified equal
sign logo across the Internet is inseparable from these same issues raised by critiques of
capital and discussions of postmodern semiotics, unfashionable as that periodizing
category may have become at the current moment. As Ryan Conrad of Against Equality
has noted, the campaign for marriage equality has been spearheaded by extremely well-
funded nonprofits that are inextricable from the capitalist ideologies of neoliberalism.  I
will return to this concern with postmodernism as an ongoing inquiry in this book, as I
believe that in the context of the digital, the status of postmodernity is productive to
interrogate and, contrary to what we might think, it has not been exhaustively explored. To
not scrutinize the power of images and their signifying practices across digital culture
would be intellectually shortsighted.
In addition to “liking” and “posting,” we need to remember that there is an arsenal of
strategies available for engaging with contemporary visual culture, including long
3
4
5
6

traditions of aesthetic and semiotic inquiries. Indeed, when Facebook’s profile pictures
transform into a sea of typographical symbols, is this not an all-too-literal manifestation of
our real bodies becoming data bodies? On some level, does this sea change not ironically
indicate that our selves are interchangeable with interchangeability itself? To answer in the
affirmative with conviction, it is useful to imagine an alternative scenario. Would it have
been possible to substitute the equal sign with an image of two members of the same sex
in wedding attire, exchanging vows or kissing, which would then have been adopted by
millions of users as their avatar? Or perhaps even more radically, imagine a scenario in
which each individual member posts a photo of himself or herself engaged in an act of
homosexual love, however he or she interprets the concept. With the equal sign, we must
concede that we are algorithmic functions, machine parts of capitalism: data bodies that
like, not human bodies that love.
In an age when we are increasingly constituted as data bodies, when our habits and
knowledge are shaped by algorithmic functions and equations, typographical symbols to a
certain degree have taken on the power to stand in for our selves. Significantly and
compellingly, the equal sign could be read as an allegory of what David Golumbia has
referred to as the “cultural logic of computation.” He writes, “There is little more to
understanding computation than comprehending this simple principle: mathematical
calculation can be made to stand for propositions that are themselves not mathematical,
but must still conform to mathematical rules.”  Golumbia contends that rather than
representing an unprecedented, new historical rupture with previous philosophical
traditions as so many writers about “new” media want to have it, computation in fact is an
extension, culmination, and utopian realization of rationalism, a mode of thought that has
been pursued for centuries. The wide circulation of the equality logo thus presents us with
an allegory of our immersion in computationalism, where the desire to rid ourselves of
ambiguity represented by mathematical calculation seamlessly extends to the logics of
visual culture.
7

The Cultural Logic of Punctuation
Where Golumbia writes of computation’s “cultural logic,” in this book, I write about
punctuation’s “cultural logic,” a phrase popularized in critical theory by Fredric Jameson’s
study of postmodernism, terms that he himself could have used an equal sign in front of
when suggesting the substitutability of the terms “postmodernism” and “the cultural logic
of late capitalism” in the title of his landmark “Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of
Late Capitalism.” As Jameson writes there, “I have felt… that it was only in the light of
some conception of a dominant cultural logic or hegemonic norm that genuine difference
could be measured or assessed.”  Following Jameson’s reliance on the phrase’s assistance
in the identification of difference (a pursuit that critics of Jameson tend to forget is his
ultimate interest), I also find cultural logic a useful phrase for thinking about how
dynamic, structuring, and shared ways of thinking — both obvious and not obvious — are
inscribed in and interact in a single site. My use of the term, however, departs from, if still
hopefully resonates with, the more directly Marxist connotations it carries in Jameson’s
work. I use it more specifically in relation to “punctuation” — and unlike Jameson’s “late
capitalism” and Golumbia’s “computation,” punctuation as a concept has been around as a
seemingly stable category for hundreds of years. Working through punctuation’s cultural
logic, we will be able to identify how these typographical marks correspond to particular
styles of thinking, and how, in the context of the emergence of digital media, the roles of
textuality in media culture have undergone a series of shifts. I am not arguing that there
have been erosions or eruptions, but I am claiming there have been what one could
envision as shifts in balance, in distributions of conceptual weight, in values and valences,
in storytelling and communication habits, and in aesthetic and social relationships that
changes in the cultural logic of punctuation help us measure. While I am very sympathetic
to the resistance of Golumbia (and indeed, so many critics, such as Lisa Gitelman and
Wendy Chun, to name primary examples) to the rhetoric of digital media’s “newness,” it is
nevertheless equally as easy and problematic to discredit the significance of the profound
changes that have accompanied the emergence of the digital. For a variety of reasons,
punctuation and nonalphanumeric symbols, as marks that have existed (and changed) for
centuries of writing, anchor opportunities to weigh these continuities, shifts, and
expansions that can be sensed as occurring with the ongoing popularity of networked
computing. By drawing attention to the concept of textual shift, I aim to both map out
some significantly distinct textual dynamics of the digital era and to be wary of
overstating divides and differences.
The example of the equality sign certainly does not tell the full story of this shift, but it
offers a snapshot that sets the stage. Its aesthetics and politics, and its cascading
contradictions, put us on a path for thinking more seriously in our contemporary
postmillennial context about what Marshall McLuhan sought to explore fifty years ago as
“typographic man,” a phrase that presciently forecasts the weight of electronic media’s
textual shifts upon our consciousness and suggests that they have been tangibly
perceptible and in the works for decades.  With various textualities proliferating across
our media landscape, zeroing in on specific punctuation marks sets in motion an
intermedial series of questions about reading protocol and the social-affective dimensions
8
9

of textual systems. Before we fully pursue this line of thought, a working definition of
punctuation, along with a common understanding of its functions, is in order.
While we might be inclined to view punctuation marks as textual units predating
language, out there in the world for us to pluck from the air (or more literally from the
surfaces of our keyboards and typing pads) as we wish to write, they are not natural.
Punctuation marks are invented inscriptions that arose in particular historical contexts, and
their meanings have cyclically congealed and fluctuated in a variety of subsequent
historical and linguistic contexts. As social inscriptions, they therefore carry with them
ideological underpinnings. As stylistic markers, their usages reflect epistemological and
aesthetic conditions. This is what Theodor Adorno provocatively observed in his terrific
and somewhat uncharacteristic short essay on punctuation: “History has left its residue in
punctuation marks, and it is history, far more than meaning or grammatical function, that
looks out at us, rigified and trembling slightly, from every mark of punctuation.”
M. B. Parkes’s Pause and Effect: An Introduction to the History of Punctuation in the
West provides, as the book’s subtitle suggests, a more comprehensive overview of the
evolving histories of punctuation marks, at least in the context of European languages and
with the development of the printing press, which significantly stabilized punctuation and
largely made it necessary. As Bruno Latour puts it, the printing press brought into
circulation “immutable mobiles,” standardizing the form of inscriptions yet also enabling
them to travel.  Parkes explains, “Punctuation became an essential component of written
language. Its primary function is to resolve structural uncertainties in a text, and to signal
nuances of semantic significance which might otherwise not be conveyed at all, or would
at best be much more difficult for a reader to figure out.”
It is important to understand, then, that punctuation’s history coincides closely with the
history of the mechanical reproduction of written language. In antiquity, language was
viewed as an oral medium; texts were conveyed by the voice, to the mind. Through the
Middle Ages, reading and writing continued to be seen as activities for an elite, educated
few, and texts would often be studied and prepared carefully. Readers would practice
proper readings, learning when to articulate appropriate breaks. Textual marks were
experimented with to indicate such cues, but no standards were in place. With the
invention of the printing press, as so many historians have documented, the book became
a popular medium. This had two important consequences for the history of punctuation —
one technological, the other social. First, now that it had to be set into movable type,
punctuation became much more standardized than it ever had been. Second, with the
subsequent rise in accessibility of the printed medium, written texts were no longer
exclusively for an educated upper class that took time to practice reading aloud, but books
were now read alone and by a mass audience. It became important for reading to be made
economical and accessible, and for books to contain as little paratextual ambiguity as
possible to facilitate reading practices. Punctuation served these purposes.
Punctuation marks are cues that writers leave for readers. They are meant to guide us
and suggest how to move through the words that they fall between, giving us pause at
appropriate moments to maximize our comprehension. As Parkes puts it, they “resolve
10
11
12

uncertainties.” Punctuation marks in this sense are reading tools, aids that help convey
meaning. They help us hear how text might sound if it were to be spoken. In this sense
punctuation marks are sometimes perceived to have musical qualities. Adorno writes, for
example, “There is no element in which language resembles music more than in the
punctuation marks. The comma and the period correspond to the half-cadence and the
authentic cadence. Exclamation points are like silent cymbal clashes, question marks like
musical upbeats, colons dominant seventh chords; and only a person who can perceive the
different weights of strong and weak phrasings in musical form can really feel the
distinction between the comma and the semicolon.”  Punctuation as Adorno sees it lends
the written word a range of sonic qualities. By extension, one might consider the ways in
which it adds a contrapuntal dimension to the text in which it occurs, in its relations with
the words it punctuates, and in the ways in which punctuation registers expressivity and
affects of a different sort than is possible with alphabetic language. Punctuation marks, in
other words, represent a coded system composed of a range of symbols that work with and
alongside the alphabet, a distinct but related coded system.
Punctuation’s affinities with music offer a suggestive hermeneutic framework too for
thinking about punctuation’s especially frequent references in indie rock of the 2000s —
from Sigur Ros’s album simply titled ( ) and the band Parenthetical Girls to the band !!!
and Vampire Weekend’s single “Oxford Comma,” to name just a few examples where the
use of marks signifies a countercultural aesthetic departing from the mainstream. In the
case of !!! or Sigur Ros’s album, for example, how is one even supposed to pronounce the
band’s name or the album’s title? Audiences must be in the know to know that the most
common way to pronounce !!! is “Chk Chk Chk.” By being stand-alone punctuation
marks, both !!! and ( ) resist the primary function of punctuation — making the transition
from reading to pronunciation easier — and instead render locution more difficult. The
third chapter’s discussion of parentheses further contextualizes this aesthetic, as these
marks in particular channel an alternative spirit and raise provocative questions about
sound.
13

Textual Shift
At the same time that punctuation might seem to be seeping into our earphones and onto
the screens of our handheld devices, I write this book surrounded by a nagging anxiety
that the days of the book — and closely connected with this, the idea of what it means to
care about punctuation — might be numbered. This sentiment is echoed for example in a
wide range of humorous image macros that have circulated online, which illustrate the
drastic semantic differences slightly varied uses of punctuation can make — from the
widely circulated JFK-Stalin-stripper Oxford comma pun to the “Let’s eat, Grandma”
meme. Lurking behind these humorous images, one senses, is a more paranoid critique
that we no longer know how to use language correctly, or care to.
Figure 2. Punctuation image macros. “With the Oxford comma: we invited the strippers, JFK, and Stalin. Without
the Oxford comma: we invited the strippers, JFK and Stalin.”

Figure 3. Punctuation image macros. “Let’s eat Grandma! Let’s eat, Grandma! Punctuation saves lives.”
Long-form reading is on the decline and many scholars and authors surely wonder who
will read the books they devote years of thought and labor to write. Do contemporary
academic books speak to only a handful of specialized scholars, or worse yet to the last
generation of people who might actually read a monograph with a theoretical orientation?
Writing about punctuation and visual culture has in this sense necessarily been
accompanied by a certain degree of self-reflexivity, allowing me to think about and speak
to broader anxieties about language, and more specifically the changes in textual practices
that have coincided with the emergence of digital media. These are among the textual
changes I have in mind throughout this book when I refer to the idea of shift. Though
much of this book comes from a self-reflexive space, the reader will find I have largely
left myself out of it — other than in its idiosyncratic writing style and series of curiosities
— for the sake of focusing on cultural analysis and putting forward ideas that will
hopefully circulate and resonate beyond their own immediate moment of articulation.
This book has two overarching purposes, which at times work on separate but parallel
tracks, at other times push up against each other to reveal their limits, and in their most
provocative moments work on multiple levels to create a textured inquiry, as if in a
performative dance. First, this book aims to simply describe a condition of contemporary

culture in a comparative way that draws on a range of objects, texts, and media histories.
The condition described is one in which textuality’s role has, in the context of the
emergence of digital media, undergone profound changes. Most radically, this shift can be
understood as one where our commonsense, established understanding of meaning has
effectively been disconnected from textual inscriptions. On this level the book builds on
and synthesizes many familiar arguments from critical theories about postmodern culture,
whose reach has not been fully thought through and mapped out in relation to digital
media and culture. I choose to map this shift, for reasons suggested above and elaborated
further below, via punctuation marks and related typographical characters. This goal of the
book might be understood as being more expository and observational, a mode that seems
to me necessary but not alone sufficient for the critical apprehension of any contemporary
or historical cultural logic.
The second aim of this book is less expository and more hermeneutical and imaginative.
Broadly, I hope to suggest that the scales and scopes of humanistic inquiry need to be
rethought and creatively imagined beyond the confines to which the questions we pose
and the objects we examine are often limited. Beginning with single punctuation marks as
units for thinking across media forms, I aim to discover unexpected connections and
insights that fall outside the parameters of the book’s argument and first aim. What
opportunities does beginning with a punctuation mark — nearly as microscopic a unit of
textuality as one can cognitively process, aside from perhaps a drop of ink or a pixel —
open up for a critic essaying to describe a text or for an everyday web user aiming to
understand the visual culture of the Internet?
Here, like Walter Benjamin’s famous description of the Angel of History, the book
moves forward while looking backward, arguing for the continued usefulness of semiotic
inquiry in and for the digital age. Now as much as ever, we must attend to questions of the
meanings of textual procedures. Just because texts spread so fast, across multiple formats,
just because they are here today and gone tomorrow, seeming impossible to apprehend, are
not satisfactory excuses to refrain from singling out moments within the visual culture of
textuality and analyzing what we see when we engage in such critical isolations. As Jodi
Dean writes, “A problem specific to critical media theory is the turbulence of networked
communications: that is, the rapidity of information, adoption, adaptation, and
obsolescence.”  Think back to the example of the equal sign phenomenon with which this
chapter opened. Facebook — a corporate platform that translates identities into data and
then sells it to marketers, particularly via the popular habit of “liking”—encourages an
ephemeral engagement with images and the ideas they generate, but in effect its
“newsfeed” design emphasizes the nowness and newness of the present and actively
discourages sustained, critical engagement. The very appearance of the equality sign
image across Facebook therefore poses a paradox in terms of how to confront its effects,
which would seem momentarily vast rather than longitudinally significant. Wendy Hui
Kyong Chun would view its paradoxical effects as being part of digital media’s
temporality that she refers to as the “enduring ephemeral,” never quite there but never
quite gone, always there for us to access as a moment in history but almost immediately
lost and forgotten in a digital archive.
14
15

In focusing on punctuation’s relationship to visual culture and critical theory, it is
instructive to recall one of critical theory’s most influential concepts, Roland Barthes’s
punctum, which Michael Fried notes parenthetically in an essay “has proven almost as
popular as Benjamin’s aura.”  (Key observations in and about theory are often
inconspicuously tucked away inside parentheses, as the third chapter will claim.) Barthes
introduces the idea in his book on photography, Camera Lucida. He expresses
dissatisfaction as a critic with language’s ability to describe the photographic experience,
ontologically based as it is not in verbal language but in the image. He explains that in
wanting to write about photography, he became aware of a “discomfort” he “had always
suffered from: the uneasiness of being a subject torn between two languages, one
expressive, the other critical… . For each time, having resorted to any such language to
whatever degree, each time I felt it hardening and thereby tending to reduction and
reprimand, I would gently leave it and seek elsewhere.”  He introduces two concepts —
the studium and the punctum — to both address and move beyond this critical impasse.
For Barthes, the studium characterizes a sort of general interest, a standard reading based
in an educated, shared perspective, but as he says, “without special acuity.”  By way of
contrast to this, he develops a discussion of the punctum, his introduction of which, even if
familiar, is worth quoting fully:
The second element will break (or punctuate) the studium. This time it
is not I who seek it out (as I invest the field of the studium with my
sovereign consciousness), it is this element which rises from the
scene, shoots out of it like an arrow, and pierces me. A Latin word
exists to designate this wound, this prick, this mark made by a pointed
instrument: the word suits me all the better in that it also refers to the
notion of punctuation, and because the photographs I am speaking of
are in effect punctuated, sometimes even speckled with these sensitive
points; precisely, these marks, these wounds are so many points. This
second element which will disturb the studium I shall therefore call
punctum; for punctum is also: sting, speck, cut, little hold — and also
a cast of the dice. A photograph’s punctum is that accident which
pricks me (but also bruises me, is poignant to me).
The idea of the punctum allows Barthes to conceptualize a personal encounter with a work
of art, to identify a particular detail in a photograph that speaks to him as a spectator. It is
not something intended by the artist; rather it represents a unique experience on the part of
the observer that idiosyncratically elevates his aesthetic investment in a piece beyond the
more ordinary level of the studium. Fried explains its central import succinctly: “The
punctum, we might say, is seen by Barthes, but not because it has been shown to him by
the photographer, for whom it does not exist.”
As Fried observes, Barthes’s punctum is one of the most frequently referenced concepts
in theoretical discussions of photography and related arts. Rather than rehearsing these
theoretical appropriations and debates about photography here, I would prefer to briefly
linger on the term’s actual etymology. What is interesting is precisely that the punctum is
such an influential, resonant concept in tandem with the fact that it, as Barthes writes,
16
17
18
19
20

“refers to the notion of punctuation.” Indeed, for all the term’s critical circulation,
relatively little has been written about the concept’s relation to punctuation, which is to
say nothing of Barthes’s own elegant and precise punctuation. Barthes turns to the concept
because the punctum breaks, interrupts, “pricks,” “wounds,” “rises from the scene, shoots
out of it like an arrow, and pierces” him. The punctum as he frames it can both refer to
literal “marks” in an image (“sometimes,” he writes, photographs are “even speckled with
these sensitive points”) and more metaphorical marks, which are “in effect” punctuated,
“rising from the scene.”
It is fascinating, if somewhat unintuitive, that Barthes attributes such punctuations of
the image to elements that the artist did not intend to be there, to characteristics that in his
encounter with the photograph he discovers unexpectedly; to what has been seen, not
shown, to recall Fried’s summarization. It is worth considering what this implies about
how Barthes conceptualizes punctuation. Recall that a punctuation mark’s purpose in
writing is to aid the reader. It is, one could say, a quite intentional mark left in the text for
the reader, a figure whom we could analogize to Barthes’s photographic viewer. This
likeness by Barthes’s logic takes us only so far, then, as punctuation marks — unlike the
punctum — are generally deliberately, even artfully, inscribed by writers. Combined with
this move punctuation forges from the writer to the reader, punctuation for Barthes
nonetheless seem to be as close as one can get to an appropriate metaphor for parts of a
work that are easily overlooked and neglected, not noticed by everyone. In fact, reading
the punctum more directly in the context of punctuation could serve to revise the concept’s
tight connection to that which is not artistically intended, to instead associate it with that
which is not noticed by most viewers, refined as their observational skills might be.
To align the inquiry to the present questions at hand, I wish to emphasize that a
punctuational concept serves as Barthes’s answer for moving beyond the impasse or
incompatibility between image and language, or what he refers to as the “reduction and
reprimand” that take place when “critical” language encounters “expressive” language.
It enhances our attention to the production of visual critique to remember that the punctum
is so intimately tied to punctuation. Punctuation marks hover between and beyond
language and image — almost, one could say, both and neither at the same time. Thus it
makes sense that they are closely related to Barthes’s identification of a way to mediate
the impasse between the photograph and the critical text. Focusing on punctuation enables
one to move between visual culture and critical theory in a comparative manner, to think
through the dimensions of text’s visibility in and structuring of both language-based
criticism and image-based media.
An additional layer of resonance to punctuation’s place in mediating between medium
and thought emerges when comparing the aesthetic value Barthes attributes to the punctum
with Vilém Flusser’s claims about medium differentiality and writing in his 1987 book,
Does Writing Have a Future? Flusser writes that an “inner dialectic of writing and its
associated consciousness, this thinking that is driven by a pressing impulse, on one hand,
and forced into contemplative pauses, on the other, is what we call ‘critical thinking.’ We
are repeatedly forced to come up from the flow of notation to get a critical overview.
Notation is a critical gesture, leading to constant interruptions. Such crises demand
21

criteria. What is true of notation is true of all history.”  If for Barthes the dialectic in
question is that of image and language and in the space of the synthesis we find critical
work, then Flusser offers a similarly dialectical view of criticism, emerging out of
opposing processes of “pressing impulses” and “contemplative pauses.”
Recall that the title of Parkes’s book on punctuation is Pause and Effect, where pause is
the effect in writing that punctuation historically instantiates. The earliest marks, such as
empty single spaces, periods, and commas, aid readers because they indicate where to
pause, reducing ambiguity and heightening clarity. On a sentence-level scale, then,
following Flusser, one could view punctuation as the inscriptions of such moments of
contemplation, pauses allowing readers to stop and think, however momentarily. This
book wagers that punctuation across media forms and contexts provides brief moments for
thought, collected in the following pages of reflections.
The affinities tying Flusser to Barthes and to punctuation are stronger still. Consider
Flusser’s following observation, just a few pages after the one cited earlier.
A scientific text differs from a Bach fugue and a Mondrian image
primarily in that it raises the expectation of meaning something “out
there,” for example, atomic particles. It seeks to be “true,” adequate to
what is out there. And here aesthetic perception is faced with a
potentially perplexing question: what in the text is actually adequate to
what is out there? Letters or numbers? The auditory or the visual? Is it
the literal thinking that describes things or the pictorial that counts
things? Are there things that want to be described and others that want
to be counted? And are there things that can be neither described or
counted — and for which science is therefore inadequate? Or are
letters and numbers something like nets that we throw out to fish for
things, leaving all indescribable and uncountable things to disappear?
Or ever, do the letter and number nets themselves actually form
describable and countable things out of a formless mass? This last
question suggests that science is not fundamentally so different from
art. Letters and numbers function as chisels do in sculpture, and
external reality is like the block of marble from which science carves
an image of the world.
Letters and numbers, in the broader view Flusser lays out, correspond with distinct ways
of thinking — auditory and visual, respectively — a perspective one finds implied here. In
the increasingly digital age of the computer, the visual, numbered mode, Flusser claims,
takes center stage over the auditory, lettered mode that previously prevailed. This
formulation coincides with this book’s own broader view of the notion of shift. But for the
moment note that, drawing on richly evocative maritime and sculptural metaphors, Flusser
is trying to understand how categories (letters and numbers) for phenomena might limit
our abilities to grasp the full spectrum of experience, not unlike Barthes’s unsatisfactory
encounter with the studium. (We are also not conceptually far removed from
Wittgensteinian philosophies of language.) Before this passage, he writes, “The
22
23

alphanumeric code we have adopted for linear notation over the centuries is a mixture of
various kinds of signs: letters (signs for sounds), numbers (signs for quantities), and an
inexact number of signs for rules of the writing game (e.g., stops, brackets, and quotation
marks). Each of these types of signs demands that the writer think in the way that uniquely
corresponds to it.”
While Flusser here makes a passing reference to punctuation alongside letters and
numbers as a distinct set of signs corresponding to a distinct type of thought, it is curious
that in his discussion just a couple pages later, this “inexact” third character set is
abandoned. If as Flusser writes in these pages, letters describe and numbers count, and if
he suggests that procedures of description and counting might exclude alternative
epistemological and phenomenological dimensions, an example of such a dimension
would, one might strongly suspect, be found in punctuation.
For Flusser and Barthes alike, then, punctuation engenders a needed but insufficiently
pursued frame within which to stage the critical encounter with media: For Barthes, it
offers a passing but structuring metaphor for a critic’s ability to perceive the unintentional
mark in the text that makes the work of art exciting and validates criticism. For Flusser,
punctuation is a more literal type of textuality that corresponds to a logic that is neither for
description nor for counting, neither visual nor auditory. Indeed, what “unique” ways of
thinking could we say punctuation corresponds to? If we configure punctuation as
Flusser’s fishing net, what undescribable and uncountable things will emerge from the
ocean?
Importantly, both Barthes and Flusser point to punctuation as a neglected dimension, if
differently. For Barthes punctuation stands in for the neglected, while for Flusser
punctuation is, given his extensive focus on writing’s symbols, more symptomatically
neglected. Punctuation marks as reading lenses for thought raise interesting questions
about what we take for granted. They are tiny bits of textuality that are smaller units than
words — and only the most sensitive of writers pay careful attention to word choice,
which is to say nothing of punctuation. The speediness with which we are able to
communicate with one another today via the keyboards of interconnected computers and
mobile devices would seem to trump a certain care for language ensured or taken for
granted by the rhythms and practices associated with slower, predigital methods of
writing. Indeed, a cursory glance at communication online and in SMS text messaging
might even suggest we tend to forget punctuation altogether — dropping periods and
question marks from the ends of sentences, not bothering to include commas where they
once would have been needed.
On the other hand, paradoxically, it might seem that punctuation is everywhere. In
graphic design, in the emoticons we text to one another, in computer code, in the
proliferating textualities we see on screens in the street and on screens at home. As
Johanna Drucker notes of our “postalphabetic” era, “Contemporary life is more saturated
with signs, letters, language in visual form than that of any other epoch — T-shirts,
billboards, electronic marquees, neon signs, mass-produced print media — all are part of
the visible landscape of daily life, especially in urban Western culture.”  In this context,
24
25

one might think of endless examples of punctuation’s visibility.
Figure 4. Question mark as vanishing point: information booth outside the Mont-Royal subway station in
Montreal. Photo by author, 2013
Both lines of thought — that punctuation is nowhere and that it is everywhere — could,
it would seem, be argued persuasively. But discerning a distinction helps make this
paradox less paradoxical: the first scenario (punctuation is nowhere) relies on a
predominantly linguistic conceptualization of punctuation, while the second (punctuation
is everywhere) relies on a predominantly visual one, which W. J. T. Mitchell would
associate with the “pictorial turn.”  I therefore take this paradox as a starting point from
which to launch the following argument: Language and image, two signifying spheres that
we traditionally conceptualize as discrete, today increasingly overlap and change functions
as screen technologies proliferate and form the interfaces of everyday life. Punctuation
marks, symbols that hover between and beyond image and language, provide a unique
opportunity to harness these shifts in language-image relations.
26

Thinking Punctuationally: Comma Boat
While this book relies on the distinction between language and image as being key to
making sense of a textual shift that has coincided with the emergence of digital media, I
also complicate it. Beyond the provocative ways in which punctuation indexes such a
textual shift, I also want to invite my readers to think about the wide range of ways in
which we (can) think punctuationally. Here, the following chapters share a significant
amount in common with two other book-length works of cultural studies on punctuation.
Marjorie Garber’s 2000 book of cultural criticism, Quotation Marks, brilliantly mobilizes
these titular punctuation marks and thinks across literature, media, history, politics, the
law, and affect, interrogating how, ultimately, quotation marks paradoxically but
necessarily render and take away credibility. As such, Garber demonstrates how
punctuation gives rise to ideas and intervenes in broader considerations of cultural
discourse. This is a key previous study, and indeed might be the first to demonstrate just
how pervasive and generative thinking punctuationally can be. Jennifer Devere-Brody, in
her 2008 work Punctuation: Art, Politics, and Play, presents a second book to explore
such associations, analyzing a wide range of performances and cultural texts not only
where we find explicit uses of punctuation but also where we find visual patterns, ideas, or
political discourses that recall punctuation marks, from Yayoi Kasuma’s politically
charged use of polka dots on bodies in her 1960s “naked demonstrations” to driving at
night and seeing “bright white lights speeding toward us along an otherwise pitch-black
freeway.”  Following Garber and Devere-Brody, I am compelled to open up any narrow
conceptualizations we might have of where we find punctuation. Making this move
involves understanding that marks are fundamentally structures of relation, showing us
how to bring two different units (usually clauses of language but also image and thought)
together. In turn, marks can be — and indeed often already are — mobilized as reading
lenses through which to pose questions about how, among various cultural configurations,
certain structures and sets of relations might be viewed as behaving punctuationally (such
as, very generally, Barthes’s punctum), which can in turn lead us to discover patterns in
political and aesthetic practices. In short, punctuation can help us theorize.
The present book’s investment in media theory, however, leads it to depart on a
trajectory that sets it on a path largely different from Garber’s and Devere-Brody’s, insofar
as it more centrally posits an argument that punctuation’s relationships to digital media
allow us to index a large textual shift that has been occurring over the course of the past
few decades, a claim that has not been pursued by either Garber or Devere-Brody. This
specifically digital shift occurs in a time propelled by technological speed, the global
information 
economy, 
smart 
phones, 
social 
networking, 
and 
corresponding
reconfigurations of labor, leisure, and love. Within these new circulations, textuality —
letters, numbers, punctuation marks, words, slogans, messages, user manuals, contracts,
information, stories, billboards, web pages, and the visual and/or sonic inscriptions of
these things — has spread far beyond the books to which it was generally more neatly
confined and in relation to which it has tended to be conceptualized. In the process, textual
inscriptions themselves have come to take on a greater number of functions used to enable
and ensure the efficiency of communication, opening up a whole parallel set of effects,
27

much like the secondary set of inscriptions that shift keys on our computers make
possible. In this same cultural condition, everyday language practices carried over from
predigital times are also undergoing notable transitions. Content of individual statements
becomes briefer, requiring busy, always-connected subjects to surrender less precious time
from the seemingly incessant demands of daily life and what Jonathan Crary calls the
“unrelenting rhythm of technological consumption” that keeps us awake more hours and
controlled by the apparatuses of 24/7 capitalism.  Textual shorthand —ubiquitous
acronyms like LOL and OMG, combined with the stylishness of leaving vowels out of
words — is, meanwhile, increasingly familiar and acceptable in a variety of discursive
habitats. While such changes are met with nervous critiques that echo concerns about
postmodernity’s depthlessness, they are also accompanied by other important features,
from an affinity with play to collaborative writing with artificial intelligence that draws on
autocorrecting tools built into text-based applications for fixing typos in the final versions
of files and messages we send or submit. Such habits of assistance of course might also be
viewed with ironic distance, given all the “fails” such “corrects” generate — something
humorous popular blogs and websites like Damn You Autocorrect capitalize upon for
comedy.
These everyday changes often seem most effectively registered when removed from
mundane, habitual contexts and channeled through artistic work, forcing us to encounter
their experiential textures and structures of feeling through distanced creative or
hermeneutic reflection. This is the effect spectators experience for example with work by
contemporary video artist Ryan Trecartin, often hailed as one of the most original and
important contemporary video artists working today. His videos rely on scripts with a
prosody that uncannily channels the rhythm and flow of the digital-native generation’s
communication practices. Made in the middle of night, they almost seem to channel the
sleeplessness that Crary observes structuring global, digital exchange. The artist explains,
“There’s no light coming in the windows at night, and people have fewer distractions —
they’re not checking their cell phones, and their associations are weirder at night.”
Probably the most important component of Trecartin’s videos are his scripts, which
produce uncanny effects through their language’s surreal relation to sense; a spectator
would have a difficult time following the exact meanings of what the characters in his
videos are actually referencing. As Bryan Droitcour notes, “the forms of all the aspects of
Trecartin’s work — the camerawork, the editing, the music, the makeup, and the
costumes… — are prefigured in the way he works with words.”  Trecartin constructs
one-of-a-kind, language-laden environments in which frenetic, irreverent characters are
simultaneously of our world and not, removed and present, seeming to channel an
unconscious logic that is neither and both digital and human. The experience of submitting
oneself to them spectatorially is likened by Allegra Krasznekewicz to “riding a roller
coaster into the vertiginous depths of the Web or looking through a kaleidoscope on
acid.”  In Comma Boat (2013), a movie whose title foregrounds punctuation, the
characters’ language resembles the claustrophobically narcissistic oversharing of the
validation-seeking self constructed by social media platforms crossed with theatricized,
bot-generated qualities of familiar spam e-mails more than it does literary conversation or
performative computer code.
28
29
30
31

Figure 5. Still from Comma Boat (directed by Ryan Trecartin, 2013)
Consider the following dialogue from an early scene in Comma Boat, which has four
participants, whom in the absence of names I identify with numbers, representing their on-
screen positions from left (1) to right (4):
1: And she’s not talking about sex or making families that matter. Because she’s talking about um particles.
Basically. I love particles. What the whore and balls… What the whore and balls is she saying? Yes. I
love a good comma. That is the name of my cat. Comma.
3: Like survival  . . .
1: comma
(4 gestures comma with hand)
3: Like survival
1: Comma. Meow
3: Before gear
1: Meow. Comma
(4 gestures comma)
3: Of the present
1: Comma
3: Type. Mega foundational shiftsssss
1: Shit
3: Shift
X (unknown, offscreen voice): comma.
1: You think you’re so smart, you can’t say the word shit. You have to say shift. Knots. Try to untie that one.
Try to fucking untie that one. Right?
(4 claps)
3: She thinks she can act with her face.
4: Off. Off.
2: Veronica Mars, you’re off.
3: Esoteric.
2: Comma.

The third character seems to be more of an official, academic reporter from the media,
wearing a suit and holding a handheld camera, in a mise en scène that evokes an interview.
Like the rest of the entire thirty-three-minute video, originally displayed on three screens,
in its single-screen version the scene is not only sonically but visually disorienting, framed
by a rectangular frame on the edges that is split in half and features two other camera
angles recording the same scene. This is clearly not exactly an interview, because the
question/answer format that normally structures an interview is not present. Rather, the
characters, especially the first and third, are talking over each other (thus becoming more
of a critique of the very genre of the interview), with the first androgynous character,
played by Trecartin in a black wig and with his face painted with a purple beard, seeming
to negatively react to his or her distaste of the third character’s pretentious, academic
language (“What the whore and balls is she saying?” “Try to untie that one.”).
The best way to read this scene is perhaps as a battle staged between an artist who
resists interpretation and a critic who attempts to generate vocabulary to analyze the artist,
character 3 versus character 1, high versus low culture, “shift” versus “shit.” (It is not lost
on me that this dialogue makes the present book’s title and critical position vulnerable to
the same pun and critique.) In fact, this scene might even be read as a playfully veiled
response to Droitcour’s Rhizome essay about Trecartin, specifically his discussion of the
artist’s K-CoreaINC.K (section a) (2009) — where characters, all named different national
“Koreas” (Mexico Korea, Canada Korea, Hungary Korea) and presided over by Global
Korea, a CEO, attempt to meet. Upon reading the video’s script, Droitcour notes,
Punctuation was invented to represent the pauses and pitches of
speech; long after it moved beyond this purpose to become a set of
standards for clarifying the meaning of written language, punctuation
marks were remixed as emoticons when writing began to take on the
phatic functions of speech. Trecartin’s unruly use of punctuation
draws on all stages of its history. When, in the script’s first lines,
Mexico Korea says “Yaw,,,,,,”, the comma does more than make a
pause. It’s a winking eye torn from a smiling face, repeated until it’s a
nervous tic. Colons join, parentheses cut, and in the designation of
Global Korea’s role — before the dialogue even starts — those marks
are staggered to herald K-CoreaINC.K (Section A) as a drama of
belonging and difference, of where the self stands with regards to
others.
The eponymous conversation about commas in Trecartin’s video made two years after
Droitcour’s article was published, whether intended so or not, could be productively
viewed as a tongue-in-cheek, or even dismissive, response to Droitcour’s scholarly
analysis of the artist’s earlier use of commas. Trecartin, who distances himself from
associating with overly intellectual rhetoric and shamelessly admits to preferring MTV
over literature, in effect reclaims the comma from critical language and brings it back into
his art. He makes “comma” the name of the cat of the resistant character played by
himself, reminiscent of that most banal but pervasive culture of Internet comedy: the
endless hours of cat videos archived on YouTube.
32

The comma, the punctuation mark we use to create lists, to elongate sentences, in the
dialogue of the scene adds to Trecartin’s sonic cacophony, becoming a way to articulate
and tie together an aggregation of language as it traditionally does in written language. But
the comma, here interjected into another speaker’s words, also cuts the critic off, as if to
expose her discourse as nonsense. In pronouncing the punctuation mark out loud, the
dialogue might also remind us of the act of machinic transcription specific to digital
contexts: as though the characters are dictating lines to be transcribed by an artificially
intelligent system, recorded for posterity’s sake. Probably even more than that, saying the
name of the mark out loud after single words recalls the fashion of speech whereby people
repeatedly pronounce the word hashtag in conversations — a phenomenon explored
further in this book’s final chapter. Comma Boat’s dialogue in a sense has an air of the
narcissistic affect Piper Marshall has written about in relation to the widespread use of the
hashtag, where “our current climate is dominated by pithy punch lines that summarize the
solipsist’s always already uploaded narrative.”  Trecartin’s repeated comma effectively
becomes the very mark of the ability to be redefined and recontextualized, to turn against
language. Whether it is a “winking eye torn from a smiling face,” a command against
interpretation, or Trecartin’s misshapen hashmark, the comma represents a structuring
logic of popular culture in Trecartin’s poetic video art.
33

Notes on the Book’s Organization
In each of this book’s primary chapters, I aim not only to narrate comparative media
histories of a distinct punctuation mark — the period, the parenthesis, and the hashmark
— but also to develop discussions and launch rethinkings of theoretical concepts to which
the typographical marks in question give rise. I mobilize these concepts to stage nested
readings in which the ideas they generate shed light on specific texts and cultural practices
and at the same time cross-pollinate one another. I aim to explain how various marks
reanimate nexuses of conversations in critical theory to in fact offer fresh perspectives on
the cultural histories and aesthetic practices associated with “new media” and the
“digital,” and especially how they also offer us ways to problematize these categories.
I am therefore not only suggesting that punctuation marks will help anchor an
understanding of cultural aesthetics and our specific textual condition, but in effect also
allowing punctuation marks to carve out space in which we can reflect on how we write
(and do not write) about and across media. In this sense, I build on Lisa Samuels and
Jerome McGann’s notion of “deformative criticism” as a mode of “engaging imaginative
work.” They write that this “alternative moves to break beyond conceptual analysis into
the kinds of knowledge involved in performative operation[s].”  All acts of interpretation
necessarily change a work and “dig ‘behind’ the text,” as Susan Sontag famously declared
in “Against Interpretation,” and as Trecartin works through in a more roundabout way in
Comma Boat.  Samuels and McGann foreground this very inevitability of critical work,
suggesting we apply strategies of literally rewriting and taking apart a text’s composition,
or isolating parts of it so as to forge connections and discover what new forms of
knowledge such procedures might create.
Punctuation as a topic of study in particular seems to invite us to engage in critical play:
what if we switch a period with a colon, replace a pair of parentheses with a pair of
dashes, or, as the JFK-Stalin-stripper meme pictured earlier suggests, leave out an Oxford
comma? Indeed, to understand how punctuation matters, consider doing without it. What
if we remove it from text altogether? How would such a move alter meaning? A glance in
nearly any book or guide about punctuation will almost certainly include a rhetorical
demonstration that juxtaposes two pieces of text containing the same words but
punctuated differently so as to demonstrate the significant (and often humorous) semantic
differences punctuation registers when used differently.
Parkes offers the following on the first page of his history of punctuation, for example,
explaining that punctuation’s “primary function is to resolve structural uncertainties in a
text.” To illustrate this point, he removes punctuation from a brief passage in Charles
Dickens’s Bleak House:
out of the question says the coroner you have heard the boy cant
exactly say wont do you know we cant take that in a court of justice
gentlemen its terrible depravity put the boy aside.
Parkes then suggests, “When punctuation is restored ambiguities are resolved:
‘Out of the question,’ says the Coroner. ‘You have heard the boy.
34
35

“Can’t exactly say” won’t do, you know. We can’t take that in a Court
of Justice, gentlemen. It’s terrible depravity. Put the boy aside.’ ”
Another common example that illustrates the strong semantic effect punctuation has and
the dangerous consequences of misusing it is in the juxtaposition of two differently
punctuated sentences:
A woman, without her man, is nothing.
A woman: without her, man is nothing.
The title of Lynne Truss’s Eats, Shoots & Leaves: The Zero Tolerance Approach to
Punctuation also refers to one of these instructional devices, a bad joke about a panda that
walks into a café and shoots a gun because of a wildlife manual’s badly punctuated
description of his behavior that inserts a comma after eats in the description “Eats shoots
and leaves.”
Several popular image macros raise such questions effectively, too. The series of
macros pictured earlier might themselves be viewed as deformative critique, particularly
in responding to the tendency to abandon punctuation discussed at the beginning of the
introduction, which as these artifacts suggest, we might more accurately rethink as a
tendency to misuse punctuation.
These images humorously play with punctuation, demonstrating the ways in which
slight misuses of marks can drastically change intended meaning, continuing a popular
cultural investment in punctuation that was evidenced by the big success of Truss’s 2003
best seller. Due to the digitally generated and circulating nature of these macros, they
inscribe an added dimension of self-reflexivity on the shifting uses of language that
coincide with digital contexts. While they tap into fears older generations have about
abuses of the English language, at the same time, through their very reliance on a popular
form of new media, they seem to acknowledge the possibility that rather than viewing this
situation as symptomatic of the deterioration of culture, we might instead consider it a
shift, a less judgmental view asserted by this book’s title.
This book offers multiple, but complementary, views on “shift” as a concept. One
approach to viewing this shift is to understand the writing in this book itself as a
performance of a textual shift, as an extended exercise in deformative criticism. In effect, I
read culture as a vast media-textual fabric and isolate, or to recall Flusser’s metaphor, fish
for, a series of punctuation marks from it. What, I ask, might these textual isolations teach
us about their broader contexts: culture and everyday life? This line of inquiry certainly
has its place; it favors knowledge generated by associative logics, close reading, formal
observations and speculations, intuitions and counterintuitions, historical coincidences and
contingencies. It creates a space that allows us to think about the sets of relations at play
with typographical structures in cultures of writing and how we might read similar sets of
relations in other nontypographical contexts. But it does not aim to forge a repeatable path,
or to launch a definitive argument about contemporary society. While the period is
examined in detail in the next chapter, the punctuation mark that guides my thought across
the chapters is more the ?, not the . or the !.
36
37

The book’s chapters can each be read individually and out of order, and readers should
be able to enter at multiple points with hopefully little confusion. However, the chapters
are also organized in a sequential order, posing a sustained question that itself shifts,
closely analyzing punctuational trajectories, allowing us to read a series of textual shifts
related to new media and the aesthetics of digital screen cultures.
On one level, one can read the movement of the book’s chapters as enacting a sustained,
playful reference to the literal shift function of a computer keyboard — a key that, when
pressed in conjunction with any alphanumeric or punctuational character’s key, achieves
an alternative inscription effect, often capitalizing a given letter or transforming a number
into a punctuation mark. The shift key is, after the space bar (which itself inscribes the
originary mark of punctuation — empty space), the largest key on the computer keyboard,
often appearing in two symmetrical positions. Quite literally, the shift key makes the
electronic writing of punctuation possible.
The second chapter begins with the period: the most elemental of marks, which gets its
own place on the QWERTY keyboard, just to the right of the M and the comma keys.
Interestingly, as I will soon explain, in the original design for the typewriter’s — which
was later borrowed for the computer’s — QWERTY layout, the period was supposed to
occupy an even more central position, where the R currently resides. But it was
subsequently moved so that all the letters of TYPEWRITER could be found along the top
row. Embedded within our contemporary keyboards is this earlier history of punctuational
shift.
Thus we start with a mark whose inscription does not require the use of the computer’s
shift key but that represents a historical shift in design that positioned punctuation in
general on the sides of our technological interfaces. The next chapter follows trails of
parentheses, symmetrical pairs of punctuation marks that work together and both of which
rely on the shift key for inscription, in and out of new media. The fourth chapter takes
Twitter’s hashtag as a starting point to think about the history of the # symbol, the sign
alternately known as number, pound, hashtag, octothorpe, and even by some (somewhat
mistakenly) as the musical sharp sign. This character, dependent upon the shift function as
well, is, however and importantly, not conventionally or in a literary sense understood to
be a mark of punctuation. Rather, this character, like the equal sign, could be understood
as what I refer to as loose punctuation. By reading the #’s media history within the book’s
larger framework, however, I in effect aim to “shift” our very understanding of what
punctuation is and can be to include such “loose” characters. This move is productive
because this shift is paralleled throughout the logic of digital culture itself, and thinking on
its borders will allow us to refine our understanding of the ontological parameters of
punctuation in the present context. It seems clear to me that today the # is a form of
punctuation and, moreover, that this is significant.
In order to understand the broader significance of punctuation’s own shift and relational
logics beyond the written text and into the images of our visual culture, I draw on several
examples from cinematic media to help illustrate this more culturally pervasive shift.
Methodologically, this offers the advantage of extending questions that might normally be

exclusively of interest to literary scholars and bringing them more centrally into the
purview of film and media scholarship. Cinematic media in particular pose further
conceptual advantages. As many film theorists have noted, film is in effect a combinatory
media form, which is not to subscribe to claims that it is a superior medium, but simply to
say that it formally integrates literature’s narrativity and temporal unfolding with
photography’s visuality.  Since a critical component of this book’s approach to
punctuation is that, in the context of the emergence of networked computing especially,
punctuation indexes a distinct reconfiguration of image and language, cinematic works
offer an opportunity to draw attention to both of these punctuational dimensions at once
and to their changing relationships with each other.
It is important to acknowledge that punctuation’s digital dimensions are being explored
quite provocatively in a range of electronic writing practices, most notably in the domain
of codework, practiced by artists and writers like Florian Cramer, John Cayley, Mez, Talan
Memmott, and Alan Sondheim, as has been studied by scholars such as Rita Raley,
Katherine Hayles, and Cayley himself.  In order to demonstrate how in the digital age
punctuation’s reach extends beyond literary practices, I take as an assumption that it is
worth devoting attention here to other media forms, where punctuation has been less
studied and foregrounded. Moreover, I hope the book’s cinematic throughline will be
useful to those invested in literary concerns, offering insights about the literary by virtue
of its being articulated in and represented ekphrastically by another media form — one
that is arguably more constitutive of the fabric of popular culture and thus might represent
more widespread ways of thinking about and culturally imagining textuality.
Thus in each chapter that follows, the book throws the textual shift it explores into
perspective via a cinematic lens. The cinematic work examined inscribes the mark in
question on a literal level, but on an even deeper level also enriches a consideration of
punctuation’s particular cultural logic that each chapter parses out. Viewed together, the
specific movies — Adaptation. (directed by Spike Jonze, U.S., 2002), Me and You and
Everyone We Know (directed by Miranda July, U.S., 2005), and I Love Alaska (directed by
Sander Plug and Lernert Engelberts, Netherlands, 2009) — form a parallel picture of a
shift toward the digital that mirrors the punctuation marks I read them in relation to (the
period, parenthesis, and hashmark, respectively). Coming from three distinct historical
points in a decade that saw rapid transformations in the influences and uses of digital
technologies within popular culture and media, these films index a shifting digital
consciousness that begins with anxieties over the dot-com crash that opened the decade
and moves toward anxieties about new ways that digitally mediated technologies reshape
human intimacy, privacy, information, consciousness, and creative expression — issues
whose stakes and consequences only seem to be increasing in magnitude as we settle into
the mid-2010s.
Formally and thematically, each film’s own relation to the idea of the digital itself also
increases as the book proceeds. Adaptation., the second chapter’s cinematic text, upon first
consideration might seem to be a postmillennial analog anomaly. The film was shot on 35
mm film and features a main character — a screenwriter named after the film’s own
screenwriter Charlie Kaufman, played by Nicholas Cage — who types his screenplay on a
38
39

typewriter. Yet Kaufman is tormented by a fictional twin brother also played by Cage, and
thus the digital creeps in as an anxiety: materially, as the actor’s ability to act with himself
is made possible by digital trick effects in postproduction; and narratively, as I will argue,
one can read the film allegorically as representing broader anxieties about the digital in the
cultural context of dotcommania ideologies.
If in Adaptation. the digital is merely a threat the film tries to keep under control, in Me
and You and Everyone We Know there is no turning away from it, and Miranda July, like
Adaptation.’s Kaufman character, maintains a semi-autobiographical presence in the
movie. The movie is shot digitally and directly thematizes digital media and art,
whimsically yet thoughtfully approaching the kinds of intimacy, connections, and creative
possibilities new media lend to contemporary life while also interweaving these digital
themes — and in a sense even interrupting them — with a tender, old-fashioned romantic
comedy. This narrative strand centers on a love story between two young adults who meet
in a mall’s shoe shop, and the couple’s greatest mark of technological advance is July’s
occasional use of a cell phone to reach her shoe clerk love interest on a landline. July’s
film, I argue in the second chapter, moves parenthetically in and out of old and new.
The book’s cinematic infrastructure becomes most fully digital in the third chapter with
its consideration of I Love Alaska, an online episodic mini-movie about an AOL search
leak. Distributed online, about the Internet, and with a “script” made only of search
queries, this movie’s documentary ethics raise questions about the ways in which we have
become posthuman data bodies, defined by our identification numbers and dependent
upon search epistemologies for navigating contemporary life. These readings thus provide
a cinematic throughline to the book’s larger argument, reinforcing and distilling the claims
I make about shift, punctuation’s cultural logic, and digital media, while at the same time
figuring as textual counterpoints to them, posing their own complicated questions about
narrative, storytelling, postmodernism, and life in our digital era.

Outro: Is the Man Who Is Tall Happy?
To stage some recurring themes that surface in the book’s attention to punctuation’s role in
visual culture via cinema, one final illustrative example provides an opportune transition
into the next chapter. Michel Gondry’s Is the Man Who Is Tall Happy? (France, 2013) is
an animated conversation between an unlikely pair: the filmmaker and renowned linguist,
philosopher, and activist Noam Chomsky.
Gondry filmed two conversations with Chomsky at MIT in 2010, which he presents
embellished with beautiful, hand-drawn animations made with neon-colored Sharpies,
illustrating and interpreting the stories and ideas Chomsky discusses on the soundtrack.
Framed as an effort to race against time and record meetings with Chomsky while he is
still alive and well (he is in his early eighties at the time of filming), Gondry focuses their
conversations on the philosopher’s personal life and his linguistic and scientific theories,
rather than politics, about which Chomsky is known to be equally if not more publicly
vocal. The title of the film refers to a discussion between the two that closes the film,
about Chomsky’s theory of generative grammar. It involves the phenomenon of children
intuitively knowing how to construct a question out of a sentence in a complex,
counterintuitive way. So they consider an example: to transform the sentence “The man
who is tall is happy” into a question, it is necessary to move the sentence’s second “is,”
not the first, to the front of the formation: “Is the man who is tall happy?” rather than “Is
the man who tall is happy?” Children always know this, suggesting that to some extent
complex linguistic rules appear to be biologically hardwired in our minds.
Interestingly, in the conversation this example starts with, Gondry provides Chomsky
with a slightly different sentence to use: “A man who is tall is in the room.” Chomsky,
however, innocently changes it to “The man who is tall is happy” in explaining his theory.
The slight difference is suggestive of the ways in which Gondry and Chomsky, despite
their best intentions and generous engagement with one another, do not always quite
follow each other (though usually as Gondry humbly presents it, it is he who struggles to
express himself clearly to Chomsky). Their subtle miscommunications, and their effort to
work past them to understand each other, become one of the movie’s charming themes, a
fascinating effect of watching them communicate. This simultaneous connection and
disconnection is very effectively captured by Gondry’s frame-by-frame animations, which
assiduously try to keep up with Chomsky’s fast-moving associations and deep knowledge,
rendering Chomsky’s ideas paradoxically abstract yet concrete.
Among the most recurrent images Gondry draws in the film is a question mark, which
has the effect of both referring to the more specific linguistic phenomenon of the syntax of
the question posed in the film’s title but also undoubtedly becoming a more general
representation of the mood of the encounter between Gondry and Chomsky — and of
Gondry’s own modest positioning of himself in relation to the great mind of the
philosopher. Over the course of the film, hundreds of question marks move through
Gondry’s drawings. They proliferate around the words of the film’s title in one of the
film’s closing sequences, and in another (pictured in Figure 6b), we see a question mark
climbing up repetitions of the word WHY, spelled out on their sides and ascending like

stairs. Question marks are often not surrounded by other words and letters at all, figuring
as characters operating on their own. For example, in another sequence, Chomsky
discusses psychic continuity and then the importance of again being willing to be “puzzled
by what seems obvious,” as the earliest scientists were, such as not taking for granted why
a ball goes down rather than up. He says about the simple question “Why?”: “As soon as
you’re willing to ask that question, you get the beginnings of modern science.” In an
abstract visual sequence accompanying this, a three-dimensional, neon-blue question mark
becomes connected to another block-faced, neon-blue question mark on its side and
behind it, until there are over fifteen identical question marks, each connected to the others
and extending in different directions on the black screen. Eventually about a dozen almost
parallel squiggly orange lines with pink dots on the end repeatedly run from the left of the
screen to the right, through this question-mark configuration. To the spectator, Gondry
then laments in response to Chomsky’s discussion that he did not express himself clearly
enough: “Once again I had posed my question the wrong way.” Gondry had been curious
to know whether humans are hardwired to build societies (“cities, art, cars, and so on”) the
way bees construct hives, but Chomsky had apparently not realized that is what the
filmmaker was trying to ask.
Adam Schartoff notes in an interview with the filmmaker, connecting Is the Man Who Is
Tall Happy? to Gondry’s previous films, “It’s as though you’ve almost created a language
problem for yourself, and that you’re making movies in another language in a way, and
you find this other, third language almost — it’s like an alternative reality component to
almost every film you’ve made.” Gondry seems intrigued by Schartoff’s observation,
thinking back to Chomsky and his 2005 film Block Party with Dave Chappelle in
particular: “in both cases, it’s hard for me to understand them, it’s hard for them to
understand me, so we have to connect on a different level, and that really describes this
level.”
The animated question-mark configuration here and indeed the visually recurring marks
throughout the movie thus seem to become Gondry’s visual metaphor for a variety of
mental states: the “third language” that punctuation represents, symbolizing the limitations
and resolving the tensions of the men trying to sufficiently understand each other; the
mode of communication taking place in the interview format, where Gondry poses
questions that Chomsky answers; and the tendency for Chomsky himself to be a question
poser, repeatedly emphasizing the epistemological need to ask basic questions. This very
baseness — Chomsky’s interest in posing simple, obvious questions — seems especially
appropriately represented by the simplicity of the single punctuation mark. It is as though
in Gondry’s visual interpretation the question mark captures the profound simplicity of the
linguist’s thought, which ultimately becomes metatheoretical at the film’s end, when
Chomsky turns to question the very form of the question itself.
40

Figures 6a and 6b. Animated question marks in Is the Man Who Is Tall Happy? (directed by Michel Gondry,
2013)
This documentary sets in motion some layered themes outlined so far and that this book
shall proceed to address. How do punctuation marks stand in for thought and how might
they ultimately be more, or differently, effective than language or image at accessing
particular epistemological and phenomenological registers? How might punctuation in
particular stage an encounter between cinema and philosophy as a way to visualize such
registers? Even though this film was made in 2013, and it was made with a notable
absence of digital technologies (though its lack of theatrical distribution makes watching it
almost entirely dependent upon personal digital media players), would these images of
question marks have had the same representational power in a predigital era, before marks
circulated so frequently in isolated conditions? Might the mark stand as a trace of the
digital condition in a work that otherwise seems to preclude the logics of the digital
entirely, from its form to its themes, especially with Chomsky’s emphasis on returning to
early scientific moments? Did Gondry intend for the mark to so frequently represent his
encounter with the philosopher or did the visual dominance of question marks go
relatively unremarked and come naturally as a way to transcribe his experience? Are other
viewers of the film struck by their presence? Put in other words: Does the question mark
figure as a punctum in Gondry’s reading of Chomsky’s words, or for me as a spectator of

Gondry’s film? Could it, contrary to Barthes’s own formation of the concept’s
personalized interpellation, serve as a punctum for both of us?

1
Connecting the Dots
Periodizing the Digital
The Digital Period
The most elemental of punctuation marks, the period gets its own place on the QWERTY
keyboard, just to the right of the M and the comma keys. In the original design for this
layout, the period was supposed to be housed where the R currently resides. But it was
then moved so that all the letters of TYPEWRITER could be found along the top row.
Economist Paul A. David explains,
In March 1873, Densmore succeeded in placing the manufacturing
rights for the substantially transformed Sholes-Glidden “Type Writer”
with E. Remington and Sons, the famous arms makers. Within the
next few months, QWERTY’s evolution was virtually completed by
Remington’s mechanics. Their many modifications included some
fine-tuning of the keyboard design in the course of which “R” wound
up in the place previously allotted to the period mark “.” Thus were
assembled into one row all the letters which a salesman would need to
impress customers, by rapidly pecking out the brand name: TYPE
WRITER.
Embedded within our contemporary computer keyboards, then, is this earlier history of the
period’s shift, displaced from its originally central position on the keyboard for the sake of
showmanship and selling commodities. Imagine the subliminal ways in which we might
have thought of punctuation differently if it had indeed occupied a place among other
letters, rather than on their peripheries. Punctuation would have an altogether different
relationship to our fingers, our muscle memory, our touch, and our bodies. In calling
attention to the relationship between punctuation and textual “shift,” I evoke the history of
keyboard design and a broader idea of how keyboard design might impact the very ways
in which punctuation signifies — in line with the phenomenological inquiry Vilém Flusser
instantiated.
1

Figure 7. Shift key
More directly, however, this chapter is concerned with examining the intersection of
textual shift and the period in relation to digital media. This most unsuspecting of
inscriptions, when we stop to think about its varied uses, indexes changed signifying
practices that correspond with networked computing’s digitally mediated communications.
One can, in effect, “connect the dots” to narrate the history of digital media as a series of
periods, dots, and points. From its typographical redefinition as an organizational structure
for Internet protocol in domain names in the 1980s, through the dot-com boom and
collapse in the 1990s and early 2000s, to the period-as-decimal-point that borrows from
software versioning to mark different phases of the Web and speculative discourses in the
early 2010s about what Web 3.0 is and could be, the dot inscribes the spirit of digital
culture. This chapter unpacks the aesthetics, ideologies, logics, and politics of this
punctuational inscription. In more than just a flimsy sense, the lesson that emerges from
this tale is that the period periodizes the cultural history of the Internet, differentiating its
historical phases.
The very term Web 2.0, Tim O’Reilly has claimed, originated as a rehabilitative
response to dominant sentiments about the dot-com era ending. Recalling the conference
brainstorming session where the term was born, he explains the participants’ impression
that “far from having ‘crashed,’ the web was more important than ever, with exciting new
applications and sites popping up with surprising regularity.”  By evoking the software
versioning strategies of numbers with decimal points, Web 2.0, and the corresponding
retroactive categorizing of the Internet’s prior phase as 1.0, was intended to be a corrective
to discourses about the Internet becoming history that followed the dot-com collapse.
One could read the shift from the dot to the point, then, as the new media industry
2

reframing the Internet as software that is, depending upon one’s perspective, planned-to-
be-obsolete or planned-to-be-improved. The dot’s continuity but shift in both phases is
worth further reflection too: the use of the mark suggests a way of conceptualizing the
Internet that is more syntactic than semantic, more mathematical than humanistic, but also
elemental and basic.
Conversely, attention to this punctuation mark also opens up an alternate — surface —
side of this history that lies not in computer code and discourses about new media but in
the very shifting mechanics of human languages that have accompanied the uses of
proliferating digital technologies. For example, today in text messages and online
conversations we commonly drop periods that would normally and formally belong at the
ends of sentences in print. Language pundit Ben Yagoda discusses this phenomenon in a
New York Times op-ed. He writes, “My 21-year-old daughter once criticized my habit of
ending text-message sentences with a period. For a piece of information delivered without
prejudice, she said, you don’t need any punctuation at the end (“Movie starts at 6”). An
exclamation point is minimally acceptable enthusiasm (“See you there!”). But a period
just comes off as sarcastic (“Good job on the dishes.”).”  Another critic, Ben Crair,
observes that the presence of a period in text messaging tends to be read as indicating
anger, writing that “digital communications are turning it into something more
aggressive,” lending the sentence a gratuitous finality.  Indeed, one could say that as the
period shifts into the middle of web addresses, it tends to shift out of short-form
communication of sentences, where the mark is increasingly viewed as unnecessary to
convey information quickly.
While the mark continues to possess a key organizational function, the content it
organizes has shifted. It no longer plays a strict role in sentence-level communication but
takes on a looser role, and now alongside this older role it adopts an additional set of roles
in organizing computer-to-computer communication. In other words, the period’s
functions loosen in natural languages and develop new roles in machine languages. Both
sides of the period’s roles in digital culture — in natural and machine languages —
suggest that it no longer regularly inscribes and signifies finality, but rather a set of
qualities that could be better understood as ongoing, architectural, and less conclusive.
Viewed from this perspective, the period reflects a larger shift that displaces the priority of
the semantic in favor of the mediated epistemological infrastructures that channel the
textual practices and protocols of our postprint, digital era.
N. Katherine Hayles has been one of the critics to take on the greatest interest in these
changes and to most articulately argue for the need for cross-disciplinary investigations of
them. In My Mother Was a Computer she writes,
Now that the information age is well advanced, we urgently need
nuanced analyses of the overlaps and discontinuities of code with the
legacy systems of speech and writing, so that we can understand how
processes of signification change when speech and writing are coded
into binary digits. Although speech and writing issuing from
programmed media may still be recognizable as spoken utterances and
3
4

print documents, they do not emerge unchanged by the encounter with
code. Nor is the effect of code limited to individual texts. In a broader
sense, our understanding of speech and writing in general is deeply
influenced by the pervasive use of code (my deliberate situating of
them as legacy systems above is intended as a provocation to suggest
the perceptual shifts underway).
Hayles argues that beyond generating new frameworks for approaching new media
textualities, we must also specify how the language of computer code bears continuities
with the distinct historical textual regimes of speech and writing that have been
elaborately theorized by semioticians and literary historians — and the ways machine
languages present undeniable, significant ruptures with them. But in her formulation, she
also importantly acknowledges that the effects of code upon language extend beyond
literal inscriptions of code. The “broader sense” of which she speaks suggests that code is
part of, even exemplary of, a larger shift in textual logics and systems that cuts to the core
of today’s communication practices and that is reconditioning worldviews (not
deterministically or unilaterally, but reconditioning nonetheless). Punctuation marks in
particular, I argue here, map paths upon which one can examine the nature of these
changes, signaled by the term shift.
The route this chapter takes to map this shift begins with some considerations of the
cultural logic of the period, collecting examples and comparative questions from across a
range of sites and discourses in visual culture, politics, digital etiquette guides, and literary
criticism. Once this logic is mapped, I turn to two analyses that stage two sides of the
typographical period’s cultural logics and textual shift across the information age. The
first, taking us back to the 1980s, will look at the ways in which the mark was in effect
redefined as a “dot” by computer programmers in Internet protocol documents. This
analysis, so to speak, takes us “inside” the logic of the period’s textual shift into digitality,
considering its literal redefinitions, infrastructural transformations, and new role in
computing. By contrast, I juxtapose this with an analysis that repositions us to an
“outside” of sorts to these logics. Moving forward in time two decades, yet to an older
media form, I explore a probably unexpected text, Spike Jonze’s 2002 film Adaptation. I
argue that the interpretation of this film — a film that has generated endless interpretations
— is enriched by situating it in a different phase in digital culture marked by the dot-com
frenzy. The title’s little-noticed period in fact offers what could be taken to be a
synthetically symptomatic reading of the film’s significance, making sense of it in its
historical context when digital dreams saturated public discourses and the national
imagination. The chapter concludes by considering periodization as a type of knowledge
work, asking how the typographical period’s textual shift maps onto notions of digital
periodizations more broadly.
5

Zeroing In on the Period’s Cultural Logic
The period, off to the side on our typing interfaces, with its no-frills simplicity and
ubiquity, might not seem worthy of much fuss. It sits firmly but quietly in the middle of a
holy trinity of sentence-ending marks. On its one side rests the uncertainty of the question
mark and on its other side one could locate the overpowering certainty of the exclamation
mark. These two other terminal points tend to elicit stronger aesthetic convictions in our
cultural imaginations than their neighbor in the middle — soliciting the disdain of
everyone from F. Scott Fitzgerald to the bloggers of Excessive Exclamation!!, a website
devoted to visually documenting various cultural artifacts and signs that illustrate a
persistent overuse of exclamation marks.  David Shipley and Will Schwalbe make sense
of this trend in their digital etiquette book, Send: Why People Email So Badly and How to
Do It Better. They write:
Exclamation points can instantly infuse electronic communication
with human warmth. “Thanks!!!!” is way friendlier than “Thanks.”
And “Hooray!!!!!” is more celebratory than “Hooray.” Because email
is without affect, it has a dulling quality that almost necessitates
kicking everything up a notch just to bring it where it would normally
be… . The exclamation point is a lazy but effective way to combat
email’s essential lack of tone. “I’ll see you at the conference” is a
simple statement of fact. “I’ll see you at the conference!” lets your
fellow conferee know that you’re excited and pleased about the
event.
Given that one of punctuation’s conventional uses is to convey a writer’s tone to a reader,
communication in digital contexts would seem to particularly need punctuation to convey
tone. The marks help recipients know how to read messages in media whose users often
lament not being able to “read” each other’s moods, finding that with no voice to carry
them, tones are easily misinterpreted. This offers an explanation not only for the recent
pervasiveness of punctuation that explicitly registers affect: “excessive exclamation” but
also even more popularly, emoticons.
6
7

Figure 8. Excessive Exclamation!! blog
Iconographically, wireless technologies also use the exclamation point to instill panic.
For example, when a computer is unable to connect to a network, and the four bars
signaling connection strength on a monitor display do not fill, an exclamation mark is
superimposed over the empty bars. One of the goals of this book is to call our attention to
and reflect on such images, whereby textual inscriptions have come to form a patchwork
of iconography throughout the visual culture of digital media, engaging in modified
practices of signification. As we asked in the previous chapter in relation to the isolated
equal sign removed from mathematical statements: Is the use of punctuation in digital
culture as iconography, disentangled from its ties to language, something new, and if so
what does it signify?
In contrast to the question mark and exclamation point, the period’s seeming neutrality
projects a certain ambivalence, if it projects anything at all. In her witty Atlantic Wire
article, “The Imagined Lives of Punctuation Marks,” Jen Doll personifies various marks,
writing,
The period is the good-on-paper guy or girl (he/she is unisex really).
You’ll never really fall in love, but you’ll appreciate and respect the
Period deeply. And you do, at the end of the day, realize in your heart

of hearts that you need him or her. Inevitably, however, you’ll cheat on
the Period with the Ampersand, Semi-Colon, or possibly the
Interrobang. The Period keeps an impeccably clean house and can be
relied upon to come and visit you in the hospital. He/she always
forgives. Full-stop.
Yet even this seemingly inviolable inscription can elicit controversy, as in Barack Obama’s
2012 campaign for a second presidential term. The campaign’s slogan was “Forward.” A
Wall Street Journal article reports: “The period was subject of a spirited debate as Mr.
Obama’s senior advisers and outside consultants spent hours in a conference room at their
Chicago campaign headquarters deliberating over the perfect slogan, according to an
adviser who was in attendance. Does a period add emphasis? Yes! Does it undermine the
sense of the word? Maybe!”  (The article also illustrates how nearly impossible it is to not
play with punctuation when writing about it.) If “forward” was intended to project voters
into the future, the period following it, some feared, seemed to halt the word — and the
idea it stands for — in the present. Catherine Pages, a Washington, D.C. art director, was
quoted in the newspaper as saying, “There’s been some speculation that the period really
gives the feeling of something ending rather than beginning.” Invoking the punctuation
mark’s “full stop” alias, one of the president’s advisers and former chairman of the
Council of Economic Advisers, Austan Goolsbee, explained, “It’s like ‘forward, now
stop.’ It could be worse. It could be ‘Forward’ comma.” Linguist George Lakoff chimed in
to the conversation, responding to questions regarding whether it was even proper English
to include a period after one word, confirming that the single word is indeed a legitimate
imperative sentence: “You can look at the period as adding a sense of finality, making a
strong statement: Forward. Period. And no more. Whether that’s effective is another
question.”
News outlets and critics of Obama noted the slogan’s ties to communist propaganda
campaigns by the Soviets that also heavily used the word, but notably, they usually added
an exclamation point: “Forward!” The Washington Times, for example, ran a story titled
“New Obama Slogan Has Long Ties to Marxism, Socialism.”  Less enthusiastic and
more understated than its Soviet counterparts, Obama’s mark is more ambivalent: it might
simultaneously read in conjunction with the “Forward” it follows as opening a
conversation or, under the media’s unrelenting microscope, as cutting off possibilities for
imagining what that “forward” might mean.
8
9
10

Figure 9. Obama’s 2012 “Forward.” campaign
Figure 10. Soviet wartime poster: “Forward! Victory is close!”
The period, as these illustrative examples drawn from popular culture and literature
suggest, is not as definitive or neutral as we might tend to think. Once we spend some time
with it, we realize that rather than making a statement it in fact raises more questions than
it answers — about how effective our language is in communicating desired meanings,
and about what our desired meanings are in the first place. In every writer’s inscription of

a period there is a loaded paradox: one is relieved to have completed a sentence, but in this
moment of relief one confronts an anxiety that threatens to overwhelm any sense of relief
its inscription might have achieved. (Does something come next or have I finished? If
something comes next, what is it? Is it someone else’s turn to speak? Or must I come up
with something else to say?) Every period, in other words, seems to disguise at least four
question marks. In this sense the period inscribes many of the same anxieties over finality
that the idea of periodization does for many historians and humanists.

Defining the Dot
Alexander Galloway suggests that the social order of our current digital or postmodern
period (descriptors he self-consciously alternates in using) is based on a configuration of
control that is represented by the Internet’s style of management — its protocol —
established through the circulation of Requests for Comments documents (RFCs) that set
standards for computer-to-computer communication. The logic of control set by these
protocols, Galloway explains, is characterized by a contradictory pull whereby on one
hand Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP), which transmits data
between computers across networks, “radically distributes control into autonomous
locales,” while on the other hand, Domain Name System (DNS) protocol, which translates
web addresses in natural languages into numerical IP addresses, “focuses control into
rigidly defined hierarchies.”  Thus even though TCP/IP might shape a dominant
impression of the Internet as unbound, horizontally sprawling networks whose inorganic
logic is impossible to grasp, DNS has the opposite effect, configuring a highly regimented,
hierarchical tree structure responsible for facilitating successful communication between
computers.
It is here, with the vertical, hierarchical, ordered logic of DNS protocol, where the
actual dot of web addresses carries a new procedural function in the computer age. The
dots in web addresses break up the command of control into subdomains, where the label
following the last dot on the right (such as com, edu, gov, org, or two-letter country codes
like ca, au, fr, uk) is the top-level domain, and the subdomain hierarchy descends from
right to left. As Jon Postel and Joyce Reynolds explain in RFC 920, a policy statement on
domain requirements, “in the future most of the top level names will be very general
categories like ‘government,’ ‘education,’ or ‘commercial.’ ”  Indeed, it is also in an RFC
such as this where the punctuation mark might be understood to be officially though
casually renamed and redefined.
Across the various standards-setting documents for the Internet, the “.” character is
treated as a noun, not just a mark of punctuation. In fact, it is often punctuated further,
surrounded by quotation marks, foregrounding the intentional textuality of the
punctuation, as if to call our attention to a mark so small we might otherwise think it is a
typo or overlook it. In this context, if spoken aloud, it becomes a word to pronounce, not
just a mark that aids the reader’s flow in pronouncing other words. We now write periods
in web addresses before we write a website’s top-level domain, which, in Paul
Mockapetris’s more technical language in RFC 1034, “mark the boundary between
hierarchy levels” of “name spaces.”  Nam June Paik’s collaborator, net activist, and
Name.Space’s founder Paul Garrin perhaps best articulates the character’s newly achieved
significance: “With the stroke of a delete key, whole countries can be blacked out from the
rest of the net. With the ‘.’ centralized, this is easily done. With the ‘.’ decentralized such a
deletion is not unilaterally possible. Control the ‘.’ and you control access. Control the
content of the ‘.’ and you also control the market.”  In other words, the architecture of the
Internet relies on the character in its organization of web pages and in the chain of
commands required to take us where we want to go. Every time we visit a website, we
need to use the character to get there. This cannot be said of any other character. Nor can it
11
12
13
14

even be said of the composition of every sentence in human languages: there is always the
possibility of ending with a question or exclamation mark, or today, in the increasingly
short messages we use to communicate with each other, with nothing at all.
This punctuational shift is perhaps most immediately perceptible via changed
terminology: no longer a period, it is now referred to as a “dot.” In RFCs 1034 and 1035
from 1987, a pair of documents widely credited for defining and setting the standards for
domain name protocol, Mockapetris defines the mark as such: “When a user needs to type
a domain name, the length of each label is omitted and the labels are separated by dots
(“.”).”  Mockapetris’s parenthetical quotation of the character (symmetrically triple
punctuation at that) in effect serves to name the mark. One could read it, as similar
parenthetical expressions often are supposed to be read, as defining unfamiliar terms for
future use in a text. In effect it says: “from here on out the “.” character will be referred to
as ‘dot.’ ” One might almost interpret these RFCs as documents that are renaming and
redefining punctuation insofar as they imagine and set standards for new textual uses of
the characters in the hopes of optimizing the Internet’s future — for technologies that run
it and users that operate it.
In their illustrated history of the Internet, Katie Hefner and Matthew Lyon have noted
the importance of the particular tone and the rhetoric of RFCs. They describe Steve
Crocker, the author of the first such document, which was about the “basic ‘handshake’
between two computers,” as an “extremely considerate young man, sensitive to others.”
They suggest that his personality inflected the language of the first RFC, written in a
bathroom in the middle of the night so as to not disturb Crocker’s housemates. Even the
note’s title of “request for comments” was named politely to “avoid sounding too
declarative.” Hefner and Lyon explain, “The language of the RFC was warm and
welcoming. The idea was to promote cooperation, not ego. The fact that Crocker kept his
ego out of the first RFC set the style and inspired others to follow suit in the hundreds of
friendly and cooperative RFCs that followed.”  Computer scientist Brian Reid notes
about this first document’s rhetorical friendliness, “It is impossible to underestimate the
importance of that. I did not feel excluded by a little core of protocol kings.”  It is worth
considering how punctuational thinking metaphorically textures this history. We might
recall that punctuation is the part of written language that lends it tone, and specifically,
the period is the mark of punctuation that lends writing a declarative tone (ending a
phrase, sentence, or thought). Does it not almost seem inevitable, read from this
perspective, that these documents attempting to thoughtfully open up an inclusive and
evolving dialogue would redefine with special care the inscriptions that tend to lend
certainty and finality to our thought?
And if we think the period is declarative, imagine the extent to which early Internet
protocol designers might have wanted to avoid the even greater assertiveness of what
Walter Ong refers to as the exclamation point’s standard “sense value.”  Consider for
example Crocker’s fellow Internet pioneer Jon Postel’s 1979 memo IEN 116. (IENs, or
Internet Experiment Notes, were a shorter-running series of protocol documents modeled
after RFCs that Postel edited from 1977 to 1982.) It reads:
15
16
17
18

It is strongly recommended that the use of host names in programs be
consistent for both input and output across all hosts. To promote such
consistency of the internet level, the following syntax is specified:
The SYNTAX of names as presented to the user and as entered by
the user is:
! NET ! REST
where:
NET is a network name or number as defined in “Assigned
Numbers” [1]
and
REST is a host name within that network expressed as a character
string or as a number. When a number is used, it is expressed in
decimal and is prefixed with a sharp sign (e.g., #1234).
Note that this syntax has minimal impact on the allowable character
strings for host names within a network. The only restriction is that a
REST string cannot begin with an exclamation point (!).
The !NET! may be omitted when specifying a host in the local
network. That is “!” indicates the network portion of a name string.
Without getting bogged down in the details of network infrastructure, one can discern at
least two points worth considering for our present purposes. First, Postel explicitly defines
here a new role for the exclamation point. And second, this redefinition rests on a
fundamental assumption about our expectations about punctuation in natural languages —
the term used to refer to languages humans speak and write (which are of course far from
“natural”), as opposed to machine languages like code. This assumption is that
punctuation is in a sense not as necessary as letters and digits; it is more disposable from
language, perceived to have a hierarchically lower value than other types of characters.
The exclamation point, in other words, can be redefined precisely because one does not
need it to uphold its normal sense value. Domain names can be written without them. In
this way, then, one can begin to understand how punctuation registers more precisely and
cleanly than other elements of language the textual shift from human languages to
machine languages that correspond with the interconnections forged between digital
technologies.
On one hand, in a web address the period continues to mark the end of a semantic unit,
insofar as we might understand a name space as a semantic unit. In this sense, and in a
very real way, the period continues to organize our experience of textualities and
communication. On the other hand, the punctuation mark takes on an irrevocably different
role — one that is less for aiding speech in the classical sense of punctuation that has been
explicated by scholars like M. B. Parkes and Walter Ong. Ong, for instance, writes in his
study of the first punctuation marks (the period, comma, and colon) in Elizabethan and
Jacobean English that in predominant early uses of all three marks, “the clarification of the
19

syntax is coincidental. The grammarians are interested primarily in the exigencies of
breathing.”  It was only in later medieval writing, after writing came to be culturally
valued more than speech, that the period’s function shifted to primarily syntactical clarity.
With textuality’s increasingly close relationship with computer languages, the period’s
primary sense value evolves again. Indeed, with the dot one detects a shifting role of
punctuation that represents a much broader and more significant textual shift that indexes
language’s modified role in the digital age. Now, the punctuation mark emerges as an
inscription tool to help manage the Internet’s growth in the 1980s.
20

Adaptation.’s Period
If the period steadily began to gain recognition as a dot in the 1980s, I will now propel us
twenty years forward, to a moment after the dot became a fixture across not only the
infrastructure of the circulation of visual culture but across the surfaces of it as well, with
the centrality of the dot-com craze in the United States at the end of the 1990s. To settle
into this time frame and typographical character, I wish to consider what at first would
seem to be an extremely unlikely outlier as an example: a hardly noticed yet ingenious
manifestation of the punctuation mark at the title’s end of the film Adaptation. (directed by
Spike Jonze, U.S., 2002). While this period fairly consistently appears in official
references to the film’s title and throughout its marketing, it is more often than not
neglected in casual and even scholarly references to the film, demonstrating just how
unnecessary and unobserved punctuation can be. The film, though — which takes writing,
and even more specifically the anxiety of writing, so seriously — clearly intends and is
enriched by its period. Beyond just encapsulating anxieties about writing and narrative
ending, one could read this period as also inscribing a historically specific set of anxieties
in the United States about the (momentary) ends of technological enthusiasm and
investment, a claim I will move toward here.
Nicolas Cage plays two lead characters: a tormented Charlie Kaufman, an
autobiographical version of the film’s real-life screenwriter of the same name (who in the
film is fresh from writing Being John Malkovich, a 1999 film Kaufman did write); and his
carefree twin brother, Donald, also a screenwriter in the film but with no real-life referent.
Charlie, admired for his writing talent and originality, is enlisted to adapt Susan Orlean’s
(Meryl Streep) New Yorker story-turned-book The Orchid Thief for the screen. The film
focuses on Charlie’s struggle to adapt Orlean’s work. He wants to resist the Hollywood
clichés. As he puts it to the studio executive Valerie Thomas (Tilda Swinton), who has
solicited his adaptation: “I just don’t want to ruin it by making it a Hollywood thing, you
know. Like an orchid heist movie, or something… . Or, you know, changing the orchids
into poppies and turning it into a movie about drug-running… . Why can’t there be a
movie simply about flowers?” He continues, “I don’t want to cram in sex or guns or car
chases. You know? Or characters, you know, learning profound life lessons. Or growing,
or coming to like each other, or overcoming obstacles to succeed in the end.”
If the first two-thirds of the film focuses on Charlie’s neuroses and writer’s block (often
conveyed by a recurring voice-over that draws us into his obsessions and afflictions), then
the final one-third self-consciously and ironically crams in all that Charlie was trying to
keep out. The film unravels, sweeping into its narrative orbit everything its main character
wanted to avoid: sex via an unlikely romance between Susan and her orchid-expert muse
John Laroche (Chris Cooper); a drug-running scheme that Charlie discovers Laroche is
orchestrating in Florida; and a fast-paced car chase to a swamp where Susan and Laroche
run Donald and Charlie down, leaving Donald shot dead and Laroche killed by an
alligator. And even that most important of Hollywood conventions, a moral: “you are what
you love, not what loves you.”
Intricately interweaving and blurring fiction with reality, the film thus asks its viewer to

reflect on what adaptation means and entails. Is Jonze’s film ultimately a true adaptation
of Orlean’s story? Are its meandering attention to The Orchid Thief and insertion of the
Kaufman twins and Hollywood clichés unfaithful to its source, or is it a faithful adaptation
precisely insofar as it transposes The Orchid Thief’s own meandering attention to its
subject, Laroche? Is the film about the real-life Kaufman and a fictional twin brother, or
do both of Cage’s characters represent two competing halves of the same real-life
Kaufman torn between maintaining an original, independent vision and selling out to
Hollywood? (With screenwriting credits and Oscar nominations for both Charlie and
Donald, this was the first time a fictional person was ever nominated for an Academy
Award.) Whatever one’s ultimate reading is, Adaptation. is surely, at least partially, about
the anxiety of ending.
Adaptation.’s seemingly tacked-on ending has been scrutinized in much of the film’s
criticism, leaving spectators uncertain of what to make of it. In his otherwise positive New
Yorker review, David Denby representatively writes of his disappointment with the
ending:
What then envelops Orlean and Laroche and Charlie (who writes
himself into the story) is awful nonsense. Drugs, guns, car crashes,
alligators — the movie becomes a complete shambles, and far more
desperate than anything conventional filmmakers would fall into. It’s
hard to know how to read this mess of an ending… . The trouble with
experimental comedies is that it’s often impossible to figure out how
to end them. But at least this one is intricate fun before it blows itself
up.
While Denby and a significant number of others seem to find the film’s conclusion
condescending and alienating, I disagree. It is certainly a joke, and one that we are
allowed in on. After the action-packed narrative ending, however, the film in fact does not
end. In a smart analysis of Adaptation. (which despite its thoughtfulness, representatively
neglects the title’s punctuation), Joshua Landy considers seven possible interpretations of
the movie. He focuses on the significance of the film’s true ending:
Recall, however, that Adaptation closes with a time-lapse sequence of
daisies on a meridian, an astonishingly powerful sequence, with
rhythms borrowed (appropriately enough) from the Fibonacci series
and set to music that ends in a lush, ethereal harmony [The Turtles’
“Happy Together”]. What if this sequence were not just the finale but
also the telos of the movie? What if the entire film were simply
building up to the daisies on the meridian, indeed making them
possible, turning them for the first time into something that can be
noticed?
This, I want to claim, is the deep strategy of the film, the seventh
and only successful approach, the one that finally brings about a
victory for the nonnarrative (the static, the cyclical) over the
narrative.
21
22

Landy claims that Adaptation.’s motivating question is how to make a cinematic narrative
“simply about flowers,” recalling Cage’s words to Swinton. The film, Landy reasons,
delivers an exaggerated, complex, and overstuffed narrative to satiate our desire for
narrative beyond any reasonable doubt, so that by the time we see the flowers that close
the film, we appreciate them. In the end, the goal — the “deep strategy” — is successful,
and the viewer has arrived at a point of being able to notice the flowers and appreciate
them for what they are. In a sense, according to this compelling interpretation, the entire
rest of the film we have seen until this point, with all its loopholes and fictions, has
canceled itself out to finally become a film “simply about flowers.”
Yet one could in fact read past the flowers to the film’s period as offering its ultimate
meaning, an added interpretation of a film that invites nested layers of reading. The
period, standing for writing’s final mark and an ending that goes unnoticed, inscribes all of
the anxieties over finality that the film is about. I have little doubt that the real-life
Kaufman, no stranger to including literary devices with multiple layers of meaning in his
titles (his directorial debut in 2008 was the acclaimed Synedoche, New York), is registering
in this single dot the many narrative desires, anxieties, and interpretations the film stages.
As a mark that ends a sentence but normally not a film title, the period’s placement asks us
to think twice about how Adaptation. ends. Out of place and tacked on, does the period
resemble or counterbalance the film’s own spectacular denouement? At the same time
could it be just conspicuous enough to catch our attention as the true finishing touch —
the point of it all — much like the film’s closing flowers? Indeed, beyond its closing time
lapse of flowers, the key to the film could be understood to lie in its period, since it at once
evokes the writing process and an ending out of place.
As much as the period might seem to end the conversation and be Adaptation.’s final
point, I would not stop there either. We should not forget when this movie was made. This
particular punctuation mark was prominent across popular culture in 2002. To read the
film in historical context, one might recall that the late 1990s and early 2000s were among
other things characterized by great hype over the dot-com boom and crash. Discourses in
an increasingly globalizing American society were saturated and undergirded by a hope
bordering on greed invested in the futures of new Internet companies, followed by a quick
realization that such a creative, economic, and expanding technological utopia could not
be sustained — a historical lesson that the contemporary wave of excitement about social
media seems not to have learned. As Andrew Ross puts it in his study of Silicon Alley
workplaces, “In next to no time, the Internet gold rush story sucked in all the available
currents of public attention.”  Geert Lovink also emphasizes the pervasiveness of dot-
com discourses during this time: “For a short while, around 1998–2000, the rhetoric of the
New Economy was hot and glamorous; Internet reporting was everywhere, from the
entertainment sections to media pages and IT supplements.”  A symptomatic, situated
analysis of Adaptation. can be enriched by understanding the movie, particularly the
attitudes and actions of the twins portrayed by Cage, as deeply formed by and responsive
to the cultural ideologies of this particular historical moment’s “dotcommania,” to borrow
Lovink’s phrase for the phase.
As the new millennium approached, news outlets and analysts also talked with
23
24

frequency about Y2K as though it would bring about apocalypse. Our computer systems,
and by extension our networked world, were based on programs that temporally stored
and used years’ last two digits. The logic underlying the panic had it that now the first two
digits would change and throw things —including life-sustaining systems — out of
whack. January 1 came and passed, and everything was fine. But in only a few months’
time, with these anxieties hardly settled, there was new reason for panic. The new
technology-based economy (often referred to just as “the New Economy”) unraveled:
many Internet start-up companies turned out to be making less money than they had
reported; many were fined by the government for misleading the public; many declared
bankruptcy; and many of their employees in the industry were left without jobs. The
riskier nature of the work they had participated in and the career decisions dot-commers
had made — often abandoning high-paying and stable jobs, which Gina Neff argues in her
ethnographic work with New York City’s Silicon Alley entrepreneurs characterizes a
broader shift in U.S. economic history at this time — proved to have their consequences.
The dot-com crash that began in March 2000 was soon followed and accompanied by
2001’s September 11 terrorist attacks in New York City. To reappropriate a remark from
Walter Benjamin’s poetic ruminations, these occurrences had a cumulative effect of
“piling wreckage upon wreckage.”  A large chunk of the country’s strong sense of
invincibility and inflated prosperity was revealed to have been built on false promises and
beliefs. People lost jobs and were forced to redirect career paths, and a nation that
imagined itself as a first-world safe haven from terrorist attacks lost thousands of its
citizens in a symbolic act of violence, leading the nation to embark on a deeply ambiguous
and one-sided “War on Terror.” Though these events did not lead to the radical
reevaluations of the national dreams they were bound up with that one might have hoped
would result, these events, and the ways in which they were retold in the media, had all
the makings of a sensational Hollywood ending.
Adaptation.’s filming took place between March and June 2001, and its theatrical
release was in late 2002. The dot-com boom and bust thus historically coincided with the
film’s development and production: Kaufman had written two drafts by September 1999
(close to the height of the dot-com boom) and completed a third in November 2000 (just
months after the crash had begun). I note this context to recall the zeitgeist of the film’s
period of production, characterized by the dot-com ideologies of speculation, greed, big
risks, and big hopes — and the sudden big disappointments — that immediately preceded
it. Adaptation.’s characters are explicitly working in Hollywood, a media industry that
scholars such as Neff in Venture Labor point out paralleled the new media industry at the
time. In multiple scenes we see characters participating in the kind of social networking,
meetings, technical seminars, and conversations about innovation and creativity that were
also so constitutive of and influenced by the dot-com bubble.
Though the dot-com context is not obviously legible in Jonze’s film, its environment
and its ideologies are subtly yet fundamentally intertwined with the film’s significance.
Moreover, there are markers of the period within the movie that do make this historical
moment legible. Beyond its characters’ enmeshment in the media industry milieu and the
frequent images we see of Donald working on screenplays at his computer (by contrast
25
26

Charlie — the quality, original writer of the two brothers — of course prefers a
typewriter), Internet entrepreneurialism does appear within the film’s narrative, even
planting the seed for the movie’s unraveling. In one blatant departure from The Orchid
Thief, a few years have passed, and we see Susan drunk and, as a version of the script
indicates, “dolled-up” in a hotel room.  She calls Laroche. We see him in a room that had
not been described in the 1999 scripts but is described in the November 2000 version as a
“little boy’s bedroom,” “now filled with computer equipment. Posters of naked women
adorn the walls” (76). After Susan asks Laroche how it’s going, he updates her:
Great! I’m training myself on the Internet. It’s fascinating. I’m doing
pornography. It’s amazing how much these suckers will pay for
photographs of chicks. And it doesn’t matter if they’re fat or ugly or
what. (76)
Laroche’s new self-trained Internet pornography start-up is a startling shift in trajectory
from his intense, obsessive involvement with orchids. It is both symptomatic of the time
and an ironic extension of the film’s running reminders of the connections between
orchids and sexuality: as if web porn is the technological version of its counterpart in the
natural world, orchid collecting, where both hobbies are driven by obsessions, arousals,
and specialized tastes. Laroche’s new undertaking, though, is also part and parcel of the
film’s deeper theme and narrative ending of selling out, which we see enacted as
the fundamental conflict of interest between Charlie and Donald. Laroche’s new embrace
of Internet porn thus stands for the film’s “bad turn,” becoming a pivotal example of
exactly those Hollywood clichés of sex and money that Charlie did not want to
sensationalize his script.
What I am suggesting, which I want to neither overemphasize nor underemphasize, is
that put in context the bad narrative Charlie tries to avoid in the film is fundamentally
bound up with the (generally unattractive) ideologies of dot-com entrepreneurialism that
were dominant throughout American society at the time the film was in development and
production. In a sense, too, this precisely furnishes the additional layer to and crucial
difference with The Orchid Thief that Kaufman has contributed in his own adaptation of
the source material. The process of adaptation itself — as we see in a variety of
postmodern film adaptations, from Amy Heckerling’s spin on Emma with Clueless (U.S.,
1995) to Baz Luhrmann’s updated cinematic treatments of literary classics, Romeo +
Juliet (U.S., 1996) and The Great Gatsby (Australia/U.S., 2013) — is about modifying
texts in current contexts, inviting spectators and readers to think about the continued yet
modified relevance of older questions and concerns. The unusual period of Adaptation.’s
title thus propels us to consider how the film as an adaptation is punctuated by the new
historical context in which it was created. And in turn, the added narrative layers — the
film’s self-reflexive anxieties over writing, ending, and selling out — are imbricated in a
critique of the dominant social and cultural values that are encapsulated in the dot of the
dot-com and open a window into an American psyche witnessing the sharp burst of the
bubble of its presumed technological and economic prosperity. Read against this
backdrop, the film’s deliberate period also provides an opportunity to consider the film’s
persistent resistance to closure. A punctuation mark that normally closes might here be
27

taken as resisting the dominant “com” of the time that it accompanied (which, one might
remember too, stands for “commerce”) — reminding us that this film is ultimately a
challenging, self-reflexive experiment in narrative storytelling, not commercial fare.
We thus note how the film’s punctuation mark ties back to our consideration of the
period’s textual shift in digital contexts. If, as we observed, the period today is arguably no
longer primarily used to end sentences, then Adaptation.’s period performs this change,
understatedly mediating the shifting and loosening of its epistemological certainty and the
range of new roles it now has in the digital “period.”
Figure 11. Nicolas Cage staring at his typewriter, as tormented writer Charlie Kaufman in Spike Jonze’s
Adaptation. (2002)

Periodizing the Period
In her book on quotation marks, Marjorie Garber notes that the pun, a linguistic shifter
that in different utterances signals different referents, can be a way of “getting at the
radical capacities to mean their various and often contradictory meanings.” She claims,
“the mode of argument that takes words seriously — and takes them most seriously when
confronted with their capacity to and for play — is an aspect of rhetorical criticism that
has historically frightened some rationalist readers, by confronting them with their poets’
— or their own — unexpected inner thoughts.”  With the power of word association in
mind, and without hinging a full-blown rational argument on one, there is a line of
thought, or perhaps a path of dots, to be pursued in the connections between the
typographical period and the notion of the period as historical era.
One of the questions the preceding interpretation of Adaptation. surely invites one to
pursue is what periodization provides as a reading strategy. How does a consideration of a
historical context’s ideological conditions complement an understanding of stylistic
operations within a text from that historical period — and vice versa? How does the visual
culture of a punctuation mark seem to particularly mediate digital ideologies and
aesthetics?
Similar to reflecting on the smaller-scale typographical period, attending to the idea of
periodization encourages us to debate the stakes of using one word over another. It forces
one to organize one’s thought, to determine how to divide and combine units of thought to
express them most effectively to others, and to decide where they begin and end, change
or continue. Italian philosopher Benedetto Croce writes, “To think history is certainly to
divide it into periods, because thought is organism, dialectic, drama, and as such has its
periods, its beginning, its middle, and its end, and all the other ideal pauses that a drama
implies and demands. But those pauses are ideal and therefore inseparable from thought,
with which they are one as the shadow is one with the body, silence with the sound.”
Croce’s remarks invoke the conceptual intimacy between punctuation and periodization in
referring to the concept of pause — one of punctuation’s primary functions as it has been
identified by those who have written about the subject, such as M. B. Parkes in Pause and
Effect. Much as Croce says of periodization, punctuation is a structural necessity, a
“silence with the sound.”
Or as Marshall Brown puts it, “Without categories — such as periods — there can be no
thought and no transcendence beyond mere fact toward understanding. Periods trouble our
quiet so as to bring history to life.” Summarizing their role in scholarly inquiry, he writes,
“We cannot rest statically in periods, but we cannot rest at all without them.”  In other
words, we need to periodize to order thought and make sense of history, but at the same
time, we need to resist periodizations. David Perkins claims periods are “necessary
fictions… . We require the concept of a unified period in order to deny it, and thus make
apparent the particularity, local difference, heterogeneity, fluctuation, discontinuity, and
strife that are now our preferred categories for understanding any moment of the past.”
After the insights and demands generated by poststructuralist and postmodernist thought
especially (whose very names, dependent upon prefixes, indicate a need to hold on to but
28
29
30
31

move beyond master categories), the unifying perspectives that periodization threatens to
impose become opportunities for counterreadings.
Fredric Jameson defends the importance of this kind of idea of periodization for the
“exceptions,” or what one might think of as the counternarratives, it helps locate.
(Adaptation., through its metanarrativity, must surely count as one of the most intricate
counternarratives — counter to dot-commania, as I have read it at least — of the early
2000s.) Jameson writes:
[T]o those who think that cultural periodization implies some massive
kinship and homogeneity or identity within a given period, it may
quickly be replied that it is surely only against a certain conception of
what is historically dominant or hegemonic that the full value of the
exception… can be assessed. Here, in any case, the “period” in
question is understood not as some omnipresent and uniform shared
style or way of thinking and acting, but rather as the sharing of a
common objective situation, to which a whole range of varied
responses and creative innovations is then possible, but always within
that situation’s structural limits.
The emergence of digital media is deeply embedded in a variety of interrelated categories
that have been used to describe periodizing shifts — whether in terms of philosophy or
cultural production (postmodernism), social order (network society, control society),
epistemologies of materiality (the information age), or technology (computer age), which
are echoed in higher education with the recent move toward an interdisciplinary “digital
humanities.”
In calling attention to digital media’s place in periodizing efforts, I am closely aligned
with a range of models that posit a historical tripartite structure whose terms, again, differ
depending on the overarching goals and contexts of such schema. For scholars of
textuality, from Vilém Flusser to N. Katherine Hayles, the major regimes that periodize
history are speech, writing, and computation.  This schema more or less also forms the
backdrop for Brian Rotman’s philosophical consideration of human subjectivity’s
increasingly distributed nature as computational media shift textual systems away from
their centuries-long emphasis on writing. Rotman situates the beginning of the end of the
“alphabet’s textual domination of Western culture” with the introduction of photographic
“new media” in the nineteenth century, which began to replace alphabetic representations
of information and ideas with visual ones. But, Rotman claims, “this dethroning of the
alphabetic text is now entering a new, more radical phase brought about by technologies of
the virtual and networked media whose effects go beyond the mere appropriation and
upstaging of alphabetic functionality. Not only does digital binary code extend the
alphabetic principle to its abstract limit — an alphabet of two letters, 0 and 1, whose
words spell out numbers — but the text itself has become an object manipulated within
computational protocols foreign to it.”
For Hayles and Rotman, then, this new textual situation is about much more than just
code. Indeed, it is not code that they are analyzing — it is more accurately a collection of
32
33
34

literary texts, critical theories, and historical and scientific discourses. In effect they urge
their readers to reckon with code as a form of textual unconscious in contemporary life.
What does it mean that the languages we encounter on computer screens undergo series of
mostly invisible translations in coded machine languages? How do knowledge and
experiences of this layered effect of machine translations — what Rotman would likely
call “ghost effects” — affect, to quote the title of Hayles’s recent book, “how we think”?
The stakes of this, according to Rotman, are huge. To vulgarly summarize a very
complicated argument, he suggests that alphabetic text and its accompanying possibility of
imagining disembodiment essentially invented God, and that the dismantling of alphabetic
text brought about by digital technologies will have profound consequences for Western
monotheism.
While Rotman and Hayles both offer important insights and provocations about human
subjectivity, cognition, literacy, education, mathematics, religion, and technology, what I
wish to emphasize by calling attention to their scholarship is in many ways a much more
basic and obvious component of their more elaborate theorizations. I believe that their
most important contributions are ambitious periodizing strategies, the significance of
which is only further supported by how wide ranging the spheres of thoughts they connect
are and how distributed the consequences of their analyses prove to be. They in effect
claim that digital media represent nothing less than a radically new phase in human
history, with new epistemological configurations, ideas of the self, formations and
relations of bodies, technological infrastructures of communication, and habits of living.
This is also of course the overarching conceptual periodization from which this book’s
notion of textual shift departs, and I mobilize it to make sense of the changed nature of
language systems, practices, and visual culture in the digital age. It allows us to ask what
set of qualities characterizes contemporary textuality. The case of the period, this chapter’s
starting point, demonstrates that as computing technologies have come to trump the
printed page as our primary medium of communication, textual protocol shifts.
One key factor that makes this trend possible and also characterizes it is textuality’s
increased mobility. By mobility I refer to a range of possible movements, only some of
which have been explored in this chapter. From text messages to e-mails, from computer
to computer, from one media form to another, from South America to Asia, textuality
moves across platforms and locales — in short, what I would refer to as contexts — with
increasing ease. With this, the range of functions that can be assigned to a given textual
inscription expands and is redefined by various users of technologies in different contexts.
At the heart of this new textual period is the networked computer, the technology that
makes language’s mobility possible. How might we interpret the fact that in this period,
the period itself seems to take over society’s visual iconography and infrastructural logic?
One way to understand the newfound significance of the period, and indeed of punctuation
more generally, is in this context of textual travel and mobility. It might be helpful to think
of an analogy. When a person travels, it is worth her while to pack for her destination
smartly. She does not want to take more baggage than she will need, but she also wants to
be prepared for the range of possible weather conditions and activities she might engage
35

in. Versatility and lightness are qualities to strive for. If textuality is traveling as well,
these same properties make punctuation marks attractive accessories to pack for the trip,
so to speak. Punctuation marks, smaller than letters and certainly smaller than words and
sentences, make communication efficient, because they are “lightweight” and can quickly
register a mood or tone, but at the same time in many ways they represent what we might
think of as floating signifiers, whose meanings and functions can be flexibly adapted for
various desired effects.
It is precisely this versatility and lightness that make the period, for example, fit to be
widely adapted throughout digital discourses and Internet protocol. Even though it has
historically been attached to specific functions in writing, at the same time it is on one
level only a dot, so basic and portable that it seems nearly impossible not to be
reappropriated. Moreover, when taken to a reasonable level of abstraction, the period’s
historical function has been syntactical clarity, and thus it makes sense that it continues to
hold on to this function in new ways and for new types of clarity, syntactical and
otherwise. These types of clarity include the syntactical, as in the case of the organization
of chains of movement in subdomain names and commands. But they also include
functions that could be said to offer periodizing clarity in cultural discourse, as in the
decimal point that marks the phases of the Web’s historical progression from 1.0 to 2.0.
Beyond such textual portability, the period’s specific periodizing capacities for the
digital should also be thought through in terms of its visual aesthetic — of smallness and
roundness — what Peter Sloterdijk might classify as a “microsphere” or bubble.  For
Sloterdijk, the sphere is a form that represents nothing short of the human condition, our
neuroses and our most important questions, from the mother’s womb to the planet Earth.
He calls for “spherology,” a mode of inquiry whose aim “is simply to retrace the
formations of shapes among simple immanences that appear in human (and extra-human)
systems of order — whether as organizations of archaic intimacy, as the spatial design of
primitive peoples, or as the theological-cosmological self-interpretation of traditional
empires.”  Though Sloterdijk does not discuss textuality, his formulation applies to this
context. If we take writing to be one of our most important “systems of order,” the period
would in Sloterdijk’s terms be the textual system’s microsphere par excellence. Moreover,
discourses about the “dot-com bubble” are provocative to imagine in this context: the term
is almost redundantly spherical, or perhaps concentrically circular, describing a round
enclosure in which cultural activity had its own set of rules and practices, which then burst
when pressures and energies from outside proved too strong.
Understanding the period as a microsphere draws it into an even wider context of
philosophical problems and intellectual history that might well help provide one final
explanation for its pervasiveness in the digital age. If, as so many critics have observed,
language has been reduced to zeros and ones, to what extent is the period a closed-in zero-
sphere, representing the ultimate reduction of language from complex expressions to two
digits to a single punctuation mark? Viewed from this perspective, the period represents
the end of one system of textuality, serving as its ultimate periodizing mark. Or, alternately
and perhaps even more provocatively, to what extent does the dot’s roundness stand in for
a larger sphere, a big world that is now connected, a world whose scale has irrevocably
36
37

changed and been reconceptualized beyond what other previous periods ever imagined
possible? To what extent does the dot compress the large, unwieldy global sphere — what
Timothy Morton might call a “hyperobject” — and make it manageable, small, almost
invisible?  In this sense the digital dot might be better viewed as paired not with zero but
with another equally pervasive sphere across the visual iconography of digital media —the
world. The period, a self-enclosed sphere, emerges as both a synecdoche for the world but
also a more manageable version of it, lending it order and clarity at a time when the globe
seems to be spiraling out of control — and when global warming, nuclear terrorism, and
other threats on an unforeseen scale seem to be threatening the end of the world, with a
finality that exceeds even Adaptation.’s crazy ending.
Figure 12. Microsphere/macrosphere conflation? Happy face planet on the cover of WIRED (July 1997)
38

Figure 13. Poster for Startup.com, a 2001 documentary about the rise and fall of a dot-com company, where the
period becomes a boulder, a suggestive graphic representation of dot-com anxieties

Dotting the I
We might observe that this chapter began with one “holy trinity” in which the period
belongs — alongside the other terminal punctuation marks, the question mark and the
exclamation mark — and ends with another, where the period stands between the small-
scale nothingness of the zero and the global sphere in which we are housed. The
discussion also began with reference to a historical decision about typewriter design in
1873, an example where the period was quite literally shifted to the side in technological
design, and I have ended it by drawing us in closer to today’s concerns, launching us into
the digital “period.”
For the sake of bringing this chapter full circle, then, but also perhaps refracting it and
even spinning it off in a new direction, I will close in not on zero or infinity, but on a
personal aside about my own process of typing this manuscript, which has been
accompanied by the added dimension of machine intelligence. In writing this chapter,
Microsoft Word’s autocorrect feature has continually capitalized words following dots I
write midsentence, assuming I intend to punctuate the sentence’s end with a period. In this
sense, the shift function has now been internalized. The computer automatically performs
this “correction” without responding to my own keyboard command, or lack thereof. Yet I
have in fact often intended to use the character as a noun (much as the language of the
RFCs did), or as part of a noun (as in the case of Adaptation.’s title), where in many cases,
after the punctuation, my sentence was supposed to continue flowing.
What does it mean that writing is now a battle — or I could be kinder and say
collaboration — with a machine? As I write, I not only have to be mindful of managing
what I mean and how I express myself, but I rely on Microsoft Word to fix my spelling
when I make a clumsy mistake, and I also have to watch out for the mistakes that it makes
on my behalf. To my mind, the benefits of its corrections and the drawbacks of its errors,
on one level, like the narrative loopholes of Adaptation., cancel each other out. The effect
of this, thus, is not so much that machine intelligence makes one’s writing qualitatively
better, but it makes writing itself a more layered process, with a built-in system of checks
and balances between the human and the machine. The nature of this system and its
distinctions from prior systems of writing will, as we are drawn deeper into computer age,
need to be more sufficiently taken into consideration. One site where this will be
especially important is in writing instruction. How will we cultivate in students the
common sense, skills, and vigilance required to know when we are right and artificial
intelligence wrong? Applying N. Katherine Hayles’s elucidation of three different reading
strategies — close reading, hyper reading, and machine reading, to be used in conjunction
with each other — seems like a promising direction forward.  But adopting such
strategies on a base level and refining different forms of writing and reading habits will
certainly pose ongoing pedagogical questions, which will be scholars’ and teachers’
responsibilities to tackle as our writing technologies and habits evolve.
39

2
Within, Aside, and Too Much
On Parentheticality across Media
The previous chapter delineates the period’s ubiquity across the visual culture of digital
media, arguing that it serves as a periodizing tool for digital culture in general but that its
shifting roles also serve as periodizing tools for specific phases of the Internet’s history.
This chapter similarly takes a single punctuation mark, the parenthesis, as a reading lens to
think through the broader textual shift associated with the emergence of digital media and
its visual culture. As we will see, the parenthesis presents continuities that bolster the
book’s broader inquiry into the cultural logic of punctuation in the computer age. Like the
period, following the parenthesis allows one to trace a parallel paradoxical visual ubiquity
but cognitive neglect of punctuation. Yet it also presents noteworthy differences that draw
attention to the specificity of the mark and the ideas it gives rise to, which in turn brings
the specificity of the period into sharper focus at the same time. Indeed, the parenthesis
inscribes a particular logic that is all its own, found in distinct aesthetic, epistemological,
and media contexts. If the period is more tied to a corporate, global aesthetic of digital
media’s innovation ideologies and postindustrial capitalism, exemplary of what Alan Liu
refers to as “information cool,” the parenthesis, by contrast, is more apposite to what could
be identified as a relative warmth — offering a textual hug — and a logic of alternativity.
Yet this is not to say that parentheses are only found in the margins of culture or are
exempt from information cool. On the contrary, parenthetical symbols are largely
continuous with the aesthetic. Though we might not think about them much, they are
everywhere throughout contemporary media cultures. Think of the smiles and frowns of
emoticons, the iconography used for volume control on iPods and MacBooks, the
“(RED)” stamp affixed to commercial products that donate money to fight AIDS in
Africa, the presentation of “texts from last night” on the amusing website of the same
name by area codes in parentheses, and even the laurels that on a film’s poster announce
its placement and prizes awarded in prestigious festivals. With the proliferation of
information about media, too, certain secondary types of details are generally contained by
parentheses, such as a movie’s running time or rating, the name of a guest musical artist
featured on a pop track, or a book’s publication information in scholarly citations.
Parentheses would seem to be in the most obvious sense of the term floating signifiers,
helping to both manage and complicate information, alternately evoking an air of
distinction, an independent quirk, the banal, or the cute, along with the gimmicky
aesthetics that sometimes accompany these features at the same time, a paradoxical set of
qualities perhaps best illustrated by their use in intertitles throughout the stylized romantic
comedy (500) Days of Summer (directed by Marc Webb, U.S., 2009) to alert us to the
film’s disjointed presentation of different days of its protagonists’ (non)relationship.
1

Figure 14. One of many parenthesized intertitles structuring the disjointed narrative of (500) Days of Summer
It was not until 2012 that a Google search for a parenthetical mark began to retrieve
results for it, and still as of this writing in 2014, somewhat curiously, the top site a search
for a single parenthetical mark currently leads one to is Wikipedia’s entry for “bracket.”
This years-long failure to retrieve offers an instructive lesson about what we might think
of as the parenthetical’s null value, which is perhaps even more effectively illustrated by
the frequent scripting of empty parentheses in computer code that many everyday
programmers widely perceive as perplexingly useless. Attending to the parenthesis
activates movement toward moments beyond the text and drives that have been contained.
Such attention also gestures toward a set of questions the parenthetical raises that are
particularly related to “new media,” a category this chapter in particular will consider and
problematize.
Scanning the areas where the parenthesis leads our thought, this chapter employs a
mode of critical reading that shuttles between the literal and the figurative (the parenthesis
and the “parenthetical”), accounting for epistemological and aesthetic interactions among
language, the moving image, and theory in our current moment. In part this reading
demonstrates, if in a necessarily aleatory manner, that parentheses have grown in cultural
significance, appearing as mechanisms that signal the undecidability, hubris, and
materiality of the textual condition. The parenthetical in this sense delineates a conceptual
genealogy of postmodernist aesthetics that connects not only issues of writing and
language but also of deconstruction, contingency, authority, sound, humor, cultural
anxieties, sexuality, narrative, and independent modes of creative production and
distribution.
The parenthesis in particular frames that which is set aside within the logic of a given
textual protocol, perceived to be too much to handle yet too important to delete. Pursuit of
this punctuation mark and the particular cluster of characteristics it represents forges
valuable critical space within which we can think through the definitions of new media
and especially the roles of theory and analysis in relation to them. The parenthesis — an
inscription that separates insides and outsides and that calls into question the boundaries

between them — moves between digital and nondigital, new and not new, and ultimately
helps to trouble and shift the distinctions we make in defining and desiring these
categories.

Derrida and Deconstruction: The Paren(t’s) Thesis?
Vladimir Nabokov’s Lolita is, depending on the edition, usually at least 300 pages long. In
an essay examining the significance of the book’s parentheses, Duncan White writes that
Lolita “is certainly a haven for charged punctuation and more specifically a novel that
teems with parentheses: there are a staggering 450 bracketed-parentheses in the novel (that
is, opposed to rhetorical asides, apostrophes, and other rhetorical parentheses contained
between dashes or commas). This abundance intrigues.”  By contrast, consider Derrida’s
“Signature Event Context.”  By my count, this twenty-one-page essay contains 191
bracketed-parentheses. “Signature Event Context” is, by the most generous estimate, no
more than one-tenth the length of Lolita, and it features almost half as many parentheses.
If Nabokov’s use of parentheses is “staggering,” how does one begin to qualify Derrida’s?
No doubt, such a comparison must be taken with a grain of salt; certainly fiction and
theory are very different kinds of writing. However, these figures provocatively suggest
that, if one can attend to closely reading Nabokov’s parentheses, one way to begin tackling
how to read Derrida’s difficult writing might be situated in considering the significance —
indeed, the necessity — of his reliance on parenthetical form. Probing this issue also
stands to offer some insight into practices of critical theory within academic culture, which
have themselves inherited parenthetical affectation to a “staggering” degree. This
inheritance undoubtedly owes a great deal to Derrida’s legacy, writing style, and
philosophy.
Many of Derrida’s parentheses in “Signature Event Context” do not take on the form of
general asides or clarifications, although most do. Many take on the form of enumeration
(a parenthesis following a number in a list), many are translations, some are parentheses
within parentheses (designated by brackets), and a few are page references. Some are
signed clarifications or remarks, such as the parenthetical signature that closes the essay,
and some reflexively call attention to their own parenthetical nature, as in this passage:
It seems self-evident that the ambiguous field of the word
“communication” can be massively reduced by the limits of what is
called a context (and I give notice, again parenthetically, that this
particular communication will be concerned with the problem of
context and with the question of determining exactly how writing
relates to context in general).
The fact that Derrida is writing about writing — and in sections such as this,
parenthesizing about parentheses — registers his deliberate grammatical style. In
Derrida’s characteristically performative mode, the reflexive parenthetical of the above
passage seems to help answer our question regarding the significance of Derrida’s reliance
on the parenthetical.
If, as Derrida directs us in the parentheses, the ambiguity of “communication” is tied up
in the matter of “determining exactly how writing relates to context,” then parenthetical
form seems to be a textual metonym that foregrounds the difficulty in thinking through
writing’s riddled relationship to context. By this I mean to say that the parenthetical is a
2
3
4

form that, within written text itself, invites one to question how writing relates to context,
since it sets apart, disrupts, or postpones the space of the “primary” writing. It seems safe
to say that part of the reason parentheses are important for Derrida is that they displace.
They displace the flow and authority of the nonparenthetical.
This sort of parenthetical displacement is critical to Derrida’s project of deconstruction,
as he describes it in this essay. He writes,
Deconstruction does not consist in moving from one concept to
another, but in reversing and displacing a conceptual order as well as
the nonconceptual order with which it is articulated. For example,
writing, as a classical concept, entails predicates that have been
subordinated, excluded, or held in abeyance by forces and according
to necessities to be analyzed. It is those predicates (I have recalled
several of them) whose force of generality, generalization, and
generativity is liberated, grafted onto a “new” concept of writing that
corresponds as well to what has always resisted the prior organization
of forces, always constituted the residue irreducible to the dominant
force organizing the hierarchy that we may refer to, in brief, as
logocentric.
In this passage, Derrida writes about the importance of working —or, more specifically,
writing — within the conceptual order, but of simultaneously “displacing” it from within.
This act of conformity and nonconformity, of reversal and displacement, is central to
Derrida’s performance and theorization of language. Following this passage, which comes
at the end of the essay, he goes on to suggest that in referring to his own work as
“writing,” he has engaged in this very act of reversal and displacement with writing itself.
While there is always meaning in writing, there is also always a field of forces in which
writing generates more than meaning; writing is, in Derrida’s language, “non-saturated”
(“generality, generalization, and generativity” — the generation of the “genera-” in his
phrase is a continuing expansion and mutation of language, signaling the precariousness of
generalization, which slipperily turns on itself — as a generative act of production and as
a generalizing act of category-covering, of contextualizing in a broader sense).
In Derrida’s spirit, then, parentheticality can name a philosophical concept that borrows
a typographical metaphor to strain upon the limits of non-saturation, as a way to explore
how language, grammar, and displacement might apply to figuring activity in the cultural
realm. Parenthesis, in Greek, means “to place in beside.” What, in culture — in our lived
practices and relations — is placed in beside? The use of parentheses brings to mind
subordination and displacement in discourse, as by definition, they can, but need not,
displace grammatical order. Historically, too, attention to them seems to be best
characterized by subordination. Theodor Adorno, in his essay on punctuation,
contemptuously issues a caveat against their use: “The test of a writer’s sensitivity in
punctuating is the way he handles parenthetical material. The cautious writer will tend to
place that material between dashes and not in round brackets… , for brackets take the
parenthesis completely out of the sentence, creating enclaves, as it were, whereas nothing
5
6

in good prose should be unnecessary to the overall structure. By admitting such
superfluousness, brackets implicitly renounce the claim to the integrity of the linguistic
form and capitulate to pedantic philistinism.” He proceeds to liken the use of parentheses
to “shutting” language “up in a prison.”
Figure 15. Parenthetical proliferation: a photograph of four pages of Derrida’s “Signature Event Context” side by
side, with text whited out and just parentheses highlighted
In another essay examining rhetoric about parentheses, mostly in literary handbooks,
Robert Grant Williams observes that “the parenthesis exemplifies the marginalization of
certain figures —particularly schemes — since not only has little been said about the
parenthesis, but what has been said… sounds strikingly denigrating and dismissive. From
the Renaissance to the present, value judgments have obfuscated the ways in which the
parenthesis generates meaning, and often have wheedled themselves into definitions of
this figure.”
Consider two examples from recent cinema and film criticism. At the end of Roger
Ebert’s four-star review of (500) Days of Summer, he includes a “note” to his readers:
“The movie’s poster insists the title is ‘(500) Days of Summer.’ Led by Variety, every
single film critic whose review I could find has simply ignored that punctuation. Good for
them.”  Or, in a pivotal scene from another of 2009’s most critically acclaimed films, Up
7
8
9

in the Air, Ryan (George Clooney) discovers that Alex (Vera Farmiga), with whom he has
been having an affair, has a family she did not tell him about. Immediately afterward we
see Ryan (figure 16), looking down and riding in a train, receive a mobile call from Alex,
inside a parked car. She says, “I thought our relationship was perfectly clear. You are an
escape, you’re a break from our normal lives. You’re a parenthesis.” Ryan responds, “I’m
a parenthesis.” Alex: “I mean, what do you want? Tell me what you want.” The sequence
cuts to Ryan, forlorn, unable to speak. We return to Alex: “You don’t even know what you
want.” She goes on, while Ryan, holding back tears and unable to say more, hangs up in
silence. In a film widely praised for its screenplay, this is one of the most cited scenes,
referred to in various commentaries as the “parenthesis scene.” Joseph Natoli reads it as
containing the movie’s moral: “One way of looking at the movie — call it the
‘constructive’ way — is to think that Bingham learns in the course of the movie that when
you avoid the serious in life no one makes you a serious part of their life. You become as
Alex, a woman he assumes is as totally an air borne wanderer as himself, no more than a
parenthesis in another’s life.”  The parenthesis, in other words, is a metaphor for the
metaphor of the film’s title and theme: being “up in the air,” living lives increasingly in
transit and online, connected but disconnected. Whether or not we find the scene as
heartbreaking as we are supposed to, there is no question that Farmiga’s comment is a
devastating blow for Clooney, signaling the slightness of his place in her life.
We might bring such popular perceptions into contact with theoretical arguments for the
productivity of studying marginalization and think about what Williams identifies as the
parenthesis’s “marginalization”; we might, in effect, read the parenthesis into intellectual
histories. Foucault writes, for example, “Silence itself —the things one declines to say, or
is forbidden to name, the discretion that is required between different speakers — is less
the absolute limit of discourse, the other side from which it is separated by a strict
boundary, than an element that functions alongside the things said, with them and in
relation to them within overall strategies. There is no binary division to be made between
what one says and what one does not say; we must try to determine the different ways of
not saying such things.”  Foucault’s stress on the different ways in which silence operates
“alongside” and “within” nonsilences, and its not operating in terms of strict separations
and boundaries resonates in the context of a consideration of the parenthetical, as curved
lines whose very shape resists rigid, linear boundaries, and as a punctuational structure
that brings into flux the boundaries between saying and not saying things.
10
11

Figure 16. George Clooney as Ryan Bingham in Up in the Air’s “parenthesis scene”
To invoke a common example of this latter point, observe whether when a speaker reads
passages of texts aloud, the reader chooses to articulate parenthetical text or to skip over it.
She or he often pauses briefly and seems uncertain as to whether or not to read it.
Regardless of whether it is spoken, most of us following along likely read the
parenthetical text. Why is it that we read the parenthetical but only sometimes speak it?
This uncertainty indicates that parenthetical text is an intriguing case for thinking about
the ways we imagine the relationships that exist between silence, (declining) speech,
writing, reading, and their dynamic discursive fields.
Within parentheses, the writer can get away with writing what he might not otherwise
be able to write outside of them (a joke, a value judgment). Writers can use them to write
something that crucially clarifies what they might not have felt was appropriate to explain
outside of them. Writers can use them to displace not only grammar but also their tone of
address. Finally, it seems that in parenthetical space, the writer is also allowed to convey
herself as a noncohesive subject. In readings throughout the Nietzschean genealogy of
cultural theory through Foucault and Derrida, one can observe the importance of this
writing strategy, which one might trace back to the incertitude and reflexivity of
Nietzsche’s own writing, in which the text’s author engages in conversation with himself,
doubting the authority or coherence of what the writer just wrote. Nietzsche writes in
Genealogy of Morals, for example, “Am I understood? . . . Have I been understood?
. . . ‘Not at all my dear sir!’ — Then let us start again from the beginning.”  He then
proceeds to start his essay over again. While this text is not physically in parentheses, one
might certainly understand it as interrupting the text and its movement in a parenthetical
manner. In fact, one might make sense of much of a work such as Genealogy of Morals by
applying the notion of parentheticality to it, as the text hovers between different tones and
voices, without always distinguishing them from one another grammatically.
Parentheticality does not occur only in written texts; its recessive generativity offers a
framework for moving beyond the text and thinking through other, nontypographical
things that circle in its conceptual orbit: comedy, sexuality, narrative form, affective cues,
value relations, cultural hierarchies, and taboos. In the next two sections of this chapter, I
turn to two primary examples from audiovisual media in American culture: the sitcom
12

laugh track and the film Me and You and Everyone We Know. In divergent ways, both
cases seem apposite to the concept of parentheticality in literal, textual, and cultural senses
of the term. Even though typography figures in both cases, there is no reason why
parentheticality needs to draw upon written parentheses; here they add texture to thinking
about the concept’s dynamics.

(Laugh track.): Parenthetical Anxieties
How, then, might the logic of parentheticality take shape as a cultural form? Its logic is
particularly resonant in the intersection of comedy and sound: the parenthesis as a
structure, as we have observed, is especially suggestive of the relationship between sound
and silence; and on top of this, the parenthetical is a textual site where a joke can take
place, where the text is able to laugh at its own discourse and puncture its own
seriousness. For these reasons, the televisual laugh track could be understood to be an
exemplary manifestation of parenthetical cultural logic.
When asked by a BBC reporter to compare deconstructionist philosophy to Seinfeld,
Derrida, seemingly taken off guard and unfamiliar with the series, responded,
“Deconstruction in the way I understand it doesn’t produce any sitcom. And if sitcom is
this, and people who watch this think that deconstruction is this, the only advice I have to
give them is just read, stop watching sitcom and try and do your homework and read.”
While his response implies that popular television was outside his field of interest and not
of significance to understanding his philosophy, in this quick dismissal, Derrida might
have given the endless openness of his philosophy more credit. The ideas we have just
revisited and developed in relation to the parenthetical resonate particularly when we
pause to take the laugh track seriously. Moreover, the cultural anxieties the track registers
open up a line of thought upon which we can consider the status of new media and its
relation to the parenthetical — itself offering a parenthesis of sorts within this book’s
broader focus on the digital.
There is a volume of television criticism, The Show and Tell Machine, written by Rose
Goldsen, that speaks to the laugh track’s stigmatization in popular culture. In her brief
chapter on the laugh track, Goldsen goes into great detail about how the laff box works.
She explains how it is played like an organ, that it can make almost an infinite number of
different laughing sounds, and that it requires high-level skill to operate. She then writes
about the laugh track in animated series:
The laugh track is built into the factory-made animations no less than
the shows performed by live-on-film actors performing before live-on-
film audiences. Bugs Bunny engages in his usual antics with Elmer
Fudd. (Laugh track.) An animated doctor car pours medicine into the
carburetor of an animated car that is ill. (Laugh track.) A bumbling
Great Dane is chased by a caveman. (Laugh track.) The Addams
Family enters a baking contest and uses alligator eggs to make the
batter. (Laugh track.) Pebbles and Bamm Bamm are chased by a
weird-looking prehistoric creature. (Laugh track.)
Goldsen describes various scenes of animated gags. Then, after each sentence, “laugh
track” gets its own grammatically incomplete, parenthetical sentence. The words are
repeated identically each time, even though she acknowledges in the same pages that the
possible sounds it can generate are nearly infinite. In other words, she never writes,
“(Guffaws.)” or “(Explosion of whoopers.),”  only “(Laugh track.).” This writing of the
laugh track seems to reflect how we imagine the track parenthetically — invariably,
13
14
15

grammatically separate, an aside.
Goldsen’s literal parentheses bring to mind a more figurative parentheticality that helps
make sense both of the laugh track’s sonic suturing into the rhythm of the sitcom and of its
place in cultural consciousness more generally. The sound of prerecorded laughter, coming
from the position of the audience — structured into the soundtrack of the television
program — interrupts or displaces the principal flow of the program. But at the same time,
its very interruption becomes integral to a show’s flow, in a manner similar to the function
of a parenthetical in a written sentence. In this spirit, Rick Altman has referred to the
laugh track in passing as an “audience within the spectacle.”  Indeed, the idea of the
parenthetical as a form that allows for the shifting of the cohesion of the articulator within
the articulated is very much in line with Altman’s characterization of the laugh track —
and with Derrida’s theory of writing, as well.
One of the most notable opponents of the track was Larry Gelbart, M*A*S*H’s creator
and writer. Gelbart adamantly protested the track’s deployment in the series with CBS
network executives, who wanted to use it consistently throughout the show. CBS
eventually decided to compromise and agreed to keep it out of scenes that took place in
the operating room, but they insisted that it be engineered into all other scenes.
Gelbart’s M*A*S*H production files contain a manuscript written by him in pencil,
which reads:
Gene [Reynolds] and I fought two of life’s unnatural forces, the
network and the studios, for the right to deal with bolder subjects than
they were inclined to allow. We wanted to explore the effects of
violence, examine pro-war attitudes, adultery, pain and death,
impotence, homosexuality, race relations, a never-ending list of topics
not generally considered subject for comedy.
Most of those battles we won (as our ratings climbed, network
resistance fell). Our most notable loss was on the matter of the laugh
track. that insidiious practise, They CBS would never let us do away
with it no matter what other compromises they were willing to make.
So there it is, on almost every episode, a machine reacting a recording
of recorded reaction to every funny line, a good many people
guffawing at material they never heard, a good many of them long
dead. The only thing I ever learned from the track was that while I
can’t be sure of life, we all have a chance at a laugh after death.
Except for that, we achieved a creative freedom that is unheard of in
the medium. We needed as much as we could get, for there was an
ongoing restlessness about trying different ways to dramatize our
material.
Gelbart’s own cross-outs in his description of the laugh track (not unlike Goldsen’s writing
of the track) can be taken as symptomatic of its aside-ness in cultural discourse. Moreover,
these notes take on an even more striking position of parentheticality in the context of
16
17
18

their relationship to their own transfer to publication. The specifics of this history were not
deemed necessary enough to tell M*A*S*H’s “complete” history, as it is excluded from
Suzy Kalter’s quotations of Gelbart’s words in the essay “The Making of M*A*S*H,”
which she includes in her The Complete Book of M*A*S*H. What she attributes to Gelbart
in the essay instead is the following:
“The network was not anti about our being anti-war. They were
antiheavy and antiserious,” Larry Gelbart says. “Most of our battles
with them stemmed from the fact that we wanted to veer so far from
what was considered half-hour comedy. They called us up periodically
to have it out with us. While the cast and crew were out at the Fox
Ranch fighting the elements, Gene and I fought two of the most
unnatural forces in the world — the network and the studio — for the
right to deal with bolder and more serious subjects than they were
inclined to allow, like the effects of violence, adultery, amputation,
derangement, impotence, homosexuality, transvestism, and interracial
marriage. Most of the battles with Army brass on the screen came out
of our battles with the network.”
Read in juxtaposition to Gelbart’s note in the original manuscript about the laugh track
being their “most notable” lost battle with the network, his reference in the published
material to wanting to break free from conventions of half-hour sitcom is clearly primarily
about the laugh track. It is quite telling that the very documentation of this debate is left
unarticulated in the official version of his words. The laugh track’s omission here
resonates with its underregarded status in popular culture and, for media scholars, also
with its largely overlooked position as an object of media studies.
Historically, the deployment of the track and its reception have been bound up with
anxieties that might be characterized, and made sense of, by the track’s being haunted by
the sounds of possibly dead people laughing. As Gelbart’s notes suggest, it seems that
these anxieties (among others) are closely connected to the ways in which we tend to
overlook and disdain its presence in sitcoms. The presence or absence of the laugh track in
a TV series often becomes an inverse marker of how publics perceive the show’s quality.
This is increasingly an especially popular and accepted opinion today, as many
contemporary, critically acclaimed comedies — The Simpsons, Arrested Development, and
The Office, to name a few — do not deploy the track. This more social and historical
characteristic of the laugh track, too, seems capable of benefiting from a conceptualization
of parentheticality: recall Robert Williams’s observation that the “parenthesis exemplifies
the marginalization of certain figures.”
Indeed, the laugh track seems to mark American cultural imagination as something that
is best forgotten and ignored: in a Derridean sense, as a sort of structured absence, as a
parenthetical. In one of the only published historical analyses of recorded laughter, Jacob
Smith writes, “the laugh has been presented as the ultimate expression of the human, and
its mechanical reproduction serves as a lightning rod for anxieties concerning authenticity
and the social dimensions of mass media consumption.”  To extend Smith’s convincing
19
20
21
22

and researched argument, I would propose that the laugh track likely becomes worth
overlooking discursively as a means of managing the anxieties that it induces and reveals.
These are fundamentally about sonic nonsaturation and the uncertainty of context — the
possibility, for example, of hearing a long-disassembled audience’s laughter recorded at a
Red Skelton Show pantomime skit, worked into the rhythm of Americans fumbling
through the Korean War (by a sound engineer in a Fox studio in the 1970s), and then heard
in a rerun syndicated for your home entertainment in the twenty-first century.  On DVD,
viewers have the option of turning M*A*S*H’s laugh track off entirely, adding a new
dimension to the unresolved debates and anxieties indexed by these documents’
parentheses, cross-outs, and neglected words.
In other words, by dint of its status as recorded and reusable, fixed and moving, the
laugh track’s temporality extends indefinitely, much like Derrida’s theorization of
writing’s ontology. Here, this case study of the laugh track’s parentheticality stands to
offer perspective on and pose questions about our conceptualizations of “new media.” The
laugh track represents the embedding of the old in the new. The uncanny, parenthetical
presence of the old in the new, of the human in the machine, inscribed by television’s
prerecorded laughter, represents a structural possibility of temporal layering found across
all media texts and forms, which Derrida reminds us is ontologically part of every
inscription. A logical extension of this claim is that the “new” of “new media” is
necessarily relative. All media are at once new and old, depending upon our vantage point
— a valuable lesson many scholars have suggested in recent work, perhaps most
compellingly by Lisa Gitelman in her comparative framing of Edison’s nineteenth-century
phonographs and the history of Arpanet in the twentieth century as new media.  This is
not, importantly, to dismiss “new” as a categorical marker: debates about the laugh track’s
use in M*A*S*H in fact prompt us to move toward a potentially useful, relational
understanding of “new media” in which the new incorporates the old, rendering it
parenthetical: staying there, but on the side, making us uneasy.
23
24

))<>((: Inside Out and Back and Forth
If the laugh track’s parentheticality foregrounds the necessarily relative and vexed
temporality of the new, I will now explore another multilayered reading of the concept that
turns it inside out, while foregrounding digital iconography. Miranda July’s film Me and
You and Everyone We Know (2005) seems to articulate, and to be articulated by, a variety
of parenthetical forms and qualities.
An appropriate transition from M*A*S*H’s laugh-track optional DVD feature and entry
into this discussion might be found not in the final film itself but in looking at the deleted
scenes on its DVD. Each of these scenes that has been deleted from the film, but which
parenthetically remain in the movie’s digital packaging — as “special features” for the
viewer to watch at his or her discretion —stars children. In one, Peter (Miles Thompson)
scolds his brother, Robby (Brandon Ratcliff), for pooping outside, and he goes into great
detail recounting stories about the dangers of human poop in the animal environment. In
another, Sylvie (Carlie Westerman) shows her parents one of her dolls, and they tell her
that the doll looks like it will grow up to be a prostitute. A third, titled “Lesbian Mom,”
shows three girls making believe they are family in a schoolyard, and Sylvie grows jealous
of the other white girl’s claim to be the black girl’s mother, so they decide that they are
lesbian mothers, but Sylvie whispers to the black girl that she is the mother who gave birth
to her. It is quite suggestive that these scenes are each in different ways exploring
children’s worlds and their (il)logics, and exploring how they play out in relation to, and
especially prior to, socialization. These might be read as being “too much” for the film to
handle — be it because of their treatment of two difficult social issues at once (race and
homosexuality), or because Sylvie’s parents are depicted too negatively and the film
ultimately aims to depict its characters in a less indicting fashion. The film itself, though,
very effectively (in my opinion) works through what is “too much” and how to make it not
too much. In this sense, the film is exploring a Derridean sort of parentheticality: how to
expand what is articulated within a given context, how to displace conceptual order, and
how this, through “writing,” creates “new” writing.
Moreover, the writing that takes place with “new,” digital media is central to the film’s
themes. One of the film’s memorable subplots involves an agrammatical use of
parentheses, which become windows into the film’s open-minded treatment of the ways in
which human — particularly childhood — interactions and relationships are inflected by
digitally mediated cultural practices and psychologies in contemporary society.
Two of the film’s young characters, Peter and Robby, seem to spend most of their free
time being socialized into the world on their shared computer. In one scene, they sit in
their bedroom, enter a chat room online, and talk to an anonymous user. Peter is
suspicious that the user is not really a woman, since, he asserts, people always go into chat
rooms and pretend to be people they are not. They ask her about her “bosom,” which Peter
mispronounces in explaining to Robby. Robby, the younger of the two, then suggests they
write to her that their Internet personage wants to “poop back and forth”: that he will poop
into her butthole, that she will poop it back into his, and that this will proceed “back and
forth. Forever.” The woman they chat to is intrigued, to Peter’s surprise. A few scenes

later in the film, we see Robby on a public computer, presumably in a school library, and
he is instant messaging with the woman again. She writes to him that she has “been
thinking about the ‘back and forth.’ ” The chat proceeds:
Untitled: Do you remember what you said the last time?
NightWarrior: I [Robby cuts and pastes “remember” from Untitled’s message] remember. The poop.
Untitled: Yes, the poop.
Untitled: It makes me want to touch myself.
Untitled: Is that very bad?
NightWarrior: Maybeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
Untitled: Sounds like you’re excited too.
Untitled: I am touching my “bosoms.” What are you doing?
NightWarrior: I am drawing
Untitled: OK… Drawing what?
[Robby looks at a sketch he made of pooping back and forth at the beginning of the conversation.]
NightWarrior: ))<>((
Untitled: Huh?
NightWarrior: Back and forth.
Untitled: I get it. When can we meet?
NightWarrior’s parenthetical expression goes on to do some traveling.
We discover that the untitled woman turns out to be the art gallery curator, Nancy
Herrington (Tracy Wright), whom Christine Jesperson (Miranda July) has been trying to
contact to review her artwork. On the poster for Herrington’s multimedia digital art
exhibition at the end of the film, we see “))<>((” reprinted as the exhibition’s tagline,
thereby serving as a ;-) to the spectator, since the only characters in the film that would
recognize the expression would be Peter and Robby, who are not at the gallery.
Figure 17. Chat screen in Me and You and Everyone We Know

Figure 18. Publicity poster for Miranda July’s Me and You and Everyone We Know (2005)
“))<>((,” followed by the word “forever,” was also essentially the film’s own tagline. It
is featured in one of the film’s two primary publicity posters — the text in large font
stands alone as the poster’s only image — and in the film’s T-shirts. An uncredited
website, backandforthforever.com, has twenty screens one can move through (back and
forth), which contain images of Miranda July–like messages written on a static television
screen and three photos of a large banner with the expression “))<>((” hanging and held
up in public spaces. Given the expression’s origin, its reappearance in these various
diegetic and nondiegetic contexts helps drive home the film’s themes of connection and
loneliness in our ubiquitously digital era. Moreover, it also drives home the film’s
suggestion that the art show within the film parallels the film itself: July, a performance
artist — who plays a performance artist in the film — in effect opens an internal
parenthesis. Both the film and the exhibition depicted within it are exploring these themes,
and the very double-mediation of these again foregrounds the same themes of
contemporary communication and awkward technologically mediated human connections
that “))<>((” evokes. (Recall Derrida’s parenthetical comment about communication and
the question of context. Here, the parenthetical expression’s serial regression might be
taken as exemplifying Derrida’s outline of the problematic of the parameters of
contextualizing. )
25

As one of the film’s most memorable exchanges, this nongrammatical use of
parentheses to stand in for the butt, and more generally the nongrammatical use of
parentheses and other punctuation marks in instant-message communication, is a case
where punctuation is not used for what it means but for what it looks like. Rather than
being used grammatically, it becomes useful for creating expressive imagery, such as
emoticons. New-media practices such as text and instant messaging thereby reappropriate
grammar’s textuality, typographically inflecting culture — as opposed to the way the
laugh track might inflect cultural imaginations in a more grammatical manner. (I would
point out, though, that both the laugh track and the emoticon are affective cues: imagine a
flashing smiley face punctuating a sitcom, telling us to laugh.) Me and You and Everyone
We Know intelligently captures the strange, imaginative impact such new processes
harness upon our everyday lives and psychologies.
Significantly, the reappropriation of parentheses originates in the film with a six-year-
old’s communication to an adult. In an interview July conducted when Me and You’s
production was in progress, she explained, “I’m trying to figure out how to have a
romance between an adult and a child that isn’t offensive, that somehow gets it. Because it
is something that exists in the world, even though we can’t deal with it. It’s almost a
symbol of what we’re not getting to have because of fear and systems based on fear.”
Perhaps it is not completely arbitrary that Lolita, the most exemplary child-adult love
narrative, also “teems” with parentheses. The hesitant, displaced space and tone of the
parenthetical might prove useful to narratives that explore sexual encounters between
children and adults, to help “reverse” and “displace” the “conceptual order” that
determines what is sexually acceptable. If one were to pursue this Derridean reading, one
might read the very inversion of parentheses in Me and You as a gesture to make the
uncomfortable more comfortable, much as July attempts to do in general with her
nonjudgmental and genuinely curious treatment of children’s sexuality. Indeed, when the
parentheses are turned inside out, we are dealing with what we cannot deal with (and
likely laughing about it, too, not least of all because punctuation marks representing poop
are between them and outside them at the same time).
It seems, then, that one could read the film’s parentheticality in a figurative sense of the
concept as well, on both narrative and cultural registers. In her Los Angeles Times review
of the film, Carina Chocano writes, “Miranda July’s gorgeously loopy Me and You and
Everyone We Know is made up of… nonsequiturs that make perfect sense, banal images
that turn transcendent on a dime, casual exchanges that seem to encompass the entirety of
human relationships.” (Is the parenthesis not a loopy nonsequitur?) Chocano goes on,
“July takes a world in which everything ugly is a distinct and lurking possibility —
rejection, stagnation, lack of money, sex between adults and teenagers, virtual coprophilia,
your true love dumping you because she’s dying — and turns it into an oddball love
song.”  One might read the film’s narrative as a series of parentheticals — a series of
asides that depict sexually curious, childishly innocent, and seemingly inessential parts of
its characters’ lives.
These sorts of encounters do not generally make up the dominant fabric of plots in
26
27

American cinema, whose narratives tend to be limited by — or tightly and economically
woven around, depending upon one’s point of view — sets of conventions that reiterate
particular unions of romantic relationships between characters, as much film scholarship
stemming from Laura Mulvey’s observations in “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema”
has critically analyzed over the past forty years.  To apply Foucault’s phrase for rules
governing representations of sexuality, we might understand the film as “putting” the
cultural and sexual parenthetical “into discourse.” Outlining his work in History of
Sexuality, he writes, “What is at issue, briefly, is the over-all ‘discursive fact,’ the way in
which sex is ‘put into discourse.’ Hence, too, my main concern will be to locate the forms
of power, the channels it takes, and the discourses it permeates in order to reach the most
tenuous and individual modes of behavior, the paths that give it access to the rare or
scarcely perceivable forms of desire, how it penetrates and controls everyday pleasure.”
With several plotlines about these various parenthetical social practices and states,
particularly the frequent interspersing of children’s explorations of sexuality throughout
the narrative of a romantic comedy presumably motivated by the reconciliation of an adult
man and woman, the film in effect relies on these practices’ parentheticalities (their
marginalized/set-aside statuses) in order to bring their very parentheticality to the fore, and
to demonstrate — in tandem with Foucault’s theory of the history of sexuality — that their
liminal positions are perceived as deviant only in specifically constituted social and
historical contexts. These contexts include codes that regulate the conventions of classical
Hollywood storytelling, which have ideologically and considerably carried over into
postclassical American cinema. Along these lines, an IMDb user attends to the movie’s
dynamic narrative silences and perceptively observes, “The movie is notable for what isn’t
in it — both malice and pain are almost absent. Removing malice — July’s world is one in
which a kid can safely walk alone through some seedy parts of Los Angeles — is
unfashionable, brave and, given the gentle tone of the piece, necessary. But the absence of
pain isn’t intentional: July would like us to feel the loneliness of the characters.”
In this way, then, one can understand the film’s parenthetical inversion in the expression
“))<>((” as representative of the film’s narrative parentheticality in a more general sense,
in that the film consists almost entirely of parenthetical content, diegetically inverting the
very rule of the parenthetical: that it is set aside from, but within, dominant discourse. In
other words, in Me and You and Everyone We Know, the parenthetical becomes the
dominant, so that a map of the film’s plot looks like:
X(a)X(b)(c)(d)(a)X(d)X(b2)X(a)(d2)X(b)(a)X(c)X(b)X(a)X(d2)
(a)X(a).
“X” represents strands of the narrative that revolve around Christine and Richard
Swersey’s ( John Hawkes) coming together as a romantic couple, and the parenthetical
letters represent the various scenes that feature children learning about the world they live
in (where “a” stands for Robby’s Internet exploring, “b” for two girls’ flirtation with an
older shoe clerk, “c” for groups of children at school, and “d” for Sylvie, a young neighbor
of Peter and Robby, who obsessively collects items for her dowry in a large chest).
One might follow the outward pull of July’s parentheses even further. It would be
28
29
30

instructive to distinguish Me and You’s narrative parentheticals from a more modernist
cinematic parenthetical: the classic sequence in Godard’s Band of Outsiders (1964), where
Godard’s three protagonists unexpectedly break out in a dance in the middle of a café
(since quoted in Pulp Fiction). We might remember that as Odile, Franz, and Arthur
dance, though we continuously hear the diegetic sound of clapping and feet moving on the
floor, music cuts out of the sound track, alternating with a narrator’s voice that announces:
“Parenthetically, now’s the time to describe their feelings,” proceeding at intervals to
describe the sexual and otherwise invisible desires of each character. For Godard, this
parenthetical, which calls attention to the discrepancy between sound and image, is one of
a variety of techniques used regularly throughout the film to expose the cinematic
apparatus.
July’s parentheticality thus instantiates a cinematic evolution from the thorough anti-
illusionism of Godard’s modernist filmmaking to a postmodern formal experimentation
and trademark “quirk” within more or less familiar conventional narrative structures (here
of the romantic comedy) that audiences have come to expect of independent cinema and
the interlocking stories that characterize what David Bordwell calls “network
narratives.”  Bordwell identifies Me and You as a key example among many recent
network narratives, alongside films such as Short Cuts, Pulp Fiction, Magnolia, Crash,
and Babel. While it certainly shares a postclassical, multistranded narrative style with
these films, grouping them together obscures Me and You’s distinct stylistic sensibility and
feminism. While the other films for the most part are overdetermined, July’s storytelling is
distinctly feminist, playfully whimsical. Though the “Everyone We Know” of July’s title
would seem to suggest an affinity with the global ambitions of other network narratives
(Bordwell himself grapples with how to read the film’s title in this context), it is
significantly underdetermined, directed by a woman with a demonstrated interest in non-
feature-length and multimedia forms of storytelling. July’s idiosyncratic film shares more
in common with the modes of video art, short story prose, and feminist punk rock that she
has been involved with over the course of her career than with the films of Tarantino,
Altman, or Inárritu. Breaking down Me and You’s narrative, we see that the parenthetical
in a sense becomes the very dominant that the structure strives to displace.
31

Figure 19. Sexually suggestive parentheses in publicity posters for Lars von Trier’s Nymphomaniac (2013)
The affinities of the parenthesis more generally with indie aesthetics that one finds
across independent cinema and indie rock here coalesce into the foreground. Musical
examples of parentheses include Sigur Rós’s 2002 album ( ), The Blow’s 2006
“Parentheses” single, and the band Parenthetical Girls (contradictorily and playfully
composed of three men and one woman), active since 2004. Notable cinematic examples
include Me and You, (500) Days of Summer, (Untitled) (directed by Jonathan Parker, U.S.,
2009), and the suggestively sexual O formed of two parentheses in the middle of the title
in 
advertisements 
for 
Lars 
von 
Trier’s 
Nymph()maniac
(Denmark/Germany/France/Belgium/UK, 2013). Von Trier’s parenthesis is especially
evocative, not only of the mark’s ability to visually stand in for body parts (here, the
labia). It also typographically suggests (1) the film’s symmetrical structural division into
two volumes, the second of which could be seen to be much more “maniacal” than the
first more “nymphic” half, and (2) the textual symbols appearing within the film, which
punctuate the image with superimposed numbers and words that complement themes of
the storyline. These inscriptions within the film serve to render the story on one hand more
serious, connecting it to the chain of classical, philosophical, historical, mathematical, and
literary references cited and alluded to in the film’s framing story. (And of course the
framing device itself could finally be viewed as lending the film a parenthetical structure,

where the characters parenthetically comment and reflect on the stories Charlotte
Gainsbourg’s character shares.) Yet at the same time these textual inscriptions are playful,
forming conscious jolts out of a spectatorial suspension of disbelief that the unpunctuated
image track seduces us into. This wave of titles, bands, songs, and films featuring
parentheses all emerge after 2002, after Adaptation. and the collapse of dotcommania
ideologies outlined in the previous chapter — as if to suggest the parenthetical serves as a
metaphor for a new waiting period in media culture, as if to ask whether this is a phase of
or against the digital (it is telling in this context that The Blow’s album featuring
“Parentheses” is called Paper Television). The appeal of the parenthesis across
independent media cultures is that it comes between, goes both ways, and thus stands for
embrace and resistance at once.

Postmodernism, New Media
To close, we might return to the issue of the enterprise of critical theory. Indeed, this
chapter largely emerged out of an encounter with Derrida’s essay on intersecting visual
and cognitive levels: observing patterns of ink on paper while reflecting on his arguments
about text, context, philosophy, and communication. Why, I asked, using “Signature Event
Context” as a defining example, do so many texts of critical theory rely so heavily on
parentheses in their prose? I have offered some speculative answers to this question, which
I believe are related to the deconstructive impulse: to unravel language and to expose its
inherent contradictions. We should read critical theory’s parentheses as bearing Derridean
traces, but also as tools for identifying and marking continuities and ruptures in
intellectual histories and paradigms. As Fredric Jameson notes, performatively in
parentheses himself, in Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism, “One of
the concerns frequently aroused by periodising hypotheses is that these tend to obliterate
differences and to project an idea of the historical period as massive homogeneity
(bounded on either side by inexplicable chronological metamorphoses and punctuation
marks). This is, however, precisely why it seems to me essential to grasp postmodernism
not as a style but rather as a cultural dominant: a conception which allows for the presence
and coexistence of a range of very different, yet subordinate, features.”
The parenthetical and the parenthesis, from television’s laugh track to the instant
message’s emoticon, resonate with postmodernism more generally because they challenge
textual authority and master paradigms. We might even say that the parenthesis makes the
very reading of postmodernity’s break with modernity legible. From Rosalind Krauss’s
sustained engagement with parentheses as a model to describe the ontology of video and
instant feedback in her influential essay in the first issue of October to Jean Baudrillard’s
reference to the automobile as a “sublime object” opening a parenthesis “in the
everydayness of all other objects,” the parenthesis figures as a recurring, if little noticed,
metaphor in seminal works of cultural criticism since 1968.  Jean-Louis Baudry, writing
in his canonical 1970 essay of film theory, for example, uses the mark as a metaphor to
explain the phenomenological encounter with the cinematic apparatus, “At the same time
that the world’s transfer as image seems to accomplish this phenomenological reduction,
this putting into parentheses of its real existence (a suspension necessary, we will see to
the formation of the impression of reality) provides a basis for the apodicity of the ego.”
Such passages suggest the agency thinkers were beginning to find in textuality to account
for, critique, and especially render visible cultural formations. Perhaps most
representatively and even more recently, in “Why Has Critique Run Out of Steam?” Bruno
Latour reads modernity itself as a parenthesis:
My point is thus very simple: things have become Things again,
objects have reentered the arena, the Thing, in which they have to be
gathered first in order to exist later as what stands apart. The
parenthesis that we can call the modern parenthesis during which we
had, on the one hand, a world of objects, Gegenstand, out there,
unconcerned by any sort of parliament, forum, agora, congress, court
and, on the other, a whole set of forums, meeting places, town halls
32
33
34

where people debated, has come to a close.
In this widely circulated essay, Latour admirably attempts to rethink the foundations of the
entire field of the history of science that he played a central part in shaping. In the context
of the disavowal of global warming and the emergence of the 9/11 Truth movement, to
which we might wish to add more recent critiques of the Republican Party as the “Post-
Truth Party,” Latour holds himself accountable for promoting this same alarming cultural
logic that denies truth. He calls for a future of critical thought that is stubbornly realist and
empirically grounded.
Though he argues for clarity, this passage admittedly remains somewhat opaque. What
exactly does Latour mean by the modern “parenthesis”? He seems to suggest that we have
arrived at a point of return, back to the way things were — a premodern, preprint, and, in
some respects as Latour freely admits, fantasized intellectual history. The model he posits,
put simply, is premodern (modern) postmodern, where these terms visualized in sequence
help suggest the parallelism between what lies on the parenthetical marks’ outer sides: the
prefixed modern. Latour’s “modern parenthesis” relies on a familiar visual model, whose
closure is suggestive of a return to a prior stage — picking up where the parenthesis was
opened — and whose epistemological incertitude also allows us to entertain the
provocative notion he coined elsewhere that “we have never been modern” in the first
place.  In this context, the implication of the parenthesis, then, is that the “modern” might
only be a placeholder for the real epistemological need at the heart of the matter:
periodization. (And the “period,” after all, is the final punctuation mark.)
By extension, this chapter has suggested that rather than understanding “new media” as
historical forms collapsed definitively (with a period) into the decades that see the
emergence and evolution of digital technologies, it could be useful to understand the
“new” of “new media” as parenthetical. In other words, the necessity of “new” is
questionable, always fundamentally relational, bound up with anxieties, value judgments,
and gimmickry, but also with potentials to subvert, rethink, and displace the status and
authority of what lies on the parenthetical’s other side — in this case, “media.” For
example, the common aversion to the use of the laugh track could be understood as
anxieties over the relationship between the new and the old: in terms of Goldsen’s and
Gelbart’s historically situated anxieties in the 1970s, when the track was a fairly “new”
technology; in terms of the track featuring “old,” dead voices laughing; or in textually
relative terms as a “new” element inserted into a program. These questions, I hope to have
demonstrated, are most productively understood as relational, discursive, and thus
epistemologically parenthetical.
Brought into more explicitly digital contexts, whether in the surfaces of emoticons,
graphic designs, and word documents or in the depths of computer code, contemporary
parenthetical marks could be read as historically layered with previous parenthetical
inscriptions’ structural possibilities, discursive tensions, and performative politics. In this
sense, we might therefore view the parenthesis as a mark inscribing the very legacies and
possibilities of the status of critical theory for visual culture today. More than any other
mark, it channels Barthes’s punctum into the current moment, unexpectedly offering a way
35
36

of reading the shifting nature of textuality in the computer age, at least as I see it.
Visualizing textual ruptures, the parenthesis brings the relationship between media and
theory into focus, or perhaps more properly, into question. The proliferation of and play
with parentheses in popular culture, whether in writing, as metaphors, or as icons, tends to
wager on the punctuation as marks that embrace and connect, but as we have seen, they
also shore up the loneliness, anxieties, and fears that structure the recessive undersides of
the utopian connections and dominant myths of modernity — and now, in what quite
possibly looks like a return to a time we might have never left, of the new media age.

3
# Logic
Hashtaggery
The preceding chapter marks a transitional parenthesis in this book’s larger account of
textual shift, with the parenthesis’s grammatical, symmetrical, and in-between allure.
Regarding punctuation and digital textuality, too, it is transitional within this book’s flow.
Unlike the period examined before it, the parenthesis relies on the computer’s shift key for
its inscription. In this chapter I turn our attention to a character that relies on the shift key
as well but that, unlike the period and the parenthesis, is less strictly a punctuation mark in
the conventional sense, though some historical accounts in this chapter’s purview have
explicitly and implicitly referred to the # symbol as punctuation in suggestive ways. Just
as the preceding chapters mobilized characters as reading lenses for comparative media
analyses, this chapter also examines a string of texts, technologies, and phenomena that
the # symbol calls our attention to and that in turn expand our understanding of the
cultural logic of the symbol — and ultimately of punctuation more generally. Precisely
insofar as the # mark straddles conceptual boundaries of punctuation more than the period
and the parenthesis, this chapter will allow us to home in on and conclude the book’s
broader inquiry by interrogating and refining our understandings of what punctuation even
is, particularly as it intersects with and is informed by media history, visual culture, and
the digitization of the world.
It seems only appropriate to pick up after the book’s parenthesis with a character (of the
nontypographical sort) who was central to the ending of the preceding chapter on the
period: Susan Orlean, the New Yorker writer who penned The Orchid Thief, the basis for
Adaptation. Shifting focus from orchids to the hashtag, she published a piece titled “Hash”
on the topic in June 2010 for the magazine’s blog. She muses at the outset, “The
semiology and phenomenology of hashtaggery intrigues me.” Orlean observes in the piece
with trademark New Yorker wit and cultural insight,
Hashtags have also undergone mission creep, and now do all sorts of
interesting things. Frequently, they are used to set apart a commentary
on tweets, sort of like those little mice in the movie “Babe” who
appear at the bottom of the frame and, in their squeaky little mouse
voices, comment on what you’ve just seen and what you’re about to
see. A typical commentary-type hashtag might look like this:
“Sarah Palin for President??!? #Iwouldratherhaveamoose”
This usage totally subverts the original purpose of the hashtag, since
the 
likelihood 
of 
anyone 
searching 
the 
term
“Iwouldratherhaveamoose” is next to zero. But that isn’t the point.
This particular hashtaggery is weirdly amusing, because, for some

reason, starting any phrase with a hashtag makes it look like it’s being
muttered into a handkerchief; when you read it you feel like you’ve
had an intimate moment in which the writer leaned over and
whispered “I would rather have a moose!” in your ear.
Orlean’s blog contribution productively begins to critically unpack the unique tone that
belongs to hashtag-preceded tweets, a form of textuality that has spread far beyond Twitter
and seeped into all forms of writing, and even into speech and music — culminating in a
popular subgenre of hip hop, “hashtag rap” and a pattern of speech frequently embraced
and parodied by Jimmy Fallon in late night television. Orlean’s humorous comparison of
tweets to Babe’s mice recalls the “audience within the text” that we considered in the
previous chapter’s discussion of the laugh track’s parentheticality. Indeed, the “whisper”
of a tweet that Orlean describes in many ways suggests a striking affinity with the
parenthetical, where both instances of inscription articulate an author’s personal and often
humorous response to the more official language that precedes it. In this sense, the hashtag
and the parenthesis both serve to set textuality off, indicating to the reader the presence of
a personal reflection from the writer.
But the difference between them is crucial. The intimate, handkerchief-muffled tone of
the tweet is projected in a forum that by its nature is anything but intimate. It is public, and
in practice the hashmark makes the message it accompanies accessible to a large audience
of friends, followers, and digital strangers. The hash’s tagging function is a key
characteristic of the mark’s shifted textual circulation in digital contexts. The symbol
indexes whatever phrase follows it alongside all other tweets that contain the same phrase,
allowing users to group and locate information that belong to a common topic, theme, or
mood —hence facilitating everything from the recent trend in marketing and quantitative
studies to conduct “sentiment analyses” of the networked community at any given
moment to the ability of comedian Gregg Turkington’s Neil Hamburger character to
retweet hundreds of messages about Taco Bell food poisoning from a myriad of users and
dates at once to create a comedic but also trenchant glimpse into American society.
1

Figure 20. Taco Bell food poisoning joke on Neil Hamburger’s Twitter page
The American Dialect Society voted the word hashtag to be 2012’s “word of the year,”
signaling the pervasiveness of the term not only in Twitter but across the Internet and in
everyday life. Voicing widespread sentiments, Lindy West writes of the mark’s hold on
popular culture, “Just a couple of years ago, our little friend # was nearly irrelevant,
relegated to the lonely domains of foam fingers (we’re #1!) and robocalls (press # for
more options). But these days, along with its boyfriend @, # is leading the charge in the
Twitter Revolution (#SorryISaidTwitterRevolution). Hashtags have changed the way we
think, communicate, process information. In all likelihood you’re hash-tagging something
right now. # is everywhere. # is inside you.”
A particularly instructive moment occurred in early 2013 when France’s Commission
générale de terminologie et de néologie officially banned the English word in official
documentation and replaced it with mot-dièse, the French equivalent for “sharp word,”
referring to the musical sharp key’s sign. The commission’s objective, since 1996, has
been to preserve the French language’s purity, largely by keeping English words out of the
language as much as possible. As such, one of their tasks is to encourage “the presence of
the French language on social media networks.”  Though the effort to not passively step
aside and watch as global English imperializes the world’s other languages is admirable, it
2
3

is also worth tuning in to the skepticism registered by those who have suggested that this
political commission’s energies are misguided and out of touch. Will official banning of
the language in documents truly have sway over vernacular that has already existed for
several years? Does the slightly inaccurate translation, since the musical sign and the
hashtag slant in different directions, demonstrate a disconnect with digital culture?
Perhaps more crucially, to what extent is such an effort denying the reality of Global
English and the way it constitutes and structures the languages and logics of networked
communication? That a national governmental organization went to the trouble to ban the
use of the word hashtag indicates the extent to which the phenomenon is “everywhere”
and “inside” us.
To write that the symbol is “inside you” is suggestive of the manner in which the # sign
harnesses a cultural logic, of how it represents a way of thinking that has deeply
penetrated cultural consciousness. One might reflect a bit further on the ontological nature
and phenomenological consequences of this strong impact. Does it mean that we now
think in keywords — and that we previously did not? Does expressing our thought in
keywords or hashtag punchlines come at the expense of other forms of expression that
have different dimensions and textures of experience? It might at first seem tempting to
associate the # sign’s cultural hold with a bad turn — a decline, a lack of sophistication, a
loss of literary complexity, or even of literariness itself.
“#Hashtag,” the most popular skit in the history of Late Night with Jimmy Fallon, as
measured by its online viewership with over 23 million views in its six months on
YouTube as of early April 2014, offers an illustrative mise en scène of these cultural
anxieties. This skit imitates — and exaggerates — the incorporation and interpenetration
of social media discourse into everyday discourse. Fallon and regular guest Justin
Timberlake perform a conversation in which hashtag discourse feels like it outweighs
nonhashtagged discourse, so that, for every phrase spoken, there seem to be two or three
hashtags the performers offer. The effect of this is, of course, irritating, as confirmed by
Questlove’s closing quip, telling them to “hashtag shut the F up.” The skit’s overwhelming
popularity certainly indicates that viewers identify with this irritation. Indeed it was so
popular that Fallon did a very similar sequel to the skit in his first week hosting The
Tonight Show a few months later with guest Jonah Hill, which featured a cameo by Martin
Scorcese.

Figure 21. Jimmy Fallon and Justin Timberlake making hashtag finger gestures on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon
(September 2013)
Both scenes’ ratios of tags to nontags register anxieties about the impoverishment of
communication — how meaningful statements and thoughts now seem to be drowned in a
sea of keywords, accompanied by a shortened attention span and a paradoxical mode
where people seem connected but not really — one strand of conversation hardly builds
on the previous one, and rather language just seems to accumulate, go nowhere,
punctuated and emphasized by the finger pound, crossing the index and middle fingers of
both hands to visualize the hashmark. The deterioration of the conversation in the original
skit is most fully realized when the final exchange between Timberlake and Fallon is just
composed of sounds, nonwords to the tune of a Missy Elliott song, interrupted by
Questlove, with his own finger pound.
Figure 22. Martin Scorcese making a cameo (and a hashmark) on a reprised hashtag skit on The Tonight Show
(February 2014)
These skits provocatively lay bare, to quote Marquard Smith’s recent claim, that in our
current moment, “all content has become largely irrelevant. What matters,” he writes, “is

not what is gathered, arranged, and transmitted, but how such gathering, arranging, and
transmitting works. ‘What’ is supplanted by ‘how.’ ”  The Fallon–Timberlake exchange
and particularly discussions about it illustrates this perfectly: cultural commentators and
various casual conversations I have overheard about it in public do not mention what
Fallon and Timberlake actually talk about — cookies, Mona Lisa, Miley Cyrus, or Orange
Is the New Black. Rather it is a vessel for metadiscourse, for talking about how we talk
with hashtags in popular culture. This is why the skit resonates.
A regular viewer of Fallon’s shows might find that the host’s critique of this habit is
undermined by his frequent use of the hashtag as a means to engage with the audience:
every week on Late Night, for example, he orchestrated the “Hashtag Game,” for which he
would coin a hashtag and invite home audiences online to contribute the preceding
statement to which the hashtag belonged, reading a handful of his favorites on air.
However, it makes sense to read this as consistent with the Timberlake skit’s critique, as
an attempt by Fallon to cultivate thoughtfulness about how to use the mark properly and
wittily. Indeed, Fallon is often admired and distinguished above and beyond his late night
peers for integrating digital trends and social media into television.
Contributing to the chorus of conviction that we are deeply under the influence of the
symbol found across popular texts to more highbrow cultural criticism, Piper Marshall
writes for Artforum,
The temperament of our generation can be summed up by the
hashmark. If the ‘90s were full of “quotation marks” indicating irony,
a decisive sarcasm and a distance from the opinion of norms, our
current climate is dominated by pithy punch lines that summarize the
solipsist’s always already uploaded narrative. The hashtag is the
redemption of Internet statements — written to be read by everyone
you know, obviously. Until they are recycled via a chaotic circuit of
retweets, reposts, and reblogs, eventually rendered as vapid as that
ubiquitous Facebook prompt: “What’s on your mind?”
Marshall suggestively takes as an assumption that the hashmark is punctuation, situating
its affective trajectory as following on the heels of another generation’s signature marks —
1990s’ quotation marks —foregrounding their analogous inscription of cultural zeitgeist.
One might note that the four fingers used to figure the hashmark, as the five performers
in Fallon’s two hashtag parody skits all gesture, are the same pairs of fingers used by
speakers to indicate quotation marks. In her 2003 book Quotation Marks, which is very
much about and symptomatic of the prior decade’s cultural fascination with quotation,
Marjorie Garber discusses the tendency to “flex the first two fingers of each hand, miming
the look of (American-style double) quotation marks on the page,” observing that “the
two-finger flex has become conventional rather than strictly mimetic, a sign of quoting
rather than a quote-sign.”  Her subsequent reference to this gesture as “digital quotation”
is a useful reminder of the close etymological and historical ontological relationship of
fingers-as-digits, our bodily counting organs, to the digital, the numerical, computerized
infrastructure of our media systems. Both hand movements notably involve the two index
4
5
6

fingers, quite literally figuring a shift in digital indexicality, where the index (finger) no
longer points to a referent but in fact gestures to an absent, metaphorical text.
This continuity from quotation marks to hashmarks is surprisingly generative to
consider. Social media’s hashtags have in a sense become repositories of quotations. Think
for example of what happens when a celebrity dies. Various other celebrities tweet their
responses and condolences, and journalists then draw on these remarks, turning them into
quotations used in longer-form obituaries. The same goes with reportage of current events:
politicians’ tweets become sound bytes used to texture coverage of current events and in
effect construct historical narrative. In other words, a distinctly late-twentieth-century
cultural fascination with quotation, which was just as much about truth and authority as an
ironic skepticism in them, finds its social media outlet in Twitter, where these same issues
are still felt but transfigured. Namely, the voice and position of authority have become
diluted, the iterations of the story have been amplified and more quickly replaced by the
latest trending topic — indexed by hashmarks.
To read the quotation mark as a predecessor of sorts to the hashmark thus affords a
useful opportunity to remember the historical and cultural contexts that it seems so often
tend to be elided in conversations about new media that focus on the nowness of the
present, or what Wendy Chun calls the “enduring ephemeral.”  Marshall’s comments —
emphasizing “retweets,” “reposts,” and “reblogs” — also point to the impossibility of
making sense of the hashtag’s significance outside of the context of textual proliferation.
According to Marshall, the marks offer the promise of the possibility for our tiny words to
seem significant and clever when they might otherwise seem lost in an endless flow of
discourse. This significance relies on being indexed and on the possibility of being found.
If periods and parentheses draw attention to the proliferation of textuality in digital
contexts, then hashmarks continue to do so, while at the same time, like the others,
demonstrating how this proliferation is managed by punctuation marks as well. Indeed,
this managerial feature is one of the striking roles the period and the parenthesis play in
digital culture — from the period’s structuring of domain names to parenthetical
bibliographic references. If in print culture punctuation helps manage semantically,
clarifying textual meaning, then in digital culture there is a distinct shift whereby
punctuation now helps manage more syntactically. While punctuation in human languages
certainly has syntactic functions, the important distinction is the loosening of its semantic
functions. Semantic displacement represents a more general textual shift that punctuation
is metonymical for: to an informational, instrumental, and short-form computer-oriented
textuality from a narrative, expressive, and long-form book-oriented textuality.
The hashmark’s popular use on Twitter, a social microblogging website composed of
updates famously limited to a maximum of 140 characters, provides an opportunity to
further condense the most salient topic of an already short message into a keyword,
a phrase, or a string of keywords and phrases. In this sense, the hashtag represents what is
arguably the single most pronounced feature of new textual practices: the brevity of
communication and expression.
This textual condensation is further highlighted by the elimination of spacing between
7

words that come after a hashmark. Spacing is itself ontologically and historically bound to
punctuation. As pure but deliberate textual emptiness, spacing could be considered
punctuation’s most basic manifestation. Writing before around 1000 AD was
conventionally in scriptio continua, meaning that texts were presented in a continuous
stream of letters, with no word separation or punctuation. As M. B. Parkes explains, text
presented in this style “required careful preparation before it could be read aloud with
appropriate pronunciation and expression. Rendering a text in scriptio continua proceeded
from identification of the different elements — letters, syllables, words — through further
stages to comprehension of the whole work. Reading at first sight was thus unusual and
unexpected.” He elaborates further,
The merit of scriptio continua was that it presented the reader with a
neutral text. To introduce graded pauses while reading involved an
interpretation of the text, an activity requiring literary judgment and
therefore one properly reserved to the reader. In ancient Rome readers
of literary texts were mostly a social elite, whereas full-time scribes
were usually freedmen or slaves (Atticus kept slaves to publish
Cicero’s work). Quintilian observed that many things to do with
reading could only be taught in actual practice: when a pupil should
take a breath… , at what point he should introduce a pause into a line
of verse… and where the sense ends or begins… . All of these are
situations which we would expect to be indicated by punctuation as
we understand it now; then, a reader had to analyse the phrasing of a
text before he could read it properly.
Thus the return to the elimination of textual space that occurs with increasing frequency in
digital culture (routine in web addresses for example, but culminating par excellence in
hashtags) foregrounds provocative affinities with ancient textual practices, bringing into
focus the relationships among literacy, clarity, social status, textual neutrality, and perhaps
most interestingly — on an ontological level — a reintroduction of an increased level of
interpretation that takes place while reading. To what extent, for example, does being able
to read a tweet depend on a technological literacy that has been cultivated to know how to
insert pauses between words? The brevity of a tweet is mostly not comparable in terms of
textual complexity to a story conveyed on ancient scroll, but such a comparison is worth
considering if only to weigh the nature of the continuities and discontinuities digital
textuality presents against previous forms of writing. Like scriptio continua, the tweet
demands mental activity of separating on one’s own to make sense.
Of course with hashtagged script, unlike scriptio continua, nonspacing coexists with
spacing. As such it is discourse that visibly inscribes the simultaneity of machine and
natural languages. One could thus read the elimination of spacing in the digital context as
registering an antagonism between the human and the machine, a result of the human
being forced by technical protocol to confine text to a limited space. Condensation
becomes an almost frantic response to pressure, cramming in what one needs to say while
one has the chance, without taking a breath, so to speak.
8

If the management of textual proliferation and the brevity of digital communication
practices mark two primary features composing the cultural logic of the hashmark, then a
third central feature of its logic could be conceptualized as a changing multidimensionality
of language throughout digital textualities, characterized by a simultaneous interaction of
the horizontality of human languages with the verticality of computer languages. The
intersecting horizontal and vertical lines of the symbol could be understood to visualize
this condition. On one hand, an overwhelming number of Internet users know how to use
the mark. Yet on the other hand the hash symbol’s function of indexing metadata, of
collecting and hyperlinking all other expressions that contain the word or phrase tagged,
points to a computational process that the majority of us understand the effect of but
which depends on our reliance upon a series of computational operations that are largely
invisible, inscrutable, and too technical for the majority of Internet users to understand —
or to want to understand.
Viewed from a more distant vantage point, this procedural logic represents an extension
of the principle of apparatus theories of cinema that were popularized (and more recently
popularly criticized) in 1970s film theories inspired by a particular confluence of
Marxism, psychoanalysis, poststructuralism, and feminism. One’s encounter with a
website such as Twitter, like one’s encounter with a given cinematic text, is facilitated by a
range of technical processes invisible to the eyes and “smoothed” over; these processes
facilitate experiences with the media interface and our psychological immersion into its
platform. (Or, in describing the Internet, “immersion” might be better substituted by
passing, browsing glances.) Indeed, if film theory’s point was that our encounters with
cinema are shaped by ideologies inscribed in the structural situation of the cinema and the
material, technical components that constitute cinematic spectatorship, then so too one
could think of the ways in which our encounters with new media texts are shaped by
ideologies inscribed in computing systems and software.
In the more specific context of digital textuality, the operative principle of the hashmark
can be viewed as exemplary of what Espen Aarseth has identified as the “dual nature of
the cybernetic sign.” Mobilizing semiotic vocabulary to describe this duality, Aarseth
identifies the scripton as designating the sign’s surface image and texton as referring to its
underlying code.  Implicitly or explicitly, a range of observations by textual scholars echo
the logic of this distinction, whose contradictions are forcefully channeled into the
hashmark’s singular character. N. Katherine Hayles, for example, coins what could be
reappropriated as the catchphrase for this situation in arguing for media-specific analysis:
“print is flat, code is deep.”  Though Hayles means to draw attention to the differential
nature of the printed page and the electronic text, one might also make sense of this
difference as constituting a differential dimensionality within all digital texts, as they
remain visual like the printed page but contain an added, “deep” dimension of code.
Alexander Galloway pinpoints this logic of the digital inscription in his response to
Wendy Chun’s reflections on software and ideology. He asserts, “Language wants to be
overlooked. But it wants to be overlooked precisely so that it can more effectively ‘over
look,’ that is, so that it can better function as a syntactic and semantic system designed to
specify and articulate while remaining detached from the very processes of specificity and
9
10

articulation.” “This,” he goes on to explain, “is one sense in which language, which itself
is not necessarily connected to optical sight, can nevertheless be visual.”  Galloway thus
suggests that the digital situation is one in which language looks at us — we in a sense are
the objects of visual culture, of the text’s gaze — in a structural inversion of cinematic
apparatus theory. This potential is perhaps most fully realized when one stops to think
about the highly technical and legal language of agreements on applications and software
we sign off to with virtual signatures by clicking “accept” in order to become “users.” This
language, too, we could surely say, wants to be “overlooked” to “look over” us. The
“language” one then inputs on popular social media websites like Facebook, via status
updates, because we have probably not fully thought through the consequences of these
agreements if one even does take the time to read them, provides endless data for
intelligence agencies and corporations who use personal information for monetary gain
and social control.
One could articulate the quality of the textual condition that I am describing as follows.
If Marquard Smith claims that how today supplants what, I would slightly revise this
formulation: increasingly, that supplants what. We know that the system works and we
know how to use it, but we don’t know how it works. The formulation usefully posits a
replacement of a different linguistic order: rather than one question replacing another
(from what to how), that suggests a uniquely removed relation to knowledge, where we do
not question it — perhaps the question mark is, as Michel Gondry’s Is The Man Who Is
Tall Happy? implied per the book’s introduction, not digital after all. Similarly, we know
that information is accessible via the Internet, but we do not know the actual information
it holds without it. Alongside social media relatives like the Google search and the
Facebook status update, the Twitter hashtag represents this new relation to information,
knowledge, and memory, part of what Bernard Stiegler would characterize as the
“informaticization” of knowledge, whereby digital media’s “memory industries” are
supplanting the primacy of human consciousness — and even “life itself.”  We do not
need to remember details, we only need a keyword to lead us through a chain of links and
to the specific details that we can browse through, doing our best to determine what
information we need or want and what information is disposable. The cognitive practices
associated with this have been studied widely and seem to characterize a significant shift
in the life of the mind in the “information age.” Information moves from being stored in
our minds to being stored in our machines, while we refine our skills for searching,
indexing, and knowing where to find stored data. The full extent of the ideological
consequences of this shift — and the exact extent to which it characterizes a shift —
remain to be witnessed and understood. Our fingertips, typing on our keyboards, mediate
our access to knowledge.
One of the most provocative theorists to discuss and forecast this situation is perhaps
the Czech writer Vilém Flusser, who presciently observed the emerging historical
consequences of computer memory upon members of a computerized society. Consider
for example his remarks in “The Non-Thing 2”:
Until quite recently, one was of the opinion that the history of
humankind is the process whereby the hand gradually transforms
11
12

nature into culture. This opinion, this “belief in progress,” now has to
be abandoned… . The hands have become redundant and can atrophy.
This is not true, however, of the fingertips. On the contrary: They have
become the most important organs of the body. Because in the
situation of being without things, it is a matter of producing and
benefiting from information without things. The production of
information is a game of permutations using symbols. To benefit from
information is to observe symbols. In the situation of being without
things, it is a matter of playing with symbols and observing them. To
program and benefit from programs. And to play with symbols, to
program, one has to press keys. One has to do the same to observe
symbols, to benefit from programs. Keys are devices that permutate
symbols and make them perceptible: viz. the piano and the typewriter.
Fingertips are needed to press keys. The human being in the future
without things will exist by means of his fingertips.
Hence one has to ask what happens existentially when I press a key.
What happens when I press a typewriter key, a piano key, a button on
a television set or on a telephone. What happens when the President of
the United States presses the red button or the photographer the
camera button. I choose a key, I decide on a key. I decide on a
particular letter of the alphabet in the case of a typewriter, or on a
particular note in the case of a piano, on a particular channel in the
case of a television set, or on a particular telephone number. The
President decides on a war, the photographer on a picture. Fingertips
are organs of choice, of decision.
Flusser conceptualizes a non-thing as that which cannot be held by the hand, and so in a
computer-based society, the information contained within our machines is untouchable
and non-thing. He argues therefore that we are increasingly “without things.” While some
of his remarks stand to be complicated by a more nuanced understanding of digital
media’s material conditions and coded infrastructures, Flusser’s comments nevertheless
register the importance of attending to what one might think of as the surface effects of
digital media, configured in the interactions of materiality, the body, keys, symbols, and
computing technologies. Flusser’s early interest in such surface effects are particularly
relevant (and also poetic) for understanding a punctuational symbol like the hashmark, a
character that appears on buttons millions of people press everyday. What “happens
existentially” when on our computers we hold down the combination of the shift and 3
keys to inscribe the # sign or when we scroll our mouse over a hashtag to click on it and
uncover related themes? What “decisions” do we make?
The use of the shift key takes for granted, for example, a certain familiarity with the
keyboard, insofar as in its current design, there is no intuitive means to discern that the
characters written directly on top of the number keys are inscribed by pushing the keys in
conjunction with shift. The current keyboard thus relies on a (relatively basic)
socialization process and learning curve whereby one gets accustomed to “playing” it like
13

a musical instrument, learning the correct combination of buttons to achieve desired
effects. I call attention to this practice more for rhetorical effect than to offer definitive
answers or claims about phenomenology and digital media, but these questions provide an
opportunity to think comparatively and historically about various media forms,
technologies, and their relationships: from the soundscapes created by musical instruments
and the telephone through the letterscapes of the typewriter and the computer.
Indeed, Flusser’s comments here and elsewhere about textuality, design, the body,
playing with symbols, and the necessity and significance of fingers pressing keys can form
a transition to delve into another moment that more closely coincides with his own,
staging a juncture of continuities and ruptures with the hash symbol’s present
pervasiveness. The symbol’s logic can be radicalized by juxtaposing it with an earlier
moment of “new” media — when the number sign was introduced to touch-tone
telephones in the late 1960s and early 1970s.

The Telephone’s Octothorpe
According to a Western Electric document on file at the Bell Laboratories archives, the
company manufactured 6,700,000 # buttons in 1972 alone.  This number of number signs
is a useful reminder that the button and the symbol on it have substantial presence
throughout the history of media technologies and their audiovisual cultures. Is it possible
that the sign’s uses in previous technological contexts such as the telephone’s made
possible a cultural context in which it could be redefined and popularized by Twitter? How
and what, in other words, might the mark be able to illuminate about cycles of culture —
how and when certain practices ebb and flow, how and when certain ways of thinking
congeal and are reconditioned? As Flusser’s comparative perspective reminds us, we use
buttons to make decisions on telephones and computers alike.
The operator’s recorded voice instructing the caller on the line to “press pound” is now
a commonplace feature of our uses of telephones, but, of course, it was not always. A Bell
Labs News article, “New Phone Buttons Offer Instant Banking, Cooking,” announces in
March 1968 the Bell System’s plan to add two buttons to its touch-tone telephones “to get
ready for the push-button world of tomorrow.”  Until that point, their telephones
contained ten numbered and lettered push buttons for dialing. The two new buttons
introduced were of course the asterisk in the lower left and the number sign in the lower
right of the keypad, sandwiching the zero, provocatively situating them as if they are
nonsignifying characters like the zero, unlike numbers and letters with positive values.
At the time the buttons were introduced, they would have indeed seemed to be
nonsignifying. As the article’s author explains, “For the time being, they have no function.
But when some of the future TOUCH-TONE services become available, the two new
buttons will be functional.” It would be too easy to equate the buttons’ nonfunctionality
with nonsignification, however. Not only could the buttons be viewed as signifying
nonfunctionality itself (which must be understood as distinct from nonsignification) but,
more accurately, they signified the promise of innovation in an unknown future. The
announcement proudly declares that “a businessman will be able to check computerized
inventories of his merchandise, or a bank clerk can adjust accounts by tapping out
information that his TOUCH-TONE set will feed into a centralized store of bank data.”
Enthusiastically anticipating a future in which “many more custom-designed services will
be available,” the author writes, “The two new buttons will be used to operate these new
services. The shopping housewife, for example, might dial her home number and then
push the asterisk button to start her electric oven.” The asterisk was of course never
developed for “instant cooking,” but the two buttons did take their place as telephone
keypads’ eleventh and twelfth buttons, taking on routine uses in various automated
services on telephone calls.
One thus encounters a historically recurring assumption that punctuational characters
serve as floating signifiers, easily adaptable to a range of situations in which designers and
cultural innovators might wish to put them to use. The flip side of this semiotic flexibility
is that their context-dependence also threatens their value, rendering them nearly
ontologically void. However, a more specific phenomenon comes into play as well: as the
14
15

marks become standardized into digital contexts, they are increasingly able to signify in
isolation, thereby losing a semantic flexibility but gaining in return an increased visual
mobility.
Moreover, we see here how the telephone’s potential is marketed to a wide audience,
while drawing on heavily gendered discourses and expectations prevalent in the 1960s,
imagining a male businessman or banker and a female housewife. One might think of the
female operator’s voice that, as the sign’s function did historically develop, instructs
callers to follow data commands by pressing the pound key, receiving and processing
commands from an implicit male, helping make the service provided more efficient. Such
a gendered dynamic is continuous with a long-standing structuring dynamic of women as
professional “computers” or “programmers” since the very first computing systems were
configured in the 1940s, which seamlessly extends into the continued imagination of the
near future.  In 2013’s Academy Award–winning Her (directed by Spike Jonze, as if to
substantiate the presence of Adaptation.’s digital subconscious discussed in the first
chapter), for example, Scarlett Johansson voices Samantha, the disembodied, Siri-like
operating system with whom Joaquin Phoenix’s character falls in love. As so many critics
have noted explicitly and viral parodies implicitly suggest, Her is resolutely not Him.
Figure 23. Her (directed by Spike Jonze, 2013): continuing the fantasy of the feminized machine
16

Figure 24. Introducing the number sign to the touch-tone telephone. Courtesy of AT&T Archives and History
Center
The pound sign, in other words, could be contextualized within this gendered history of
new media and punctuation, where the user tells the automated female voice that his
command is complete, and she can take over, helping him get whatever he needs to get.
Pressing the pound sign is an authoritative command, coming at the end of a data transfer,
signaling the transmission’s completion, of often important and often private information,
such as a password or a credit card number. The expectation of entrusting this kind of
personal information with a feminized machine signals the ways in which, historically,
women have been assumed to be more reliable and trustworthy than men.
In a note addressed in 1991 to William Safire on file at the AT&T Archives, which one
could infer to be a direct response to his New York Times Magazine “On Language” entry
“Hit the Pound Sign” of the same year, James Harris, a Bell Laboratories employee who
was part of the team that introduced the two symbols to the touch-tone telephone, attempts
to “put a bit of history on the record” about the # button. He explains that he and others at
the Laboratories wanted to take “advantage of the fact that a touchtone ‘pad’ could be
made to produce twelve different signals almost as easily as the ten that were in common
use; the two extra signals (buttons) would be identifiers and punctuation for the data
message.”  Harris’s references to the symbols as punctuation usefully invite us to
consider an expanded notion of punctuation that approaches a range of typographic
symbols as behaving like punctuation, what I call loose punctuation, a conceptual
invitation that the number sign instantiates. His use of the term might simply refer to the
mark’s status as a nonalphanumerical character, but more than that, it also seems to
17

register a sense of stopping and starting, of making data more readable, the way
punctuation does in natural languages.
Harris recalls,
It was fairly easy to agree on the asterisk… . The great problem was
the naming of the lower right button… . I would have preferred a
simple dot or period, but our professional human-factors people held
strongly that a dot could be confused with an asterisk and did not have
sufficient distinctiveness. Way back then the many names we were
aware of for “#” included octothorp(e) and lumberyard and, of course,
pound mark and number sign. I was reluctant to go with the number
sign (as I think of it) for three reasons: First, its name is a source of
undesirable confusion. Second, for those people who do think of it as
a number sign, the mind is pre-programmed to use it as a number sign;
this may be different from the meaning in the particular protocol that
is in use. Finally, thirty years ago I was deeply concerned with
worldwide standardization, and I was concerned that some typewriters
and keyboards around the world lacked the “#” symbol, thus denying
their users the ability to type out the DIVA format.
Given the symbol’s eventual frequent use as finalizing the transmission of a code, it is
interesting that Harris wanted to make the key a period. He points to ways the two
symbols are in a sense kindred spirits, where the pound is the period’s less linguistic
cousin — since it does not have a linguistically traditional role as punctuation in human
languages, something which, after Twitter, is now changing. Along these lines, the symbol
repeated three times is also used to mark the document’s end in press releases or typed
manuscripts.
The status and etymology of the term octothorpe itself is shrouded in a bit of mystery.
Some writers claim that thorpe means village, and the symbol visually represents eight
(octo) fields surrounding a village. Whatever its true origins, it seems to have been a
jokingly and internally used nickname at Bell for the number sign. While some writers
claim that the proper term for the sign is “octothorpe,” various employees in the
telecommunications industry insist that the symbol’s name is emphatically not
“octothorpe” but “number sign.”
A Western Electric news memo titled “A Story about #” seems to in fact be a memo that
plays into the company’s internal joke about the sign. Its author references a quote from a
nonexistent poem by Shelley B. Percey, “To a Number Sign”: “Hail to thee, blithe Symbol
/ Octothorp though never wert,” riffing on the line in the poet’s “To a Skylark”: “Hail to
thee, blithe Spirit! / Bird thou never wert.” The document also discusses a man, Charles
Octothorp, who “decided one day to find a way of making his family name famous. His
strategy was simple, but effective. He’d approach anyone with a Touch-Tone phone, stop,
look closely and say admiringly: ‘Golly, that’s a remarkably handsome octothorp you’ve
got there.’ ” After detailing an elaborate story about this man’s effort to deceive a gullible
public, the author asserts to the reader, “When you encounter these people and hear their
18

misusage, correct them. Tell them the truth — that the ‘#’ on the Touch-Tone button made
by Western Electric is called a ‘number sign.’ ”  This is accompanied by a cartoon
illustration of a personified number sign with an angry face in the middle of repeating for
a fourth time on a chalkboard the phrase “MY NAME IS NUMBER SIGN” (figure 25).
Reading the exact tone of this memo is difficult: it does not read straightly as an
instructional memo, nor is it entirely a joke. Somewhere between the two, it captures a
certain geeky, technophilic attitude that nevertheless reflects a serious concern.
Figure 25. “MY NAME IS NUMBER SIGN.” Courtesy of AT&T Archives and History Center
For Harris, the stakes of naming the sign include historical accuracy, which would also
seem to be the stakes inscribed in Western Electric’s documents, though in a roundabout
way, via its perversion of history with the fictional character Charles Octothorp. One could
thus read this fiction as playing provocatively with the symbol’s mysterious and debated
history, and its ongoing shifting status in technological contexts.
It is also worth considering further what Harris refers to as “worldwide
standardization,” since various international keyboards were not equipped with number
signs. The sheer variety of terminology for the symbol speaks to the ways in which the
number sign in particular registers national differences. It has been called the lumberyard
in Sweden, the cross in Chinese, a hex in Singapore and Malaysia, hash in Britain, and
pound and number in the United States and Canada, just to name a few. Harris’s concern
was not treated as significant cause for choosing an alternate symbol, suggesting that those
(Western) nations with the symbol on their keyboards would likely find themselves at a
technological advantage when services provided by touch-tones would become more
widespread. The recent decision by the French government to replace all official mention
of the word hashtag with mot-dièse thus presents a provocative continuity with concerns
19

over uses and naming of the symbol favoring English-language operating systems. In both
cases, what might seem to be trivial worries over naming the symbol in fact channel
broader concerns over what could be viewed as the spread of Global English that
accompany the expanding empires encompassed by American technological services.
With this history put in perspective, one might begin to view the issues surrounding
computing culture not as radically new but as continuous with recurring anxieties we can
locate across multiple histories of new media that settle into standardized procedures as
technologies become more everyday and less “new.” In this frame, the octothorpe/number
sign/hashmark, like the period and parenthesis before it, becomes an instructive reading
lens, which — as media historical text that is semiotically loose enough to be redefined
with new technologies — is synechdochical. That is to say, it both ontologically shifts on a
textual level and is also representative of much larger shifts under way in operating
systems, media ecologies, and visual culture.

The Human behind the Number: I Love Alaska, Search Logic, and
Narrative Desire
In keeping with the spirit of this book’s inquiry into the cultural logic of punctuation,
which turns our attention not only to the ways marks circulate and indeed pervade visual
culture, but to the ways thinking associated with these marks also circulates more broadly
across media and culture — thus suggesting an even greater pervasiveness of
punctuational logics and aesthetics — I conclude this chapter with an analysis of a text, I
Love Alaska, which triangulates other technological iterations of the symbol, synthesizes
its cultural logic, and in the process also returns us to the question of the broader status of
semiotics in the digital age.
In particular, this work draws our attention to the # symbol’s role as a number sign and
how it not only structures information in databases via its role as hashmark but organizes
subjects as data bodies in digital ecosystems. The symbol-as-number sign also closes in on
the very idea of the digital as that which is structured by discreet numbers. Isolated, the
symbol, not itself a typographical number, helps throw the relationship between
punctuation and numbers into relief, inviting one to speculate on the visualization of data
in starkly different ways than how this topic is generally broached in digital humanities
scholarship.
I Love Alaska is a fifty-minute-long online mini-movie divided into thirteen episodes
and was made by Dutch artists Sander Plug and Lernert Engelberts. The movie draws on
the residue of an event in media history: when AOL leaked over 650,000 users’ search
histories from a three-month period, which was intended to be made available for
academic researchers but was accidentally leaked publicly online for three days in August
2006. The filmmakers focus on one user’s search history: #711391, identified by a number
sign. The movie features a woman’s voice narrating a selection of the user’s search
keywords over images of Alaska —ironically evoking one strand of the search that
eventually suggests the user is planning a family vacation to Alaska. The irony is all the
more biting when juxtaposed with other components of the user’s search history, about
marital infidelity, explicitly sexual curiosities, celebrity gossip, and anxieties about illness.
The first episode begins with a fast left-to-right swipe of white text across a black
screen, accompanied by a machinic sound that signifies the presence of an advanced,
efficient recording technology, that reads: “On August 4, 2006, AOL accidentally
published a text file on its website containing three months’ worth of search keywords
submitted by over 650,000 users.” After a few seconds, we then hear wind blowing,
sonically bridging the image track’s transition to a shot of Alaska, where the frame of the
image is adjusted and we hear the sound of a computerized surveillance system
accompanying the adjustment, giving the viewer the feeling of approaching the film from
the perspective of spies, zeroing in on our target. After we settle on an image of a snowy
mountain, the film presents us with another textual swipe: “The keywords in this file were
typed into AOL’s search engine by users who never suspected that their private queries
would be revealed to the public.” We return to our positions as voyeurs, looking at a
snowy landscape, and the film plays with the image’s brightness. Another textual swipe:

“After three days, AOL pulled the file from public access, but not before it had been
copied widely on the Internet.” Another image adjustment of a scene in Alaska, and then
we see: “This movie presents the true and heartbreaking search history of user #711391.”
The title credits then come on the screen; we are informed that this is Episode 1, dated
March 1–7, 2006, and a final textual swipe reads: “Introducing user #711391 and her
unique way of searching the Internet.” We then cut to what looks like a curtain being lifted
from a window, accompanied by an exaggerated sound effect of the curtain being lifted,
revealing a scenic view of Alaska, with mountains in the background and pine trees
surrounding tiny buildings in the foreground. We hear a bell ding, white text in the lower
left of the frame reveals that this is Wednesday, March 1, 2006, and over the still image we
hear a woman’s voice: “Cannot sleep with snoring husband.” A few seconds later, “How
to sleep with snoring husband.” We hear a dog barking in the background. “How to kill
mockingbirds.” “How to kill annoying birds in your yards.” We hear a bird sound. “Online
friendships can be very special.” Another ding, and then we move on to the next day’s
searches.
Some other queries eventually revealed include the following:
“adults with nervous tic,”
“gay churches in houston tx,”
“pimple that gets white head on it and never goes away,”
“how many online romances lead to sex in person,”
“things for kids to do in alaska,”
“how can you tell if he used you for sex,”
“christian women caught in extramarital affairs,”
“poems about friendship,”
“adults with nervous tic,”
“how does a person get over internet addiction,” and
“nicole richie is a bitch.”
The filmmakers’ project raises ethical questions that, in light of subsequent events —
from WikiLeaks’ unveiling the contents of diplomatic cables in 2010 to Eric Snowden’s
release of documents revealing the National Security Agency’s massive surveillance
programs in 2013 — are increasingly pertinent in culture today about access to
information, privacy, security, and the Internet. When the AOL leak occurred, many
researchers felt that using the leaked information violated their ethical commitments. Jon
Kleinberg, a computer scientist at Cornell, stated in response to the leak, “The number of
things it reveals about individual people seems too much. In general, you don’t want to do
research on tainted data.”  Christopher Manning, a computer scientist and linguist at
Stanford, felt that the possible advantages to using the information for research
outweighed the ethical stance that it should not be treated as a valid data set. Despite
acknowledging “genuine privacy concerns,” he believed that “having the AOL data
available is a great boon for research.”  Through its own artistic entry point to and
reliance on this leaked data, I Love Alaska provocatively refracts this ethical conundrum,
obliging its spectator to consider the extent to which the filmmakers themselves are
20
21

complicit with AOL’s breach of privacy and engage in an ethically inappropriate act. An
unavoidable question that I Love Alaska raises, in other words, is whether it is an ethically
sound documentary project. Without any metacommentary, is it able to pass as a critique
of AOL? Do the filmmakers violate the user’s right to privacy and intimacy by drawing
attention to her search history? Or, viewed from a more redemptive perspective, could I
Love Alaska be interpreted to function as a critique of the very ideology of privacy — that
our data belongs to us?
Twitter and the AOL search leak temporally coevolved: Twitter launched in July 2006,
AOL’s search leak occurred one month later in August, Chris Messina introduced the #
sign on Twitter in 2007, and I Love Alaska was completed by 2009. The two phenomena, I
would argue, are part and parcel of a broader cultural “hash logic” of searchability and
distributability, of hoping that the answers to our questions can be both archived and
provided by outsourcing our uncertainties to networked computing machines. I Love
Alaska’s textual dynamics seemingly strictly adhere to data and, by extension, legitimate
its truth claims. Significantly, the movie’s protagonist is identified as “#711391.” This
identification by number sign speaks to the film’s larger relationship to fact, giving the
impression that the filmmakers are simply relaying content from a database, without
veering into subjective interpretation. Along with the numbers provided by the movie’s
reliance on episodic divisions by weeks and individual sequences by date, the number sign
evokes a sense of mathematical precision and historical accuracy; semiotically speaking, it
carries what Roland Barthes might have called the “dream of scientificity.”  The
character indicates also semianonymity: it is a precise identification number belonging to
and serving to identify only one person as a highly specific data-collecting and -generating
body yet at the same time renders the person unnamed, faceless, and dehumanized.
In this sense, I Love Alaska is suggestive of the # sign’s allegorical potential for
describing the condition of digital culture: as part of a system for organizing,
communicating, and differentiating what Helen Nissenbaum refers to as our “personal
information flow” in an increasingly networked and information-based society.  From
this perspective, the sign’s function is in fact quite continuous with the hashmark and the
telephone’s number sign: an iteration for managing information, organizing data. To recall
the discussion of the Human Rights Campaign’s equal sign in the introduction, on AOL —
like so many other contemporary services — we are data bodies, encoded in and
represented by mathematical symbols. We are, in short, the digital’s digits.
By presenting information contained in leaked search histories, and without relying on
extracontextual content, I Love Alaska plays with our desire to infer narrative from data.
In the first day alone, we encounter an exposition that hints at the protagonist’s
dissatisfaction with domestic life — bothered by her husband’s snoring and birds in the
backyard — and curiosity about a virtual life beyond her home that her computer connects
her to, with either the possibility of or an already forming “online friendship.” As the days
proceed, the viewer infers from the data presented a narrative featuring a character we
might imagine to be a married, middle-aged, neurotic Christian woman living in Texas
who has fantasies of extramarital and alternative forms of sex, and, in the three-month
span of the movie’s plot, has an affair with someone she meets online and regrets it.
22
23

It is instructive to contrast the movie’s staging of the desire for narrative and character
with a New York Times cover story that gives in to it, tracking down a violated woman
behind one of AOL’s user numbers. Within a few days of the information leak, the
newspaper published a piece on its front page titled “A Face Is Exposed for AOL Searcher
No. 4417749.” It was accompanied by a photograph, also on the front page, of Thelma
Arnold, an older woman with a small black dog standing on her lap and kissing her face,
with a caption reading: “Thelma Arnold’s identity was betrayed by AOL records for her
Web searches, like ones for her dog, Dudley, who clearly has a problem.”  This caption’s
joke is a reference to one of Arnold’s searches identified in the article for “dog that
urinates on everything.” This front-page story serves as a counterpoint to Alaska,
providing the absent “face” behind the semianonymous user number. Even though the
New York Times piece in a sense reveals more — the name and private searches of the user
as well —within Helen Nissenbaum’s framework of “contextual integrity” for discussing
privacy and digital media, it would likely be viewed to be more ethically sound, largely
because the piece interviews Arnold and we can therefore presume that she has willingly
consented to the information’s publication.  I Love Alaska, on the other hand, offers no
such consolation: the woman remains unnamed, and there is no evidence suggesting the
user approves of the artistic appropriation of her personal information flow, particularly
given its dark, private, and likely embarrassing nature.
A second way to frame the distinction between these two texts is in narrative terms: the
New York Times story not only offers a character’s name and face, but it offers one of the
most attractive and necessary features that narrative has to offer: closure. A woman’s
personal information was wrongly revealed, AOL fixed their mistake, she was identified,
she spoke to reporters, and now readers see her dog happily kissing her. By contrast, the
movie is steadfastly resistant to cleaning up the messes of digital culture. It confronts its
viewers with them — and with a pessimistic paradox. On one hand it stands as a reminder
of the public’s weak historical memory that new media and its outlets are in the business
of making us forget (who recounts or even recalls this search leak anymore?), but at the
same time that the event is impossible to remember, it is also impossible to forget. In
recirculating leaked data, I Love Alaska is suggestive of the historical event’s impossibility
to achieve closure, drawing on the inevitable residual consequences of the AOL leak:
though the company removed users’ search histories from the Web, that did not stop
others, during the three days when the information was publicly available, from
downloading and storing the information elsewhere. Years later, #711391’s data, along
with many other users’ search histories, can still be easily accessed.
24
25

Figure 26. I Love Alaska (directed by Sander Plug and Lernert Engelberts, 2009)
I Love Alaska could be understood to stage what media theorist Lev Manovich
describes as the crucial antagonism between narrative and database, which he claims new
media in general throw into relief. He observes that with literature and cinema, “the
database of choices from which narrative is constructed (the paradigm) is implicit; while
the actual narrative (the syntagm) is explicit. New media reverses this relationship.
Database (the paradigm) is given material existence while narrative (the syntagm) is de-
materialised. Paradigm is privileged, syntagm is downplayed. Paradigm is real, syntagm is
virtual.”
What I thus want to suggest is how this movie, digital through and through — from its
subject matter to its critique, from its mode of production to its mode of distribution —
might be impossible to fully understand outside of what this chapter has been considering
as hash logic. Hash logic is in other words a logic of keywords, searchability, and
informaticization; it strips down language to basic elements, to bits of information. From
this data, the reader or Internet user is set on a task of inference and filling in gaps, or as
Manovich would say, of deducing syntagm from paradigm. A text such as I Love Alaska,
whose language is reduced to only keywords, precisely through its textual restraint,
demonstrates how narrative desire is structurally fetishized by this logic.
At the same time, this movie stages the problematic status of indexicality in the digital
age, whereby our access to reality relies less on the presumed authority of the
photographic image and increasingly on a presumed authority of the algorithms used to
access information. Its content, composed of search terms, not only points to our
investment in the belief of a universal index, but, presented in a moving image medium, it
also reminds us of indexicality’s other side. The identification number points indexically,
after all, to a person with thoughts and intentions who exists in the real world. The proof
of this reality, however, is not photographic or visual. Indeed, the images of Alaska that
the film provides adamantly insist that we are operating outside the logics of visual
indexicality. We have no proof that user #711391 ever made it to Alaska with her family.
Maybe in the end her extramarital affair destroyed her marriage, or maybe a family
26

vacation to Alaska was just another fantasy she was addicted to imagining, an escape from
Texas’s stifling heat. Or, maybe user #711391 does not even correspond to a single person,
as the movie’s narration slyly wants us to believe. In reality, there is a fair possibility that
multiple members of the household were sharing one account — hence the range of sexual
fantasies explored and also the paranoia not only about cheating but about accessing
Internet search histories as well (one query reads, for example, “how can you tell if a
spouse has spyware on your computer”). Even if #711391 is a she, and even if she did
make it to Alaska, we can rest assured that the film’s own images of Alaska do not belong
to her.
Without a face behind the user, we are, it would seem, only left with fingertips, if here
they are implicit. As a return to Vilém Flusser’s poetics, one might sense a series of
fingers playing with computers: whether it is AOL user #711391 exploring a new intimacy
with her computer or whether it is the filmmakers, ultimately editors, using their fingers
manipulatively, to match images with sounds that have no inherent, indexical connection.
The false indexicality of the image, in other words, is exposed, while we are confronted
with an index of what would seem to be of an altogether different nature. The index as
digit as number sign. All conflated by a sort of hash logic into Jimmy Fallon’s late night
finger-pounding shenanigans.
Emmanuel Levinas’s well-known reflections on the face in Totality and Infinity are
instructive to remember in this context. In a key passage, he writes, “[T]he face speaks to
me and thereby invites me to a relation incommensurate with a power exercised, be it
enjoyment or knowledge.” Levinas suggestively posits the face as a rubric for ethical
engagement, using the extreme case of murder as an example: “The epiphany of the face
brings forth the possibility of gauging the infinity of the temptation to murder, not only as
a temptation to total destruction, but also as the purely ethical impossibility of this
temptation and attempt.”  Another way to make sense of Levinas’s point would be to
understand the claim as follows: it is when we are face to face with the Other (to hold on
to Levinas’s terminology) that we are in effect able to determine what our ethical relation
to the Other is. In the absence of this face, our ethical compass is tumultuous and less
grounded; we are not reminded of the human being for whom our decisions have
consequence. This notion hinges on the assumption, as so many writers have claimed in
various contexts — to take an example from classical film theory, one might recall Béla
Bálazs’s writings on the close-up — that the face is an expressive landscape upon which
one can read the range of human emotions.  Extended into the 2010s, this phenomenon of
course surely contributes to Facebook’s enormous success as a social networking site: a
virtual sea of profile pictures of faces connected to each other, communicating, and
sharing information. Levinas’s point also, I would contend, accounts for I Love Alaska’s
ethical ambiguity: without a face behind the user and only her number, a viewer has
difficulty assessing his or her ethical engagement with the text.
In a sense, we return full circle to where this book began: staring into the strange
everydayness of the Facebook profile picture, and with a new reading of the equality sign
phenomenon. Perhaps it is the massive facelessness this event staged that confronts us
with an ethical ambiguity similar to what we find in I Love Alaska. Many users of the site
27
28

believed that uploading an image of an equal sign in the place where they normally show
their face was the “right” thing to do, to show their support for marriage equality. But
when datasets or typographical characters replace human faces, the effect throws us out of
the regime of right and wrong or good and bad —and into a loop of floating signification.

Coda
Canceling the Semiotic Square
The lines that end the preceding chapter were generated when I tried closing the chapter
with three consecutive number signs (###), the mark a press release uses to signify the end
of the document. The multi-lined graphic Microsoft Word translates them into, like the #
signs, also indicates the text has come to a finish. The altered inscription, not what I
intended, seems a fitting reminder of how punctuation both signifies on its own and also
takes on a command function in digital media contexts — when a specific combination of
keys is entered, the computer will turn it into a typographical symbol, lead us to a
webpage, or in some other way make a series of complex machinic operations readable for
humans.
Upon a first, broad consideration of the semiotics of such inscriptions and
transformations, it might seem that we ultimately rearrive at Peirce’s basic semiotic rule of
the symbol’s arbitrary relationship between the signifier and the signified. Especially in
looking at the number sign’s iterations across media technologies, a striking theme of the
previous chapter but indeed of the ones before it as well is that computers are agnostic
about which tokens are used to perform which functions. They just need to have functions
programmed. One might ask, for example, if the dot in web addresses could have been a
comma instead. Yet the same could be asked of natural languages as well — one need only
consider that French and English use different marks to signify quotation to see that marks
in a sense are pure symbols — unlike the index and the icon, bearing no trace to their
referents. Finally, however, this agnosticism reasserts the importance of the ambiguities
and anxieties that humans bring to encounters with technology: the # symbol becomes
pure reflection of ideology, from the pervasiveness of hashtags in popular culture to
worried reactions about the spread of Global English, from the gendered discourses about
the symbol’s introduction to telephones to its serving as a visual allegory for the
datafication of our lives.
The number sign’s function might ultimately be best distilled in an older media history
of an inscription the previous chapter did not examine and that is probably less familiar.
When a legal document in Ancient Rome was “canceled,” one would draw a lattice,
crisscrossing lines over the document, effectively and officially deleting the file upon
which the mark was superimposed. In her book Files, Cornelia Vismann offers a
theoretical reading of legal documents as a genre of writing and focuses her first two
chapters on canceling, which she argues is a conceptually revealing and sociohistorically
constitutive process of writing the law. She explains,
[T]here is another, far more literal link between barriers and
tabelliones [Roman notaries]. In the most literal way possible, the
latter determine the letter of the law when they use lines and strokes to
cross out a draft that has been copied. Because of the “latticed”
appearance of the deletions, this act is referred to as “canceling.”

Derived from Latin cancelli grating or lattice, from which are also
derived “chancel” and “chancellor” — the word means “to cross out,
from crossed lattice lines drawn across a legal document, to annul it,
hence destroy or delete it.” After they have been copied, drafts must
be crossed out so that the clean copy can become the unmistakable
original. The act of copying, then, is followed by the act of canceling.
Latticed lines or bars exclude the draft from further copying. The
lattice covering the writing literally bars textual production; it puts an
end to the chancery’s babble of voices arising from dictation and
public reading, and releases the clean copy, the written law, into a
“zone of silence.”
Figure 27. “Scripsi.” Adriano Capelli, Lexicon Abbreviaturarum: Dizionario di Abbreviature Latine et Italiane
(Milan, 1994), 411
Vissman argues that this process of deleting “rather than writing establishes the symbolic
order of the law.”  She quotes Derrida, who makes the same point more generally, writing
that it is “obliteration that, paradoxically, constitutes the originary legibility of the very
thing it erases.”  Chancery, the term for the site where such official documents were
written, etymologically comes from chancel or cancel, “to cross out with lines.” The
mark’s ultimate irony, by extension, is that if the lattice works properly, it obliterates itself.
The canceled document disappears. Indeed, in reviewing the various historical trajectories
of the # symbol, one could consider how it in effect writes over itself, renamed and
reprogrammed again and again. In turn, the cancel figures as a useful metaphor to think
about the # symbol’s forgotten histories and semiotic circulations — and indeed of the
neglected but constitutive legacies and inscriptions of punctuation and typographical
symbols more broadly.
This book has staged a series of readings, pausing on moving and still images, revisiting
theoretical concepts, and mobilizing them in new directions as inspired by a series of
punctuation marks. Rather than following a prescribed path or selectively forcing
examples into a predetermined master argument, I have attempted to let the representation
and logic of such inscriptions guide our thought to ultimately better make sense of digital
media and contemporary culture.
As they move into digital contexts, punctuation marks reveal themselves to be both
continuous and discontinuous: each individual mark has a set of relatively dependable
qualities and textual functions within its context of use that carries with it an opportunity
to reflect on particular cultural protocols, while each mark also adapts to new conditions
1
2
3

of meaning. As such, punctuation’s cultural histories and aesthetic practices both direct us
to and problematize the categories of “new media” and the “digital”: from older moments
of new media represented by the number sign’s introduction to the touch-tone telephone to
the visual culture of dotcommania at the turn of the millennium to the everyday
exchanging of emoticons made of punctuation marks in the 2010s. Such textual shifts
across contemporary media cultures have largely been critically overlooked, while the
little attention that has been paid to various punctuation marks is generally disdainful or at
best whimsical. Backlash against the popularity of the hashtag might be the most obvious
and recent illustration of this tendency, which itself must be interpreted as having a
discursive history rooted in anxieties about language and literacy. Yet the ways in which
punctuation marks elicit larger questions about patterns of and within culture, society, art,
and knowledge production, I hope to have demonstrated, are suggestive of the ongoing
values of critical theories. Theory is needed more than ever at this moment of information
overload in our media fields when we are witnessing profound epistemological
restructurings that coincide in contemporary scholarly discourses with what often feels
like the short-sighted embrace of digital technologies in the hopes that they will solve
complicated problems.
On this note, I have in mind a previous remark, written twenty years ago in relation to
media theory. W. J. T. Mitchell claimed in 1994, in his introduction to Picture Theory:
“Knowing what pictures are doing, understanding them, doesn’t seem necessary to give us
power over them. I’m far from sanguine that this book, or any book, can change the
situation. Perhaps its principal function is disillusionment, the opening of a negative
critical space that would reveal how little we understand about pictures and how little
difference mere ‘understanding’ alone is likely to make.”
Mitchell’s “negative critical space” invokes a Nietzschean turn to the dark as forging a
path of inquiry, aligning theoretical work with the lucid description of the structures that
guide social and cultural practices, so as to cast them in a new light and to reveal the limits
of our knowledge, perspectives, and experiences. It is worth understanding various
hesitations to confront the abstract claims of theory in scholarly discourses and research
initiatives at the moment in the context of facing what seem to be strikingly “material”
problems across the economy and the environment. The more “concrete” nature of digital
technologies tempt us with tangible solutions that would seem outside theory’s domain.
Yet such hope in technology masks conditions whose limits need to be confronted in their
own terms. Aren’t many “material” problems facing us fundamentally ideological?
Haven’t the great philosophers compellingly shown how ideological and material
conditions, base and superstructure, are mutually constitutive?
I am aligned with efforts by a handful of media scholars, from Wendy Chun to
Alexander Galloway to Mark Hansen, who have turned to rather than away from theory to
make more complete sense of the cultural implications of digital media, mobilizing
concepts that allow us to think through and understand the stakes of the digital within long
and deep, or even scattered, philosophical trajectories. I share a realist skepticism with
Mitchell, however, about the limits of theoretical work’s potentials for enacting
substantive change upon its areas of study.
4

Nonetheless, I hope this book has demonstrated some potentials for renewing rich
traditions of theoretical inquiry for digital contexts — specifically, in this case, those
associated with semiotics —that have largely been abandoned but are needed for making
sense of contemporary textual mobility and visual culture. Punctuation marks are more
present than ever in our visual field, engaging in contradictory but nevertheless structuring
processes of making meaning.
Pronouncing an even more direct engagement with semiotic theory, this book originally
began with an illustration of a semiotic square, which would map out the conceptual
relations among the primary symbols that each chapter would proceed to examine. The
logic of the semiotic square relies on its most fundamental level on a term and its opposite.
As Paul Bouissac explains, the first phase in the “generation of the categorical terms that
articulate semantic categories” in the Greimasian square is a “set of relations between a
term and its contrary and between these two terms and their contradictories.”  Though
there have of course been a fair share of very complex semiotic squares drawn by
sophisticated thinkers, punctuation marks did not seem to map onto one appropriately. As
we have seen, punctuation tends to fall outside the logic of binary suppositions, perhaps
most obviously of image/language and of number/letter. Punctuation’s ability to flirt with
and escape such traditional categories, as implied by Flusser and Barthes, is precisely one
of its most alluring features.
It was not until considering how the # symbol leaves us alongside the history of the
lattice mark, as Vissman documents it, that, rather than opening the book with a semiotic
square, it made sense to instead close the book by “canceling” the semiotic square. How
might this ancient hash’s tic-tac-toe structure, like the semiotic square, invite us to map
conceptual relations by filling in its various coordinates? Reappropriating the Roman
lattice as a form in lieu of the square offers the conceptual advantage that it need not be
restricted to the binary divisions that so often structure the logic of the square into
oppositions. The form of the lattice nevertheless offers a similarly gridded structure,
which, like the square, could be used to map out relations with categories, if only as
provocations for critical reflection. From the dot to the hash, punctuation today is
continually redefined and put to new uses to help navigate and manage textual expression
and proliferation. Thus I close with a playful gesture that once again puts a loose
punctuational mark to a new use, here becoming a metamark for visualizing conceptual
relations among other punctuation marks.
The perfect lattice would, ontologically, never be seen or written in. I will embrace this
book’s many inevitable imperfections and let the square’s cancel remain imperfect by
actually drawing a lattice. In other words, I offer a cancel in the form of a semiotic lattice
for my readers. Like Me and You and Everyone We Know’s parenthetical expression that
turns punctuation inside out to allow its young character to charmingly visualize his
perverse idea, the following lattice deforms the traditional semiotic square, spilling out
into its environment rather than closing itself off from it. I invite you, the reader, to draw
in it and use it to visualize the dynamics of punctuation marks — those that this book has
explored and/or those it has left out.
5

Figure 28. Semiotic lattice
Will you place the marks all in one corner? Will you fill in each grid with a different
mark? Do those marks that use the computer’s shift key for their inscription go at the top
and those that are “unshifted” belong at the bottom? Will “loose” punctuation marks like
the hash be separated from “strict” marks like the period? Perhaps one column is for
letters, one for numbers, and one for punctuation? Or is the grid itself punctuation,
mapping out nonsemantic relations of thought? Does every mark inscribe its own history
of erasure? The lattice, in the end, stands as a summary of where this book’s winding path
into the digital present has taken us.

Notes
Introduction
1 Visual AIDS Staff, “Before There Were Memes, There Was LOVE, AIDS, RIOT,”
http://www.visualaids.org/blog/detail/7509#.UVnOIXDZYeG (27 March 2013).
2 This line, though, is in fact spoken by Barnes’s character Felix, describing his love for Robin, in Nightwood (New
York: New Directions, 1937), 111.
3 Immanuel Kant, Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, trans. Paul Carus (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1977), 14.
4 Naomi Klein, No Logo (Toronto: Knopf Canada, 1999), 26.
5 Jean Baudrillard, “The Precession of Simulacra,” in B. Wallis, ed., Art after odernism (Boston: Godine, 1984).
6 Kathy Giuffre, Interview with Ryan Conrad, Off Topic, Episode 4, “Marriage Unions, and The Politics of
Partnership” (5 April 2013), http://offtopicradio.org/2013/04/05/episode-4-marriage-unions-and-the-politics-of-
partnership/.
7 David Golumbia, The Cultural Logic of Computation (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2009), 14.
8 Fredric Jameson, “Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism,” New Left Review I/146 (July–
August 1984): 57.
9 Marshall McLuhan, The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 1962).
10 Theodor Adorno, “Punctuation Marks,” trans. Shierry Weber Nicholsen, Antioch Review 48, no. 3, Poetry Today
(Summer 1990): 301.
11 Bruno Latour, “Visualisation and Cognition: Drawing Things Together,” in Knowledge and Society: Studies in the
Sociology of Culture Past and Present, vol. 6, ed. H. Kuklick (Bingley, UK: Jai Press, 1986), 7.
12 M. B. Parkes, Pause and Effect: An Introduction to the History of Punctuation in the West (Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1993), 1.
13 Adorno, “Punctuation Marks,” 300–301.
14 Jodi Dean, Blog Theory: Feedback and Capture in the Circuits of Drive (Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2010), 1.
15 Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, “The Enduring Ephemeral, or the Future Is a Memory,” Critical Inquiry 35, no. 1
(Autumn 2008): 148–71.
16 Michael Fried, “Barthes’s Punctum,” Critical Inquiry 31, no. 2 (Spring 2005): 542.
17 Roland Barthes, Camera Lucida: Reflections on Photography, trans. Richard Howard (New York, NY: Hill and
Wang, 1981), 8.
18 Ibid., 26.
19 Ibid., 26–27.
20 Fried, “Barthes’s Punctum,” 546.
21 Barthes, Camera Lucida, 8.
22 Vilém Flusser, Does Writing Have a Future?, trans. Nancy Ann Roth (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 2011), 20.
23 Ibid., 25.
24 Ibid., 23.
25 Johanna Drucker, The Alphabetic Labyrinth: The Letters in History and the Imagination (London: Thames and
Hudson, 1995), 21.
26 W. J. T. Mitchell, “The Pictorial Turn,” Artforum International 30, no. 7 (March 1992): 89–94.

27 Jennifer Devere-Brody, Punctuation: Art, Politics, and Play (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2008), 48,
165.
28 Jonathan Crary, 24/7: Late Capitalism and the Ends of Sleep (London: Verso, 2013), 44.
29 Quoted in Calvin Tomkins, “Experimental People,” The New Yorker 90, no. 5 (24 March 2014): 38.
30 Brian Droitcour, “Making Word: Ryan Trecartin as Poet,” Rhizome (27 July 2011),
http://rhizome.org/editorial/2011/jul/27/making-word-ryan-trecartin-poet/.
31 Allegra Krasznekewicz, “Ryan Trecartin at LACMA,” Daily Serving: An International Publication for
Contemporary Art (31 March 2014).
32 Droitcour, “Making Word.”
33 Piper Marshall, “Hash the Planet,” Artforum (2 September 2011), http://artforum.com/diary/id=28881.
34 Lisa Samuels and Jerome McGann, “Deformance and Interpretation,” New Literary History 30, no. 1 (1999): 26.
35 Susan Sontag, “Against Interpretation,” Against Interpretation and Other Essays (New York: Picador, 2001), 4.
36 Parkes, Pause and Effect, 1.
37 Lynne Truss, Eats, Shoots & Leaves: The Zero Tolerance Approach to Punctuation (New York: Gotham Books,
2003).
38 See, for example, André Bazin’s “The Myth of Total Cinema” or “The Evolution of the Language of Cinema,” in
What Is Cinema? Vol. 1, trans. Hugh Gray (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967), 17–40.
39 A useful overview of literary codework that is quite attuned to the genre’s tendency for punctuational play is Rita
Raley’s “Interferences: [Net.Writing] and the Practice of Codework,” electronic book review (September 2002).
40 Michel Gondry interviewed by Adam Schartoff, Filmwax Radio, episode 177 (25 November 2013),
http://rooftopfilms.com/blog/.
1. Connecting the Dots: Periodizing the Digital
1 Paul A. David, “Clio and the Economics of QWERTY,” American Economic Review 75, no. 2 (May 1985): 333.
2 Tim O’Reilly, “What Is Web 2.0? Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next Generation of Software,” in
The Social Media Reader, ed. Michael Mandiberg (New York: New York University Press, 2012), 32.
3 Ben Yagoda, “The Point of Exclamation,” New York Times (6 August 2012).
4 Ben Crair, “The Period Is Pissed,” New Republic (25 November 2013),
http://www.newrepublic.com/article/115726/period-our-simplest-punctuation-mark-has-become-sign-anger.
5 N. Katherine Hayles, My Mother Was a Computer: Digital Subjects and Literary Texts (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2005), 39.
6 Ashley Kunsa writes, “F. Scott Fitzgerald once called for authors to ‘Cut out all these exclamation points,’
claiming, ‘An exclamation point is like laughing at your own joke.’ ” She likens Fitzgerald to Cormac McCarthy,
who in an interview with Oprah Winfrey dismissively referred to punctuation as “weird little marks.” Kunsa,
“Mystery and Possibility in Cormac McCarthy,” Journal of Modern Literature 35, no. 2 (2010): 146. See also
http://excessiveexclamation.blogspot.ca/.
7 David Shipley and Will Schwalbe, Send: Why People Email So Badly and How to Do It Better (New York: Alfred
A. Knopf, 2008), 137.
8 Jen Doll, “The Imagined Lives of Punctuation Marks,” Atlantic Wire (21 August 2012).
9 Carol E. Lee, “Punctuation Nerds Stopped by Obama Slogan, ‘Forward.’ ” Wall Street Journal (30 July 2012).
10 Victor Morton, “New Obama Slogan Has Long Ties to Marxism, Socialism,” Washington Times (30 April 2012).
11 Alexander Galloway, Protocol: How Control Exists after Decentralization (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2004),
8.
12 J. Postel and J. Reynolds, “Domain Requirements,” RFC 920 (October 1984), 1.

13 P. Mockapetris, “Domain Names-Concepts and Facilities,” RFC 1034 (November 1987), 1.
14 Paul Garrin, “DNS: Long Winded and Short Sighted,” Nettime (19 October 1998).
15 Mockapetris, “RFC 1034,” 8.
16 Katie Hefner and Matthew Lyon, Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins of the Internet (New York: Simon
and Schuster, 1996), 144.
17 Brian Reid, quoted in Hefner and Lyon, Where Wizards Stay Up Late, 144.
18 Walter Ong, “Historical Backgrounds of Elizabethan and Jacobean Punctuation Theory,” PMLA 59, no. 2 (June
1944): 353.
19 J. Postel, IEN 161 (August 1979), 1.
20 Ong, “Historical Backgrounds,” 351.
21 David Denby, “Adaptation,” The New Yorker (9 December 2002).
22 Joshua Landy, “Still Life in a Narrative Age: Charlie Kaufman’s Adaptation,” Critical Inquiry 37, no. 3 (Spring
2011): 508–9.
23 Andrew Ross, No Collar: The Humane Workplace and Its Hidden Costs (New York: Basic Books, 2003), 14.
24 Geert Lovink, “After the Dotcom Crash: Recent Literature on Internet Business and Society,” Australian
Humanities Review (September 2002).
25 Gina Neff, Venture Labor: Work and the Burden of Risk in Innovative Industries (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
2012), 6.
26 Walter Benjamin, “Theses on the Philosophy of History,” in Illuminations, ed. Hannah Arendt, trans. Harry Zohn
(New York: Schocken Books, 1968), 257.
27 Charlie Kaufman, Adaptation., November 21, 2000 revision, 76.
28 Marjorie Garber, Quotation Marks (New York: Routledge, 2003), 5.
29 Benedetto Croce, History: Its Theory and Practice, trans. Douglas Ainslie (New York: Russell and Russell,
1960), 12.
30 Marshall Brown, “Periods and Resistances,” Modern Language Quarterly 62, no. 3 (December 2001): 312.
31 David Perkins, Is Literary History Possible? (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992), 64.
32 Fredric Jameson, “Periodizing the 60s,” Social Text 9/10 (Spring/Summer 1984): 178.
33 Brian Rotman, Becoming Beside Ourselves: The Alphabet, Ghosts, and Distributed Human Being (Durham,
N.C.: Duke University Press, 2008); Hayles, My Mother Was a Computer.
34 Rotman, Becoming Beside Ourselves, 2.
35 N. Katherine Hayles, How We Think: Digital Media and Contemporary Technogenesis (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2012).
36 Peter Sloterdijk, Spheres, Vol. 1: Microspherology, trans. Wieland Hoban (Los Angeles, Calif.: Semiotext(e),
2011).
37 Ibid., 80–81.
38 Timothy Morton, Hyperobjects: Philosophy and Ecology after the End of the World (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2013).
39 Hayles, How We Think, 55–79.
2. Within, Aside, and Too Much: On Parentheticality across Media
1 Alan Liu, The Laws of Cool: Knowledge Work and the Culture of Information (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2004).
2 Duncan White, “‘(I have camouflaged everything, my love)’: Lolita’s Pregnant Parentheses,” Nabokov Studies 9

(2005): 48.
3 Jacques Derrida, “Signature Event Context,” Limited Inc (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1988), 1–
21. The irony is not lost that this essay was, in fact, originally delivered not in print, but in an oral presentation.
4 Ibid., 2.
5 Ibid., 21.
6 Derrida’s idea of “non-saturation” is essentially related to his idea of there always being an act of absent reading
that is present in every act of writing. One can never know what traveling a piece of writing will do, and this
uncertainty is always necessarily worked into the act of writing, and it is this sort of openness to uncertain futures,
meanings, and paths that marks context as non-saturated —never finished, never completely mastered. “Signature
Event Context,” 3–12.
7 Theodor W. Adorno, “Punctuation Marks,” trans. Shierry Weber Nicholsen, The Antioch Review 48, no. 3
(Summer 1990): 304.
8 Robert Grant Williams, “Reading the Parenthesis,” SubStance 22, no. 1 (1993): 53.
9 Roger Ebert, “500 Days of Summer,” Chicago Sun Times (15 July 2009).
10 Joseph Natoli, “The Perils of Being Up in the Air,” Senses of Cinema (April 2010),
http://sensesofcinema.com/2010/feature-articles/the-perils-of-being-up-in-the-air/.
11 Michel Foucault, The History of Sexuality, trans. Robert Hurley (New York: Pantheon Books, 1978), 27.
12 Friedrich Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals and Ecce Homo, ed. and trans. Walter Kaufmann (New York:
Vintage Press, 1989), 97–98.
13 Quoted in Derrida (directed by Kirby Dick and Amy Ziering, U.S., 2002).
14 Rose Goldsen, The Show and Tell Machine: How Television Works and Works You Over (New York: Dial Press,
1977), 67.
15 These are examples of phrases Goldsen uses elsewhere in the chapter to describe the range of sounds the laff box
can make. Ibid., 68.
16 Rick Altman, The American Film Musical (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1987), 202.
17 The laugh track has also captured the theoretical interest of Slavoj Zizek. He has written of it in terms of its
setting into place not interactivity, but an “interpassive” engagement, by which the laugh track “deprives” us of
our own “passive reaction of satisfaction.” He uses this notion to suggest that contrary to the more traditional
criticism of new media, they turn us into passive consumers: “the real threat of new media is that they deprive us
of our passivity, of our authentic passive experience, and thus prepare us for mindless frenetic activity — for
endless work.” In “Will You Laugh for Me, Please?” 18 July 2003,
http://www.16beavergroup.org/mtarchive/archives/000330.php.
18 Gelbart Papers, Box 36, Folder 5, 2. UCLA special collections, Performing Arts. The “strikethrough” font stands
for what was crossed out in pencil in the manuscript. Apparently, in fact, the network did do “testing” of the show
with and without the laugh track. Todd Gitlin writes, “After a few years of its run, . . . the producers of M*A*S*H
tried to convince CBS to drop the show’s laugh track, which they thought distracting. Testing showed that the
same show scored higher with the track than without it, so the track stayed,” Inside Prime Time (New York:
Pantheon Books, 1983), 33. Gitlin notes in his own footnote to this that the British syndication of M*A*S*H did
not employ a laugh track. He comments that Americans require “social cues to confirm what is comical,” further
reflecting the sort of disdain with which scholars and television watchers regard the track.
19 Suzy Kalter, The Complete Book of M*A*S*H (New York: H. N. Abrams, 1984), 29.
20 There have also been numerous social psychology experiments conducted that examine the relationships between
perceptions of humor, self-perception, and gender differences that use the laugh track as a variable. See, for
instance, Howard Leventhal and Gerald C. Cupchik, “The Informational and Facilitative Effects of an Audience
upon Expression and the Evaluation of Humorous Stimuli,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 11
(1975): 363–80.
21 Williams, “Reading the Parenthesis,” 53.
22 Jacob Smith, “The Frenzy of the Audible: Pleasure, Authenticity, and Recorded Laughter,” Television and New

Media 6, no. 3 (2005): 23.
23 Many live-audience laughs for laugh tracks were recorded from pantomime routines such as Red Skelton’s, since
the silence of the performance makes it easier to record pure audience sound. Ben Glenn II, “A Short History of
the Laugh Track,” www.tvparty.com/laugh.html.
24 Lisa Gitelman, Always Already New: Media, History and the Data of Culture (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
2005).
25 Derrida, “Signature Event Context,” 2.
26 Julia Bryan-Wilson, “Some Kind of Grace: An Interview with Miranda July,” Camera Obscura 19, no. 1 (2004):
193.
27 Carina Chocano, “Me and You and Everyone We Know,” Los Angeles Times (24 June 2005).
28 Laura Mulvey, “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema,” Screen 16, no. 3: 6–18.
29 Foucault, History of Sexuality, 11.
30 Charlie Chan, “Back and forth, forever,” Me and You and Everyone We Know, IMDb user comment board, page
1, http://imdb.com/title/tt0415978/usercomments (posted 3 May 2005).
31 David Bordwell, “Mutual Friends and Chronologies of Chance,” in Poetics of Cinema (New York: Routledge,
2008), 189–250. Bordwell discusses Me and You throughout the chapter and in detail on 216–17.
32 Fredric Jameson, Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (Durham, N.C.: Duke University
Press, 1991), 4.
33 Rosalind Krauss, “Video: The Aesthetics of Narcissism,” October 1 (Spring 1976); Jean Baudrillard, The System
of Objects, trans. James Benedict (London: Verso, 2005), 70. Krauss writes, “Unlike the other visual arts, video is
capable of recording and transmitting at the same time — producing instant feedback. The body is therefore as it
were centered between two machines that are the opening and closing of a parenthesis. The first of these is the
camera; the second is the monitor, which re-projects the performer’s image with the immediacy of the mirror”
(52). She later elaborates on this “paradigm situation” in relation to Vertical Roll (61). Video’s medium-specific
instant feedback could be read as instantiating a trajectory of a distinctly postmodern aesthetic that undoes the
unidirectional, top-down path from artist to spectator, which continues to be relevant with online video, Web 2.0,
and user-generated content.
34 Jean-Louis Baudry, “Ideological Effects of the Basic Cinematographic Apparatus,” Critical Visions in Film
Theory: Classic and Contemporary Readings, ed. Timothy Corrigan, Patricia White, and Meta Mazaj (Boston,
MA: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2011), 40.
35 Bruno Latour, “Why Has Critique Run Out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to Matters of Concern,” Critical
Inquiry 30 (Winter 2004): 236.
36 Bruno Latour, We Have Never Been Modern (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993).
3. # Logic
1 Susan Orlean, “Hash,” New Yorker Online (June 2010), http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/susanorlean/.
2 Lindy West, “Symbol of the Year: #,” GQ.com (13 December 2010).
3 Kelly Conniff, “France Bids Adieu to the Word ‘Hashtag,’ ” Time (30 January 2013).
4 Marquard Smith, “Theses on the Philosophy of History: The Word of Research in the Age of Digital Searchability
and Distributability,” Journal of Visual Culture 12, no. 3 (2013): 385.
5 Piper Marshall, “Hash the Planet,” Artforum (2 September 2011), http://artforum.com/diary/id=28881.
6 Marjorie Garber, Quotation Marks (New York: Routledge, 2003), 10.
7 Wendy Chun, “The Enduring Ephemeral, or the Future Is a Memory,” Critical Inquiry 35, no. 1 (Autumn 2008):
148–71.
8 M. B. Parkes, Pause and Effect: An Introduction to the History of Punctuation in the West (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1993), 10, 11.

9 Espen Aarseth, Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1997), 40.
10 N. Katherine Hayles, “Print Is Flat, Code Is Deep: The Importance of Media-Specific Analysis,” Poetics Today
25, no. 1 (Spring 2004): 67–90.
11 Alexander Galloway, “Language Wants to Be Overlooked,” Journal of Visual Culture 5, no. 3 (December 2006):
320–21.
12 Bernard Stiegler, Technics and Time: 2, trans. Stephen Barker (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2009),
98, 116, 136.
13 Vilém Flusser, “The Non-Thing 2,” in The Shape of Things, trans. Anthony Mathews (London: Reaktion, 1999),
92.
14 “A Story About ‘#’,” Western Electric news features (September 1973), courtesy of AT&T.
15 “New Phone Buttons Offer Instant Banking, Cooking,” Bell Labs News (29 March 1968).
16 Sadie Plant, Zeroes + Ones: Digital Women + The New Technoculture (New York: Doubleday, 1997); Alexander
Galloway, Protocol: How Control Exists after Decentralization (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2004), 188;
Wendy Chun, Programmed Visions: Software and Memory (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2011), 29–34.
17 James R. Harris, letter to William Safire (25 March 1991), courtesy of AT&T Archives, 1.
18 Ibid., 2–3.
19 “A Story about ‘#’,” Western Electric news features (September 1973), courtesy of AT&T.
20 Katie Hafner, “Researchers Yearn to Use AOL Logs, but They Hesitate,” New York Times (23 August 2006).
21 Ibid.
22 Roland Barthes, “Réponses” (interview), Tel Quel 47 (Autumn 1971): 97.
23 Helen Nissenbaum, Privacy in Context: Technology, Policy, and the Integrity of Social Life (Stanford, Calif.:
Stanford University Press, 2010), 4.
24 Michael Barbaro and Tem Zeller Jr., “A Face Is Exposed for AOL Searcher No. 4417749,” New York Times (9
August 2006).
25 Nissenbaum, Privacy in Context, 6–11.
26 Lev Manovich, “Database as a Symbolic Form,” Convergence 5 (1999): 89.
27 Emmanuel Levinas, Totality and Infinity: An Essay on Exteriority, trans. Alphonso Lingis (The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff Publishers, 1979), 198, 199.
28 See Mary Ann Doane’s overview of these discourses in her essay “The Close-Up: Scale and Detail in Cinema,”
differences: A Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies 14, no. 3 (Fall 2003): 89–111.
Coda
1 Cornelia Vismann, Files: Law and Media Technology, trans. Geoffrey Winthrop-Young (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford
University Press, 2008), 26.
2 Ibid.
3 Jacques Derrida, Of Grammatology, trans. Gayatri Spivak (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1997), 109, quoted in Vissman, Files, 26–27.
4 W. J. T. Mitchell, Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and Visual Representation (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1994), 6.
5 Paul Bouissac, Encyclopedia of Semiotics, ed. Paul Bouissac (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), 866.

Index
(500) Days of Summer, 74–75, 80, 96
Aarseth, Espen, 114
Academy Award, 57, 120
Adaptation., 33–34, 45, 55–63, 65, 70, 72, 97, 104
Adorno, Theodor, 9–11, 78
alphabet, 11, 20, 66–67, 117; postalphabetic, 20
Altman, Rick, 84
American Dialect Society, 106
AOL, 35, 126–131, 133
apparatus, 23, 95, 98, 114–115
appropriation, 16, 66, 130
Arpanet, 88
Arrested Development, 87
asterisk, 119, 122
autocorrect, 23–24, 72
Babe, 104
Babel, 95
Balázs, Béla, 133
Barnes, Djuna, 3
Barthes, Roland, 15–20, 22, 39, 100, 129, 140; punctum, 15–17, 22, 39, 100; scientificity, 129; studium, 15–16, 19
Baudrillard, Jean, 6, 98
Baudry, Jean-Louis, 98
Bazin, André, 145n38
Being John Malkovich, 56
Bell Laboratories, 118–119, 121, 123
Bell Labs News, 118
Benjamin, Walter, 14–15, 60; Angel of History, 14; aura, 15
Bordwell, David, 95
Bouissac, Paul, 139
Brown, Marshall, 65
buttons, 117–119, 121–123
Cage, Nicolas, 34, 56–58, 60, 63
canceling, 135–136, 140
Carina Chocano, 93
Cayley, John, 33
chancery, 137
Chomsky, Noam, 35–39
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong, 8, 15, 111, 114, 139
cinematic apparatus, 95, 98, 114–115
clicktivism, 3

Clueless, 62
codework, 33
colon, 10, 27, 29, 55
comma, 10–12, 18, 20, 25–30, 32, 41, 49, 55, 76, 135
Comma Boat, 24–25, 28–29
Commission générale de terminologie et de néologie (France), 106
computation, 7–8, 66, 113
Cramer, Florian, 33
Crary, Jonathan, 23–24
Crash, 95
Croce, Benedetto, 64
Crocker, Steve, 53
Dave Chappelle’s Block Party, 37
Dean, Jodi, 14
deconstruction, 76–77, 83
deformative criticism, 28–29
Denby, David, 57–58
Derrida, 76–79, 82–83, 85, 87–89, 91–92, 97–98, 137; “Signature Event Context,” 76–79, 97
Devere-Brody, Jennifer, 22–23
digital media, 4, 8, 13, 15, 22–23, 48, 66, 70, 73, 89, 116–18, 130, 135, 137, 139; digital ecosystems, 125; digital
subconscious, 120; history, 42, 66–67; players, 39
digitization, 104
displacement, 77–78, 92, 111
distributability, 128
Domain Name System, 51
dot-com, 34, 42–43, 46, 55, 59–63, 65, 69, 71; dotcommania, 34, 97, 138
Droitcour, Bryan, 24, 26–27
Drucker, Johanna, 20
Ebert, Roger, 80
Edison, Thomas, 88
Elliott, Missy, 109
Emma, 62
emoticons, 4, 20, 27, 47, 74, 92, 98, 100, 138
enduring ephemeral, 15, 111
Engelberts, Lernert, 33, 125, 132
equality sign, 1, 3–8, 15, 134
ethics, 35, 127–28, 130, 133–34
exclamation mark, 43, 46–49, 52–54, 71
face, 26, 70, 92, 124, 130, 133–34; facelessness, 129, 133–34
Facebook, 1–2, 6, 14–15, 110, 115, 133–34; liking, 6, 14; posting, 6; profile pictures, 1–2, 6, 133
Fallon, Jimmy, 104, 107–10, 133
feminism, 95–96, 114

film theory, 33, 98, 114, 133
fingers, 5, 42, 106–7, 109–10, 116–18, 133
Fitzgerald, F. Scott, 46
floating signifier, 68, 74, 119, 134
Flusser, Vilem, 17–20, 31, 42, 66, 116–18, 133, 140; non-thing, 116–17
Foucault, Michel, 81–82, 93–94
Fried, Michael, 15–17
Galloway, Alexander, 51, 114–15, 139
Garber, Marjorie, 22–23, 64, 110
Garrin, Paul, 52
Gelbart, Larry, 85–86, 100
gender, 120–21, 136, 150n20
Gitelman, Lisa, 8, 88
global English, 106–7, 124, 136
Godard, Jean-Luc, 95
Goldsen, Rose, 83–85, 100
Golumbia, David, 7–8
Gondry, Michel, 35–39, 115
Google, 75, 115
The Great Gatsby, 62
Hansen, Mark, 139
hashmark, 28, 34, 108–14, 117, 125, 129; hash logic, 118, 128, 132–33; hashtag, 3, 28, 32, 103–13, 115, 117, 124,
136, 138; hashtaggery, 103–4
Hayles, N. Katherine, 33, 44–45, 66–67, 72, 114
Heckerling, Amy, 62
Hefner, Katie, 53
Her, 120
Hill, Jonah, 108
Hollywood, 56–57, 61–62, 94
Human Rights Campaign, 1, 6, 129
hyperlinking, 113
hyperobject, 70
I Love Alaska, 33, 35, 125, 128–32, 134
icon (semiotic), 4, 100, 136; iconography, 47–48, 68, 70, 74, 88
image, 1–6, 11, 12, 14–19, 21, 30, 32–33, 36, 39, 48, 75, 91–93, 95, 97–98, 114, 126–27, 132–134, 137, 140; and
language, 4, 15, 17–19, 21, 33, 39, 140
Iñárritu, Alejandro González, 96
indie aesthetics, 11, 74–75, 95–97; independent cinema, 57, 95–96
indexicality, 110, 132–33, 136; hashtag’s indexing function, 105, 111, 113, 116; index fingers, 109–110
instant messaging, 89, 92, 98
interface, 21, 32, 46, 114
interpellation, 39

Is the Man Who Is Tall Happy?, 35–38, 115
Jameson, Fredric, 7–8, 65, 98; periodization, 65; postmodernism, 7–8
Jonze, Spike, 33, 45, 56–57, 61, 63, 120
July, Miranda, 33–35, 70, 88, 96, 128
Kalter, Suzy, 86
Kant, Immanuel, 4
Kasuma, Yayoi, 22
Kaufman, Charlie, 34, 56–57, 59, 61–63
K‑CoreaINC.K (section a), 26
keys, 23, 31, 32, 41, 42, 52, 103, 106, 116–120, 122, 124, 135, 141; keyboards, 9, 20, 31, 41, 42, 72, 116–20, 122,
124
Klein, Naomi, 5
Krauss, Rosalind, 98
Lakoff, George, 49
Landy, Joshua, 58
Late Night with Jimmy Fallon, 104, 107–10
Latour, Bruno, 9, 99
laugh track, 82–88, 92, 98, 100, 105
letters, 19, 21, 23, 32, 37, 41–42, 54, 66, 68, 112, 118–19, 141
Levinas, Emmanuel, 133
Liu, Alan, 73; “information cool,” 73–74
Lolita, 76, 92
loose punctuation, 3–4, 32, 122, 140–41
Lovink, Geert, 59–60
Luhrman, Baz, 62
Lyon, Matthew, 53
macros, 11–12, 30
Magnolia, 95
Manning, Christopher, 128
Manovich, Lev, 131–32
marginalization, 79–81, 87, 94
Marshall, Piper, 28, 109–11
Marxism, 8, 49, 114
M*A*S*H, 85–88
McGann, Jerome, 28–29
McLuhan, Marshall, 8
Me and You and Everyone We Know, 33–34, 82, 88, 90–93, 95, 140
Memmott, Talan, 33
Messina, Chris, 128
metadata, 113
metamark, 140
Microsoft Word, 72, 135

mise en scene, 26
Mitchell, W. J. T., 21, 138–39; pictorial turn, 21
Mockapetris, Paul, 52
modernity, 95, 98–99, 101
Morton, Timothy, 70
mot-dièse, 106, 124
MTV, 27
Mulvey, Laura, 93
Nabokov, Vladimir, 76
National Security Agency, 127
Neff, Gina, 60–61
neoliberalism, 6
New Economy, 59–60
new media, 28, 30–32, 34, 43, 45, 61, 66, 75, 83, 85n17, 87–88, 97, 100–101, 111, 114, 118, 121, 125, 130–31, 138
New Yorker, 56–57, 104
New York Times, 121, 129–30
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 82, 138
Nissenbaum, Helen, 129–30; contextual integrity, 130; personal information flow, 129
nonalphanumerical, 8, 122
non-saturation, 78, 87
nonsignificaiton, 119
numbers, 4–5, 18–19, 23, 31–32, 35, 54, 66, 76, 97, 117–19, 121–125, 128–130, 132–136, 138, 140–141
number sign, 119, 121–126, 128–129, 133, 135–136, 138
Nymphomaniac, 96–97
Obama, Barack, 48–50
October, 98
octothorpe, 32, 118, 122–23, 125
Office, The, 87
Ong, Walter, 53, 55; sense value, 53–55
Orange Is the New Black, 109
Orlean, Susan, 56–57, 104–5; The Orchid Thief, 56–57, 61–62, 104
Paik, Nam June, 52
paradigm, 131–132
Parkes, M. B., 9, 10, 18, 29, 55, 65, 112
pause, 10, 18, 27, 64, 81, 112, 113
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 135
Percey, Shelley B., 123
Perkins, David, 65
phenomenology, 20, 39, 42, 98, 104, 107, 118
Plug, Sander, 33, 125, 132
postclassical cinema, 94–95
Postel, Jon, 51, 53–54

posters (movie), 71, 74, 80, 91, 96
postindustrial capitalism, 73
postmodernism, 6–7, 13, 23, 35, 51, 62, 65–66, 75, 95, 97–99
poststructuralism, 65, 114
premodern, 99
printing press, 9–10
psychoanalysis, 114
Pulp Fiction, 95
question marks, 36–39, 46, 48, 71, 115
Questlove, 108–9
quotation marks, 19, 22, 51–52, 64, 109–11, 135
QWERTY keyboard, 31–32, 41
race, 85, 89
Radiohead, 5
Raley, Rita, 33
reappropriation, 4, 92
Red Skelton Show, The, 87
Requests for Comments (RFCs), 51–54, 72
romantic comedy, 34, 74, 94–95
Romeo + Juliet, 62
Ross, Andrew, 59–60
Rotman, Brian, 66–67
Safire, William, 121
Samuels, Lisa, 28–29
Schartoff, Adam, 37
Schwalbe, Will, 46
Scorcese, Martin, 108
Scriptio continua, 112–13
scripton, 114
searchability, 128, 132
Seinfeld, 83
self-reflexivity, 13, 30, 63
semantic, 4–5, 9, 11, 29–30, 43–44, 55, 111, 120, 139
semicolon, viii, 11, 48
semiotics, 6, 14, 45, 114, 119, 125, 135, 137, 139–41; semiotic lattice, 137, 140–41; semiotic square, 135, 139–40
sentiment analyses, 106
sexuality, 1, 5–6, 62, 75, 82, 85–86, 89, 92–94, 96, 126, 132
shift, 4, 6, 8, 11, 13, 19, 21–23, 26, 30–34, 41–46, 52, 55, 63, 66, 67, 72–73, 100, 116, 117, 125, 138; digital
indexicality, 110; shift key, 31–32, 42, 103, 117, 141; syntactical, 111; textual, 8, 11, 13, 21–23, 31, 33, 42, 45–46,
55, 63, 67, 73, 103, 111
Short Cuts, 95
signifier, 68, 74, 119, 135

Silicon Alley, 59–60
Simpsons, The, 87
slacktivism, 3
Sloterdijk, Peter, 69
Smith, Jacob, 87
Smith, Marquard, 109, 115
Snowden, Eric, 127
social media, 24, 59, 106, 108–11, 115
Sondheim, Alan, 33
Sontag, Susan, 29
space (typographic), 31, 112–13
spherology, 69–70
Stiegler, Bernard, 116
strict punctuation, 3–4, 44, 103, 141
Synedoche, New York, 59
syntax, 36, 54–55; syntactic, 43, 55, 68–69, 111, 115; syntagm, 131–32
Taco Bell, 105–6
tagging, 105–6
Tarantino, Quentin, 96
text messaging, 20, 23, 43–44, 52, 68, 89, 91–92, 98, 105, 112, 121
texton, 114
Timberlake, Justin, 107–109
Tonight Show, The, 108
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol, 51
Trecartin, Ryan, 24–29
Truss, Lynne, 30
Turkington, Gregg, 106
Twitter, 32, 104–6, 111, 114–15, 122, 128; retweets, 110; tweet, 104–6, 110–11, 113
Twitter Revolution, 106
typewriter, 32, 34, 41, 61, 63, 71, 117–18, 122
typography, 82
Up in the Air, 80
Vismann, Cornelia, 136–37
Visual AIDS, 3
von Trier, Lars, 96–97
Western Electric, 118, 123–24
WikiLeaks, 127
Wikipedia, 75
Williams, Robert Grant, 79–80, 87
words, 3, 5, 10–11, 20, 23–24, 27–29, 36–37, 48–49, 52, 64, 66, 68, 72, 84, 87, 97, 106–7, 111–13, 124, 126, 132
Yagoda, Ben, 43
YouTube, 27, 108


Jeff Scheible is assistant professor of cinema studies at Purchase College, State University
of New York.

